This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at  http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/| 


^ 


l^arbart  College  l.itirars 


^.    Dr.J.V.TaDor 


Deposited  in 
ANDOVER-HARVARD  LIBRARY 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


\ 


THE  PREACHER'S  COMMENTARY 


ON  THB 


BOOK  OF  LAMENTATIONS. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THB 


|reaxher*0  (Eonvjfhit  ^pomUcttcal 

COMMENTARY 


ON  THB 


OLD   TESTAMENT 

(Oy  AN  ORIGINAL  PLAN). 


nr 


VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 


Weto  ¥or» 

rUNK   &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY 

London  and  Toronto 

1S92 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC    COMMENTARY 


ON  THE 


BOOK  OF  LAMENTATIONS. 


BY 


EEV.    GEO.   BAELOW, 

AUTHOR  OF  "  HOMILBTIO  COMMBNTART  ON  THB  BOOKS  OF  KINO0/'  BTO. 


tMfttii  ITotft 

FUNK  ft  WAGNALLS  COMPANY 

London  &  Toronto 

1892 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^-.^srrTXT^ 


*- 


0:G   4    IC09 


') 


<i 


ji-> 


c^-    .n'  '  ^^'. ' 


tloivc 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PREFACE. 


Pbbachbbs  appear  to  have  shunned  the  Book  of  Lamentations,  as  if  it  lacked 
suggestiveness  for  homiletic  purposes ;  and  there  are  comparatively  few  sermons 
based  on  texts  selected  from  this  portion  of  Holy  Writ.  It  may  be  that  the 
undertone  of  melancholy,  that  runs  so  sadly  through  the  five  elegies  of  which  the 
book  is  composed,  has  created  the  impression  that  the  theme  is  too  monotonous 
to  admit  of  the  freshness  and  variety  expected  from  the  pulpit  of  the  present  day. 
A  little  patient  study  of  the  book  in  detail  will  correct  tliat  impression.  The 
predominating  subject  is  indeed  a  story  of  desolation  and  sorrow ;  but  it  is  told 
with  a  marvellous  versatility  of  poetic  imagery  and  with  exquisite  pathos. 

The  Lambntations  are  more  than  the  lamentations  of  Jeremiah — more  than  the 
lamentations  of  the  Jews,  who  were  the  immediate  and  principal  sufferers  in  the 
disasters  narrated  :  they  are  typical  of  a  sorrow  that  is  as  universal  as  humanity. 
Individuals  or  nation?,  brooding  over  conscious  unfaithfulness  and  sin,  and 
smitten  with  the  conviction  that  tlie  misery  in  which  tliey  are  whelmed  is  the 
just  and  bitter  fruit  of  their  own  reckless  disobedience,  will  find  in  the  Lamenta* 
tions,  as  they  cannot  elsewhere,  the  most  appropriate  words  in  which  to  voice 
their  gnel  We  cannot  conceive  of  any  possible  plia^^e  of  human  misery  that 
may  not  be  fittingly  expressed  in  some  portion  of  this  remarkable  book,  and  that 
will  not  find  some  relief  in  being  thus  expressed.  Trouble  fills  a  large  space  in 
our  experience  of  life,  and  the  homilete  will  find  in  the  study  of  this  tragic  poem 
the  many  varied  forms  in  which  the  sufferer  may  give  utterance  to  his  distress, 
whether  in  an  individual  or  a  collective  capacity. 

This  Commentary  contains  161  outlines,  brief  or  more  extended,  of  which  136 
are  bnginal :  the  remaining  25  bear  the  names  of  their  respective  authors. 

The  comprehensive  and  lucid  Introduction  to  this  work  is  written  by  the  Bev. 
D.  G.  Watt,  M.A,  The  Kxegetical  Notes  at  the  head  of  each  chapter  are  als^o 
supplied  by  the  same  writer,  and  will  be  found  not  only  a  faithful  exposition  of 
the  text,  but  also,  if  studied  in  connection  with  each  homiletic  paragraph,  a 
suggestive  help  to  the  thoughtful  sermoniser. 

Great  care  has  been  exercised  in  the  selection  of  the  262  Illustrations,  and 
it  is  believed  that  the^e  will  be  regarded  as  not  the  least  valuable  feature  in  the 
Commentary. 

The  Book  of  Lamentations  is  not  the  poem  of  despair.  There  is  nothing  more 
dismally  depressing  than  the  monotone  of  unmitigated  grief.  Throughout  the 
eloquent  wail  of  the  Poet-Prophet  the  spiritualised  ear  detects  the  recurring  notes 
of  a  growing  hope — timidly  expressed  at  first,  but  gradually  gaining  strength  and 
confidence.  The  darkest  period  is  not  without  shimmerings  of  coming  light. 
The  morning  of  rescue  dawns :  despair  gives  place  to  hope,  and  defeat  is  followed 
with  the  joy  of  triumpL 

GEO.  BABLOW. 

ESNDAI^  /l%  1891. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO   COMMENTARY 


THE   LAMENTATIONS. 


INTRODUCTION. 

HamaL — AH  liteTatnres — ^Hebrew,  English,  and  the  leat — ^bear  wiiness  to  the 
forces  with  which  sorrowfal  emotions  press  for  utterance.  Hence  comes  the  ancient 
and  widespread  custom  of  making  public  recognition  of  the  decease  of  famous  or 
beloved  persons ;  of  the  disasters  of  cities  and  countries.  Speeches  or  orations 
more  or  less  eloquent,  poems  more  or  less  deep-toned,  are  handed  along  the  cen- 
turies^  and  remind  the  readers  that  man's  state  in  every  land  is  shadowed  by 
clouds  of  dark  and  mournful  hue.  The  Hebrew  people  were  exposed  to  many 
such  sad  and  sunless  times,  perhaps  more  awful  than  have  overtaken  any  other 
people,  and  the  ''  almost  unalloyed  expression  of  unrestrained  anguish  and  utter 
inconsolable  desolation  "  given  by  this  book  may  be  taken  as  proof  thereof.  No 
wonder  that  it  is  commonly  called  '*  T?ie  Lamentaiiona,"  It  is  not  classified  in 
ordinary  Hebrew  Bibles  by  this  term.  There  it  is  denominated  Aicah,  the 
Hebrew  equivalent  to  "  How,"  which  is  the  first  word  of  the  book.  Rabbinical 
writers  have  styled  it  Qinoth.  That  is  the  word  which  denotes  the  ode  com- 
posed by  David  on  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  (2  SauL  i  17),  as  also  similar 
compositions  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament  It  is  also  employed  in  2  Chron. 
XXXV  25,  where  it  is  recorded,  And  Jeremiah  lamented  for  Josiah ;  and  aU  the 
ringing  men  and  singing  women  spake  of  Josiah  in  their  lamentations  (qinoth) 
unto  this  day;  and  they  made  thorn  an  ordinance  in  Israel:  and^  behold  they  are 
written  in  the  lamentations  (qinoth).  Some  expositors  hold  that  the  five  elegies 
collected  in  this  book  are  those  lamentations  on  Josiah's  death.  Others,  seeing 
the  unlikelihood  of  this,  aver  that  the  fourth  chapter  is  identical  with  the  dirges 
of  Jeremiah.  Against  this  stands  the  fact  that  that  event,  instead  of  being  the 
refrain  of  the  elegy,  receives  but  the  slightest  allusion,  if  it  is  an  allusion  at  all 
(chap.  iv.  20).  It  seems  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that  the  lamentations  of  the 
prophet  and  singers  over  Joeiah's  death  have  not  been  transmitted  to  us,  as  other 
portions  of  ancient  Hebrew  literature  have  not  For,  assuredly,  the  references  of 
this  elegiac  collection  are  to  casualties  far  more  painful  and  depressing  than  the 
removal  of  the  noblest  of  kings,  and  truly  fit  to  give  the  name  to  this  book  during 
succeeding  centuries. 

Form. — The  book  is  poetical  and  unusually  technical  in  its  framework.  In 
other  Biblical  poetical  books  the  usual  division  into  chapters  and  verses  is  not 
always  made  according  to  the  structure,  and  sometimes  even  breaks  into  the  sense  of 
a  passage.  In  Lamentations  there  are  no  untoward  separation&  Its  five  chapters 
are  five  distinct  odes  or  elegies,  and  each  ode  is  divided  into  twenty*two  parts 

1  M 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


regulated  by  the  number  of  letters  in  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  the  verses  of  the  first 
four  chapters  following,  on  the  whole,  the  order  of  the  alphabet.     Thus  : — 

Chap.  i.  Each  verse,  while  beginning  with  a  word  which  has  a  letter  of  the 
alphabet  in  its  grammatical  order,  is  constituted  of  three  double  clauses. 

Chap.  iL  Constructed  similarly  to  chap  i.,  except  that  the  letter  seventeenth  in 
the  normal  order  is  placed  before  the  sixteenth — a  course  which  is  kept  up  in  the 
two  succeeding  chapters. 

Chap.  iiL  Differs  from  the  two  preceding  in  having  three  double  clauses,  each  . 
of  which  is  made  a  verse  in  our  English  versions,  beginning  with  the  same  letter 
of  the  alphabet 

Chap.  iv.  Takes  a  structure  like  that  of  chap,  il,  with  the  exception  of  having 
only  two  double  clauses  in  every  verse. 

Chap.  V.  Is  divided  as  the  others  into  twenty-two  verses,  but  the  verses  do  not 
put  their  initial  words  in  the  order  of  the  alphabet. 

No  satisfactory  explanation  has  been  suggested  for  the  variation  of  the  order  of 
the  alphabet  in  chapters  ii.,  iii,  and  iv.  Difference  from  that  order  is  found  also 
in  Psalms  xxxiv.  and  cxlv. 

The  technicality  or  artificiality  of  the  form  is  plain.  And  it  is  as  plain  that  it 
would  be  next  to  impossible  to  present  that  formal  structure  in  a  translation,  and 
at  the  same  time  do  justice  to  the  original  Merely  as  an  illustration  of  the/orm 
of  the  book,  the  first  two  verses  of  chapter  iii.  are  appended : — 

1.  Afflictioii,  by  the  rod  of  His  wrath,  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen. 
And  He  hath  led  me,  caused  me  to  walk  in  darkness,  not  in  light. 
Against  me  surely  He  tumeth  His  hand,  again  and  again  all  the  day. 

S.  Broken  my  bones  hath  He,  and  made  old  my  flesh  and  skin. 

Builded  against  me  hath  He,  and  compassed  me  with  gall  and  travaiL 

By  dark  places  hath  He  made  me  to  dwell,  as  those  that  have  been  ever  dead. 

Certain  suggestions  made  to  account  for  this  technical  form  are  hardly  to  be 
entertained,  e.g,^  that  it  is  a  sipn  of  a  simulated  grief :  a  product  of  later  and  de- 
generated taste  or  of  a  declining  art :  the  resource  of  a  poet  who  is  inferior  in 
spiritual  feeling  :  a  means  of  joining  in  sentences  thoughts  which  are  only  loosely 
related  to  each  other.  Is  it  not  rather  the  token  that  a  grief,  which  had  benumbed 
the  faculty  of  expression,  has  passed  the  emotional  stage  and  begins  to  traverse 
the  reflective?  There,  in  the  effort  to  express  itself  in  a  peculiar  form,  it  finds  a 
counteractive  to  its  masterful  depression.  Why  should  we  ascribe  this  to  unreal 
emotion,  or  to  decadence  of  art,  or  to  inferiority  of  faculty,  any  more  than  we 
should  ascribe  the  peculiar  form  of  ".In  Memoriam  "  to  either  of  these  influences  t 
May  not  the  intensest  feelings  find  utterance  in  an  elegy  which  employs  the  order 
of  an  alphabet  in  the  beginning  of  its  lines,  as  well  as  in  an  ode  of  Horace  which 
uses  long  and  short  syllables  in  unvarying  succession,  or  as  in  a  sonnet  of 
Shakspere  employing  words  of  the  same  sound  at  the  end  of  certain  lines  t 
Surely  a  deep  sorrow  can  find  a  distraction  in  putting  its  phases  into  special 
verbal  form,  whether  that  form  shows  itself  at  the  end  of  lines,  as  in  English,  or 
all  through  the  lines,  as  in  Latin,  or  at  the  beginning  of  lines,  as  in  this  and  other 
specimens  of  Hebrew  literatura  "Tersely  and  vividly,  thought  after  thought 
shaped  itself  round  each  letter  of  the  alphabet  in  order,  while  in  the  effort  the 
writer  found  relief  for  his  anguish." 

Oontents. — The  Jewish  historian  Josephus  makes  the  statement  that  "  Jeremiah 
composed  a  dirge  for  Josiah's  funeral,  which  remains  unto  this  day."  Does  this 
prove  that  he  identified  that  dirge  with  this  series  of  dirges  t  It  is,  to  say  the 
least,  doubtful.  If  it  is  a  valid  proof,  there  can  be  little  hesitation  in  regarding 
Josephus  as  mistaken.  Each  chapter  of  the  Lamentations  might  be  adduced  in 
evidence  that  it  was  penned  under  the  pressure  of  grief,  not  for  a  deceased 
sovereign,  but  for  a  prostmted  kingdom — for  an  utterly  ruined  metropolis;  for  the 
2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


covenant  people  disgraced,  outraged,  captives,  in  despair.  Again  and  again  are  tue 
wretched  conditions  sketched  in  the  most  sombre  colouis,  and,  to  the  eyes  ol  a 
distant  age,  with  a  sort  of  monotony  tending  to  irksomenesa  For  *' sorrow  is 
distasteful  to  those  who  are  not  suffering:  it"  A  cursory  glance  at  the  several 
chapters  is  all  that  is  needed  here. 

In  the  first  the  lamentation  is  chiefly  over  the  desolated  city,  and  t!ie  people 
plundered,  starved,  and  carried  into  captivity  amid  the  taunts  and  brutality  of 
the  enemy. 

In  the  second  it  is  the  wrath  of  Jehovah,  taking  vengeance  upon  the  persistent 
sins  of  His  people,  which  is  depicted.  Herein  the  sweeping  away  of  means  of 
worship,  the  terrible  anguish  of  men  and  women,  mothers  and  tlieir  little  children, 
the  hopelessness  of  all  human  effort,  and  the  imperious  need  of  pleading  the  mercy 
of  the  Lord,  are  pourtrayed. 

In  the  third  the  form  of  the  subject-matter  is  diverse  from  that  of  the  otlier 
chapters.  A  thoughtful  reader  will  notice  a  characteristic  feature,  the  bearing  of 
which  he  will  desire  to  understand.  It  is  that  the  writer  seems  to  speak  largely 
of  hiB  own  personal  experiences,  occasionally  sinking  his  own  under  those  of  others. 
He  begins  with  the  outburst^  /  am  the  man  that  Jias  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of 
His  wrathy  and  continues  in  Uie  same  manner  to  the  verge  of  despair.  Then,  as 
in  a  more  illustrious  case,  he  realises  that  when  he  is  weak  he  is  really  strong, 
and  for  a  moment  there  is  hope,  and  a  vision  of  a  wider  area :  It  is  of'tlte  Lords 
mercies  thai  we  are  not  consumed.  His  own  case  is  again  referred  to  (ver.  24), 
only,  however,  as  a  momentary  step  towards  embracing  the  Israel  of  God  who 
trust  on  Him  (vers.  25-39).  Here  the  impersonal  is  left,  and  again  (vers.  40-47) 
the  associated  community  makes  known  its  aims  and  hardships :  Let  us  search 
and  try  our  ways.  Once  more,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter,  it  is  the  individual  who 
laments  and  implores  recompense.  How  is  this  interchange  of  persons  to  be 
accoonted  for,  here  as  also  in  certain  portions  of  other  poetical  parts  of  the  Scrip- 
tures t  Assuredly  by  the  supposition  that  the  consciousness  of  the  writer  testifies 
to  him  that  his  sufferings  are  representative  of  his  nation's  sufferings,  or,  as  Cheyne 
•ays,  ^*of  those  of  the  pious  believers  who  formed  the  kernel  of  the  Israelitish 
people."  Accepting  this  representativeness,  we  perceive  why  the  expressions  of 
sadness  and  dismay  are  such  as  go  beyond  mere  individual  experience,  or  are  such 
as  can  be  predicted  only  of  an  individual  who  felt  as  if  the  whole  burden  of  the 
tribulation  was  laid  upon  himsell  It  is  ever  thus  with  hearts  that  are  sensitive 
to  the  visitations  of  trouble  which  they  share  in  common  with  others,  and  it 
becomes  hard  to  distinguish  the  personal  from  the  collective  sorrows  and  pains. 

In  the  fourth  gruesome  details  of  the  calamities  which  had  overtaken  aU  classes 
— ^matrons  and  young  children,  princes  and  nobles,  prophets  and  priests — are  out- 
lined :  outlines  which  sliow  the  hand  of  an  eyewitness.  It  concludes  with  an 
appeal  to  and  a  denunciation  of  Edora,  the  age-long,  bitter  adversary  of  Judah. 

T)^Q  fifth  begins  with  a  prayer,  and  then  proceeds  to  draw  up  something  like 
a  list  of  the  errors  and  outrages  which  had  characterised  the  national  history^ 
It  closes  with  a  hesitating  call  upon  Jehovah  to  turn  the  people  to  Himself  and 
restore  their  ancient  glory. 

From  such  a  view  of  the  contents  Keil  suggests  one  may  *^  readily  perceive  in 
these  poems  a  well-cogitated  plan  in  the  treatment  of  the  material  common  to  the 
whole,  and  a  distinct  progress  in  the  execution  of  this  plan."  This  may  be  open 
to  doubts.  If  earlier  expositors  failed  to  affix  the  contents  of  the  different  elegies 
to  the  different  leading  features  of  the  Chaldean  invasion — the  siege,  the  capture, 
the  desolation  of  the  Temple,  city,  and  land — the  attempt  of  Keil,  or  any  other, 
also  fails  to  make  clear  a  definite  plan  and  progression  moulding  the  whole. 
Whatever  be  the  connection  of  ene  chapter  with  another,  it  is  the  connection  of 
a  common  subject  rather  than,  a  connection  formed  by  the  order  of  thought 
Besides  that  there  seems  no  other  clue  needed  to  thread  our  way.     The  exposition 

3 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


must  be  the  exposition  of  separate  poems ;  at  any  rate  not  of  a  drama  with  fiye 
acts,  as  the  imagination  of  Ewald  makes  out  the  contents  to  foim. 

In  contrast  with  opinions  already  referred  to,  regarding  the  poetical  vigour  of 
this  book,  that  of  one  who  cannot  be  ranked  as  a  poor  judge  of  poetry — the  late 
Dean  of  St  Paul's,  Milman— may  be  cited.  In  his  "History  of  the  Jews"  he 
says,  "Never  was  ruined  city  lamented  in  language  so  exquisitely  pathetic. 
Jerusalem  is,  as  it  were,  personified,  and  bewailed  with  the  passionate  sorrow  of 
private  and  domestic  attachment  While  the  more  general  pictures  ...  are 
successively  drawn  with  all  the  life  and  reality  of  an  eyewitness."  It  may  be 
interesting  to  present  a  specimen  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Dean  translates  the 
original  (from  chap.  v.). 

•<  BMsember,  Lord,  what  bath  befallflo. 

Look  down  on  our  reproAoh  : 
Cor  hraiUge  is  given  to  itrangei^ 

Onr  home  to  foreignen. 
Cor  water  have  we  drank  for  moMj; 

Our  fuel  hath  its  price. 

Frinoes  were  hnng  up  by  the  baiM^ 

And  age  had  no  reepect 
Yoong  men  are  grinding  at  the  mil], 

Boys  faint  'neath  loads  of  wood. 
The  elders  from  the  grate  have  oeaeed. 

The  young  men  from  their  mmia 

The  crown  is  fallen  from  oar  head. 

Woe  1  woe !  that  we  have  sinned* 
"Us  tiierefore  that  our  hearts  are  falal^ 

Therefore  our  eyes  are  dim, 
Vor  Zion's  mountain  desolate ; 

Foxes  walk  on  it" 

Aftthor. — ^Ibe  name  of  no  author  is  attached  to  the  book,  or  to  any  of  its 

separate  elegies.  In  Hebrew  MSS.  and  Bibles  the  book  generally  appears  in  the 
third  division  of  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old  Testament  called  K'thubim, 
between  Buth  and  Ecclesiastes.  This  is  no  criterion  as  to  its  authorship;  for 
'*  the  Lamentations,  as  being  lyrical  poetry,  are  classed,  not  witli  prophecies,  but 
with  the  Psalms  and  Proverbs/'  according  to  the  understood  arrangement  of  the 
canon  by  the  Jews.  It  is  an  old  and  concurrent  tradition  to  name  the  prophet 
Jeremiah  as  the  sole  author.  This  tradition  is  formulated  by  the  Septuagint 
translator.  He  prefaces  the  book  with  words  which  are  not  found  in  any  extant 
Hebrew  MS.,  And  it  ccane  to  pass,  after  Israel  had  been  carried  captive  and  Jeru- 
salem was  delated  J  Jeremiah  sat  weeping,  and  lamented  with  this  lamentation  over 
Jerusalem  and  said,  How,  &c.  Whatever  be  the  historical  worth  of  this  state- 
ment, the  ascription  to  Jeremiah  is  backed  up  by  Josephus  and  the  Talmudical 
writers.  Such  testimonies  have  been  accepted  by  subsequent  students  until  a 
comparatively  recent  period.  Indeed,  it  is  only  within  the  present  century  that 
anything  like  material  objections  have  been  made  to  the  traditional  belief.  The 
gravity  of  these  objections  may  be  measured  by  the  consideration  that  it  is  prin- 
cipally derived  from  the  words  and  style  of  the  poems.  And  the  operations  of 
such  attempts  are  far  from  uniform.  ''The  absence  of  certain  specific  Jere- 
mianic  peculiarities,''  which  Schrader  adduces,  is  counterbalanced  by  his  own 
acknowledgment  of  its  affinity  in  contents,  spirit,  tone,  and  language  with  Jere- 
miah's prophecies.  Keil  represents  Kaegelsbach,  in  Lange's  series,  as  having, 
**  with  the  help  of  the  concordance,  prepared  a  table  of  those  words  and  forms  of 
words  found  in  Lamentations,  but  not  occurring  in  the  prophecies  of  Jeremiah,** 
and  so  concluding  against  the  authorship  of  the  prophet  On  the  other  hand,  Dr; 
Homblower,  translator  of  Naegelsbach,  and  Keil  present  the  evidenoe  of  passages 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILSTIC  COMMMTAHY:  lAMSNTATJONa. 


in  oontiadiction  of  Naegelsbach's  conclufflon.  Attributing  the  book  to  Ezekiel 
may  be  looked  on  as  an  exhibition  of  ingenuity  and  not  of  convincing  effect 
Besides  this,  there  is  extreme  dirersity  of  opinion  regarding  the  composition  of  the 
separate  odes.  Ewald  maintains  that  "  eyeiy  competent  judge  vrill  ascribe  [these 
five  poemsj  to  only  one  poet."  Thenios  assures  us  that  diaps.  iL  and  iv.  are 
^*  undeniably  from  Jeremiah,"  chaps.  L  and  iii  from  some  unknown  resident  in 
Judssa,  and  chap.  y.  from  the  leader  of  a  band  of  wanderers  seeking  an  asylum. 
Cheyne  is  sure  that  the  firsts  second,  and  fourth  chapters  are  not  the  productions 
of  Jeremiah ;  that  the  third  chapter  is  by  a  different  author  from  these,  probably 
by  one  who  was  acquainted  with  Jeremiah's  prophecies ;  and  the  fifth  cliapter 
<<  very  certainly  not  by  the  author  of  any  of  the  foregoing  Lamentations,"  though 
he  r^iards  it  as' probable  that  '*  Jeremiah  was  the  favourite  book  of  these  poets 
(next  to  the  Psalter,  so  far  as  this  book  was  in  existence).'' 

To  pronouncements  on  such  precarious  evidence  there  can  be  but  one  fair  atti- 
tude— ^that  of  suspense,  until  more  definite  contingents  than  those  represented  by 
words  and  style  are  forthcoming.  For  this  sort  of  evidence  is  by  no  means  con- 
dusire  either  for  or  against  the  genuineness  of  any  writings.  It  may  or  may  not 
be  important,  as  it  is  related  to  other  conditions.  It  may  betoken  different 
authors,  or  it  may  be  the  same  author  in  altered  circumstances  of  thought  and 
life.  His  age,  new  events,  the  limitations  of  his  subject,  his  purpose  in  writing 
— each  one  of  these  will  be  a  modifying  element  in  his  choice  and  allocation  of 
worda  It  is  therefore  unwise  and  hazardous  to  assert  positively  whether  Jere- 
miah was  the  author  or  not,  unless  we  can  decide,  approximately  at  any  rate,  how 
he  and  his  style  would  be  affected  by  the  points  just  referred  to.  This  has  not 
been  done,  and,  until  something  of  this  kind  is  done,  the  tradition  that  Jeremiah 
is  the  author  of  all  or  chief  part  of  the  Lamentations  is  entitled  to  preference.  It 
is  indeed  little  matter  who  the  writer  or  writers  might  be  when  they  are  moved 
by  the  Spirit  of  Grod. 

There  is  one  topic  yet  unnoticed  which  may  be  a  difficulty  in  the  way  of  accept- 
ing the  traditions!  belief,  and  it  is  raised  by  that  artificial  form  of  the  Lamenta- 
tions already  described.  Could  that  form  have  been  given  them  so  close  to  the 
occurrence  of  the  fearful  calamities  as  Jeremiah  must  have  beent  Could  he, 
with  his  intense  sensitiveness  to  the  sins  and  miseries  of  his  fellow-countrymen, 
have  sat,  as  tradition  reports,  among  the  ruinous  heaps  of  Jerusalem,  and,  in  sight 
of  the  fiery  ordeal  through  which  his  ill-treated  people  were  passing,  busied 
himself  with  the  technicalities  of  poetic  artt  Must  not  the  condition  for  the 
composition  of  such  poems  be  not  that  of  perturbation  but  of  reflectiveness  t  Are 
not  the  mitigations  of  time  requisite,  has  not  the  emotion  already  parted  with 
its  overwhelming  vehemence,  before  downcast  men  will  care  to  express  their  grief 
in  peculiar  forms  t  ''  We  are  recorering  from  love  or  grief  or  any  other  passion 
when  we  are  able  to  rhyme  on  it  with  elegance"  (Daily  NewSy  in  review  of 
** Poems  of  Afghanistan").  This  may  be  true;  but  there  is  anot^ier  view.  In 
poignant  trouble  a  short  time  may  appear  long,  and  the  words,  Wherefore  dod 
then  fcreake  ua  so  long  time  f  (cK  v.  20),  are  not  so  decisive  as  to  settle  the 
question  whether  a  longer  or  shorter  period  had  intervened  between  the  desolation 
of  Jerusalem  and  the  production  of  the  elegies.  ''We  should  count  time  by 
heart-throbs."  In  reference  to  this  Cheyne  quotes  from  ''The  Dream  of 
Gerontius":— 

"•    •    •    time  ii  not  a  common  property ; 
Bat  what  U  long  U  shorti  and  swift  is  slow. 
And  near  is  distant  as  received  and  grasped 
By  this  mind  and  by  that,  and  every  one 
Ii  standard  of  his  own  chronology." 

Thus  the  element  of  time  brings  no  ingredient  to  solve  the  riddle  of  authorship. 
It  eannot  eliminate  the  claim  of  Jeremiahl    He  could  have  written  the  five  poems 

6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JI'}MILI:T1C  COyfMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS. 


80  far  as  his  intense  sorrow  was  concerned.  There  is  much  force  in  a  remark 
made  by  Kiehm  :  "  In  lyric  poetry  proper  the  employment  of  this  artificial  form 
is  naturally  and  intrinsically  justified  only  when  a  single  fundamental  strain,  that 
fills  the  whole  soul  of  the  poet, — deep,  strong,  and  sustained — seeks  to  die  away 
in  many  different  forms  of  chords.** 

Date. — There  is  no  chronological  record  as  to  the  time  of  composition  except 
that  which  is  involved  in  the  fact  that  the  awfulness  of  the  desolation  was  fresh 
in  the  writer's  mind.  And  if  he  was  not  Jeremiah,  he,  or  they  who  wrote,  may  be 
supposed  to  have  written  under  the  impulse  of  "  a  great  lyric  movement,"  which 
Ewald  conceives  took  place  "among  the  conquered  Jews,  as  well  those  in  Babylon 
as  those  who  remained  in  their  much-loved  home."  And  he  believes  the  Lamen- 
tations came  into  their  existing  form  coincident  with  that  movemefit.  But  beyond 
all  such  considerations  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the  thought  which  the  writer 
or  writers  wanted  to  present  was  in  no  sense  dependent  on  a  date. 

The  structure  and  contents  of  the  Lamentations  are  seen  to  be  unique.  No  one 
of  the  collection  of  documents  containing  record  of  the  unfolding  of  God's  will  to 
His  servants  during  centuries  can  be  compared  with  it.  It  makes  infinitesimal 
additions  to  history,  and  contributes  next  to  nothing  to  dogmatic&  It  is  at  the 
apex  of  the  literature  of  sorrow,  and  reverberates  with  the  thought  that  sins  against 
the  living  holy  Lord  bring  condign  punishment.  The  diverse  peculiarities  suggest 
two  questions  which  are  not  irrelevant,  and  may  be  considered  briefly. 

1.  Why  should  a  composition,  so  obviously  technical,  be  a  factor  in  the  revela- 
tion of  God  and  His  will  1  Or  it  may  be  put  thus,  Why  should  holy  men  of  God^ 
moved  by  the  Holy  Spirit^  trammel  or  order  their  emotions  by  the  demands  of  an 
alphabet  and  metre  1  It  was  an  old  Greek  and  Boman  belief  that,  "  When  the 
gods  spoke  they  spoke  in  verse "  (Hatch).  Why  should  not  the  only  true  God 
make  use  of  men  who  were  born  poets  ?  If  the  susceptibility  to,  and  expression 
in  poetic  forms  be  an  endowment  He  has  bestowed;  if  there  are  abounding 
materials  in  nature  and  the  life  of  humanity  fitted  for  such  forms ;  if  the  rudest 
tribes  and  the  most  cultured  nations  appreciate  them,  as  affecting  the  mind  for 
good  and  evil,  for  pleasure  and  pain,  is  it  to  be  credited  that  He  who  made  all 
these  capacities  will  refuse  to  employ  them  as  a  vehicle  for  the  transmission  of  the 
sublime  truths  of  eternal  righteousness  and  love  t  Surely  the  presentation  of  the 
data  requisite  to  poetic  form  will  solve  the  question  propounded. 

Moreover,  poetry,  with  its  measured  rhythm,  is  more  likely  to  be  remembered 
than  prosaic  expression.  With  reference  especially  to  the  Jewish  people  it  has 
been  said,  "  The  obvious  advantages  of  the  poetic  style  and  of  a  metrical  struc- 
ture are — the  adaptation  of  both  to  the  tastes  and  culture  of  the  people ;  and 
especially  the  adaptation  of  the  latter  to  the  purpose  of  storing  those  compositions 
in  the  memory  from  infancy  upward.  Thus  it  was  that  the  minds  of  this — indeed 
favoured  though  afflicted — people  were  richly  furnished  with  religious  and  moral 
sentiments,  and  thus  was  meditative  thought  nourished  and  suggested  and 
directed,  and  was  made  conducive  to  the  momentous  purposes  of  the  individual 
and  of  the  domestic  spiritual  life.  Too  little  do  we  now  take  account,  in  our 
Biblical  readings  and  criticisms,  of  this  deep-going  purpose  of  Hebrew  poetic 
Scriptures  which,  through  centuries  of  national  weal  and  woe,  have  nourished 
millions  on  millions  of  souls  *  unto  life  eternal"'    (Isaac  Taylor.) 

2.  Cheyne  remarks,  *'  We  cannot  fail  to  see  in  this  short  elegaic  book  that 
peculiar  quality  which,  in  all  its  degrees  of  manifestation,  the  Jewish  Doctors 
agree  with  us  in  describing  as  inspiration."  Granted.  But  are  not  inspiration  and 
the  limitations  of  an  alphabet  and  definite  numbers  mutually  exclusive,  or  restrictive 
at  least  t  Was  the  soul  of  an  inspired  man  but  "  as  a  flute  through  which  the 
breath  of  God  flowed  in  Divine  music  "  t  Or  had  that  soul  power  over  itself,  and, 
as  a  boat  whose  sails  are  filled  with  a  breeze,  could  take  any  course  except  dead 
against  the  breath  of  God)     Various  solutions  of  the  perplexity  hafe 

o 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY t  LAMENTATIONa. 


attempted,  but  no  one  altogether  satisfactory  has  been  formulated,  and  the  dia- 
cusBions  still  carried  on  prove  that  the  premises  for  sufficient  conclusions  are  yet 
unsettled.  It  would  help  to  the  acquisition  of  such  premises  i(  on  all  sides, 
preconceived  ideas  of  inspiration  were  resolutely  thrown  off,  and  the  somewhat 
obscure  indications  in  the  Bible  itself  were  cleared  up  and  harmonised  so  far  as 
oould  be.  How  did  the  Lord  speak  to  men  of  old  t  How  was  it  that  a  prophet 
could  know  that  it  was  His  word  whdch  was  in  his  hearty  as  U  were  a  burning  fire 
shut  up  in  his  bones  f  What  is  it  to  speak  from  God^  being  moved  by  the  Holy 
Spirit f  What  are  the  criteria  of  being  in  the  Spirit?  Such  inquiries  suggest 
further  questions.  Was  the  realm  of  inspiration  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  so 
closely  interlinked  with  the  region  of  His  operations  in  the  new  birth  that  it 
could  not  be  known  whence  the  afflatus  came  or  whither  it  went  t  If  a  prophet 
was  speaking  in  the  old  Church  of  Corinth,  and  one  sitting  by  the  speaker  had  a 
revekUiony  what  was  it  which  enabled  the  others  to  discriminate  that  a  fresh  inspira- 
tion had  been  vouchsafed  and  the  first  speaker  was  to  keep  silence  f  Is  that  dis- 
criminating power  withdrawn  wholly!  Are  there  not  subtle  tokens  by  which 
a  man  in  Christ  even  now  may  discern  inspiration  in  himself  and  in  another 
brother!  The  answer  to  those  inquiries  may  never  be  definite,  there  is  so  much 
unknown,  but  qualified  research  and  devout  patience  may  be  taught^  as  Qod  will, 
to  see  some  undetected  aspects  of  inspiration,  even  if  it  be  impossible  to  embrace 
in  one  formula  all  the  facts.  So  we  may  need  to  rest  contented  with  the  truth 
that  to  one  member  of  the  body  of  Christ  is  given  t?ie  discerning  of  spirits  in  the 
one  Spirit,  but  also  be  convinced  that  there  is  a  wider  range  in  whidi  he  that  is 
spiritual  jvdgeth  all  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  Ood,  In  that  conviction  we  may 
feel  that  the  "  quality  '^  of  inspiration  is  present  throughout  the  technical  con- 
struction of  the  Lamentations,  as  also  we  can  find  in  the  form  of  a  servant,  Christ, 
in  whom  are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  hidden, 

Pnrport. — The  elegies  issue  out  of  the  preceding  history  of  the  Jewish  people, 
and  thus  stand  related  to  other  portions  of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  even  if  the  points 
of  contact  appear  to  us  under  a  haza  They  are  resonant  with  chords  formed  by 
the  claims  of  Grod,  who  makes  judgment  the  line  and  rigMeousness  the  plummet 
in  His  dealings  with  men.  They  signify  that  moral  decadence  is  in  closest  alliance 
with  religious  compromises ;  that  rueful  calamities  seize  on  a  nation  which  swerves 
from  its  normal  position ;  that  if  a  people  favoured  by  God,  Creator  and  King, 
stand  in  the  way  of  the  knowledge  of  His  saving  health  among  all  nations,  down 
that  people  must  go,  no  matter  what  it  has  been  in  His  procedure  hitherto.  This 
result  would  be  promoted  by  the  repetitions  of  ideas  and  even  expressions  which 
are  frequent  throughout  the  book.  Sucb  a  feature  certainly  detracts  from  its 
literary  finish,  but  we  must  suppose  that  the  author  did  not  give  heed  to  that. 
He  might  have  managed  to  improve  its  symmetry  if  he  had  tried.  Obviously  he 
did  not  try.  He  had  an  end  in  view,  which  a  finished  literary  form  would  not 
have  brought  him  to  so  well  as  the  redundant  form  he  has  adopted.  And,  if  we 
dare  define  what  his  aim  was,  we  should  say  that  he  wanted  to  portray  an  im- 
pressive picture  of  a  country,  people,  worship,  God-forsaken  because  God-forsaking. 
The  unusual  structure  of  the  book  also  would  tend  to  deepen  this  impression. 
Thus  an  enduring  symbol  was  erected  of  that  long  course  of  scatterings  and 
wanderings,  of  insults  and  oppressions,  which  was  to  be  trod  by  the  Jewish  tribes. 
At  any  rate  the  Great  Revealer  was  opening  up,  by  these  outbursts  of  grief,  some 
fresh  aspect  of  His  character  and  purpose ;  intimating  that  He  had  brought  to 
a  further  stage  the  discipline  and  development  of  Israel,  with  whom  He  had 
entered  into  covenant,  and  was  forging  a  new  link,  into  which  another  link  in 
due  course  would  be  welded,  so  as  to  extend  the  outstretch  of  that  chain  which 
should  lift  the  world  into  a  wider  life.  Then,  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  earns, 
Jesus  Christ,  who  searched  the  Scriptures,  as  He  directed  others  to  do,  found  His 
Bjmpathy  stirred  in  unison  with  these  I^amentations :  When  He  saw  the  city  He 

7 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


wept  over  it,  because  its  enemies  should  not  leave  one  stone  upon  another,  and 
because  it  knew  not  the  time  of  its  visitation. 

The  prophecies  of  Ezekiel,  not  a  few  of  which  mnst  hare  been  contemponneons 
with  the  publication  of  the  Lamentations,  have  one  erer-Tecnrring  re^n,  And 
they  shall  know  that  I  am  Jehovah,  Since  that  was  the  goal  to^mds  which  all 
the  changes  of  that  time  were  leading  men,  and  as  this  book  pointed  in  the  same 
direction,  we  may  have  a  valid  presentiment  that  it  helped  towards  the  formation 
of  the  new  spirit  which  pervaded  the  Jews  when  the  Lord  turned  again  the  cap- 
tivity  of  Zion.  They  had  voiced  their  laments  here,  their  prayers  in  such  a  Psalm 
as  the  seventy-fourth,  and  then  followed  their  praise  :  The  Lord  hath  done  great 
things  for  vs,  whereof  we  are  glad. 

Idtnrgical  XJse.-— -Jewish  synagogues  have  recognised  the  bearing  of  the  Lamen- 
tations by  appointing  that  they  should  be  read  on  the  anniversary  day  commemo- 
rating the  destruction  of  the  first  and  second  Temple.  In  the  Christian  Church 
also  their  importance  has  been  regarded.  The  Roman  Catholic  Church  assigns 
three  portions  of  the  book  to  be  reail  as  part  of  the  ritual  of  each  of  the  three  last 
days  of  Passion-week.  In  the  German  United  Evangelical  Church,  adaptations 
are  made  for  liturgical  use.  In  the  revised  Prayer  Book  of  the  Episcopal  Church 
of  England,  "portions  are  ordered  to  be  read  on  the  Monday,  Tuesday,  and 
Wednesday  in  Holy-week."  The  reasons  for  such  use  of  these  elegies  may  have 
been  (1)  that  a  homeless  nation  and  desolated  city  suggested  the  condition  of 
mankind  far  from  (}od,  and  of  a  soul  doomed  to  die  in  the  bondage  of  sin ;  and 
(2)  that  the  sorrows  of  the  representative  of  the  suffering  people  suggested  the 
Lamb  of  Ood  who  hears  away  the  sin  of  the  worlds  and  of  whom  we  cannot  but 
think  as  enduring  a  sorrow  like  unto  no  other  sorrow. 

What  one  and  another  portion  of  the  Lamentations  has  been  for  the  expression 
of  emotion  to  the  tried  and  troubled  of  many  a  country  and  age,  none  but  Ood, 
the  all -knowing,  can  declare.  Assuredly  they  still  will  be  so  used,  even  until  the 
Lord  Jehovah  shall  wipe  away  the  tears  from  offallfacee,  and  the  reproach  of  His 
people  shall  He  take  away  from  off  all  the  earth, 

NoTB. — In  the  translation  I  have  generaUy  adhered  to  the  Revised  Version 
I  have  deviated  from  it  where  I  aimed  to  express  more  literally  what  I  eonsider 
the  representation  of  the  Hebrew  original.  I  offer  no  apology  for  always  nsing 
our  time-honoured  word  Jehovah  instead  of  the  pedantic  Yahveh. 


D.  G.  W. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap,  l 


CHAFFEE  I. 
Thb  Miseries  of  Jerusalkh. 

KxsomoAL  Nona. — ^This  elegy  may  be  diTided  into  two  chief  parts.  The  first,  Ten.  1-11, 
exhibits  the  moaraful  condition  of  an  unnamed  city,  OTortaken  by  various  calamities,  with  a 
break,  at  rers.  9  and  11,  by  an  ejacnlatory  appeal  to  Jehovah.  The  second,  vers.  12-22,  con- 
tains a  bitter  complaint  from  the  city  herself,  or  rather  from  the  city  personified  by  a  sufferer. 

Yen.  1  and  2  present  the  city  as  she  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  what  she  was,  and  as  an  obiect 
of  deep  distress,  on  account  of  her  sins  and  their  penalties.  The  verses  have  a  pictorial  illua- 
tration  in  the  medal  struck  by  the  Roman  Emperor  Titus  in  commemoration  of  the  capture  of 
Jerusalem  (A.D.  71). 

(K)  Ver.  1.  How,  not  in  interrogation,  but  in  surprise  and  pain.  This  particle  is  unneoessarily 
inserted  twice  in  the  Authorised  Vemion.  It  is  not  again  employed  in  the  Hebrew  of  the  book, 
except  in  chaps,  ii.  1  and  iv.  1,  2,  fittetli  alone,  in  a  posture  of  overpowering  sorrow  rather  than 
of  ntter  isolation,  like  Nehemiah,  who,  when  he  heard  of  the  doleful  state  of  Jerusalem,  tat  down 
and  iffepi  and  mourned  (L  4),  the  dtj  =  Jerusalem,  as  following  verses  prove.  The  fact  that 
the  Chaldean  captain  lefi  of  the  poor  of  the  people,  which  had  noUUng,  in  tke  land  of  Judah  ( Jer. 
iTxix.  10)  suggests  that  a  few  waifs  and  strays  might  be  still  hanging  round  the  mined  city, 
wtiOe  the  reference  (chap.  ii.  10)  to  the  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  may  intimate  that  some 
of  better  means  were  also  with  them ;  that  was  fall  of  people.  No  known  criterion  exists  by 
which  to  estimate  the  population  of  ancient  Jerusalem.  An  approximate  guess  even  cannot  be 
made  from  the  perfunctory  census  taken  in  David's  reign.  She  if  become  ai  a  widow,  forsaken 
and  under  the  reproach  of  widowhood,  seeing  that  she  is  not  in  communion  with  the  Lord,  her 
Maker;  but  still  she  is  not  quite  a  widow ;  there  is  to  be  a  restoration,  beoause  ftr  a  tmaU 
moment  have  I  fbradken  thee  .  .  .  taith  the  Lord  thy  JUdeemer  (Isaiah  liv.  6) ;  that  waa  great 
among  the  nations,  respected  and  powerful ;  a  pzincess  oyer  the  proTincee.  The  dominion 
centered  in  Jerusalem  is  illutitriited  by  the  letter  of  Artaxerxes  to  his  subordinates.  There  have 
been  mighty  hinge  over  Jeruealem,  which  have  ruled  over  all  the  country  beyond  tlte  river;  and 
tribute,  cuttom,  and  toll  was  paid  unto  them  (Ezra  iv.  20).  This  jurisdiction  over  dependent 
peoples  was  at  its  height  in  the  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon,  though  after  them  there  were 
also  kings  whose  rule  embraced  others  beside  the  Jews.  In  sad  contrast  she  ii  become  a 
▼asial,  generally  shown  by  taskwork,  not  so  often  by  money-payment,  and  expressing  entire 
subservience. 

(3)  Yer.  2.  Intense  grief  overwhelms  her,  She  weeps  bitterly  in  the  night ;  no  temporary 
oblivion  comes  to  her ;  the  silent  hours  pass  with  her  tears  on  her  che€^  For  her  there  is 
no  oomforter  among  all  her  lovers ;  all  her  ftiends,  or  neighbours,  have  dealt  treaoheronsly 
with  her.  The  Babylonians  and  all  the  Chaldeans,  Pekod  and  Shoa  and  Koa,  and  aU  the 
Assyrians  with  them  (Ezek.  xxiii.  23),  were  alienated  from  her,  while  Egypt,  Ammon,  Edom, 
Moafa^  disowned  their  alliance  with  her :  they  are  beoome  her  enemies,  and  gloat  over  her 
downfall  (2  Kings  xxiv.  2). 

(3)  Ver.  S.  Jndah,  the  population  of  the  whole  territory,  with  that  of  Jerusalem,  is  taken 
into  ezile^  a  subjuga^tod,  impoverished  remnant  being  left.  From  aiBiction,  the  same  expres- 
sion oooors  in  Exod.  iii  17  and  Ps.  oviii.  4,  and  firom  mnoh  sezTitnde^  not,  as  mig^t  seem  inti- 
mated by  the  Authorised  Version  and  Revised  Version,  that  the  Jews  were  led  into  captivity 
beoause  of  the  manumitted  Hebrew  servants  being  again  subjected  to  bondage  by  their  richer 
brethren  (sl  Jer.  zzxiv.  8-12) ;  not  that  the  Jews  fl^  as  voluntary  emigrants  to  esoM>e  the 
oppression  of  conquerors ;  but  that,  from  the  low  depth  of  misery  into  which  they  had  been 
brought  by  the  invasions  and  exactions  of  foreign  powers,  from  months  of  faction  and  ooerdon 
and  famine,  they  were  taken  into  the  lower  depth  of  being  made  captives.  In  Babylon,  in  the 
centre  of  old  world  civilisation,  with  its  tra£Bc  and  magnificence,  she  has  not  foond  rest. 
Nebuchadnezzar  employed  *'them  upon  those  Uurge  works  of  irrigation  and  the  building  of 
cities,  for  which  his  ambition  required  labourers,  jcuit  where  they  were  forced  to  share  and  oon- 
tribute  to  Babylonian  life."  7'hou  didst  show  them  no  merey;  upon  the  aged  hast  thou  very 
heavily  laid  thy  yoke  (Isa.  xlviiL  6).  All  her  porraers  have  overtaken  her  between  the 
straits ;  they  liud  affliction  upon  her  when  she  was  ahready  pressed  in  by  trouble ;  hit  her  when 
she  was  down. 

O)  Ver.  4  introduces  another  view  personifying  the  religions  condition :  not  the  banished 
people^  not  the  faUen  dty,  but  the  dweUing-plaoe  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  is  forsaken  and 
overthrown.  The  ways  of  Zion,  not  the  streets  in  Jerusalem  leading  up  to  the  Temi>le,  but 
the  roads  from  all  quarters  of  the  land,  which  found  their  termini  in  the  JToly  hiU,  are 
monmfli],  for  they  are  entirely  deserted  ;  being  without  those  who  go  to  a  solemn  assembly, 
none  oome  to  appear  before  the  Lord  in  His  courts  at  set  times,  as  He  had  enjoined  His  wor- 
shippers to  do ;  all  her  gates,  which  Jehovah  loveth,  are  desolate,  broken  down  ;  no  one  goes 
up  to  or  Imgers  about  tbem.  The  Temple  has  lost  its  sanctity  and  is  open  to  all  intmders. 
Th»  i^offT  has  departed  from  it :  her  priests  are  sighing;  her  virgins  are  afflicted.  "The 
fBMQO  Wl|y  the  priests  and  the  virgins  are  here  conjoined  is  that  lamentation  is  made  over  the 

9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 

cessation  of  the  rehgious  feasts.  The  Tirgins  are  here  considered  as  those  who  enlivened  the 
national  festivals  by  playing,  singing,  and  danoing  (Ps.  Ixviii  26  ;  Jer.  zzxL  13) "  (Keil).  And 
■he  ii  in  bittemeu  hariielf,  as  if  all  was  lout  religiously  as  well  as  politically. 

(n)  Ver.  6.  Her  adyenaiies  are  become  the  head,  aa  was  threatened  if  nnfaithfol  to  the 
Lord  (Dent  zxviii.  44) ;  her  enemiee  prosper,  are  in  peace,  and  rest  secure,  knowing  that  all 
resistance  is  over,  so  completely  has  Rhe  b^  crushed.  This  was  brought  about  not  by  tiieir 
might,  but  because  Jehovah  has  afflicted  her  for  the  greatness  of  her  transgressions ;  and 
the  BuJfferings  befall  the  most  innocent  also ;  her  yoong  children  have  gone  oaptires,  the  most 
ominous  of  all  her  disasters,  driven  like  a  band  of  the  enslaved  in  Africa,  before  the  adyersary. 

())  Ver.  6.  She  has  not  only  been  harried  of  her  meet  precious  and  tender  charges,  ahM>  from 
the  daughter  of  Zion  is  departed  all  her  beauty.  God  Himself,  whose  Shechinah  made  Zum 
the  perfection  of  beauUy^  no  longer  sbined  there  ;  no  longer  was  there  a  worship  of  Him  in  tht 
beauty  of  kolinesi,  and  even  her  princes  are  become  like  harts  that  do  not  find  pastnre ; 
enfeebled  by  the  scanty  diet  of  the  close  siege,  they  have  lost  vigour,  and  go  without  straigth 
when  chased  before  the  pursuer,  so  as  to  be  easily  caught.  This  is  in  evident  allusion  to  the 
flight  and  capture  of  the  King  and  his  men  of  war,  within  a  few  miles  from  Jerusalem,  when  it 
was  besieged  by  the  Chaldean  army  (2  Kings  zxv.  8-{>). 

(T)  Ver.  7.  Again  a  change  of  aspect  is  presented.  Already  the  dty  ruined,  the  people  exiled, 
the  holy  mountain  desecrated  have  been  regarded.  Now  the  poet  gives  the  name  of  the  dty, 
which  he  shrank  from  pronoundng  before,  and  uses  it  as  a  generic,  all-embracing  term,  Jem- 
salem  remembers,  adding  an  item  of  pungency  to  her  deep  sufferings,  in  the  days  of  her 
afliiction  and — a  probable  meaning  of  the  following  word  is  wanderingtt  as  in  margin  of  Revised 
Version  here.  In  chap.  iii.  19,  where  the  same  word  is  again  employed,  the  margin  gives  outcast 
state  as  a  fresh  rendering.  That  of  the  Speaker's  Commentary  is  to  be  preferred — ^homelessness, 
describing  the  state  of  the  Jews  cast  out  of  their  homes  and  driven  into  banishment ;  all  her 
pleasant  things  which  were  firom  the  days  of  old.  Bv  the  riven  of  Babylon,  there  ve  eat 
down,  yea,  toe  wept  when  we  remembered  Zion.  "Sorrows  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering 
happier  things."  When  her  people  fell  into  the  hand  of  the  adversary,  and  there  is  no 
helper  to  her;  the  adversaries  see  her,  they  sneer  at  her  cessations  {deiUation$  in  Revised 
Version).  This  last  Hebrew  word  occurs  only  here.  Its  root  means  to  cease,  and  so  this 
derivative  is  applied,  as  by  Plumptre,  to  "the  enforced  Sabbaths  of  untilled  land,  and  the 
Sabbaths  conspicuous  for  the  absence  of  any  religious  rites."  This  seems  far-fetched,  except 
as  to  the  latter  part,  and  this  should  be  considered  as  but  a  portion  of  the  Jewish  customs 
which  had  been  discontinued.  If  Romans  derided  the  Jews  for  cessation  from  work  on  the 
seventh  day  of  the  week,  Babylonians  would  not.  They  may  have  mocked  at  the  faith  of  Israel 
in  the  supremacy  of  Jehovah,  seeing  they  regarded  Him  as  a  subjugated  national  deity ;  but 
**  it  was  no  subject  of  wonder  to  the  Babylonians  that  the  Jews  celebrated  a  weekly  day  of  rest, 
as  they  had  one  of  their  own  {sabbatu) " — (Cheyne). 

(n)  Ver.  8.  Jemsalem  hss  sinned  a  sin,  has  broken  the  law  of  her  God  with  determinate 
will,  and  bears  the  natural  penalty ;  therefore  she  is  become  as  an  nnolean  one ;  not  as  one 
who  has  been  removed  (Authorised  Version)  as  a  captive  from  her  native  place,  but  as  one  set 
aside  because  of  impurity.  All  who  honoured  her  despise  her,  for  they  see  her  nakedness ;  her 
evil  is  laid  bare ;  the  very  peoples  who  had  respected  her,  and  who  had  far  less  knowledge  of 
what  was  right  and  true  than  she,  are  now  alive  to  the  real  character  of  her  procedure,  and 
count  it  shamefully  bad.  Even  Nebuzar-adan,  captain  of  the  Babylonian  guard,  could  say,  after 
her  overthrow,  Beeauie  ye  have  sinned  against  Jehovah  and  have  not  obeyed  His  voice,  therefore 
this  tiling  is  come  upon  you  (Jer.  xl.  3).  There  was  still  a  sensitiveness  of  consdenoe  in  the 
ideal  Jerusalem  ;  Yea,  die  sighs  and  turns  backward,  moaning,  as  if  conscious  of  spectators 
and  mortified  by  her  open  shame,  she  is  fain  to  screen  herself,  *'  as  those  in  such  case  would  do 
that  have  any  shamefacedness  or  spark  of  ingenuity  at  all  in  them." 

(D)  Ver.  9.  Her  evil  is  very  obvious,  her  defilement  is  in  her  skirts,  not  below,  but  manifest 
on  her  long  flowing  robe  ;  she  remembers  not  her  latter  end ;  as  she  continued  sinning,  she  paid 
no  regard  to  the  issue  of  it  all,  and,  in  consequence  of  this  want  of  forethought,  she  is  eome 
down  wonderfully,  dovm  to  the  lowest  depth  of  misery,  an  astonishment  to  herself,  and  to  aU 
around  her ;  there  is  no  comforter  for  her.  Her  conviction  of  sin,  and  shame,  and  sorrow 
impels  her  to  go  to  her  God,  and  she  cries,  See,  0  Jehovah,  my  aflUctien,  for  the  enemy  doth 
magnify  himself ,  the  appeal  is  supported  on  two  bases :  (1)  Her  humiliation;  and,  (2)  The 
arrogant  pretensions  of  her  foes  ;  surely  with  some  vague  hope  like  that  of  the  Psalm-writer, 
Though  I  walk  in  the  midst  of  trouble,  thou  wilt  revive  me  ;  thou  shalt  stretch  fortfi  tftine  hand 
against  the  wrath  of  tfiine  enemies,  and  thy  right  hand  shaJU  save  me  (cxxxviii.  7). 

(>)  Ver.  10.  His  hand  the  adversary  stretches  out  upon  all  her  pleasant  things,  treasures 
of  all  sorts,  thus  described  by  Isaiah  (Ixiv.  11,  12),  Thy  holy  cities  are  become  a  wUdemess, 
Zion  is  become  a  wilderness,  Jerusalem  a  desolation.  Our  hdy  and  beautiful  house,  where  our 
faihers  praised  thee,  is  burned  %o%th  fire,  and  ail  our  pleasant  things  are  laid  waste.  The  plunder- 
ing of  the  Temple  was  the  most  aggravating  of  aill,  for  she  has  seen  the  nations  enter  her 
sanctuary,  whom  thou  didst  command  that  they  should  not  enter  into  thine  assembly; 
heathens,  who  were  not  admissible  even  into  the  congregation  of  the  Lord — into  religious  com- 
munion with  Israel — had  trod  the  courts  which  were  most  holy  to  Jewish  worshippen^  and 
10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,  chap.  I. 

where  only  priests  could  legitimately  gri,  and  they  had  pillaged  the  pUasarU  ve$seU  of  the  KouH 
of  Jehovah,  therewith  to  adorn  the  shrines  of  their  idol  deities. 

(3)  Ver.  11.  In  Ter.  4  the  priests  sigh  ;  in  ver.  8  Jerusalem  Kighs,  and  here  one  and  all,  heoanso 
in  addition  to  the  religious  oollapse,  a  terrible  bodily  hunger  is  universally  felt,  so  all  h«r  people 
an  dghing,  are  eeeking  bread.  This  use  of  participles  signifies  that  both  the  past  and  present 
condition  of  the  people  is  regarded  by  the  writer.  He  saw  that  the  scanty  meals  to  which  they 
wer.*  reduced  when  beleaguered  by  the  Chaldean  army  had  not  ended  after  the  Temple  had  been 
desecrated  and  despoiled  ;  they  had  parted  and  were  parting  with  ornaments,  jewellery,  every 
one  of  their  valuables,  merely  to  keep  body  and  soul  together ;  they  give  their  pleasant  things 
for  food ;  after  a  dose  siege  of  eighteen  months,  preceded  by  the  overrunning  of  the  country, 
food -supplies  must  have  been  all  but  exhausted  ;  to  restore  their  seal,  to  bring  bai'k  life,  to 
tlio$e  who  are  drawn  unto  death  (1  Kings  zvii.  21),  and  spiritually  to  rexiore  the  twL  (Ps.  xiz.  8). 
There  is  bread  of  which  if  any  man  eat  he  shall  live  for  ever,  given  by  Him  who  gave  His  Jleth 
for  the  life  of  the  world.  Was  there  any  undefinable  longing  for  such  bread  in  the  following 
appeal,  similar  to  that  of  ver.  9»  but  somewhat  intensified  ?  See,  0  Jehovah,  and  behold,  for 
I  am  become  despised  1  Would  He  take  away  her  reproach  !  Thus  a  transition  is  made  to 
the  lamentation  and  supplication  of  Jerusalem  herself  in  the  following  half  of  this  elegy. 

Vers.  12-22.  These  verses  form  the  second  section  of  the  poem.  The  city  is  represented  as 
oomplHining  of  its  harassed  condition,  12-16,  and  then  as  acknowledging  her  persistent  sin  in 
sight  of  her  righteous  Lord,  who  will  deal  out  justice  to  all  trauBgressors,  17-22. 

(7)  ^®f*  ^*^'  ^o  curtness  of  the  opening  Hebrew  phrase  causea  doubt  as  to  its  proper 
explanatiun.  Hence  by  some  it  is  taken  as  an  address  to  the  wayfarers,  and  is  paraphrased  in 
words  like,  *'  I  pray  all  you,"  or  '*  Oh,  that  my  cry  might  reach  all  you."  By  others  it  is  taken 
as  a  question,  and  more  reasonably  ;  fo  they  explain  it  by  words  like,  **  Does  not  my  misery 
eome  to  you  I  *'  or  '*  Do  you  not  observe  what  has  befallen  me  ? "  In  either  case  it  conveys  a 
call,  as  from  the  weeping,  solitary  woman,  sitting  on  the  ground,  to  all  travellers  to  consider 
her  deplorable  state,  and  our  English  Versions  have  caught  the  right  tone.  Is  It  nothing  to 
yon,  all  ye  passers  by  the  way  ?  Im  there  nothing  in  my  condition  to  produce  seriousness  in 
you  instead  of  indifference  or  levity!  Nothing  to  warn  you!  Nothing  to  call  forth  your 
sympathy !  Behold  and  see  if  there  is  sorrow  like  my  sorrow.  The  feeling  of  a  troubled 
pressent  tends  to  make  it  loom  before  the  sufferer  as  if  there  never  was  the  like  before,  which  is 
done  to  me  whom  Jehovah  has  afflicted  in  the  day  of  the  heat  of  his  anger. 

The  ascription,  in  religious  addresses,  which  has  been  often  made  of  this  vene  to  the 
sufferings  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  far  from  commendable.  In  a  very  real  sense  His 
sorrows  were  onparalleled,  but  innocent  of  sin  though  He  was.  He  made  no  attempt  to  call 
attention  to  Himself  as  peculiarly  afflicted.  His  thought  was  for  others'  sufferings.  Weep  not 
for  me,  hut  weep  for  yoiirtdvet  and  for  your  children, 

(D)  Yen  1 3.  Here  begin  references  to  various  events  which  had  contributed  to  her  unequalled 
sorrow.  Fire,  a  net,  sickness  and  a  yoke  are  set  forth.  The  figure  presented  in  the  last  olause 
of  the  preceding  verse  is  now  more  fully  traced.  From  on  high  he  sent  Are,  Ujnyn  the  wicked 
He  $hall  rain  fire  (Ps.  xL  6),  into  my  bones,  where  pain  is  supposed  to  be  most  keenly  felt. 
She  recognises  that  the  cause,  which  is  behind  all  visible  causes,  of  her  pain  is  in  the  spiritual 
realm,  and  that  in  the  face  of  the  Eternal  Righteousness  her  bones  must  be  shrivelled  np ;  and 
it  overpowered  them.  The  next  figure  is.  He  spread  a  net  for  my  feet;  he  turned  me 
back.  So  entangled,  she  oould  not  go  away  and  escape  capture.  The  third  figure  is  sickness. 
He  made  me  dMolate,  all  the  day  fainl  The  light  of  her  life  was  quenched,  and  she  was 
constantly  exhausted. 

0)  Ver.  14.  There  follows  a  figure  from  agricultural  pursuits.  A  yoke  [formed]  of  my 
transgressions  is  bound  by  his  hand.  The  Hebrew  verb  here  is  of  uncertain  meaning,  and 
there  is  no  rendering  preferable  to  that  which  is  given.  She  has  made  thongs  or  cords  for  the 
yoke  with  her  sins ;  they  are  twisted  together.  Her  misdomgs  have  acted  and  reacted  that 
they  are  knit  together,  so  as  to  c<mstitute  a  thraldom  which  cannot  be  thrown  off ;  so  inter- 
twined they  have  come  np  upon  my  neck.  A  consequence  of  this  enthralment  by  the  knotted 
yoke  is,  it  has  made  my  strength  to  fail,  literally  to  stumble,  t.&,  to  stagger  from  the  weakness 
and  exhaustion  incident  to  such  a  fearful  yoke.  The  yoke  of  transgression  is  hard  ;  the  yoke 
of  Christ  is  easy.  The  conviction  is  now  expressed  that  the  Divine  Ruler  is  at  work,  and  a  new 
phase  riites  in  the  lamentation.  The  Lord  has  given  me  into  the  hands  [of  those  that  are 
against  me].  I  am  not  able  to  stand  np.  She  can  do  nothing  but  yield.  Consciousness  of 
transgression  paralyses  body  and  mind.  Note  that  it  is  the  general,  not  the  covenant  name  of 
her  (^  which  she  utters.  This  title  occurs  fourteen  times  by  itself  in  this  book,  while  in  the 
Prophecies  of  Jeremiah  only  along  with  the  covenant  name.  The  reason  for  this  usage  of  Lord, 
and  of  refraining  from  Jehovah  has  yet  to  be  found.  To  say  that  the  people,  in  their  punish- 
ment, felt  the  Lordship  of  the  Deity  more,  and  His  covenant  love  to  them  less,  is  a  statement 
which  is  not  confirmed  by  an  examination  of  the  passages  in  the  Lamentations  where  each  nam* 
is  found. 

^D)  Ver.  15.  Inability  to  resist  is  associated  with  other  fatal  experiences.  He  has  set  at 
nanght  all  my  strong-enes  ;  not  on  an  open  battlefield,  not  in  a  struggle  Hh  hold  an  important 
poet,  is  it  that  hor  able-bodied  men  are  counted  for  nothing  before  uie  Chaldean  host ;  losses 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  I.  HO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTAR  Y :  LA  MES  TA  TIONS, 

Ihey  might  have  had,  "the  babble  reputation**  attached  to  them,  but  not  when  cooped  up  in 
the  city,  in  the  midst  of  me.  He  has  oonroked  a  solemn  assembly  against  me ;  it  it  the 
word  used  of  the  annual  and  other  religious  festivals,  as  in  ver.  4,  and  intimates  that  to  the 
enemies  of  Jerusalem  a  call  had  been  issued  to  gather  at  an  appointed  time  and  have  siioh  joy 
as  might  be  found  in  the  ability  to  crash  my  young  men,  those  who  promised  to  be  the 
strength  of  the  nation  in  the  generation  following.  And,  to  make  the  overthrow  complete,  the 
maidens,  who  had  been  carefully  guarded  from  violence,  the  Lord  has  trodden  as  in  a  wine- 
press the  virgin  daughter  of  Judah.  The  treading  of  the  grapes  in  a  wine-press,  as  iliustra- 
tive  of  the  execution  of  divine  judgment,  is  not  unusual  in  the  Scriptures  (Isa.  Ixiii  6 ;  BeT. 
xiv.  19),  and  signifies  both  suffering  and  good  results  from  suffering  rightly  ! 


**  Still  hope  and  trust,  it  sang ;  the  rod 
Must  fall,  the  wine-press  must  be  trod.** 


{V)  Ver.  16.  Having  shown  by  the  events  how  terrible  her  sorrow  oould  not  but  be,  Jemsalem 
reiterates  her  complaint  with  a  flopd  of  tears.  Because  of  these  things  I  weep;  mine  eyey 
mine  eye  runs  down  with  water,  so  great  is  her  trouble  and  so  onalleviated,  for  far  from  me 
is  the  comforter,  the  restorer  of  my  souL  My  children  are  beoome  desolate,  and  cannot 
chetr  me,  for  the  enemy  has  proTailed. 

(€) )  Ver.  17.  The  sobs  of  the  weeper  stifle  her  utteranoe.  In  the  pause  the  poet  himself 
-seems  to  take  up  the  word,  something  like  the  part  of  the  diorus  in  Greek  tragedies,  and 
describes  the  state  of  the  three  personified  objects — ^the  Temple,  the  people,  the  city.  He  sees 
that  Son,  representing  the  houie  of  prayer  for  all  nations,  stretches  out  her  hands,  as  praying 
in  a  laTui  where  no  water  is,  but  in  suspense  ;  there  is  no  comforter  for  her.  He  sees  that 
Jehovah,  her  covenant  God,  has  commanded  oonoeming  Jacob,  representing  the  people  whom 
He  chone  for  His  heritage,  that  those  round  about  him,  the  neighbouring  nations,  diould  be 
his  adversaries.  He  sees  that  Jerusalem,  representing  the  government  and  national  aspira- 
tions, has  become  as  an  unclean  one  among  them  (ver.  8). 

(V)  Ver.  18.  During  her  pause  the  weeper  has  received  new  thoughts.  Like  the  younger 
ton  when  feeding  on  husks,  she  has  come  to  herself  so  far  that  she  is  ready  to  own  the  justice  of 
Jehovah  in  her  sufferings.  He  is  righteous,  Jehoyah,  for  I  have  disobeyed  his  Toloe,  rejected 
the  wordit  of  His  mouth.  Yet  she  sorely  wants  human  pity,  and  cries  to  them.  Hear,  I  pray ; 
all  ye  i>eople8,  and  see  my  sorrow ;  the  fluwer  of  her  youth  has  gone  into  captiYity. 

(p)  Ver.  19.  She  addresses  Jehovah,  and  tells  how  her  appeals  to  the  friends  of  her  proeperoos 
days  have  proved  futile  ;  I  called  to  my  loyers ;  they  have  deceived  me,  disappointed  my  hopes ; 
and  not  only  they  have  failed  ;  my  priests  and  my  elders  have  expired  in  the  city,  where  they 
had  been  high  in  iMwition,  the  medium  between  God  and  His  worshippers,  and  leaders  in  the 
ttate,  when  they  sought  food  for  themselves  to  restore  their  souls,  they  were  starving,  like 
the  common  people  in  the  closely  invested  city,  and  made  a  strenuous  quest  for  tome  meant  to 
keep  themselves  alive  in  famine. 

("1)  Ver.  20.  Again  she  refers  to  Jehovah  as  to  her  forlomnest  and  aggravated  sin.  See,  O 
Jehovah,  for  I  am  in  distress,  and  this  distress  is  felt :  (1)  Internally.  My  bowels  are  troubled, 
my  heart  is  turned  within  me ;  agitation  and  anguish  excite  her,  even  her  vital  parts,  at  it 
were,  change  their  position.  The  reason  therefor  is  not  ascribed  to  man's  neglect  and  in- 
humanity to  her,  but,  (2)  to  her  disregard  of  God,  for,  she  confesses,  I  have  grievously  dis- 
obeyed. The  penalty  she  undergoes  is  calamitous  indeed  ;  abroad  the  sword  bereaveth,  she 
is  rendered  a  mourner  because  of  slaut^hter  in  the  open  country  and  in  the  streets  ;  at  home  is 
like  death,  as  if  nothing  but  the  dead  were  in  the  houses — so  overpowering  was  the  exhaustion 
from  Btarvati(»n  and  diseases.  This  somewhat  halting  explanation  may  be  compared  with  the 
free  rendering  of  the  Septuagint  translator — at  leant  there  is  no  extant  authority  in  the  Hebrew 
for  an  equivalent  reading  — Ou^nc^  the  stoord  made  me  childless  (u  death  in  the  house, 

(C^)  Ver.  21.  A  transition  is  made  from  unfaithful  friends  to  open  enemies,  and  they  too  are 
denounced.  The  sounds  of  her  grief  have  echoed  far  off  among  persons  unnamed,  they  have 
heard  that  I  sigh ;  again  the  refrain  of  this  chapter  is  repeated,  there  is  no  oomforter  for  me. 
The  frequent  allusions  to  a  personal  comforter,  vers.  2,  9, 16, 17,  21,  are  worthy  of  consideration, 
as  if  there  was  a  feeling  after  a  higher  gift  not  yet  distinctly  perceived.  All  my  enemies  have 
heard  of  my  evil,  and  understand  something  of  the  unseen  influences  which  pnxluced  it ;  they 
rejoice  that  thou  hast  done  it.  From  Jer.  xl.  2,  8,  it  appears  that  even  foes  recognised  that 
tlie  calamitous  state  of  the  Jews  proceeded  from  their  disobedience  to  Jehovah,  thouffh  their 
joy  may  have  been  more  because  of  her  fall  than  for  the  confirmation  given  to  the  truth  of  the 
Lord.  Nevertheless,  vengeance  for  their  misdeeds  was  coming  on.  The  Lord  bat  announced 
a  Hay  of  judgment  on  the  heathen  as  well  as  on  Judah,  and  the  cup  of  wrath  shall  be  drunk 
from ;  thou  bringest  the  day  thou  hast  announced,  and  they  shall  beoome  like  me  in  suffer- 
ing their  penalties. 

(n)  Ver.  22.  Jerusalem  further  formulates  the  wish  that  the  retribution  due  to  their  guilty 

actions  should  not  be  put  a»ide  ;  Let  all  their  evil  come  before  thee,  and  do  unto  them  as 

thou  hast  done  unto  me,  for  all  my  transgressions.     The  first  natural  cry  of  those  that  are 

pimithed  is  for  justice  all  round.     "  If  I  suffer  for  every  wrong,  make  every  other  wrongdoet 

12 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,  ohap.  i. 


Miffer  equally  with  me ! "  In  this  deeire  there  appean  the  oonsoioosness  that  Jehovah  nrasl 
pan  judgment  upon  every  form  of  sin,  and  rightly,  for  He  if  of  purer  eyet  than  to  behold  iniquity; 
and  also  a  grim  expectation  of  revenge,  nnder  which  Edom,  Moab,  Babylon,  &a,  disappeared. 
We  may  say  that  confession  of  her  own  transgressions  should  have  been  aocompani^  with 
sympathy  and  pity  for  other  sinners  ;  bat  the  time  for  that  love  of  enemies, did  not  arrive  for 
many  a  day.  Her  own  sad  state  agahi  moves  her,  For  my  eighB  aie  manyj  and  my  h«art  ii 
faint.  So  Jeremiah  felt  (viiL  18).  "With  these  words  the  sound  of  this  iMnentotkm  dieo 
away.** 

EOMILJBTICS. 

Gbibf  foe  a  Ruined  Omr. 

(Verses  1,  2.) 

There  is  a  fine  piece  of  statuary  representing  the  figure  of  a  Hebrew  female  in 
a  sitting  posture,  the  head  and  shoulders  slightly  bent  forward,  the  hair  escaping 
in  disordered  tresses  from  the  neatly  plaited  fillets,  the  arms,  carelessly  crossed 
over  each  other,  resting  helplessly  in  her  lap,  the  eyes,  moistened  with  tears,  gazing 
wistfully  on  the  ground,  and  the  face  expressing  in  every  feature  the  tenderest 
pathos  of  sorrow.  The  whole  figure  seems  to  quiver  with  irrepressible  emotion. 
Every  part  is  moulded  with  voluptuous  grace,  and  is  susceptible  of  the  deepest 
passion,  but  it  is  the  passion  of  an  inconsolable  grief !  The  genius  of  the  artist 
has  thus  sought  to  idealise  unhappy  Judah  weeping  amid  the  scattered  fragments 
of  national  ruin.  It  is  a  reproduction,  by  the  art  of  the  nineteenth  century,  of 
the  same  sad  image  that  appeared  on  the  well-known  medal  of  Titus,  struck  to 
celebrate  his  triumph  over  Jerusalem — a  woman  sitting  weeping  beneath  a  palm- 
tree,  and  below  is  inscribed  the  legend  Judea  capta.  It  is  startling  to  observe 
how  exactly  the  heathen  conqueror  copied  the  poetic  description  by  Jeremiah  of 
the  forlorn  condition  to  which  his  beloved  country  was  reduced.  These  words 
describe  a  pathetic  picture  of  grief  for  a  ruined  city, 

L  Because  of  its  ntter  desolation.  ''  How  doth  the  city  sit  solitary  that  was 
foil  of  people  "  (ver.  1)  There  is  a  tradition  that  Jeremiah  wrote  these  elegies  in 
a  grotto  that  is  still  shown,  situated  in  the  face  of  a  rocky  hill  on  the  western  side 
of  Jerusalem ;  and  there  is  a  freshness  and  versatility  in  the  images  employed,  as 
if  every  time  he  glanced  at  the  ruins  of  the  ill-fated  city,  full  in  his  view,  he  was 
unable  to  repress  a  new  outburst  of  griel  He  had  seen  Jerusalem  in  prosperity, 
its  Temple  thronged  with  worshippers,  its  commerce  flourishing,  its  people  content 
and  joyous ;  but  now  all  is  changed  ;  the  market-place  is  empty,  the  streets  silent, 
the  princes  and  people  in  exile,  and  the  Temple,  which  the  Jew  fondly  dreamed 
invulnerable,  was  a  heap  of  ruins.  Such  desolation  was  unparalleled  in  the  history 
of  the  nation  and  in  the  experience  of  the  prophet,  and  his  heart  was  riven  with 
anguish.  We  may  read  about  the  decay  of  great  cities  without  emotion  ;  but  to 
witness  the  demolition  of  our  own  city  is  a  different  matter. 

IL  Becanse  of  the  loss  of  its  beloved  cliiefl  ''  How  is  she  become  as  a 
widow  I "  (ver.  1).  A  city  is  often  described  as  the  mother  of  ^ts  inhabitants,  the 
king  as  husband,  the  princes  as  children.  When  the  king  is  gone,  and  not  even 
a  representative  is  left,  the  city  is  widowed  and  orphaned  indeed.  The  condition 
of  an  Eastern  widow  is  pitiable.  Her  hair  is  cut  short,  she  strips  off  all  her 
ornaments,  eats  the  coarsest  food,  fasts  often,  and  is  all  but  an  outcast  in  the 
family  of  her  late  husband.  The  image  employed  by  the  prophet  would  therefore 
be  painfully  suggestive  to  the  Jewish  mind. 

111.  Because  of  its  humiliating  snl^ection.  ''  She  that  was  great  among  the 
nations  and  princess  among  the  provinces,  how  is  she  become  tributary  t"  (ver*  1). 
The  older  meaning  of  the  word  tributary  refers  not  to  a  money-payment,  but  to 
personal  labour  (Josh.  xvi.  10).  The  city  that  ruled  from  the  Nile  to  the 
Euphrates  is  now  reduced  to  slavery,  and  the  few  inhabitants  who  are  left  must 
render  bond-service  to  a  heathen  potentate.     It  is  galling  to  a  once  proud  and 

13 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Cff  AF  HOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  T:  LAMENT  A  TI0N8. 


prosperous  people  to  be  thus  hnmiliatecL  They  who  will  not  serve  God  faithfrjlj 
must  be  compelled  to  serve  their  enemies. 

lY.  Because  of  its  being  cruelly  betrayed.  ''  Among  all  her  lovers  sbe  hath 
none  to  comfort  her.  All  her  friends  have  dealt  treacherously  with  her ;  they 
have  become  her  enemies  "  (ver.  2).  Her  allies,  who  made  great  protestations  of 
attachment  when  all  was  prosperous,  not  only  forsake  her  when  adversity  comes, 
but  unite  with  her  enemies  in  completing  her  destruction.  It  is  a  bitter  irony  of 
human  professions  when  love  turns  to  enmity  and  friendship  to  treachery.  **  A 
loose  tooth  and  a  fickle  friend  are  two  evils."  The  sooner  we  are  clear  of  them 
the  better ;  but  who  likes  the  wrencb  t  If  we  lose  the  comfort  of  God,  we  are  not 
likely  to  find  help  in  man.     We  can  trust  in  no  one  if  we  cannot  trust  in  GkxL 

y.  Is  expressed  with  irresistible  pathos.  ''  She  weepeth  sore  in  the  nigbt» 
and  her  tears  are  on  her  cheeks  "  (ver.  2).  It  was  a  fine  touch  of  poetic  genius 
when  the  prophet  selected  a  sorrowful  woman  as  an  emblem  of  a  disconsolate  city. 
Woman  is  never  so  fascinating,  so  tender,  so  bewitohingly  irresistible  in  com- 
manding sympathy  as  when  she  is  in  tears !  The  hardest  heart  is  melted,  the 
sternest  enemy  subdued.  The  sorrow  of  Judah  was  overwhelming  because  the 
ruin  was  so  unexpected  and  unparalleled.  No  city  has  been  wept  over  like  Jeru- 
salem. The  melancholy  wail  has  been  prolonged  through  the  centuries,  and  is 
reproduced  to-day.  The  Lamentations  are  still  read  yearly  by  the  Jews  to  com- 
memorate the  burning  of  the  Temple.  Every  Friday,  Israelites  young  and  old,  of 
both  sexes,  gather  at  the  wailingplace  in  Jerusalem,  where  a  few  of  the  old  stones 
of  the  Temple  still  remain  in  the  wall,  and,  amid  tears,  recite  these  sad  verses 
and  suitable  psalms,  as  they  fervently  kiss  the  stonea  On  the  9th  of  the 
month  Ab,  nearly  our  July,  this  dirge,  composed  about  600  years  before  Christ, 
is  read  aloud  in  every  synagogue  over  the  world.  Weeping  is  not  repentance ; 
but  the  tears  of  the  contrite  do  not  flow  in  vain.  They  are  noted  in  heaven,  and 
God  will  help. 

LKSBON&— 1.  The  ruin  of  a  once  prosperotu  city  is  a  sad  and  sugfesHve 
spectacle.  2,  The  miseries  of  others  sh^Ui  rouse  (mr  compassion.  Z.  The  greatest 
gri^  finds  relirf  in  tears. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yer.  1.  '*  How  doth  the  city  sit  soli-  reyerses  of  fortune.      1.  The   ruler 

tary  that  was  full  of  people."    A  popn-  becomes  the  ruled.     2.  The  free  are  the 

lous  city.     1.  A  busy  scene  of  activity,  conquered.     3.  Wealth  exchanged  for 

gaiety,   sin,   sorrow,    and    complicated  poverty.     4.  Life  dependent  on  abject 

experiences.      2.  Produces    a    strange  submission  to  those  who  were  once  our 

sensation  upon  the  belated  visitor  when  inferiors. 

it  is  hushed  in  the  silence  of  sleep.  Ver.  2.  ''She  weepeth  sore  in  the 

8.  Its  ruin  a  subject  of  profound  sorrow  night,  and  her  tears  are  on  her  cheeks." 

and  suggestive  refiections  to  one  who  The  pathos  of  tears.     I.  A  sublime 

has  known  it  in  the  flood-tide  of  its  spectacle  in  the  ideal  woman.     2.  An 

prosperity.  evidence  of  profound  sorrow.  8.  Gathers 

—  "  How  has  she  become  as  a  widow,  its  significance  from  the  character  of 
she  that  was  great  among  the  nations."  the  calamity  it  bewaila  4.  A  merciful 
Widowhood.  1.  Suggestive  of  loss —  relief  to  an  intensely  sensitive  nature, 
loss  of  happiness,  solace,  guardianship,  —  '*  All  her  friends  have  dealt  trea- 
affection.  2.  Implies  loneliness,  dejec-  cherously  with  her ;  they  are  become  her 
lion,  sorrow.  3.  A  painful  experience  enemies."  The  flddeness  of  human 
when  contrasted  with  a  former  state  of  fHendships.  L  Genuine  friends  are 
affluence  and  grandeur.  rare.     They  may  usually  be  counted  on 

—  "Princes  among  the  provinces, how  a  thumb  and  finger ;  the  one  is  the  wife 
is  she  become  tributary."     The  strange  or  husband,  the  other  is  the  mother, 

14 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMIIETIC  OMMBNTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAF.  L 


who  is  father,  mother,  and  a  great  deal 
more.  There  is  no  folly  so  fanatical  as 
that  which  flings  away  a  real  friend. 
XL  Friends  are  jplentifuL  wlien  we  do  not 
need  their  hdp.  They  depend  on  ns 
more  than  ever  we  had  occasion  to 
depend  on  them.  While  we  can  help 
them,  their  friendship  is  effusiye  and 
their  vows  of  fealty  emphatic  When 
our  power  declines,  so  does  their  attach- 
ment :  when  our  circumstances  alter,  so 
do  they.  They  are  swallow  friends, 
fluttering  merrily  ahout  us  in  the  summer- 
time of  prosperity,  hut  suddenly  become 
inyisible  when  the  winter  of  adversity 
sets  in.  UL  It  %»  a  ead  proof  of  the 
perversity  of  human  nature  when  a  friend 
is  transformed  into  an  enemy.  The 
enmity  is  often  the  more  rancorous 
because  of  the  intimacy  of  a  former 
friendship.  The  secrets  confided  in  a 
moment  of  familiarity  are  used  against 
us  with  a  studied  ingenuity  of  irritating 
spitefulness.  It  is  a  painful  shock  to 
an  unsophisticated  youth,  and  leaves  a 
wound  that  time  cannot  heal,  when  he 
discovers  for  the  first  time  the  base 
treachery  of  a  pretended  friend. 

iLLUBTRATioNa— Mutual  sympatliy 
in  BOCTOW.  When  Henry  VIL  heard 
of  the  sudden  death  of  his  son  Prince 
Arthur  at  Ludlow  Castle  in  1502,  he 
said,  "  Send  some  one  for  the  Queen ; 
let  me  bear  this  grief  with  her."  She 
came  and  did  her  best  to  comfort  him. 
She  then  retired  to  her  own  room,  was 
overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  and  swooned 
away.  It  was  now  his  turn  to  cheer 
and  comfort  On  both  sides  it  was, 
"  Let  me  bear  this  grief  with  her,''  and, 
''Let  me  bear  this  grief  with  him." 
And  thus  in  their  retreat  at  Green- 
wich the  King  and  Queen  of  England 
mourned  in  silence  for  the  loss  of  their 
fiist-bom  son. 

—  It  is  the  weeping  clond  that 
blesses  the  earth. 

Oxief  nselam  tlptt  does  not  lead  to 
active  help.  We  are  sorry  (for  the 
English  are  a  kind-hearted  people)  for 
the  victims  of  our  luxury  and  neglect ; 
sorry  for  the  thousands  whom  we  let 
die  every  year  by  preventible  diseases, 
because  we  are  either  too  busy  or  too 


comfortable  to  save  their  lives;  sorry 
for  the  savages  whom  we  exterminate 
by  no  deliberate  intent,  but  by  the 
mere  weight  of  our  heavy  footstep; 
sorry  for  the  thousands  who  are  used 
up  yearly  in  certain  trades  in  minister- 
ing to  our  comfort,  even  to  our  very 
luxuries  and  frivolities;  sorry  for  the 
Sheffield  grinders,  who  go  to  work  as 
to  certain  death ;  sorry  for  the  people 
whose  lower  jaws  decay  away  in  lucifer- 
match  factories ;  sorry  for  the  diseases 
of  artificial  flower-makers;  sorry  for 
the  boys  working  in  glass-houses  whole 
days  and  nights  on  end  without  reet, 
**  labouring  in  the  very  fire,  and  weary- 
ing themselves  with  weary  vanity." 
We  are  sorry  for  them  all,  as  the  giant 
is  for  the  worm  on  which  he  treads. 
Alas  1  poor  worm.  But  the  giant 
must  walk  on.  He  is  necessary  to  the 
universe,  and  the  worm  is  not  So  we 
are  sorry,  for  half  an  hour,  and  glad  too 
(for  we  are  a  kind-hearted  people)  to 
hear  that  charitable  persons  or  the 
(Government  are  going  to  do  something 
towards  alleviating  these  miseries.  And 
then  we  return,  too  many  of  us,  each 
to  his  own  ambition,  comforting  our- 
selves with  the  thought  that  we  did  not 
make  the  world,  and  we  are  not  re- 
sponsible for  it — C.  Kingsley. 

The  All-seeing  Gkxl  and  the  lonely. 
Gkxi  sees  you  always.  There  is  no 
moment  when  He  does  not  eee  you, 
night  or  day,  waking  or  sleeping,  alone 
or  in  comftany.  It  is  told  of  Linnsus, 
the  famous  naturalist^  that  he  was 
greatly  impressed  with  this  thought, 
and  that  it  told  upon  his  conversation, 
his  writings,  and  his  conduct  He  felt 
the  importance  of  this  so  much«  that  he 
wrote  over  the  door  of  his  study  the 
Latin  words,  Innocui  vivUe;  Numen 
ad  est,   '*  Live  innocently  ;Grod  is  here  1" 

Ohristianity  relieyes  the  miseries 
of  great  dtiea  Look  at  those  noble 
buildings  which  the  generosity  of  onr 
fellow-countrymen  have  erected  in  all 
our  great  cities.  You  may  truly  find 
in  them  sennons  in  stones;  sermons 
for  rich  and  poor  alike.  They  preach 
to  the  rich,  these  hospitals,  that  the 
sick-bed  levels  all  alike ;  that  they  are 
the  equals  and  brothers  of  the  poor  in 

15 


Digitized  by 


Google 


cmAP.  1. 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


the  terrible  liability  to  suffer.  They 
preach  to  the  poor  that  they  are,  through 
Christianity,  the  equals  of  the  rich  in 
their  means  and  opportunities  of  care. 
Whether  the  founders  so  intended  or 
not,  these  hospitals  bear  direct  witness 
for  Christ  They  do  this,  and  would 
do  it  even  if — which  Qod  forbid  I — 
the  name  of  Christ  was  never  mentioned 
within  their  walla  That  may  seem  % 
paradox,  but  it  is  none;  for  it  is  a 
historic  fact  that  hospitals  are  the  crea- 
tion of  Christian  times  and  of  Christian 
men.  The  heathen  knew  them  not. 
In  the  great  city  of  ancient  Rome,  as 
far  as  I  have  been  able  to  discover, 
there  was  not  a  single  hospital,  not  even 
a  single  charitable  institution.  Fearful 
thought  1  A  city  of  a  million  and  a 
half  inhabitanta,  the  centre  of  human 
civilisation,  and  not  an  hospital  there ! 
The  Roman  Dives  paid  his  physician ; 
the  Roman  Lazarus  literally  lay  at  his 
gates  full  of  sores,  till  he  died  the 
death  of  the  street  dogs  which  licked 
those  sores,  and  was  carried  forth  to  be 
thrust  under  ground  awhile,  till  the 
same  dogs  came  to  quarrel  over  his 
bonea  The  misery  and  helplessness  of 
the  lower  classes  in  the  great  city  of  the 
Roman  Empire,  till  the  Church  of  Christ 
arose  literally  with  healing  in  its  wings, 
cannot,  I  believe,  be  exaggerated. — 0, 
Kingaiey, 

—  When  yon  hear  a  man  praising 
'^  the  good  old  times,"  ask  him  how  the 
peasantry  were  then  sheltered  and  fed. 

The  power  of  tears.  A  young  lady 
once  visited  a  lunatic  asylum,  and  was 
led  into  a  room  where  there  was  but 
one  patient,  a  young  girl  of  the  same 
age  as  herself.  She  was  standing  in 
the  comer  of  the  room,  her  face  almost 
touching  the  wall.  In  stony  hopeless- 
ness she  stood.  She  neither  looked  nor 
•poke.    She  might  have  been  dead  bnt 


that  she  still  stood  on.  It  was  a  pathetic 
sight.  "  Will  you  speak  to  her  t "  asked 
the  doctor ;  '*  we  can  do  nothing  with 
her.  She  has  been  thus  for  days ;  but 
one  like  yourself  might  move  her." 
The  young  lady  stepped  forward,  and, 
with  an  upwaixl  cry  for  Divine  help, 
laid  her  hand  gently  on  the  shoulder  of 
the  listless  form,  and  with  tears  in  her 
eyes  spoke  one  sentence  of  yearning 
sympathy  and  compassion.  The  spell 
was  broken.  Tlie  poor  patient  turned, 
gazed  for  a  moment  on  the  face  of  the 
weeping  visitor,  and  then  burst  into 
tears  1  The  doctor  exclaimed,  **  Thank 
God,  she  may  now  be  saved!"  The 
visitor  could  never  recall  the  words  she 
had  used ;  but,  with  the  voice  softened 
with  tears,  they  had  done  their  work. 
The  still  and  c^Ud  indifference  of  the 
patient  gave  way  before  the  warmth  of 
a  pitying  heart  and  the  magic  touch  of 
a  hand  stretched  out  to  help.  The  elo- 
quence of  tears  is  irresistible. 

The  fiiends  of  yonth:  Where  are 
they? 

*'  I  goagbt  yon,  friends  of  youth,  in  inn  and 
shade, 
By  home  and  hearth;  but  not  ye  were 
not  therew 
Where  are  ye  gone,  beloved  one%  where? 
I  said. 
I  Ustened,  and  an  echo  answered,  Where  T 

Then  silence  fell  around :  upon  a  tomb 
I  aat  me  down,  dismayed  at  death,  and 
wept; 

Over  my  senses  fell  a  doad  of  gloom ; 
They  sank  before  the  mystery,  and  I  slept 

I  slept,  and  then  before  my  eyes  there  pressed 
Faoes  that  showed  a  bliss  unknown  before ; 

The  loTed  whom  I  in  life  had  onoe  possessed 
Game  one  by  one^  till  aU  were  there  onoe 
more. 

A  lifirht  of  nobler  worlds  was  round  thdr 


A  s^ow  of  better  aotions  made  them  fair. 

*  Tha  dead  are  there,'  triumphantly  I  said  ; 

Triumphantly  the eohoans wared,  'There' !" 


nOMILETIOS. 

Ths  Judgment  of  Oppression: 

(Verse  8.) 

I.  The  oppressor  is  in  torn  oppressed.     ''  Judah  is  gone  into  captivity  because 
of  affliction  and  because  of  great  servitude.'^    The  prophet  would  probably  have 
16 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOM  I  LET  10  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  otap.  L 


in  view  the  circumstances  narrated  in  Jer.  xxxiv.,  where  the  Jewish  princes  and 
people  were  threatened  with  captivity,  because,  in  violation  of  the  law,  they  with- 
drew the  grant  of  liberty  made  to  their  servants,  and  reduced  them  to  their  former 
servitude,  aggravated  with  increased  exactions.  It  is  an  oft-repeated  charge  against 
the  Jews  that  they  robbed  and  oppressed  their  own  countrymen ;  and  the  day 
came  when  they  were  robbed  and  oppressed  by  their  powerful  conquerors.  It  is 
a  cruel  abuse  of  power  when  it  is  used  to  injure  the  helpless.  Every  act  of  wrong- 
doing carries  within  it  the  germ  of  future  recompense.  The  boomerang  rebounds 
towanls  the  man  who  threw  it. 

II.  The  judgment  is  constant  **She  dwelleth  among  the  heathen ;  she  findeth 
no  rest."  The  endless  and  impossible  tasks  imposed  on  others  are  now  allotted 
to  the  oppressors.  There  is  no  prospect  of  release — they  dwell  among  the  heathen ; 
no  prospect  of  abatement — they  find  no  rest  Judgment  knows  nothing  of  pity : 
while  the  sinner  remains  obdurate,  its  mission  is  to  punish.  There  is  no  change 
in  the  punishment  until  there  is  a  moral  change  in  the  offender.  Divine  mercy 
alone  can  break  the  entail  of  suffering,  and  that  can  be  effected  only  by  satisfying 
the  claims  of  justices 

III.  The  judgment  cannot  be  evaded  by  flight.  "All  her  persecutors  oveiv 
took  her  between  the  straits.'*  Zedekiah  and  the  princes  of  Judah  strove  to  escape 
from  besieged  Jerusalem,  but  the  wary  Chaldeans  pursued  and  captured  them 
(Jer.  lit  7,  8).  The  people  fled  to  the  mountain  passes,  but  they  were  there  con- 
fronted by  the  enemy,  and  flight  was  impossible.  like  hunted  deer,  whichever 
way  they  turned,  they  found  themselves  within  the  toils  of  the  invaders.  The 
conquerors  held  them  as  in  a  grip  of  steel.  The  day  came  when  the  Chaldeans 
were  similarly  helpless  in  the  hands  of  a  superior  force.  Judgment  perpetually 
dogs  the  heel  of  the  oppressor,  and  eveiy  possible  avenue  of  escape  is  carefully 
guarded.  Oppression  is  the  attempt  of  an  imperious  will  to  have  its  own  way, 
and  it  does  not  answer.  *<  Not  thy  will  but  mine  be  done,"  changed  Paradise  into 
a  desert  ''Not  My  will  but  Thine  be  done,"  changed  the  desert  into  Paradise, 
and  made  Gethsemane  the  gate  of  glory. 

Lessons. — 1.  Oppression  is  a  short-sighted  policy.  2.  The  spoils  gained  by 
oppression  are  worthless.     S.  The  law  of  retribution  is  always  at  work, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yer.  S.  **  Judah  is  gone  into  captivity  Illustrations. — The  oppressor  pim- 

because  of  affliction  and  great  servitude."  ished.  There  is  an  £astem  fable  that 
A  time  of  trouble.  1.  Should  induce  a  wicked  and  oppressive  king  was  once 
careful  self-examination.  2.  Should  kissed  on  either  shoulder  by  the  Evil 
lead  us  to  reflect  whether  we  have  caused  One.  Immediately  there  sprang  there- 
trouble  to  others.  3.  Is  a  call  to  re-  from  two  serpents,  who,  furious  with 
pentance  and  moral  reform.  hunger,  attacked  the  man  and  strove  to 

—  **  She  dwelleth  among  the  heathen,  eat  into  his  brain.  The  terrified  king 
she  findeth  no  rest."  The  changes  of  tried  to  tear  them  away  and  cast  them 
life.  1.  Often  bring  us  into  the  midst  from  him,  when,  to  his  horror,  he  found 
of  strange,  unfriendly  a8sociation&  they  had  become  part  of  himself.  So 
2.  Interfere  with  growth  in  personal  is  it  with  those  who  yield  to  anger  or 
piety.     3.  Disturb  the  souFs  peace.  any  other  evil  passion.     The  man  who 

—  '*  All  her  persecutors  overtook  her  tyrannises  over  others  becomes  by  and 
between  the  straits."  The  spirit  of  by  the  victim  of  his  own  tyrannical 
persecntion,  1.  Instigated  by  hatred  temper,  and  all  efforts  to  deliver  him- 
to  the  good.  2.  Is  vigilant  and  active  self  are  in  vain ;  it  has  become  a  part 
in  its  cruel  pursuits.  3.  Takes  advan-  of  himself.  Wrong-doing  carries  with 
tage  of  the  helplessness  of  its  victims.  it  its  own  punishment     In  its  earlier 

17  B 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  L 


BOM  I  LET  IC  COMMBNTAR  Y :  I A  MENTA  TIONS. 


stages  we  fancy  it  will  be  easy  at  any 
time  to  do  right ;  but  when  we  try,  we 
are  helpless. 
The  oppressor  a  selfish  man. 

"  He  pours  no  cordial  in  the  wounda  of  pain  ; 
Unlocks  no  prison,  and  unclasps  no  chain. 
His  heart  is  like  the  rock,  where  snn  nor  dew 
Can  rear  one  plant,  or  flower  of  heavenly  hue. 
No  thought  of  mercy  there  may  have  its  birth, 
For  helpless  misery  or  sufifering  worth. 
The  end  of  all  his  life  is  paltry  pelf, 
And  all  his  thoughts  are  centred  ott  Itimself. 
The  wretch  of  Ixith  worlds  ;  for  so  mean  a  sum, 
First  starved  in  this,  then  damned  in  that  to 
come  !  " 

A  time  of  trouble.  If  God  brings 
us  into  difficulties,  we  may  be  sure  He 
will  bring  us  out  again;  but  no  such 
confidence  should  be  ours  if  we  bring 
ourselves  into  them. 

Trouble  and  the  way  <mt  An  ex- 
pedition started  from  Buenos  Ayres  to 
explore  the  Pilcomayo  River,  South 
America,  with  the  view  of  establishing 
a  water  communication  between  the 
Argentine  Republic  and  Bolivia.  For 
the  first  fortnight  the  explorers  made 
fair  progress,  but  after  that  the  naviga- 
tion was  difficult  and  slow,  it  being 
necessary  to  construct  dams  across  the 
river  below  their  vessel  and  wait  till 
the  water  accumulated  sufficiently  to 
float  it.  At  length  they  could  proceed 
no  farther,  and  remained  in  the  same 
position  for  months.  Having  exhausted 
all  their  provisions,  and  their  efforts 
at  foraging  proving  unsuccessful,  they 
daily  expected  the  arrival  of  a  relief 
party,  and  were  daily  disappointed. 
When  they  were  wasting  with  famine 
and  had  given  up  all  hope,  they  were 
surprised  one  morning  by  hearing  a 
bugle  blast,  and  knew  they  wei'e  saved. 
Only  those  who  have  been  in  extremity 
can  realise  how  exquisite  is  the  joy  of 
sudden  and  unexpected  rescue. — The 
Scoltiah  Pulpit. 

The  chaniBTes  of  life.  A  mill-owner 
was  obliged  to  dismiss  several  of  his 
hands.  Among  them  was  a  man  whose 
faith  and  trust  in  God  always  led  him 
to  say,  "  The  Lord  will  provide."  One 
day  when  he  had  eaten  his  last  morsel 
of  food,  and  his  faith  was  tried  to  the 
utmost^  some  street-boys,  opening  his 
door,  flnng  in  a  dead  raven,  shouting 
18 


mockingh',  ''The  liOrd  will  provide  * 
He  quietly  took  up  the  dead  bini  and 
tenderly  stroked  its  plumage.  Sud'lenly 
he  felt  something  hard  in  the  crop  of 
the  bird,  and  wondering  what  it  was, 
he  took  a  knife  and  opened  it.  To  his 
amazement  he  found  there  a  gold  chain. 
He  felt  here  was  God  providing  for  him 
and  his  family.  He  went  straight  to  a 
jeweller,  telling  his  story,  and  asked  if 
he  would  buy  it.  The  jeweller  saw  it 
to  be  a  chain  of  great  value,  with  initials 
on  it,  and  said,  **  If  you  could  learn  the 
name  of  the  owner,  would  you  return 
itr  "Certainly,''  replied  the  work- 
man. "  Well  then,"  said  the  jeweller, 
**  it  belongs  to  your  late  master."  Hear- 
ing that,  the  man  set  off  without  delay 
and  put  the  chain  into  his  master's 
hands,  who  received  it  with  great  joy, 
as  he  had  on  missing  it  accused  one  of 
his  servants  of  theft  Greatly  struck 
with  his  workman's  honesty,  he  told 
him  he  wished  him  to  return  to  his 
employment,  as  he  could  not  part  with 
so  honest  a  man.  In  the  most  trying 
changes  of  life  it  is  best  to  do  what  is 
right. 

Perseoution.  A  sensation  was  caused 
in  Hungary  by  a  certain  Count,  a  large 
landed  proprietor,  giving  orders  that 
thenceforth  no  Protestant  was  to  be 
engaged  in  the  service  of  his  estate,  and 
that  Protestants  already  employed  were 
disqualified  from  any  further  promotion. 
Any  officials  who  married  Protestants 
were  to  be  at  once  dismissed.  This 
high-handed  procedure  was  the  more 
remarkable  as  religious  toleration  was 
recognised  as  a  supreme  political  and 
socifd  principle,  there  being  already 
eight  different  Christian  denominations. 
Persecution  and  bigotry  are  weeds  diffi 
cult  to  eradicate,  and  there  is  no  know- 
ing into  what  eccentric  and  tyrannical 
forms  they  may  develop. — The  Scottish 
Pulpti. 

God  the  Helper  of  the  persecuted. 
Have  faith,  O  you  who  suffer  for  the 
noble  cause,  the  apostleis  of  a  truth 
which  the  world  of  to-day  comprehends 
not;  warriors  in  the  sacied  fight  whom 
it  yet  stigmatises  with  the  name  of 
rebels.  To-morrow  victory  will  bless 
the  banner  of  your  crusade.     Walk  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMBNTAJtT:  LAMENTATIONS. 


ORAP.  L 


faith  and  fear  not  That  which  Christ 
has  done,  humanity  may  do.  Believe, 
and  you  will  conquer.  Action  is  the 
word  of  God  ;  thought  alone  is  hut  His 
shadow.  They  who  disjoin  thought 
and  action  seek  to  divide  Deity,  and 
deny  the  Eteraal  unity.  They  who  are 
not  ready  to  hear  witness  to  their  faith 
with  their  hlood  are  no  true  helievers. 
From  your  cross  of  sorrow  and  persecu- 
tion proclaim  the  religion  of  the  epoch. 
Soon  shall  it  receive  the  consecration 
of  faith.  From  our  cross  of  misery  and 
persecution  we  men  of  exile,  the  repre- 
sentatives of  heart  and  faith  of  the 
enslaved  races,  of  millions  of  men  con- 
strained to  silence,  will  respond  to  your 
appeal,  and  say  to  our  brothers.  The 
cUliance  is  founded.  Answer  your  perse- 
cutors with  the  formula,  Ood  and  the 
people.  They  may  rebel  and  blaspheme 
against  it  for  a  while,  but  it  will  be 
accepted  and  worshipped  by  the  peoples. 
— Mazzini. 

The  spirit  of  persecntion  inexorable. 
A  poor  Anabaptist,  guilty  of  no  crime 
but  his  fellowship  with  a  persecuted 
sect,  had  been  condemned  to  death. 
He  had  made  his  escape,  closely  puiv 


sued  by  an  officer  of  justice,  across  a 
frozen  lake.  It  was  late  in  the  winter, 
and  the  ice  had  become  unsound.  It 
trembled  and  cracked  beneath  his  foot- 
steps, but  he  reached  the  shore  in  safety 
The  officer  was  not  so  fortuuate.  The 
ice  gave  way  beneath  hitn,  and  he  sank  , 
into  the  lake  uttering  a  cry  for  succour. 
There  were  none  to  hear  him  except  the 
fugitive  whom  he  had  been  hunting. 
Dirk  Willemzoon,  for  so  was  the  Ana- 
baptist called,  instinctively  obeyed  the 
dictates  of  a  generous  nature,  returned, 
crossed  the  quaking  and  dangerous  ice 
at  the  peril  of  his  life,  extended  his 
hand  to  the  enemy,  and  saved  him 
from  certain  death.  Unfortunately  for 
human  nature,  it  cannot  be  added  that 
the  generosity  of  the  action  was  met  by 
a  corresponding  heroism.  The  officei 
was  desirous,  it  is  true,  of  avoiding  the 
responsibility  of  sacrificing  the  preservei 
of  his  life,  but  the  burgomaster  of 
Asperen  sternly  reminded  him  to  re- 
member his  oath.  He  accordingly 
arrested  the  fugitive,  who,  in  the  month 
of  May  following,  was  burned  to  death 
under  the  most  lingering  tortures. — 
MotleifB  "  Dutch  BejnMic'* 


HOMILETICS. 

Lahsntation  oyer  a  Forsaken  Sanotuabt. 

(Verse  4.) 

L  Because  its  thoroughfares  are  no  longer  thronged  with  worsliippers. 

''  The  ways  of  Zion  do  mourn,  because  none  come  to  the  solemn  feasts ;  all  her 
gates  are  desolate."  Those  were  happy  days  when  the  roads  leading  up  to  Jeru- 
salem were  crowded  with  eager  worshippers,  coming  to  the  three  great  annual 
festivals — the  Passover,  Pentecost,  and  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  The  city  was 
jubilant  in  song,  and  full  to  overflowing  with  life  and  movement.  Now  the  very 
roads  are  represented  as  mourning,  as  if  they  missed  the  tread  of  the  pilgrims' 
feet ;  and  the  gates  look  in  vain  for  the  travellers  they  had  so  often  welcomed. 
"  All  her  gates  are  desolate." 

It  is  a  dispiriting  spectacle  to  see  a  closed  sanctuary,  with  weeds  and  grasses 
jrrowing  about  the  entrance ;  the  more  so  when  we  have  seen  the  same  sanctuary 
filled  with  delighted  worshippers.  When  men  forsake  the  house  of  Qod,  God 
forsakes  it  too,  and  it  is  then  desolate  indeed. 

IL  Because  the  office  of  the  ministry  is  obsolete.  '*  Her  priests  sigh '' — sigh 
not  only  for  want  of  bread,  because  the  oflerings,  which  were  their  means  of 
livelihood,  fail ;  but  because  their  life-work  is  useless,  because  the  people  lapse 
into  ignorance  and  sin,  because  the  worship  of  Jehovah  is  neglected  and  dis- 
honoured. The  true  minister  is  wholly  consecrated  to  his  sacred  calling ;  it  is 
the  theme  of  his  earnest  prayers,  his  consteat  study,  and  exercises  his  best  powers. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMEXTARY:  LAMENTATIOYS. 


Life  to  him  is  bereft  of  its  holiest  motive,  its  sweetest  relish,  when  it  is  baulked 
of  its  loftiest  purpose.  "  It  is  time  to  sigh  when  the  priests,  the  Lord's  ministersi 
sigh." 

III.  Because  the  training  of  the  young  is  neglected.  "Her  virgins  are 
afflicted.'*  The  virgins  are  mentioned  because  they  took  a  prominent  part  in  all 
religious  festivals  (Jer.  xxxi.  13;  Exod.  xv.  20;  Ps.  IxviiL  '25);  and  therefore 
special  notice  is  taken  of  the  educative  loss  to  them  occasioned  by  disused  ordi- 
nances. Neglect  in  the  religious  training  of  the  young  means  grave  peril  to  the 
moral  stamina  of  the  community.  Religion  is  the  mightiest  force  in  the  formation 
of  youthful  character.  The  men  and  women  of  the  future  will  be  what  the  Church 
makes  them  in  their  younger  years.  It  has  been  said — '*  People  fancy  that  we 
cannot  become  wise  without  becoming  old  also ;  but  in  truth,  as  years  accumulate, 
it  is  hard  to  keep  as  wise  as  we  were.  Man  becomes,  in  the  different  stages  of 
his  life,  a  different  being,  but  he  cannot  say  that  he  will  surely  be  better  as  he 
grows  onwards.  In  certain  matters  he  is  as  likely  to  be  right  in  his  twentieth 
as  in  his  sixtieth  year."  The  young  will  carry  with  them  through  life  the 
influences  for  good  or  evil  that  have  been  brought  to  bear  upon  them  in  their 
early  days. 

lY.  Because  the  city  is  deprived  of  religions  ordinances.  ''And  she  is  in 
bitterness."  It  is  a  beautiful  and  touching  conception  to  impersonate  the  metro- 
polis of  Judah  as  a  disconsolate  female,  troubled  with  the  evident  cessation  of 
Divine  worship  and  the  universal  neglect  of  religious  duties.  As  is  the  Church, 
so  will  be  the  city  ;  as  is  the  state  of  religion,  so  will  be  the  people.  The  glory  of 
a  city  is  gone  when  religious  ordinances  are  abandoned.  No  loss  should  be 
lamented  more  bitterly  than  the  loss  of  religion. 

Lbssoks. — 1.  A  dosed  temple  anywhere  is  a  pitiable  eigJU,  2.  Where  religious 
privileges  are  withdraiwn  the  people  suffer*  3.  Love  of  worship  will  always  crowd 
the  sanctuary. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  4.  "Her  priests  sigh,  her  vir- 
gins are  afiicted."  A  dispirited  mini- 
stry. 1.  Because  the  sanctuary  is 
destroyed.  2.  Because  the  worshippers 
are  scattered  and  uncared  for.  3.  Be- 
cause its  maintenance  is  withdrawn. 
4.  Because  the  joyous  song  of  the  young 
is  turned  to  sorrow.  "  Her  virgins  are 
afiicted."  6.  Because  of  conscious  im- 
perfections and  unfaithfulness. 

—  "  She  is  in  bitterness."  A  city  in 
sorrow.  1.  Because  its  reputation  is 
dishonoured.  2.  Because  its  resources 
are  crippled,  its  people  dispersed,  its 
commerce  interrupted,  its  institutions 
destroyed.  3.  Because  the  public  wor- 
ship of  God  is  abandoned.  4.  Because 
its  future  seems  hopeless. 

Illustrations. — Dead  and  dying 
Churches.  A  barque  on  her  voyage 
from  Hong-Kong  fell  in  with  a  British 
ship,  the  "Guiding  Star,"  helplessly 
floating  about  with  a  fever-stricken 
20 


crew.  When  found,  only  one  member 
of  the  crew  was  able  to  work.  The 
captain,  the  first  mate,  the  steward, 
and  a  seaman  had  died.  Five  men 
were  lying  helpless,  though  still  alive, 
and  the  boatswain  had  gone  mad  from 
the  want  of  proper  attention.  The 
"  Guiding  Star  "  was  towed  to  Batavia, 
where  the  survivors  were  placed  under 
medical  treatment  Are  there  not 
Churches  to-day  that  are  morally  in 
a  similar  plight  —  drifting  hospitals, 
officered  with  the  dead  and  dying)  It 
will  be  a  mercy  if  they  are  spiritually 
rescued  before  they  become  sepulchres, 
entombing  the  hopelessly  dead. — The 
Scottish  Pulpit. 

The  tme  man  superior  to  his  sur- 
roundings.— The  scientist,  while  ad- 
mitting the  influence  of  geographical 
surroundings  in  shaping  the  history  and 
character  of  nations,  admits  that  nothing 
would  be  more  erroneous  than  to  sup- 
pose that  Nature  alone  acts  in  determin- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


CRAP.  L 


ing  the  conditions  of  life  and  of  races. 
Man's  activity  must  be  associated  with 
Nature.  A  country  may  be  prominent 
and  fertile,  and  yet  occupied  by  a  race 
of  men  utterly  unfit  to  develop  its  re- 
sources. After  all,  man  is  greater  than 
Nature,  and  it  is  his  lofty  mission  to 
subdue  it  The  energy  of  the  Nether- 
lands turned  a  swamp  into  a  garden, 
while  their  Spanish  oppressors,  with 
inexhaustible  resources  in  soil  and 
mineral,  sank  into  decay.  We  are  apt 
to  lay  too  much  stress  upon  the  opera- 
tion of  the  law  of  environment,  and  to 
ignore  individual  responsibility.  Plant 
within  man  the  vital  principles  of  Chris- 
tianity, and  he  will  soon  change  his  en- 
vironment.— The  Scottish  Pulpit. 

Ministers  not  only  ilxigw-postB,  but 
gnidea.  There  ought  to  be  no  hiatus 
between  our  declarations  and  our  spiri- 
tual conduct.  W^  must  not  only  be 
finger-posts,  but  guides,  ''Lest  having 
preached  to  others,  we  ourselves  become 
castaways." 

**  The  love  of  Ohriit  and  His  Apottlee  twelve 
He  taoght,  but  first  be  followed  it  himself." 

If  we  are  the  channels  of  good  to  otir 
fellows,  it  behoves  us  to  clear  away  all 
that  might  impede  the  flowing;  and 
defile  the  purity,  of  the  stream  of  truth 
from  Grod. 

Youth  needs  instruction.  Narcissus, 
a  beautiful  youth,  though  he  would  not 
love  them  that  loved  him,  yet  after- 
wards fell  in  love  with  his  own  shadow. 
Ah!  how  many  young  men  in  these 
days,  who  were  once  lovely  and  hopeful, 
are  now  fallen  in  love  with  their  own 
and  others'  shadows,  with  high,  empty, 
airy  notions,  and  with  strange,  mon- 
strous speculations,  to  their  own  dam- 
nation. A  youth  deprived  of  instruc- 
tion and  left  to  his  natural  development 
is  a  pitiable  object,  and  is  menaced  by 
many  perils. 

Work  a  remedy  for  misery.  Nothing 
is  more  remarkable  in  the  Apostles  than 
their  unbroken  mental  health.  The 
histories  of  religious  communities  are 
full  of  instances  of  ecstasies  and  hys- 
terical delusions ;  but  never  do  we  find 
among  our  Lord's  followers  anything 
approaching  to  a  spiritual  craze.     This 


health  of  theirs  came  in  great  measure 
from  their  being  constantly  employed 
about  matters  of  which  their  hearts 
were  full.  The  busy  man  has  neither 
time  nor  inclination  to  nurse  delusive 
fancies.  Hard,  honest,  practical  work 
is  a  panacea  for  many  ills.  Underneath 
a  fresco  of  the  13  th  century  discovered 
at  Cortona,  in  Italy,  is  inscribed  the 
motto,  Sum  misero  nid  ieneam  ligonem 
— I  am  miserable  unless  I  hold  a  spada 
—The  Scottish  Pulpit 
The  uses  of  suffering. 

''Through  long  days  did  ADguish, 
And  sad  nights  did  Pain 
Forge  my  shield,  Endurance, 
Bright  and  free  from  stain* 

Doubt  in  misty  caverns, 
'Mid  dark  horrors  sought, 

Till  my  peerless  jewel. 
Faith,  to  me  she  brought. 

Borrow  that  I  wearied 

Should  remain  so  long, 
Wreathed  my  starry  glory. 

The  bright  crown  of  song. 

Strife,  that  racked  my  spirit 

Without  hope  or  rest, 
Left  the  blooming  flower, 

Patience,  in  my  breast." 

-^Proctor, 

Love  in  sorrow.  Always  through 
the  darkest  part  of  every  life  there  runs, 
though  we  may  sometimes  fail  to  see  it, 
the  golden  thread  of  love,  so  that  even 
the  worst  man  on  earth  is  not  wholly 
cut  off  from  God,  since  He  will,  by 
some  means  or  other,  eternally  try  to 
draw  him  out  of  death  into  life.  We 
are  astounded  now  and  then  to  read 
that  some  cold-blooded  murderer,  some 
man  guilty  of  a  hideous  crime,  will  ask 
in  his  last  moments  to  see  a  child  who 
loved  him  devotedly,  and  whom  he  also 
loved.  We  are  astonished  just  because 
we  do  not  understand  the  untiring  heart 
of  the  Almighty  Father,  who  in  His 
goodness  often  gives  to  the  vilest  sinner 
the  love  of  a  pure-hearted  woman  or 
child.  So  true  is  the  beautiful  old 
Latin  saying,  Mergere  nos  patitur,  aed 
non  'submergere  Christus — Christ  lets 
us  sink,  may  be,  but  not  drown. — Edna 
Lyall, 

A  city  in  sorrow.  In  1576  Antwerp 
was  stormed  by  the  Spaniards  with  fire 
and  sword.     Never  was  there  a  more 

21 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIG  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


monstrous  massacre,  even  in  the  blood-  to  discover  hidden  treasure  ;  and,  after 
stained  annals  of  the  Netherlands.  In  all  had  been  given,  if  the  sum  seemed 
the  course  of  three  days  eight  thousand  too  little,  the  proprietors  were  brutally 
human  beings  were  murdered.  The  punished  for  their  poverty  or  their  sup- 
Spaniards  seemed  to  cast  off  even  the  posed  dissimulation.  Women,  children, 
vizard  of  humanity.  Hell  seemed  and  old  men  were  killed  in  countless 
emptied  of  its  fiends.  Night  fell  upon  numbers,  and  still,  through  all  this 
the  scene  before  the  soldiers  were  havoc,  directly  over  the  heads  of  the 
masters  of  the  city ;  but  worse  horrors  struggling  throng,  suspended  in  mid-air 
began  after  the  contest  was  ended,  above  the  din  and  smoke  of  the  conflict. 
This  army  of  brigands  had  come  thither  there  sounded,  every  half-quarter  of 
with  a  definite,  practical  purpose,  for  it  every  hour,  as  if  in  gentle  mockery, 
was  not  blood  thirst,  nor  lust,  nor  re-  from  the  belfry  of  the  cathedral,  the 
venge  which  impelled  them,  but  greedi-  tender  and  melodious  chimea — MaUe^9 


m 


ness  for  gold.     Torture  was  employed      ''  Dutch  BepublieJ 


HOMILETICS. 

'  Thb  TANTALisma  Indiffebbncb  of  the  Enemies  of  the  Chuboh. 

(Verses  5-7.) 

I.  They  contentedly  enjoy  the  fruits  of  their  conquest.  "  Her  adversaries 
are  the  chief;  her  enemies  prosper."  Her  foes  have  become  her  masters;  her 
enemies  enjoy  quiet  prosperity — Geikie  (ver.  5).  Judea  has  become  so  ntterly 
crushed  that  her  conquerors  revel  in  their  spoils  without  fear  of  resistance,  or  any 
attempt  at  reprisals  on  the  part  of  the  vanquished.  If  we  allow  our  vices  to 
become  our  masters,  we  have  the  chagrin  of  seeing  them  rioting  in  indulgence 
while  we  are  powerless  to  interpose. 

XL  They  have  no  concern  to  know  the  cause  of  the  Ohnrch's  calamities. 
''  For  the  Lord  hath  ajQfticted  her  for  the  multitude  of  her  transgressions  "  (ver.  5). 
What  of  that  f  It  is  no  concern  of  theirs  to  pry  into  moral  causes.  The  in- 
vaders  wish  to  strike  a  blow  at  imperious  Egypt.  Judah  stands  in  the  way,  and, 
becoming  troublesome,  must  be  crushed.  They  knew  not,  nor  did  they  care  to 
know,  that  they  were  but  instruments  in  the  hands  of  a  Higher  Power  to  punish  a 
nation  for  its  sins.  It  was  brought  home  to  Judah  that  her  disasters  were  pro* 
voked  by  her  manifold  transgressions,  and  it  was  an  aggravation  of  her  sufferings 
that  her  enemies  were  utterly  regardless  and  apparently  ignorant  of  all  thi&  Had 
they  understood  it,  they  might  have  shown  more  pity. 

III.  They  are  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  they  inflict.  '*  Her  children  are 
gone  into  captivity.  Her  princes  have  become  hke  harts  .  .  .  without  strength 
before  the  pursuer"  (vers.  5,  6).  The  young  children  are  driven  before  the  adver- 
sary, not  as  a  flock  of  lambs  which  follow  the  shepherd,  but  for  sale  as  slaves. 
The  princes  are  hunted  down  to  exhaustion.  In  the  ancient  sculptures  nothing  is 
more  affecting  than  the  mournful  processions  so  often  depicted  of  tender  women 
and  young  children  driven  in  gangs  as  captives  before  their  heartless  conquerors. 
In  olden  times  the  treatment  of  prisoners  of  war  was  characterised  by  the  most 
brutal  cruelty.  They  were  regarded  as  an  encumbrance,  and  were  often  butchered 
wholesale  to  save  further  trouble.  They  were  subjected  to  degradations  from 
which  death  would  have  been  a  merciful  relief. 

lY.  They  make  no  allowance  for  the  feelings  of  the  conquered  regarding 

their  lossea     ^*  From  the  dau^diter  of  Zion  all  her  beauty  is  departed.    Jerusalem 

remembered  all  her  pleasant  things  that  she  had  in  the  days  of  old  "  (vers.  6,  7). 

In  the  midst  of  her  distress  Jerusalem  remembered  the  happiness  ot  former  dayS| 

22 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMBNTATI0N8. 


CHAP.  T. 


when  the  Temple  stood  out  in  all  the  beauty  of  its  architecture,  and  as  the  syrahol 
of  holiest  worship ;  when  the  throne  was  the  centre  of  impei-ial  power  and  mag- 
nificence ;  when  the  land  was  prosperous,  and  the  people  nnited  and  content. 
Kow  the  Temple  is  shattered  past  recognition,  the  most  distinguished  citizens  are 
in  exile,  the  land  is  desolate,  and  the  people  plunged  in  misery.  But  all  this  is 
nothing  to  her  enemies ;  they  heed  not  what  their  victims  have  lost ;  they  are 
more  interested  in  what  their  conquests  have  gained. 

y.  They  make  sport  of  the  Church's  ntter  discomfiture.  ''  The  adversaries 
saw  her,  and  did  mock  at  her  Sabbaths,"  her  calamities,  her  mined  circumstances 
{Chikie ;  Henderson),  The  more  literal  meaning  is  her  Sahbaiisms.  Foreigners 
ridiculed  the  custom  of  the  Jews  in  ceasing  from  labour  every  seventh  day,  and 
attributed  their  niin  to  what  appeared  to  them  a  strange,  fanatical  practice.  Oh, 
had  those  Sabbaths  been  as  faithfully  observed  in  spirit  as  they  were  in  form, 
how  different  would  have  been  the  career  of  Judah  f  The  Church  is  familiar  with 
the  scoffs  of  unbelievers.  While  she  is  true  to  God,  they  are  powerless  to  harm. 
It  is  when  she  is  conscious  of  unfaithfulness  that  they  begin  to  irritate. 

Lessoito. — 1.  It  is  a  hard  time  for  the  Church  when  her  enemies  triumph,  2. 
Ood  is  the  refuge  of  the  Church  in  time  of  trouble.  He  is  never  indifferent  to  her 
mjtfferings.     i.  The  Church  should  learn  to  make  the  best  ofprosp^ous  timet. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  5.  "Her  adversaries  are  the 
chief;  her  enemies  prosper."  New 
masters :  1.  Soon  make  evident  their 
newly-acquired  superiority.  2.  Rule 
with  severity  when  actuated  by  a  spirit 
of  enmity.  3.  Enjoy  without  com- 
punction the  prosperity  secured  by  the 
ruin  of  others. 

—  "  The  Lord  afflicted  her  for  the 
multitude  of  her  transgressions."    Sin : 

1.  Is  a  transgression  of  the  law  of  God. 

2.  Has  a  tendency  to  multiply  itself. 

3.  Is  a  prolific  source  of  trouble.  4. 
Is  punished  by  the  Being  against  whom 
it  is  committed. 

Vers.  5, 6.  National  disaster.  I.  In- 
volves the  suffering  of  innocent  children. 
"  Her  children  are  gone  into  captivity 
before  the  enemy "  (ver.  5).  II. 
Quenches  the  splendour  of  its  reputa- 
tion. "  From  the  daughter  of  Zion  all 
her  beauty  is  departed  "  (ver.  6).  III. 
Degrades  and  harasses  its  most  iUus- 
tritfus  rulers.  "Her  princes  are  be- 
come like  harts  that  find  no  pasture, 
and  they  are  gone  without  strength  be- 
fore the  pursuer"  (ver.  6). 

Ver.  7.  Sad  memories.  1.  When  con- 
trasting present  miseries  with  former 
joys.  2.  When  reflecting  on  the  sud- 
denness and  completeness  of  our  cala- 
mities.    3.  When   mingled   with   the 


heartless  mockery  of  the  authors  of  our 
misfortunes. 

Illxtbtrationb. — ^Lessomi  fi*om  the 
world's  treatment.  Three  men  are  my 
friends,  He  that  loves  me,  he  that  hates 
me,  and  he  that  is  indifferent  to  me. 
Who  loves  me  teaches  me  tenderness  ; 
who  hates  me  teaches  me  caution  ;  who 
is  indifferent  to  me  teaches  me  self- 
reliance. 

Loose  talk  leads  to  loose  conduct 
Indulgence  in  verbal  vices  soon  en- 
courages corresponding  vices  in  conduct 
Let  any  one  talk  about  any  mean  or 
vile  practice  with  familiar  tone,  and  do 
you  suppose,  when  ,the  opportunity 
occurs  for  committing  the  mean  or  vile 
act,  he  will  be  as  strong  against  it  as 
before  ^  It  is  by  no  means  an  unknown 
thing  that  men  of  correct  lives  talk 
themselves  into  sensuality,  crime,  and 
perdition.  Bad  language  easily  iiins 
into  bad  deeds.  Select  any  iniquity 
you  please,  suffer  yourself  to  converse 
in  its  dialect,  to  use  its  slang,  to  speak 
in  the  character  of  one  who  relishes  it, 
and  I  need  not  tell  you  how  soon  your 
moral  sense  will  lower  down  to  its  level. 
Becoming  intimate  with  it,  you  lose 
your  horror  of  it.  To  b«  too  much  with 
bad  men  and  in  bad  places  is  not  only 

23 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  L 


nOMILBTlC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


unwholesome  to  man's  morality,  but 
unfavourable  to  his  faith  and  trust  in 
God.  It  is  not  every  man  who  could 
live  as  Lot  did  in  Sodom,  and  then  be 
fit  to  go  out  of  it  under  God's  convoy. — 
The  Christian  Commonwealth. 

New  masters :  Tyraomy  not  perma- 
nent By  the  volcanic  eruption  among 
the  Tonga  group  in  1885,  a  new  island 
was  formed  When  it  was  visited  a 
few  years  after,  the  soil  below  the 
surface  was  still  hot,  the  temperature 
at  a  depth  of  seven  feet  being  100* 
Fahr.,  while  at  the  surface  it  was  only 
74*.  With  the  exception  of  two  young 
cocoa-nut  trees,  which  seemed  not  very 
hardy,  there  was  no  vegetation  but  a 
few  bunches  of  grass,  and  a  moth  and 
small  sandpiper  constituted  the  animal 
population.  It  is  thought  the  island 
will  disappear  in  a  few  years,  as  the 
waves  are  rapidly  wearing  the  shore-line 
away.  Such  has  been  the  history  of 
many  a  vaunted  human  tyranny.  Its 
policy  was  inaugurated  with  noise  and 
heat,  and  threatened  to  revolutionise 
the  existing  order.  But  when  it  had 
spent  its  force  and  cooled  down,  it 
revealed  its  barrenness,  and,  worn  away 
with  the  ever-active  waves  of  time,  it 
at  length  disappeared. — The  Scottish 
Pidpit. 

Sin  a  poison.  What  poison  one  fang 
of  the  old  serpent  will  throw  into  our 
moral  system  !  Look  around  and  see 
how  many  have  been  poisoned  with  the 
desire  for  strong  drink,  with  lust,  with 
avarice,  with  pride,  with  anger,  with 
unbelief.  Fiery  serpents  are  among  us, 
and  many  die  of  their  venom.  If  we 
tolerate  the  least  sin,  it  is  a  burning  drop 
in  the  veins  of  the  soul.  One  touch  of 
the  fangs  of  this  serpent  will  work  im- 
measurable sorrow,  even  if  the  soul  bo 
saved  from  death.  It  is  only  the  power 
of  God  that  keeps  us  from  being  de- 
stroyed by  this  viper.  Had  he  his  will, 
he  is  a  spirit  so  malignant  that  no  heir 
of  heaven  would  survive.  O  God,  keep 
Thine  own  !  Deliver  us  from  the  evil 
onel — C,  //.  Surgeon. 

Sin  defies  law.     A  woman  named 

Guerin,  in  a  rage  of  jealousy,  murdered 

her  unfaithful  husband.     Going  to  a 

villa  where  she  learnt  he  was  living 

24 


with  another  woman,  she  stood  at  the 
door  and  called  his  name.  Hearing 
her  voice,  he  went  out  to  speak  to  her, 
and  had  scarcely  crossed  the  threshold 
when  she  stabbed  him  in  the  abdomen. 
He  staggered  back  into  the  house,  and 
after  a  few  minutes  crawled  to  the 
window  and  said  in  a  feeble  voice, 
"  Kiss  our  child,  for  all  is  over."  The 
recital  of  this  incident  in  the  court  in 
Paris,  told  as  a  woman  could  tell  it, 
and  she  a  principal  actor  in  the  scene, 
and  the  evidence  adduced  that  Madame 
Guerin  had  borne  an  irreproachable 
character  and  was  an  excellent  mother, 
so  moved  the  jury  that  they  acquitted 
her  without  a  moment's  hesitation,  amid 
a  storm  of  applause  from  the  public  in 
couri  A  gush  of  sentiment  disarmed 
the  rigour  of  the  law  and  choked  the 
voice  of  vengeance.  One  wrong  does 
not  justify  another.  But  sin  defies 
law  and  justice,  and  spreads  con- 
fusion wherever  it  leigns. — The  SeottUh 
Pulpit 

Avoid  the  example  of  the  bad.  I 
would  desire  all  young  men  often  to 
remember  the  saying  of  Lactantius, 
'*  He  who  imitates  the  bad  cannot  be 
good."  Young  men,  in  these  professing 
times,  stand  between  good  and  bad 
examples,  as  Hercules  in  his  dream 
stood  between  virtue  and  vice,  solicited 
by  both.  Choose  you  must  who  to 
follow.  Oh,  that  you  were  all  so  Wise 
as  to  follow  the  best!  Life,  heaven, 
happiness,  eternity,  hang  upon  it. 

Sad  memories.  A  small  boat  was 
picked  up  one  morning  on  the  north 
shore  at  Troon.  It  had  the  appearance 
of  having  broken  away  from  a  vessel 
during  a  great  gale  in  the  Clyde.  It  is 
a  dangerous  moment  when  a  young  man 
breaks  away  from  the  happy  associa- 
tions of  his  early  life,  whether  in  church 
or  home.  Chafing  under  restraint,  he 
plunges  heedlessly  into  the  wide  world 
in  search  of  a  larger  liberty.  Unac- 
customed to  self-control,  he  is  swayed 
by  every  varying  current,  drifts  out 
to  sea,  and  is  ultimately  picked  up  a 
partial  wreck  on  some  faivoff  shore. 
Then  it  is  that  he  is  tormented  with 
painful  memories ;  he  sees  his  foUj,  and 
laments    his    reckless    severanoe  from 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap,  l 


the  moral  restrictions  of  a  happier  time,  against  melancholy.     One  was  a  bright 

"  It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  fire,  another  to  remember  all  the  plea- 

the  yoke  in  his  yonth." — The  Scottish  sant  things  said  to  her,  another  to  keep 

Pulpit.  a  box  of  plums  on  the  mantelpiece  and 

Memory  and  iniisi&     Music  touches  a  kettle  simmering  on  the  hob.     She 

every  key  of  memory,  and  stirs  all  the  thought  this  mere  trifling  at  the  moment, 

bidden  springs  of  sorrow  and  joy.     We  but  did  in  after  life  discover  how  true 

love  it  for  what  it  makes  us  forget^  and  it  is  that  these  little  pleasures  often 

for  what  it  makes  us  remember.  banish  melancholy  better  than  higher 

Beware  of  melancholy.     Never  give  and  more  exalted  objects,  and  that  no 

veay  to  melancholy ;  resist  it  steadily,  means  ought  to  be  thought  too  trifling 

for  the  habit  will  encroach.     A  lady  which  can  oppose  it  either  in  ouiselvea 

was  once  given  two-and-twenty  recipes  or  others 


HOMILETICS. 

The  Terriblb  Havoc  of  Snr. 

(Verses  8-11.) 

L  In  its  revolting  defilement.  *'  Jerusalem  hath  grievously  sinned,  therefore 
she  is  removed.  Her  fllthiness  is  in  her  skirts"  (vers.  8,  9).  The  expression 
''grievously  sinned''  gives  the  idea  of  persistent  continuance  in  wickedness. 
This  condition  is  not  reached  all  at  once.  It  began  in  trifling  with  the  first 
enticements  to  eviL  The  entrance  to  the  pathway  of  sin  is  gaily  decked  with 
flowers,  but  they  are  flowers  that  wither  as  soon  as  they  are  plucked.  It  is  over- 
hung with  tempting  fruits,  but  they  are  fruits  that  turn  to  bitter  ashes  between 
the  teeth.  It  is  sprinkled  with  subtle  and  delicious  perfumes,  but  they  are  per- 
fumes that  distil  the  poison  of  the  deadliest  drug.  The  air  around  palpitates  with 
strains  of  bewitching  music,  but  it  is  music  that  lures  its  charmed  victim  down 
the  dizzy  slopes  of  irreparable  ruin.  The  allurement  may  be  presented  in  the 
shape  of  a  book,  a  picture,  or  a  whispered  word,  that  suggests  more  of  evil  than 
it  actually  expresses,  and  the  soul  is  blotted  with  a  moral  stain  that  rivers  of  tears 
cannot  wash  away.  Every  act  of  sin  increases  the  defilement,  and  it  becomes 
the  more  exposed. 

II.  In  sinking  the  sonl  to  a  state  of  aldect  degradation.  ''  Therefore  she 
came  down  wonderfully ;  she  had  no  comforter "  (ver.  9).  You  have  seen  the 
little  snowflakes  flutter  about  the  railway  track  like  lovely  bits  of  down  shook 
from  angelic  wings,  and  you  have  seen  with  what  ease  the  proud  locomotive 
scatters  the  fleecy  morsels  in  the  early  stages  of  the  storm  ;  but  the  falling  atoms 
increase  with  such  rapidity  and  accumulative  force,  that  the  panting  engine  is  at 
length  completely  mastered,  and,  utterly  exhausted,  lies  buried  fathoms  deep 
beneath  the  crystal  drift.  So  in  the  early  stages  of  transgression,  the  soul  deems 
itself  capable  of  throwing  off  every  little  temptation  that  beguiles,  and,  when  it 
is  too  late,  discovers  itself  so  completely  bound  in  their  toils  that  all  efforts  to 
escape  are  ineffectual.  1.  Sin  dishonours  the  sotd  in  the  estimation  of  others. 
"All  that  honoured  her  despise  her,  becauj^e  tliey  have  seen  her  nakedness"  (ver. 
8).  The  first  step  downwards  is  to  sink  in  the  estimation  of  others.  Their 
commendation  sustained  us  and  helped  us  to  keep  up  to  a  certain  standard  of 
conduct.  Others  may  see  the  tendency  of  our  sins  before  we  see  it  ourselves. 
When  others  show  their  disapproval  and  despise  us  for  our  folly,  it  is  time  to 
pause  and  reflect.  2.  Sin  dishonours  the  soul  in  its  own  estimation.  **  Yea,  she 
sigheth  and  turneth  backward"  (ver.  8).  It  is  a  lower  depth  when  a  man  sinks 
in  his  own  estimation,  when  he  cannot  courageously  confront  others,  or  even  face 
up  his  better  sell     Sin  saps  the  strength  of  our  manhood.     To  be  conscious  of 

25 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  I.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


Bin  and  ashamed  of  it  are  the  first  hopeful  eigns  of  repentance ;  hut  if  the  repent- 
ance is  not  prompt  and  genuine,  the  soul  is  in  danger  of  becoming  more  thoroughly 
demoralised.     Such  a  critical  moment  comes  in  most  men's  lives  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2). 

III.  In  rendering  the  sonl  reckless  as  to  consequences.  "  She  remembereth 
not  her  last  end  " — had  not  thought  of  the  sure  end  of  her  sins  (ver.  9).  The 
down  grade  is  steep,  and  every  step  increases  the  momentum  of  the  terrible 
descent.  One  sin  leads  to  another,  and  that  to  another  in  darker  and  deeper 
gradations,  until  the  light  of  hope  is  quenched,  and  the  helpless  victim  gropes 
about  aimlessly  in  the  ever-deepening  gloom  of  despair.  The  soul  is  now  and 
then  haunted  with  the  shadow  of  a  coming  reckoning  day ;  but  it  seems  a  great 
way  off,  and  may  never  come.     The  reckoning  day  does  come. 

IV.  In  its  desecration  of  sacred  things  (ver.  lit).  Even  the  Jew  was  pro- 
hibited from  entering  the  innermost  sanctuary,  and  now  tlie  prophet  laments  that 
the  heathen  conquerors  force  their  way  into  the  holy  place  and  plunder  Jehovah's 
Temple,  that  they  may  adorn  with  its  sacred  vessels  the  shrines  of  their  false 
deities.  It  was  desecration  to  enter  the  sanctuary,  and  high  sacrilege  to  rob  it  of 
its  "  pleasant  things."  Sin  knows  no  respect  of  persons  or  places.  It  obtrudes 
with  shameless  effrontery  into  the  holiest  place,  and  is  callous  as  to  the  havoc  it 
works, 

y.  In  reducing  a  people  to  distress  and  want.  "  All  her  people  sigh ;  they 
seek  bread ;  they  have  given  their  pleasant  things  for  meat  to  relieve  the  soul " 
(ver.  11).  Famine  follows  in  the  train  of  war.  A  siege  lasting  a  year  and  a  half 
exhausted  the  surrounding  country,  and  the  Chaldean  army  would  have  difficulty 
in  supplying  its  own  commissariat.  In  the  hope  that  the  present  scarcity  will 
pass  away,  the  people  dispose  of  the  wealth  and  precious  jewels  that  remain  to 
them  for  the  merest  trifles  of  food.  Sin  is  the  prolific  cause  of  war,  famine,  and 
the  acutest  forms  of  personal  and  national  suffering.  Money  is  valueless  when  it 
can  purchase  nothing  in  exchange — it  cannot  prolong  the  life  of  the  starving. 
The  best  things  are  capable  of  the  worst  abuse.  The  very  abuse  may  test  the 
value. 

YI.  Oompels  the  sonl  to  appeal  to  the  Divine  compassion.  "O  Lord, 
behold  my  affliction,  for  the  enemy  hath  magnified  himself  "  (ver.  9).  "  See,  O 
Lord,  and  consider,  for  I  am  become  vile."  I  am  despised  (ver.  11).  It  is  not 
our  vileness  that  can  form  a  ground  of  appeal  to  the  Divine  consideration,  but 
the  abject  misery  into  which  our  vileness  has  brought  us.  God  does  not  pity  our 
sins,  but  He  does  pity  the  distress  tliey  occasion,  though  that  distress  is  the  direct 
result  of  our  obstinate  violation  of  His  laws  and  disregard  of  His  repeated  warn- 
ings. Suffering  is  a  severe  teacher.  It  is  a  mercy  when  the  eyes  of  the  sinner 
are  at  length  opened,  and,  seeing  that  his  sins  are  tlie  cause  of  his  trouble,  he 
cries  to  God  for  help.  Long  and  patiently  does  God  wait  for  such  a  cry ;  and 
then  with  what  gracious  speed  does  He  hasten  to  our  rescue  ! 

Lebsons. — 1.  Sin  demoralises  wherever  it  reigns,  2.  Is  the  occasion  of  un- 
speakable  suffering,     3.  Can  he  cured  only  by  Divine  remedie$. 


GERM  NOTES  ON^  THE  VERSES. 

Ver.  8.    "She  sigheth  and   tumeth  lusive   in   its  beginning.     2.  Hardens 

Imckward."       Oonscions    sin  :     1.    A  the  transgressor  into  reckless   indiffer- 

paiiiful  humiliation.     2.  The  first  step  ence.     3.  Is  certain  to  endin  ruin, 

in  genuine  repentance.     3.  Should  in-  —  Sin  an  implacable  foe.     I.  Drags 

duce  the  soul  to  seek  immediate  de-  doitm    the  soul  to  comfortless  depths. 

liverance.  "  Wherefore  she  came  down   wondor- 

Ver.  9.  "She  remembereth  not  her  fully;    she   hud   no   comforter."      II 

last  end."     The  course  of  sin :  1.  De-  Extdts  over  the  misery  of  its  victims. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CSAP.  L 


"  The  enemy  haih  magnified  himself." 
See  how  proudly  the  foe  deali  with  me 
(Geikie).  IIL  Convinces  the  sotd  that 
its  only  resource  is  in  the  Divine  piiy. 
"O  Lord,  behold  my  affiction." 

Ver.  10.  Heathenism  a  moral  obli- 
qnity.  I.  Sees  no  sin  in  theft.  "  The 
adversary  hath  spread  out  his  hand 
upon  all  her  pleasant  things."  II.  Has 
no  scruples  in  desecrating  the  holiest 
place,  "  The  heathen  entered  into  her 
sanctuary."  III.  Disregards  the  Divine 
laws.  "Thon  didst  command  that 
they  should  not  enter  into  Thy  congre- 
gation." 

Yer.  11.  The  extremities  of  fiamina 
L  A  sorrowful  craving  for  food,  "All 
her  people  sigh  ;  they  seek  bread." 
11.  Desperate  efforts  made  to  retain 
life.  "To  relieve  the  soul'* — to  keep 
them  alive.  liL  The  dearest  treasures 
readily  sacrificed.  "They  have  given 
their  pleasant  things  for  meat." 

iLLusTRATiONa — Sill  the  danger  of 
great  cities.  The  spiritual  destitution 
of  London  is  something  appalling. 
There  are  10,000  prostitutes — a  pro- 
cession a  mile  long,  walking  double  file 
— all  somebody's  daughters.  There  are 
20,000  thieves — two  miles  more  of  that 
dread  procession,  and  there  are  100,000 
nncared  for  children,  making  the  pro- 
cession ten  miles  in  length.  These  are 
what  John  Bright  called  the  residuum, 
and  Dr.  Chalmers  the  lapsed  classes. 
In  their  abodes  every  breath  is  poison ; 
they  are  so  crowded  together  that 
morality  is  impossible.  Such  a  glimpse 
of  spiritual  destitution  ought  to  arouse 
the  heart,  not  only  of  every  Christian, 
but  of  every  patriot. 

Sin  stapifles.  Oh,  how  difficult  it  is 
to  awake  some  men  to  a  sense  of  danger 
or  duty.  Happening  to  be  lounging  in 
the  market-place  of  a  little  seaport  town 
in  France,  I  saw  with  some  surprise 
several  men  in  a  cafe  inhaling  the 
fumes  of  opium  through  a  tobacco-pipe. 
By-and-by  the  wife  of  one  of  these  men 
called  for  her  husband  to  return  home 
in  their  little  market-cart.  But  he, 
being  in  a  poisoned  slumber,  was  un- 
eonscious  of  her  existence,  and  oblivious 
of  things  about  him«     She  lifted  him 


up  and  shook  him,  but  he  would  not 
awake  till  the  honied-trance  stupor  was 
ended.  So  some  of  us  are  steeped  in 
the  opium-lethargy  of  sin,  and  will  not 
awake.  It  is  not  that  we  cannot ;  we 
will  not 

Sin  a  disease.  A  minister  once  met 
a  man  in  the  street  who  was  afflicted 
with  heart-disease,  and  said  he  could 
not  sleep,  and  that  the  doctor  could 
do  nothing  for  him.  "  Ah  ! "  said  the 
minister,  "the  worst  form  of  heart- 
disease  is  sin.  Yet  people  go  about 
with  the  disease ;  they  do  not  know  it, 
and  they  sleep  quite  soundly.  Now,  it 
is  my  business  to  tell  them  how  matters 
stand,  and  to  try  to  disturb  their  sleep, 
for  I  can  tell  them  of  a  physician  who 
can  cure  them.  Have  yon  been  to 
Christ  with  your  sins  1 "  The  man  was 
silent,  but  went  away  deeply  impressed. 

Sin  and  individuality.  I  remember 
as  though  it  were  yesterday  the  moment 
when  the  idea  of  individual  identity 
dawned  upon  my  boyish  mind.  The 
thought  appalled  me,  for  I  had  been 
looking  at  a  wretch^  little  beggar- boy 
with  a  crutch,  a  dirty  face,  and  miser- 
able rags  for  garments,  and  it  had  just 
occurred  to  me  that  he  was  not  to  him- 
self merely  an  unpleasant  object,  to  be 
sent  away  out  of  sight  with  some  dole 
of  pennies  or  broken  fragments  of  food, 
but  just  the  I  that  I  was  to  myself,  as 
precious,  as  important ;  and  I  grew  cold 
from  head  to  foot,  and  felt  as  though  I 
must  do  something  to  alter  it  all.  After 
all  these  years  the  horror  abides  with 
me  yet.  I  do  not  know  whether  others 
feel  it  as  keenly,  but  it  is  to  me  worse 
than  any  ghost  could  be  to  remember 
the  wretched  people  of  the  world — the 
prisoners  in  their  cells,  convicts  in  their 
chains,  men  doomed  to  die  upon  the 
gallows  at  dawn,  women  who  sell  their 
souls  for  bread  or  jewels,  beggars  gnaw- 
ing their  crusts  by  the  roadsides,  suf- 
ferers whose  every  breath  is  agony, 
wives  whose  hearts  are  broken  by  the 
cruelty  of  the  husbands  who  were  once 
their  lovers,  men  who  are  plotting  mur- 
der and  men  who  are  committing  it, 
lepers  in  the  cities  of  lepers  holding  out 
their  mouldering  bands  for  alms  as 
strangers  flee  by  their  gates.     To  re- 

37 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  L 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


member  these,  and  many,  many  more, 
wicked  or  accursed,  crushed  beneath 
loads  of  crime  and  sorrow  too  heavy  to 
be  borne,  and  to  know  when  we  clasp 
our  hands  or  drop  a  tear,  and  say  with 
a  shudder,  as  we  sometimes  do,  "  And 
it  might  have  been  I :  that  it  actually 
is  I  to  some  one!"  It  is  a  terrible 
thought,  and  yet  we  should  not  set  it 
aside.  Surely  nothing  could  prompt  us 
so  strongly  to  do  all  we  can  for  those 
who  sin  or  suffer. 

Sin  a  doable  defect  The  verb  used 
oftenest  in  the  New  Testament,  «n, 
means  literally  to  miss  the  mark.  The 
corresponding  nouns  have,  of  course, 
similar  meanings.  The  idea  conveyed 
is  deviation  from  a  standard  at  which 
men  ought  to  aim,  and  which  they  ought 
to  reach.  They  may  miss  it  by  going 
beyond,  as  well  as  by  falling  short.  The 
moral  idea  is  the  same  as  that  of  omis- 
sion and  transgression. — The  Scottish 
Pulpit 

The  course  of  sin. 

*<  We  are  not  wont  at  once.  The  ooorse  of 
evU 

Begins  so  slowly  and  from  such  slight  souroe, 

An  infant's  hand  might  stem  its  breach  with 
day; 

But  let  Uie  stream  get  deeper,  and  philo- 
sophy shall  strive  in  vain 

To  turn  the  headlong  current." 

Sin  a  foe,  bnt  not  invincible.    It  is 

said  that  the  late  Lord  Ampthill,  when 
on  diplomatic  service  in  Rome,  possessed 
a  boa-constrictor,  and  interested  him- 
self in  watching  its  habita  One  day 
the  monster  escaped  from  the  box  where 
he  supposed  it  was  asleep,  quietly 
wound  iteelf  around  his  body,  and  be- 
gan gradually  to  tighten  its  folds.  His 
position  became  extremely  perilous ; 
but  the  consummate  coolness  and  self- 
possession  which  had  enabled  him  to 
win  many  a  diplomatic  triumph  be- 
friended him  in  this  dangerous  emer- 
gency. He  remembered  there  was  a 
bone  in  the  throat  of  the  serpent  which, 
if  he  could  find  and  break,  he  would 
save  himsell  He  was  aware  that  either 
he  or  the  snake  must  perish.  Not  a 
moment  must  be  lost  in  hesitation.  He 
deliberately  seized  the  head  of  the  ser- 
pent, thrust  his  hand  down  its  throaty 
28 


and  smashed  the  vital  bone.  The  coils 
were  relaxed,  the  victim  fell  dead  at 
his  feet,  and  he  was  free!  So  in  all 
wickedness  there  is  weakness,  and  it  is 
a  grand  thing  to  discern  the  vulnerable 
spot,  and  be  ready  with  the  exact  truth, 
fact,  or  promise  which  deals  death  to 
the  foe.  This  insight  and  power  are 
given  to  all  who  prayerfully  study  God's 
Word. 

Heathen  worship  a  performanca 
Marcus  Varro,  the  great  Roman  anti- 
quarian, wrote  forty-one  books  on  the 
Pagan  cultua  He  speaks  of  three 
orders  of  gods — the  certain  gods,  the 
uncertain  gods,  and  the  chief  and  select 
gods.  Referring  to  the  worship  offered 
to  these  various  deities,  he  arranges  liis 
material  under  four  divisions — who  per- 
form, where  they  perform,  when  they 
perform,  what  they  perform.  How 
true  it  is  that,  apart  from  genuine 
spiritual  religion,  all  worship,  and  espe- 
cially heathen  worship,  is  but  a  scenic, 
pantomimic  performance! 

Light  for  heathen  darkness.  The 
simile  **dark  as  a  coal-pit"  will  soon 
lose  its  meaning  and  become  obsolete. 
A  colliery  company  has  abolished  the 
miner's  lamp  and  lit  up  one  of  their 
pits  with  electric  lamps,  placed  at  inter- 
vals of  fifteen  yards  apart.  Indeed,  the 
depths  of  earth  and  sea  arc  now  to  be 
illuminated.  One  of  the  difficulties  of 
the  deep-sea  diver  has  been  the  com- 
parative darkness  in  which  he  has  had 
to  go  about  his  work  at  the  bottom 
of  the  ocean.  Now  a  French  engineer 
has  constructed  a  lamp,  suppliexl  with 
petroleum,  which  burns  as  well  under 
water  as  in  the  open  air.  By  an  in- 
genious contrivance  it  can  be  lighted  at 
the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and  with  the  aid 
of  its  friendly  light  the  diver  is  enabled 
to  discover  his  greatest  treasures.  So 
the  earnest  missionary  penetrates  the 
dark  depths  of  heathenism,  holding  the 
lamp  of  Divine  truth,  flaming  with  the 
burning  love  of  the  world's  Redeemer, 
and  picks  up  the  most  degraded  victims 
of  idolatry,  who,  penetrated  and  refined 
by  the  same  Divine  light  that  first  found 
them  out,  shall  shine  with  the  lustre  of 
the  finest  jewels. — The  Scottish  Pulpit 
The  horrors  of  famina  The  bed^ied 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  OHAT.  L 

city  of  Leyden  was  at  its  last  gasp,  living  herb  was  converted  into  human 

Bread,  malt-cake,  horse-flesh,  had  en-  food,  but  these   expedients  could  not 

tirely  disappeared ;  dogs,  cats,  rats,  and  avert  starvation.     The  daily  mortality 

other  vermin  were  esteemed  luxuries,  was  frightful — infants  starved  to  death 

A  small  number  of  cows,  kept  as  long  on  the  maternal  breasts  which  famine 

as  possible  for  their  milk,  still  remained ;  had    parched    and    withered,    mothers 

but  a  few  were  killed  from  day  to  day,  dropped  dead  in  the  streets  with  their 

and  distributed  in  minute  proportions,  dead  children  in  their  arms.     A  dis- 

hardly  sufficient  to  support  life  among  order   called  the  plague,  naturally  en- 

the    famishing   population.      Starving  gendered  of  hardship  and  famine,  now 

wretches    swarmed   daily   around    the  came,  as  if  In  kindness,  to  abridge  the 

shambles  where  these  cattle  were  slaugh-  agony  of  the  people.     The   pestilence 

tered,  contending  for  any  morsel  which  stalked  at  noonday  through  the  city, 

might  fall,    and   eagerly   lapping    the  and  the  doomed  inhabitants  fell  like 

blood   as   it   ran  along  the  pavement,  grass  beneath  its  scythe.     From  six  to 

while  the  hides,   chopped  and  boiled,  eight  thousand  human  beings  sank  be- 

were  greedily  devoured.     Women  and  fore  this  scourge  alone ;  yet  the  people 

children  all  day  long  were  seen  search-  resolutely  held  out,   women  and  men 

ing  gutters  and  dunghills  for  mors' Is  of  mutually    encouraging   each    other    to 

food  which  they  disputed  fiercely  with  resist  the  entrance  of  their  foreign  foe 

the  famishing  dogs.     The  green  leaves  — an  evil  more  horrible  than  pest  or 

were  stripped  from    the   trees,   every  famine. — Motleifi  "  Dutch  Be^ublic*' 


H0MILETIC8. 
A  DiSTRKssED  Nation. 

(Verses  12-17.) 

L  Utters  a  piteoas  appeal  for  sympathy.  ''  Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that 
pass  by  %  Behold  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  my  sorrow,"  &c.  (ver. 
12).  Sorrow  craves  sympathy.  A  crumb,  an  atom,  however  trifling,  is  eajrerly 
seized  and  fondly  cherished.  It  matters  not  from  what  source  it  comes.  It  is 
welcome  from  any  casual  passer-by,  from  anybody,  from  anything.  The  despair- 
ing find  comfort  in  a  flower  as  it  gracefully  bends  towards  them ;  in  the  mute 
sympathy  of  a  favourite  dog.  as  it  caressingly  thrusts  its  nose  into  the  limp  hands. 
It  is  easy  to  exaggerate  our  troubles  and  imagine  there  is  no  sorrow  like  our  own  ; 
but  a  wider  knowledge  of  the  world's  ills  helps  us  to  correct  our  magnified  esti- 
mate. There  is  only  One — the  world's  Redeemer — whose  sufferings  are  unique 
and  unparalleled. 

II.  Painfully  conscious  of  the  overwhelming  nature  of  its  sufferings  (ver. 
13-15).  1.  In  their  fierceness.  "From  above  hath  He  sent  fire  into  my  bones, 
and  it  prevaileth  against  them" — subdues  them  (ver.  13).  It  is  no  earthly,  but 
heavenly  fire  which  burns  in  the  bones  of  Jerusalem  {Speaker's  Commentary), 
It  is  a  fact  well  established  in  osteology  that  inflammation  in  the  bones  is  not 
only  extremely  painful,  but  dries  them  up  and  renders  them  brittle  and  useless 
(Henderson),  2.  All  attempts  to  escape  from  t?iem  are  futile,  **  He  hath  spread 
a  net  for  my  feet.  He  hath  turned  me  back  :  He  hath  made  me  desolate  and  faint 
all  the  day*'  (ver.  13).  Judea,  like  a  hunted  animal,  endeavours  to  escape,  but 
finds  every  outlet  blocked  with  nets,  and  recoils  from  them  in  terror,  and  a  sense 
of  utter  hopelessness  and  exhaustion.  The  only  thing  to  flee  from  is  sin ;  the 
only  refuge  to  flee  to  is  God.  There  is  no  relief  from  sufiering  till  we  are  divested 
of  the  coils  of  our  sin.  3.  They  are  an  unmistakable  consequence  of  sin.  "  The 
yoke  of  my  transgressions  is  bound  by  His  hand :  they  are  wreathed  and  come 
up  upcm  my  neck,''  &c  (ver.  14).     The  metaphor  is  taken  from  aghcultuial  life. 

29 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  L  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 

As  the  ploughman  binds  the  yoke  with  cords  so  knotted  and  twined  together  that 
they  form  a  bunch  upon  the  neck  of  the  oxen  impossible  to  shake  off,  so  does 
God  compel  Judah  to  bear  the  punishment  of  her  sins.  The  yoke  thus  imposed 
by  the  hand  of  God,  and  securely  knotted  around  the  neck  of  Judah  by  the 
entangled  bonds  of  her  own  sins,  bows  down  her  strength  by  its  weight,  and 
makes  her  totter  and  stumble  beneath  it  "  He  hath  made  my  strength  to  fall " 
— to  stumble  {Speaker's  Comnientary),  Sin  by  and  by  becomes  an  intolerable 
burden,  and  is  constantly  reasserting  its  power  over  u&  There  is  a  lake  in 
Switzerland,  shut  in  by  high  mountains,  a  solitary,  lonely  place,  which  few 
travellers  visit,  and  where  few  care  to  linger,  so  desolate  and  homeless  is  the  spot. 
Here,  an  old  legend  says,  every  night  at  midnight  the  watcher  may  see  the  ghost 
of  Pilate  come  to  the  shore  and  try  with  piteous  lamentations  to  wash  from  his 
hands  some  red  stains  that  are  upon  them — the  marks  of  the  blood  of  Jesus.  But 
as  fast  as  he  washes  them  off  they  reappear.  So  is  it  with  all  our  sins,  small  and 
great  4.  They  are  an  evidence  of  contempttunus  and  crushing  defeat,  "The 
Lord  hath  trodden  under  foot  all  my  mighty  men  in  the  midst  of  me,"  &c.  (ver. 
15).  They  had  not  fallen  gloriously  in  the  battlefield,  but  remained  ignominiously 
in  the  city,  confessing  their  inability  to  fight  Irving  once  said,  "  With  every 
exertion,  the  best  of  men  can  do  but  a  moderate  amount  of  good,  but  it  seems  in 
the  power  of  the  n^ost  contemptible  individual  to  do  incalculable  mischief."  The 
governor-general  of  a  Russian  province  was  once  mildly  remonstrated  with  by  his 
secretary  regarding  a  high-handed  proceeding,  producing  at  the  same  time  a  para- 
graph from  a  state  volume  proving  the  illegality  of  the  action.  The  angry  governor 
seized  the  book  and  sat  upon  it,  shouting,  "  Where  is  the  law  now  1 "  He  then 
pointed  to  his  decorated  breast,  and  continued  in  a  pompous  strain,  "  Here  it  is ; 
I  am  the  law ! "  and  the  secretary  had  to  beat  a  prudent  retreat  It  is  very 
humiliating  to  be  in  the  grip  of  tyranny  like  this. 

III.  The  most  iMissionate  expression  of  sorrow  brings  no  reliet  ''  For  these 
things  I  weep,  4&c.  Zion  spreadeth  forth  her  hands,  and  there  is  none  to  comfort 
her,"  &c.  (vers.  16,  17).  Spreading  out  the  hands  is  a  token  of  the  deepest  dis- 
tress. There  is  no  one  to  comfort — not  God,  for  He  is  chastening ;  nor  man,  for 
all  the  neighbouring  nations  have  become  enemies  (ver.  2).  Tears  are  a  sign  of 
*  weakness  and  helplessness.  To  give  way  to  grief  is  not  tlie  way  to  conquer  it 
God  is  the  only  refuge  in  distress,  and  His  help,  if  sincerely  sought,  is  not  in  vain. 
The  common  cry  of  the  Breton  mariner  is,  '*My  God,  protect  me !  my  bark  is  so 
small  and  Thy  ocean  so  vast" 

**  I  am  BO  weak,  dear  Lord,  I  cannot  atand 

One  moment  without  Thee  : 
But  oh  I  the  tenderness  of  Thine  enfolding ; 
And  oh  !  the  faithfulness  of  Thine  upholding  | 
And  oh  1  the  strength  of  Thy  right  band : 

That  strength  is  enough  for  me. 

I  am  so  needy,  Lord,  and  yet  I  know 

All  fulness  dwells  in  Thee  ; 
And  hour  by  hour  that  never-failing  treatovt 
Supplies  and  fills,  in  overflowing  measure^ 
My  least,  my  greatest  need ;  and  so 

Thy  grace  is  enough  for  me.'' 

Lbbsons. — 1.  II  is  painful  to  witness  distress  toe  are  helpless  to  relieve,  2. 
National  distress  is  tJie  fruit  of  national  crime.  3.  National  steering  should 
purify  the  national  life. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Ver.    12.    The    sufferings    of   the     classes  of  the  human  family.    2.  Unique 
world's  Redeemer:   1.  Appeal  to  all     in  their  character  and   poipose.     S. 
x30 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOyriLETIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


CHAP.  I. 


Aggravated  by  the  mysterions  manifes- 
tation of  the  Divine  wrath.  4.  The 
basis  of  the  world's  salvation.  5. 
Should  arrest  the  attention  and  engage 
the  prayerful  thought  of  the  sinner. 

— 18  it  nothing  to  yon  t  I.  The 
sufferings  of  Christ  upon  the  Gross  were 
unparalleled.  1.  Because  of  the  dignity 
of  His  person.  2.  Because  of  the  per- 
fect innocence  of  His  character.  3. 
Because  there  was  such  a  conjunction 
of  griefs.  4.  Because  they  were  volun- 
tarily undertaken  and  continued  in.  5. 
Because  those  for  whom  He  died  thus 
Toluntarily  were  His  enemies.  6.  Be- 
cause they  were  expiatory.  IL  The 
sufferings  of  Christ  have  had  a  deep 
interest  in  them  for  many,  1.  Mul- 
titudes have  found  in  them  a  cure 
for  despair.  2.  In  others  they  have 
wrought  a  complete  transformation  of 
their  lives.  3.  Had  power  on  men's 
minds  to  gird  them  to  heroic  deeds.  4. 
Men  who  love  the  suffering  Saviour  be- 
come patient  in  their  every-day  suffer- 
ings. 5.  They  learn  to  hate  sin  by 
seeing  the  agonies  by  which  redemption 
was  obtained.  Ill  What  have  you 
to  do  with  Christ  t  "Write  down  your 
decision  whether  you  will  have  Christ 
or  not  A  poor,  suffering  girl,  who  had 
long  loved  the  Saviour,  under  a  feeling 
of  depression,  confessed  to  her  minister 
that  she  had  deceived  herself,  and  did 
not  love  Him.  The  minister  walked 
to  the  window  and  wrote  on  a  piece  of 
paper,  "  I  do  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christy"  and  said,  <<  Susan,  here  is  a 
pencil  Just  put  your  name  to  that.'' 
"  No,  sir,"  she  said,  "  I  could  not  sign 
that:*  "Why  notr*  "I  would  be 
torn  to  pieces  before  I  would  sign  it, 
sir."  "But  why  not  sign  it  if  it  is 
true?"  "Ah!  sir,"  she  said,  "I  hope 
it  is  not  true.  I  think  I  do  love  Him." — 
G,  H,  Spurgeon. 

—  Onr  dnty  towards  the  Jewish 
peoide.  I.  The  facts  on  which  the  appeal 
is  founded.  The  unparalleled  sorrow  and* 
sufferings  of  the  Jewish  people.  Where 
is  the  nation  that  has  been  subject  to 
such  universal  contempt!  All  mankind 
seems  to  have  conspired  to  despise  the 
Jews.  They  seem  under  the  curse  of 
Heftven.    IL  The  appeal  itself,    "  Is  it 


nothing  to  you!"  That  the  world 
should  pass  by  we  cannot  wonder. 
That  the  heathen  or  Mohammedan 
should  neglect  the  Jew  can  excite  no 
surprise.  That  the  mere  self-loving 
nominal  Christian  should  heed  him  not, 
is  all  natural ;  but  that  the  follower  of 
Christ  should  pass  by  may  well  excite 
astonishment.  It  is  an  error  to  suppose 
we  need  not  care  to  labour  among  the 
Jews  because  the  Gospel  is  a  Gentile 
dispensation,  and  that  the  Jews  are 
shut  out  until  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles 
be  come  in.  The  Gospel  is  as  much  a 
Jewish  dispensation  as  was  the  Law. 
To  them  it  was  promised ;  to  them  it 
was  given.  By  them  it  was  proclaimed 
to  the  Gentiles,  and  theirs  it  still  is. 
Zeal  for  the  honour  of  Christ  should 
lead  us  to  direct  our  first  endeavours  to 
the  Jewish  people. — M^Gavl, 

Yer.  13.  Divine  pnnishment.  L 
Marked  by  great  severity,  "  From 
above  hath  He  sent  fire  into  my  bones, 
and  it  prevaileth  against  them."  IL 
Admits  of  no  escape  from  its  toils,  "  He 
hath  spread  a  net  for  my  feet ;  He  hath 
turned  me  back."  IIL  Thoroughly 
subdues  the  sufferer,  "He  hath  made 
me  desolate  and  faint  all  the  day." 

Ver.  14.  The  galling  tsrranny  of 
Bin.  L  Oppressive,  "The  yoke  of  my 
transgressions  is  bound  by  His  hand; 
they  are  wreathed  and  come  up  upon 
my  neck."  II.  Exhausting.  "  He 
hath  made  my  strength  to  fall."  III. 
Reduces  the  soul  to  helplessness,  "The 
Lord  hath  delivered  me  into  their 
hands,  from  whom  I  am  not  able  to 
rise  up." 

—  The  misery  of  the  penitent.  1. 
When  conscious  of  the  burden  of  sin. 
2.  When  realising  his  increasing  help- 
lessness. III.  When  abandoned  to 
reap  the  consequences  of  his  transgres- 
sions. 4.  Can  be  relieved  only  by  the 
pitifulness  of  the  Divine  mercy. 

Ver.  15.  Ingloiions  defeat  I.  The 
veteran  warriors  are  captured  in  the 
midst  of  the  city  from  which  they  had 
not  courage  to  issue  forth  and  defend. 
"  The  Lord  hath  trodden  under  foot  all 
my  mighty  men  in  the  midst  of  me." 
II.  The  combinations  of  iliefoe  were  too 
powerful  for  the  bravery  of  the  young  to 

31 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  I. 


nOMJLETlC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATT0N8. 


resut,  "He  hath  called  an  assembly 
against  me  to  crush  my  young  men." 
IlL  The  defeat  of  the  nation  is  abject 
and  complete,  "  The  Lord  hath  trodden 
the  virgin,  the  daughter  of  Judah,  as 
in  a  wine-press." 

Vers.  16,  17.  The  helplesniMS  of 
despair.  I.  Tears  and  entreaties  are 
in  vain.  "For  these  things  I  weep; 
mine  eye,  mine  eye  runneth  down  with 
water.  Zion  spreadeth  forth  her  hands, 
and  there  is  none  to  comfort  her  "  (vers. 
16,  17).  II.  Sin  debases  a  people  in 
the  estiniation  of  God  and  man.  "  Jeru- 
salem is  as  a  menstruous  woman  " — hath 
become  a  loathing  —  "among  them  " 
(ver.  1 7).  IIL  There  is  no  ho2fe  of  escape, 
"  My  children  are  desolate  because  the 
enemy  prevailed"  (ver.  16).  *'The 
Lord  hath  commanded  concerning 
Jacob  that  his  adversaries  should  be 
round  about  him"  (ver.  17). 

iLLusTRATioNa  —  A  distressed  na- 
tion: the  havoc  of  war.  When  the 
French  army  invaded  Russia  in  1812, 
and  penetrated  as  far  as  Moscow,  Count 
Rostopchin,  the  governor,  thinking  it 
more  glorious  to  destroy  the  ancient 
capital  of  the  Czars  tluui  suffer  it  to 
harbour  and  protect  an  enemy,  caused 
it  to  be  burned  to  the  ground.  The 
most  heartrending  scenes  were  wit- 
nessed. The  people,  hastily  snatching 
up  their  most  precious  effects,  fled  be- 
fore the  flames.  Others,  actuated  by 
the  general  feelings  of  nature,  saved 
only  their  parents  or  their  infants,  who 
were  closely  clasped  in  their  arms. 
They  were  followed  by  their  other 
children,  running  as  fast  as  their  little 
strength  would  permit,  and,  with  all  the 
wildness  of  childish  terror,  vociferating 
the  beloved  name  of  mother !  The  old 
people,  borne  down  by  grief  more  than 
hy  age,  had  not  sufficient  power  to 
follow  their  families,  and  expired  near 
the  houses  in  which  they  were  bom. 
No  cry,  no  complaint  was  heard.  Both 
the  conqueror  and  the  conquered  were 
equally  hardened.  The  flre,  whose 
ravages  could  not  be  restrained,  soon 
reached  the  finest  parts  of  the  city. 
The  palaces  were  enveloped  in  flames. 
Their  magnificent  fronts,  ornamented 
32 


with  bas-reliefs  and  statues,  fell  with  a 
dreadful  crash.  The  churches,  with 
their  steeples  resplendent  with  gold  and 
silver,  were  destroyed.  The  hospitals, 
containing  more  than  12,000  wounded, 
began  to  burn,  and  almost  all  the  in- 
mates perished.  A  few  who,  still  lin- 
gered were  seen  crawling  half  burnt 
amongst  the  smoking  ruins,  and  others, 
groaning  under  heaps  of  dead  bodies, 
endeavoured  in  vain  to  extricate  them- 
selves from  the  horrible  destruction 
which  surrounded  theuL  From  what- 
ever side  viewed,  nothing  was  seen  but 
ruin  and  flames.  The  fire  raged  as  if 
it  were  fanned  by  some  invisible  power. 
The  most  extensive  range  of  buildings 
seemed  to  kindle,  to  bum,  and  to  dis- 
appear in  an  instant.  The  wild  pil- 
lagers precipitated  themselves  into  the 
midst  of  the  flames.  They  waded  in 
blood,  treading  on  dead  bodies  without 
remorse,  while  the  burning  ruins  fell 
on  their  murderous  hands.  The  signal 
patriotism  of  sacrificing  the  city  in  order 
to  subdue  the  enemy  actuated  all  ranks. 

Affliction  reveals  onr  sins.  So  long 
as  leaves  are  on  the  trees  ond  bushes, 
you  cannot  see  the  bird's  nests ;  but  in 
the  winter,  when  all  the  leaves  are  off, 
then  you  see  them  plainly.  And  so 
long  as  men  are  in  prosperity  and  have 
their  leaves  on,  they  do  not  see  what 
nests  of  sin  and  lust  are  in  their  hearts 
and  lives ;  but  when  all  their  leaves  are 
ofli  in  the  day  of  their  afflictions,  then 
they  see  them,  and  say,  "I  did  not 
think  I  had  had  such  nests  of  sins  and 
lusts  in  my  soul  and  life." — Bridge, 

Whose  sorrows  are  like  nnto  mine  t 
O  thou  erring  mortal,  repine  not.  Our 
Father  has  some  great  and  wise  purpose 
in  thus  afflicting  thee,  and  wilt  thou 
dare  murmur  against  Him  when  He 
removed  the  idol  that  He  alone  may 
reign?  Pause  and  reflect.  Examine 
well  thy  conscience,  and  see  if  there 
were  not  earthly  attractions  clinging  to 
thy  soul  and  leading  thee  to  forget  the 
Creator  in  thy  love  for  the  creature. 
Raise  not  thy  feeble  voice  against  the 
Most  High,  lest  He  send  upon  thee  a 
still  greater  trial  in  order  to  teach  thee 
submission.  Behold  His  noble  example 
when  persecuted  by  a  whole  world. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CHAP.  I. 


Imagine  Him,  the  God  of  the  universe, 
standing  before  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin, 
condemned,  buffeted,  spit  upon  !  One 
blazing  look  of  wrathful  indignation 
\rould  have  annihilated  that  rude 
rabble;  but,  with  all  the  beauty  and 
grace  of  self-abnegation,  He  bowed  His 
head  and  prayed,  "Father,  forgive 
them;  they  know  not  what  they  do." 
Wouldst  thou  find  relief  for  thy  suffer- 
ings f  Contemplate  the  life  of  Him 
who  spake  as  never  man  spake.,  Fol- 
low Him  through  all  those  years  of  toil 
and  suffering.  Witness  His  deeds  of 
mercy  and  love,  and  then — go  thou  and 
do  likewise. — German  Reformed  Mes- 
mnffer. 

Self-sacrifice.  An  extraordinary  ex- 
ample of  self-sacrifice  was  witnessed  at 
Chicago.  A  member  of  the  brother- 
hood of  Knight-Templars  was  operated 
upon  for  cancer,  and  a  wound  nearly  a 
foot  square  was  left.  The  surgeon  de- 
clared that  if  the  patient  was  to  recover, 
the  wound  must  be  covered  with  new 
human  skin.  At  once  132  members  of 
the  brotherhood  volunteered  to  allow  a 
small  strip  of  skin  to  be  cut  from  their 
arms,  so  that  the  pieces  thus  obtained 
might  be  transferred  to  the  wound  of 
their  comrade.  The  operation  was  per- 
formed. Several  of  tiie  brave  fellows 
fainted,  but  the  majority  bore  the  in- 
cision of  the  surgeon's  knife  without 
flinching.  It  is  inspiriting  to  hear  of 
such  heroic  self-sacriOce.  Much  of  the 
suffering  of  the  Christian  worker  is 
vicarious;  but  no  number  of  acts  of 
suffering  on  behalf  of  others  can  equal 
the  sublime  sacrifice  of  Him  who 
suffered  and  died  for  the  whole  race. — 
The  Scottish  Pulpit 

Divine  punishment  and  pessiinism. 
Noah  was  a  pessimist  to  the  antedilu- 
vian world;  Moses  was  a  pessimist  to 
Pharaoh  in  Egypt ;  Samuel  was  a  pes- 
simist, and  his  very  first  prediction 
foretold  the  downfall  of  the  aged  Eli 
and  his  godless  family.  Jeremiah  was 
a  pessimist,  constantly  foretelling  evil 
and  danger ;  Jonah  was  a  pessimist,  who 
disturbed  the  peace  of  the  city,  crying, 
"Yet  forty  days  and  Nineveh  shall  be 
overthrown."  Nahum  was  a  pessimist, 
crying,  **Woe  to  the  bloody  city!" 
83 


Micaiah  was  a  pessimist  when  he  fore- 
told the  overthrow  of  Ahab,  the  guilty 
king,  who  complained  that  he  never  pro- 
phesied any  good  of  him.  The  Saviour 
was  a  pessimist,  for  He  foretold  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  cala- 
mities that  were  to  come  upon  the 
world.  The  Apostles  Peter,  James, 
John,  Jude  were  all  pessimists,  for  they 
were  continually  foretelling  perilous 
times,  departure  from  the  faith,  and 
the  coming  judgment  upon  the  godless 
world.  The  great  preachers  and  poets 
of  the  ages  have  been  pessimists,  for 
they  were  ever  warning  men  of  present 
evil  and  coming  wrath,  of  predicted 
calamities  and  judgments  overhanging 
the  godless  and  profane. — Christian 
Repository, 
Sin  a  slavery. 

"  There  ia  a  bondagB  whioh  b  worse  to  bear 
Than  bis  who  breathes,  by  roof  and  floor 

and  waU 
Pent  in,  a  tyrant's  solitary  thrall : 
'Tis  his  who  walks  about  in  the  open  air, 
One  of  a  nation  who  henceforth  must  wear 
Their  fetters  in  their  souls." 

Discovery  of  the  destructive  work 
of  sin.  The  steeple  of  the  Church  of 
St.  Bride,  London,  originally  built  by 
Christopher  Wren,  was  struck  by  light- 
ning in  1764,  and  the  upper  part  had 
to  be  rebuilt,  when  it  was  lowered  eight 
feet.  It  was  then  discovered  that  an 
old  hawk  had  inhabited  the  two  upper 
circles,  the  open  arcades  of  which  were 
filled  with  masses  of  birds'  bones,  chiefly 
those  of  the  city  pigeons  upon  which  it 
had  preyed.  It  would  be  well  if  more 
frequent  discovery  could  be  made  of 
those  wily  hawks  of  society  who  prey 
with  such  merciless  and  ingenious  greed 
upon  the  simple  and  unsuspecting. 
Their  discovery  is  all  the  more  difficult 
when  they  make  the  Church  of  Christ 
their  hiding-place,  and  the  clean-picked 
relics  of  their  numerous  victims  are  all 
the  more  sad  to  contemplate  when  one 
at  length  finds  out  that  the  work  of 
plunder  has  been  carried  on  under  the 
sacred  garb  of  religion. 

The  misery  of  the  penitent;  how 
cured.  Five  persons  were  studying 
what  were  the  best  means  for  mortifying 

c 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  I. 


BOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


sin.  One  said,  to  meditate  on  death ; 
the  second,  to  meditate  on  judg- 
ment; the  third,  to  meditate  on  the 
joys  of  heaven;  the  fourth,  to  medi- 
tate on  the  torments  of  hell ;  the  fifth, 
to  meditate  on  the  hlood  and  suffer- 
ings of  Christ;  and  certainly  the  last 
is  the  choicest  and  strongest  motive 
of  alL  If  ever  we  would  cast  off  our 
despairing  thoughts,  we  must  dwell  and 
muse  much  upon  and  apply  this  precious 
blood  to  our  own  souls ;  so  shall  sorrow 
and  mourning  flee  away. — Brooks, 

Bemorse.  Bemorse  may  disturb  the 
slumbers  of  a  man  who  is  dabbling  with 
his  first  experiences  of  wrong;  and 
when  the  pleasure  has  been  tasted  and 
is  gone,  and  nothing  is  left  of  the  crime 
but  the  ruin  which  it  has  wrought,  then 
the  Furies  take  their  seats  upon  the 
midnight  pillow.  But  the  meridian  of 
evil  is  for  the  most  part  left  unvezed ; 
and  when  a  man  has  chosen  his  road, 
he  is  left  alone  to  follow  it  to  the  end. 
— Froude. 

Inglorious  defeat — The  retreat  firom 
Moscow.  The  annals  of  ancient  and 
modem  warfare,  in  the  vast  catalogue 
of  woes  which  they  record,  do  not  pre- 
sent a  parallel  to  the  sufferings  of  the 
French  on  the  retreat  from  Moscow — 
sufferings  neither  cheered  by  hope  nor 
mitigated  by  the  slightest  relief.  The 
army  in  its  retreat  had  to  encamp  on 
the  bare  snow  in  the  midst  of  the 
severest  winter  that  even  Bussia  ever 
experienced.  The  soldiers,  without 
shoes  and  almost  without  clothes,  were 
enfeebled  by  fatigue  and  famine.  Sit- 
ting on  their  knapsacks,  the  cold  buried 
some  in  a  temporary,  but  more  in  an 
eternal  sleep.  Those  who  were  able  to 
rise  from  this  benumbing  posture,  only 
did  it  to  broil  some  slices  of  horse-flesh, 
perhaps  cut  from  their  favourite  charger, 
or  to  melt  a  few  morsels  of  ice.  In  the 
march  it  was  impossible  to  keep  them 
in  order,  as  imperious  hunger  seduced 
them  from  their  colours,  and  threw  their 
columns  into  confusion.  Many  of  the 
French  women  accompanied  the  army 
on  foot,  with  shoes  of  stuff  little  calcu- 
lated to  defend  them  from  the  frozen 
snow,  and  clad  in  old  robes  of  silk  or 
the  thinnest  muslin;  and  they  were 
34 


glad  to  cover  themselves  with  tattered 
pieces  of  military  cloaks,  torn  from  the 
dead  bodies  of  the  soldiers.  The  cold 
was  so  severe  that  men  were  frozen  to 
death  in  the  ranks,  and  at  every  step 
were  seen  the  dead  bodies  of  the  soldiers 
stretched  on  the  snow.  Of  four  hundred 
thousand  warriors  who  had  crossed  the 
Kiemen  at  the  opening  of  the  campaign, 
scarcely  twenty  thousand  repassed  it. 
Such  was  the  dreadful  havoc  which  a 
Russian  winter  caused  to  the  finest, 
best-appointed,  and  most  powerful  army 
that  ever  took  the  field. 

Ohristianity  addresses  the  despair- 
ing. Throughout  all  the  ages  which 
have  followed  Christ's  word,  Christ's 
message  has  rung  in  with  power  upon 
men's  lives  just  in  proportion  to  their 
dejection  and  despair.  One  of  the 
earliest  attacks  upon  Christianity  was 
the  censure  that  it  was  a  word  to  the 
miserable.  Such  indeed  it  is.  If  it 
is  censurable  to  move  among  men  when 
they  are  dispirited,  when  they  have 
come  to  the  end  of  a  civilisation,  when 
nothing  but  blank  hopelessness  and 
no  remedy  lies  in  front  of  them,  then 
Christianity  is  censurable,  Christ's  mes- 
sage is  open  to  reproach.  If  that  be 
a  fault,  it  is  not  faultless.  It  stands 
condemned.  If  too  you  deem  it  blame- 
worthy to  go  to  the  individual  when  he 
has  sinned,  when  he  has  flung  away  his 
life  madly,  wickedly,  passionately,  to 
stand  beside  him,  nay,  to  bend  over 
him  with  affectionate  interest,  when  he 
is  lying  ragged,  beaten,  hungry,  and 
filthy  in  the  far  country  into  wluch  he 
has  gone,  then  neither  Christianity  nor 
Christ  can  escape  your  blame.  They 
stand  convicted  of  the  crime  of  re- 
ceiving sinners  and  eating  with  them, 
of  laying  their  hands  on  lepers  who 
are  unclean,  of  seeking  the  society  of 
the  demented  and  insane. — Eev,  Hi 
R088, 

Orying  to  GkkL  Several  children  of 
a  family  were  once  playing  in  a  garden 
when  one  fell  into  a  tank.  When  the 
father  heard  of  it,  he  asked  what  means 
they  thought  of  to  rescue  their  brother 
from  his  perilous  situation.  Inquiring 
of  the  youngest,  he  said,  "John,  what 
did  you  do  to  rescue  your  brother  1* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATfONS.  chap.  i. 

The  boy  answered,  "  Father,  what  cried  as  loud  as  I  could."  If  we  cannot 
should  I  do  t  I  am  so  young  that  I  bring  a  ladder  or  rope,  all  can  ciy,  all 
could  not  do  anything,  but  I  stood  and      can  plead  with  God. 


EOMILETICS. 

The  Bitter  Fruits  of  Rebbllioh. 

(Verses  18-22.) 

L  That  rebellion  is  the  violation  of  the  law  of  a  righteous  Ood.  *'The 
Lord  is  righteous,  for  I  have  rebelled  against  His  commandment "  (ver.  18).  "  I 
have  grievously  rebelled "  (ver.  20).  A  man  may  fight  against  God's  will  and 
exalt  his  own ;  but  he  cannot  fight  against  the  law  by  which  obedience  brings 
peace,  harmony,  and  joy  to  the  soul,  and  disobedience  brings  unrest,  pain,  and 
deadness.  All  things  in  God's  universe  proclaim  the  folly  of  the  man  who  thinks  • 
to  oppose  his  will  to  the  Infinite.  He  may  to  some  extent  succeed  in  thwarting 
the  Divine  will ;  but  he  cannot  prosper.  What  may  seem  success  will  turn  into 
shame  and  ruin.  The  violation  of  law  puts  us  out  of  harmony  with  God,  Nature, 
and  man. 

IL  That  rebellion  is  the  occasion  of  great  national  disasters.  1.  The  young 
are  enslaved,  **  My  virgins  and  my  young  men  are  gone  into  captivity  "  (ver.  18). 
There  is  little  hope  for  the  future  of  a  nation  when  its  young  people  are  in 
degrading  bondage.  Christianity  has  created  a  just  appreciation  of  the  worth  of 
young  life.  A  Japanese  woman  once  came  to  a  Christian  lady  in  Japan  with  a 
girl-l^by  which  had  been  thrown  into  a  ditch  by  its  father,  as  thousands  were, 
because  it  was  "  only  a  girl."  In  begging  the  Christian  lady  to  take  care  of  the 
naked  child,  covered  with  mud,  the  poor  woman  said,  "  Please  do  take  little  baby. 
Your  God  is  the  only  Grod  that  teaches  to  be  good  to  little  children."  2.  Friend- 
Mps  are  demoralised,  "  I  called  for  my  lovers,  but  they  deceived  me  "  (ver.  19). 
The  confusion  that  springs  out  of  rebellion  is  a  severe  strain  on  the  fidelity  of 
professed  friends.  Promises  made  with  the  utmost  solemnity  are  little  regarded. 
One  brave  and  truthful  action  tells  more  than  a  million  utterances  of  the  mouth. 
Genuine  friendship  is  ever  frank  and  true.  Simplicity  is  not  the  absence  of 
intricacy,  but  its  solutioa  The  true  friend,  however  much  misunderstood  in  a 
time  of  disorder,  comes  out  scatheless.  3.  The  nation  is  ravaged  by  war,  famine, 
and  death,  "  Abroad  the  sword  bereaveth,  at  home  there  is  as  death  "  (ver.  20). 
**My  priests  and  mine  elders  gave  up  the  ghost  in  the  city,  while  they  sought 
their  meat  to  relieve  their  souls  "  (ver.  29).  Those  who  should  have  advised  and 
comforted  the  people  were  disabled  by  starvation,  or  were  lying  dead  among  the 
slain.  4.  The  sufferings  of  the  people  are  distressingly  acute.  "  I  am  in  distress ; 
my  bowels  are  troubled ;  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me  "  (ver.  20).  My  heart 
is  so  violently  agitated  that  it  seems  to  have  changed  its  position — to  be  over- 
turned. It  is  difficult  to  conceive  words  that  could  more  pathetically  describe 
the  extremity  of  griel  Much  of  our  trouble  is  intensified  by  forebodings  as  to  the 
future.  God  gives  ns  strength  to  bear  each  day's  burden  as  it  comes.  When  we 
stagger  and  fall  because  our  burden  has  become  too  heavy,  it  is  because  we  have 
added  of  our  own  accord  something  of  the  future's  weight  to  that  of  the  present 
5.  The  enemies  ghat  over  the  national  troubles,  "  They  have  heard  that  I  sigh ; 
there  is  none  to  comfort  me.  All  mine  enemies  have  heard  of  my  trouble.  They 
are  glad  that  thou  hast  done  it"  (ver.  21).  It  is  the  acme  of  cruelty  and  obduracy 
of  heart  to  chuckle  over  the  miseries  of  the  fallen.  How  di£Perent  is  the  true 
Christian  spirit  Lord  Shaftesbury  earned  the  title  of  "the  good  Earl"  by  his 
philanthropic  endeavours  to  raise  the  most  depraved.  A  costermonger  who  had 
been  a  most  notorious  sinner  was  once  asked,  "  What  did  his  Lordship  say  to  you 

35 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  L 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


til  at  made  you  a  reformed  man  t "  "Oh,  he  didn't  say  much,"  was  the  reply. 
**  He  just  sat  down  by  my  side  and  said,  *  Jack,  we  will  make  a  man  of  you  yet'" 
It  was  the  upward  gravitation  of  Christian  manhood  that  helped  Jack,  and  many 
like  him. 

III.  That  every  nation  that  rebels  against  Gkxl  will  be  certainly  punished. 
"  Thou  wilt  bring  the  day  that  Thou  hast  called,  and  they  shall  be  like  unto  ma 
Do  unto  them  as  Thou  hast  done  unto  me,"  &c.  (ver.  21,  22).  The  prophet,  in 
terms  that  seem  dictated  by  a  spirit  of  retaliation,  is  but  expressing  in  prophecy 
what  actually  happened  in  the  capture  of  Babylon — the  destruction  of  the  Chaldean 
empire  and  of  the  neighbouring  states  by  which  the  Jews  had  been  ill-used.  He 
also  expressed  the  general  trutli,  so  often  exemplified  in  history,  that  the  nations 
that  ignore  God  come  to  nought 

LHsaoNa — 1.  The  greatest  troubles  of  a  nation  are  the  result  of  rebellion,  2.  God 
is  not  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  of  a  nation  under  punishment.  3.  Obedience  to 
Ood  is  the  only  guarantee  of  national  prosperity. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  18.  "The  Lord  is  righteous,  for 
I  have  rebelled  against  His  command- 
ment." Divine  Justice :  1.  Is  publicly 
acknowledged.  2.  Must  punish  rebel- 
lion.    3.  Is  ever  mingled  with  mercy. 

—  "  Hear,  I  pray  you,  all  people,  and 
behold  my  sorrow."  The  voice  of  sor- 
row: 1.  Has  a  lesson  for  all  classea 
2.  Cannot  express  all  that  is  felt  3. 
Excites  sympathy  among  the  most  in- 
different 4.  Should  lead  to  inquiry 
as  to  its  cause. 

—  *'  My  virgins  and  my  young  men 
are  gone  into  captivity."  Young  life  : 
1.  The  hope  and  strength  of  a  nation.  2. 
Should  be  placed  in  the  most  favourable 
circumstances  for  development  and  cul- 
ture. 3.  Is  crushed  by  the  degradation 
of  slavery. 

Ver.  19.  "I  called  for  my  lovers, 
but  they  deceived  me."  Human  fickle- 
ness :  1.  A  bitter  disappointment  when 
shown  by  those  we  love,  and  who  have 
professed  to  love  us.  2.  Cannot  bear 
the  strain  of  a  great  trial.  Fails  us 
when  we  most  need  help.  3.  A  pure, 
unselfish,  faithful  affection  a  rarity.  4. 
Should  teach  us  to  trust  alone  in  God. 

Yer.  20.  Sincere  penitence:  I. 
Shown  in  a  frank  and  full  confession  of 
sin.  "  I  have  grievously  sinned."  II. 
Experiences  the  most  pungent  sorrow  for 
sin.  "  I  am  in  distress :  my  bowels  are 
troubled :  mine  heart  is  turned  within 
me."  IIL  Appeals  to  God  alone  for 
mercy.     "  Behold,  0  Lord." 


Yer.  21.  A  spirit  of  enmity:  I.  Is 

coldly  indifferent  to  the  troubles  of  others, 
though  cognisant  of  them.  "  All  mine 
enemies  have  heard   of  my  trouble.'' 

II.  Exhibits  a  refinement  of  cruelty  in 
refoicing  over  tJte  distresses  of  its  victims. 
'^They  are  glad   thou  hast  done  it'* 

III.  WUl  meet  with  a  day  of  retribu- 
tion. "Thou  wilt  bring  the  day  that 
Thou  hast  called,  and  they  shall  be  like 
unto  me." 

Yer.  22.  The  punishment  of  Judah 
a  type  of  the  punishment  of  all  un- 
faithfU  nations.  I.  Their  sins  are 
fully  k^icn  to  God.  **Let  all  their 
wickedness  come  before  Thee."  11. 
They  will  be  punished  according  to  their 
actual  sins.  "  Do  unto  them  as  Thou 
hast  done  unto  me  for  all  my  trans- 
gressions." III.  They  shall  know  what 
it  is  to  endure  sorrow  and  exhaustion. 
**  For  my  sighs  are  many,  and  my  heart 
is  faint" 

Illustrations.  —  Rehellion  —  Dead 
Sea  fruit. — If  Satan  over  knows  plea- 
sure at  all,  it  is  of  the  foulest  and  most 
unsatisfactory  kind.  Dust  is  his  meat 
There  is  nothing  satisfying  in  the  plea- 
sures of  rebellion.  He  remains  a  dis- 
appointed, restless  being.  The  most 
cunning  error  which  he  invents  and 
sustains  by  philosophy  is  no  more  than 
dust.  His  whole  cause,  for  which  he 
has  laboured  these  thousands  of  years 
with  a  horrible  perseverance,  will  dis- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


OHAF.  L 


solve  into  dust,  and  be  blown  away  as 
Biuoke.  Still  doth  he  feed  himself  on 
dost  Let  those  who  are  servants  of 
Satan  know  assuredly  that  as  they  are 
living  in  sin  ihey  will  have  to  eat  at 
their  father's  table  and  learn  the  empti- 
ness of  all  the  pleasures  of  sin,  and  the 
worthlessness  of  all  the  treasures  of 
evil.  Everything  that  sin  can  bring 
you  is  just  so  much  dust — foul  eating, 
insufficient,  clogging,  killing.  Though 
you  hoard  up  wealth,  gold  is  nothing 
but  dust  to  a  dying  man.  Though  you 
gain  all  earthly  honour,  it  too  dissolves 
into  dust  This  is  the  misery  of  that 
great  spirit  who  is  called  the  Prince  of 
Darkness,  that  he  must  eat  dust  all  his 
days.  But  what  misery  it  must  be  to 
be  only  some  poor  subject  in  that  unhal- 
lowed kingdom,  and  still  to  be  doomed 
to  the  same  loathsome  fare !  Dust 
shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days  of  thy  life. 
Note  that  right  well;  and  may  God 
deliver  you  from  such  feeding ! — Spur- 
geon. 

Fomentiiig  rebellion,  a  minotui 
policy.  The  rebellion  in  the  Nether- 
lands had  already  been  an  expensive 
matter  to  the  crown.  The  Spanish 
army  numbered  more  than  sixty-two 
thousand  men.  Forty  millions  of  dol- 
lars had  already  been  sunk,  and  it 
seemed  probable  that  it  would  require 
nearly  the  whole  annual  produce  of  the 
American  mines  to  sustain  the  war. 
The  Transatlantic  gold  and  silver,  dis- 
interred from  the  depths  where  they 
had  been  buried  for  ages,  were  em- 
ployed not  to  expand  the  current  of  a 
healthy,  life-giving  commerce,  but  to  be 
melted  into  blood.  The  sweat  and  tor- 
tures of  the  king's  pagan  subjects  in 
the  primeval  forests  of  the  New  World 
were  made  subsidiary  to  the  extermina- 
tion of  his  Netherland  people  and  the 
destruction  of  an  ancient  civilisation. 
To  this  end  had  Columbus  discovered  a 
hemisphere  for  Castile  and  Aragon, 
and  the  new  Indies  revealed  their  hid- 
den treasures.  The  military  expenses 
alone  of  the  Netherlands  were  more 
than  seven  million  dollars  yearly,  and 
the  mines  of  the  New  World  produced 
an  annual  average  of  only  eleven. 
There  was  not  a  stiver  left  in  the  ex- 


chequer, nor  the  means  of  raising  one. 
Such  was  tiie  condition  to  which  th« 
unrelenting  tyranny  and  financial  ex- 
periments of  Alva  had  reduced  the 
country. — Motley's  ^^  Dutch  Republic.'* 

Sorrow  does  not  regenerate.  On  a 
May  day  in  the  French  Revolution  of 
1848,  a  wretched-looking  man  wa^seen 
dragging  himself  along  by  the  help  of 
a  sti(;k,  fleeing  frt>m  the  excited  and 
rushing  crowd,  till  he  entered  a  hall  in 
the  Louvre,  where  was  an  exquisite 
piece  of  sculpture,  the  Venus  of  Milos. 
Before  this  statue  the  man  broke  down, 
and  bitter  tears  streamed  over  his  face. 
That  man  was  Heinrich  Heine,  the 
scoffing  Israelite.  This  one  moment 
disclosed  a  whole  world  of  heartache. 
"Deepest  misery,  thy  name  is  Heine  1" 
was  the  passionate  cry  that  escaped  his 
lips.  The  source  of  this  misery  was 
the  pleasure  of  the  world.  The  goddess 
before  whom  he  lay  prostrate  entwined 
the  poet  with  the  glowing  arms  of  sense. 
He  had  sacrificed  all  to  her — body,  soul, 
conscience,  reason,  heart,  and  harp. 
"  Once,"  he  groaned,  "  I  fancied,  with 
Hegel,  I  was  a  god ;  now  I  know  I  am 
a  sick,  forgotten  Jew."  Sixteen  years, 
filled  with  unexampled  pains,  followed, 
but  it  was  only  a  transitory  glance  of 
faith  to  which  the  poet  attained.  On 
the  whole,  affliction  only  excited  him 
to  new  blasphemies. — Otto  Funcke, 

Justice  and  mercy.  Terror  is  sub- 
servient to  love.  As  a  skilful  painter 
fills  the  background  of  his  picture  with 
his  darker  colours,  so  God  introduces 
the  black  thunder-clouds  of  Sinai  to 
give  brighter  prominence  to  Jesus,  the 
Cross  of  Calvary,  and  His  love  to  the 
chief  of  sinners. — Guthrie. 

Youth.  Youth  and  white  paper  take 
any  impression.  The  young  are  the 
divinely-appointed  heirs  of  the  great 
past,  and  the  fatliers  of  the  sublime 
future. 

—  Perhaps  as  the  Creator  looks  down 
on  this  world,  whose  wondrous  beauty 
beams  on  us  more  and  more  in  propor- 
tion as  our  science  would  take  it  from 
poetry  into  law.  He  beholds  nothing  so 
beautiful  as  the  pure  heart  of  a  simple, 
loving  child. — Lytton, 

Human  fickleness  a  disappointment. 
37 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  I. 


HOMJIETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


Astronomers  tell  ua  that  temporary  stars 
attain  their  maximum  hrightness  only 
once  and  for  all.  They  burst  into 
brilliance  suddenly,  come  to  a  point, 
continue  at  that  point  only  for  a  short 
time,  and  then  vanish,  either  by  ex- 
ploding or  by  coming  into  collision  with 
another  body.  It  is  difficult  to  see  the 
reason  for  their  existence  at  all,  except 
to  show  that  the  steady,  dependable 
light  of  the  permanent  star  is  of  more 
service  in  the  heavens  than  the  flashing 
brilliance  that  dazzles  only  to  confuse 
and  mislead.  It  is  dangerous  to  be 
star  of  any  kind,  whether  pulpit  star, 
political  star,  or  social  star ;  but  to  be 
a  temporary  star  is  the  most  provoking 
and  disappointing  of  alL — The  Scottish 
Pulpit. 

HamaA  llcklAneaB  and  its  contrast. 
At  a  trial  in  Anglesey  the  heroic  devo- 
tion of  a  wife  and  the  base  fickleness 
and  savagery  of  a  husband  were  pain- 
fully illustrated.  The  prisoner  saved 
his  neck  through  the  self-forgetful  de- 
votion of  his  wife,  who  sat  at  his  side, 
pale  and  suffering,  through  the  trial.  If 
it  had  been  known  that  the  third  bullet 
fired  from  his  pistol  was  even  then 
lodging  in  the  body  of  his  faithful  wife, 
nothing  would  have  saved  his  life.  It 
was  only  after  the  miserable  man  had 
been  convicted  of  murder  in  a  minor 
degree  that  did  not  involve  hanging 
that  she  applied  to  a  doctor,  confessed 
that  her  husband  had  shot  her,  and 
that  the  bullet  was  still  in  her  hip. 
Who  can  fathom  a  woman's  love  and 
'devotion  f  It  is  often  strangely  lavished 
'^n  those  who  deserve  it  least — Itnd, 

Penitence  inyolves  confession  of  sin. 
Sometimes  a  prisoner  is  advised  to  plead 
not  guilty  because  his  advocate  has  dis- 
covered a  flaw  in  the  indictment,  or  a 
weak  place  in  the  chain  of  evidence, 
and  he  may  get  the  benefit  of  the  doubt. 
Not  so  in  the  case  of  the  sinner ;  there 
can  be  no  doubt.  The  evidence  is 
cumulative.  He  is  caught  red-handed 
in  the  act  of  sin.  His  only  hope  for 
mercy  is  in  a  full  and  frank  confes- 
sion. 

How     enmity    is     mann&ctnred. 
"Right  must  right  remain,"  says  the 
farmer,  and  goes  to  law  with  his  neigh- 
38 


hour  about  a  strip  of  pnsture-land  a 
quarter  of  a  yard  wide,  and  enmity  and 
hatred  exist  between  the  two  families 
for  whole  decades,  while  a  thousand 
times  the  value  of  the  disputed  strip  is 
lost  over  it.  But  no  matter ;  "  Right 
must  right  remain."  Nor  is  it  only 
among  farmers,  but  among  all  kinds  of 
people  that  such  foolish  and  unhappy 
litigation  takes  place,  just  because  no 
one  chooses  to  give  way ;  nay,  not  even 
to  submit  to  the  judgment  of  an  um- 
pire. "  Right  must  right  remain,"  says 
A,  and  passionately  disputes  in  a  large 
party  with  B  as  to  whether  the  train 

which  ran  two  years  ago  to  H in 

the  evening  was  an  ordinary  or  an  ex 
press  train;  and  this  wretched  stub- 
bornness in  disputing  about  trifles 
destroys  the  sociability  of  men  who 
ought  to  have  brought  light  and  salt  to 
each  other.  "  Right  must  right  remain," 
says  this  respectable  man.  He  was 
offended  by  the  harsh  words  of  another, 
and  has  now  passed  him  coldly  by  for 
years.  "He  must  first  apologise,"  he 
says,  instead  of  saying,  "  Don't  let  us 
please  the  devil  by  hating  one  another ; 
here  is  my  hand ;  we  are  brethren  and 
heirs  of  one  heaven."  No!  "Right 
must  right  remain." — Otto  Funcke. 

Betribation.  The  certainty  that  un- 
repentant wickedness  will  be  punished 
may  be  argued — 1.  From  the  principle 
of  moral  causation.  God  has  established 
such  a  connection  between  character 
and  condition  that  misery  must  ever 
spring  from  sin,  and  blessedness  from 
virtue.  Our  present  grows  out  of  the 
past,  hence  our  sins  must  find  us  out. 
What  we  morally  sowed  yesterday  we 
reap  in  experience  to-day,  and  so  on  for 
ever.  2.  From  the  operation  of  moral 
memory.  Memory  recalls  sins,  places 
them  before  the  eye  of  conscience,  and 
sets  the  soul  aflame.  3.  From  the 
declarations  of  Scripture.  "  The  wicked 
shall  not  go  unpunished.  The  wicked 
shall  be  turned  into  hell,  with  all  the 
nations  that  forget  God."  4.  From  the 
history  of  mankind.  Nations  are  an 
example  —  the  Antediluvians,  the 
Sodomites,  the  Jews.  Individuids  are 
an  example. — Moses,  David,  Judas.-— 
D,  Thomas,  D.D. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENT AR  Y :  LA  MENTA  TI0N8.  ohap.  n. 

CHAPTEE  IL 
The  Punishment  of  National  Sm. 

In  this  second  elegy  the  poet  hM  his  attention  fixed  on  something  that  Is  beyond  Ohsldean 
and  Jew.  He  sees,  what  the  eyes  of  the  world  do  not  see,  that  the  hand  of  the  inrisible  Qovemor 
of  all  nations  is  directing  both  oppressor  and  oppressed,  and  is  at  work  to  show  that  no  force 
and  no  victory,  no  diaaster  and  no  shame,  were  aimless  happenings.  He  is  to  be  regarded  as 
the  real  agent  in  producing  the  yarions  events  referred  to.  His  righteous  judgments  are  not 
deferred  to  a  future  state :  they  are  issued  in  this  life  against  all  WMrighteouineu  of  mat,  and  from 
Him  alone  can  relief  and  instruction  be  obtained.  So  throughout  the  song  is  heard  the  refrain 
that  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  supreme  over  all  the  forces  of  the  world,  and  over  all  that  those  forces 
seem  to  accomplish.  In  face  of  the  great  Babylonian  power,  boastful  of  its  victories  and  material 
grandeur,  deemmg  itself  at  liber^  to  harry,  enslave,  idll  for  its  own  selfish  interests ;  in  face 
of  his  ruined  city  and  desecrated  Temple,  of  starving  children  and  slaughtered  chiefs,  the  writer 
holds  up  the  fact  that  these  are  not  independent  potentates  fixing  their  own  terms ;  that  they 
are  but  messengers  of  the  Lend,  who  doeui  according  to  Hit  wiU,  in  the  army  of  heaven  and  among 
the  inhabitanit  of  the  earth,  and  who  is  preparing  ways  for  the  triumph  of  His  free  mercy  and 
unstained  holiness.  **  This  Hebrew  was  saved  from  the  terrible  conclusion  that  the  selfish,  cruel 
force,  which  in  his  day  carried  all  before  it,  was  the  highest  power  in  life,  simply  by  believing 
righteousness  to  be  more  exalted  stilL"  (SmUh),  Every  nerve  may  tingle  with  pain,  everything 
dear  may  be  cut  down,  every  step  onward  may  seem  to  add  another  miseir,  but  God's  righteous 
and  loving  will  shall  make  all  things  work  together  for  "the  far-off  divine  eventualUes  towards 
**  which  the  whole  creation  "  is  impelled. 

Two  principal  divisions  mark  off  the  poem.  The  first,  ver.  1>10,  describes  the  palpable 
effects  of  the  subjugation  on  things  and  persons.  Ascribing  these  to  the  Lord,  he  passes,  in 
the  second  section,  to  mournful  utterances  over  the  obvious  desolations — harping,  as  grief  is 
prone  to  do,  on  the  same  note— and  concludes  with  a  call  for  prayer  to  the  Lord,  and  the  form 
which  that  prayer  would  take  in  such  dire  straits. 

((C)  Ver.  1.  The  poet  sees  nature  as  if  it  were  in  commotion.  A  storm-cloud  piles  up  over 
Jerusalem,  shrouding  with  its  gloom  even  the  most  commanding  summit.  But  it  is  not  the 
swirls  of  an  inanimate  force  which  he  perceives,  nor  yet  the  rush  of  human  passion  in  an  army 
of  cruel  men,  it  is  the  Supreme  Ruler  who  hath  Mis  wiy  in  the  whirlmnd,  ana  the  storm  of  anger 
and  strife^  and  the  douds  of  disaster  are  the  dust  of  His  feet.  How  doth  the  Lord  in  His  angar ; 
anger  is  the  acting  quality  which  impresses  its  aspect  on  the  writer's  mind,  as  is  shown  by  his 
frequent  references  to  it — twice  here,  and  in  vers.  3,  6,  21,  22,  cf.  ver.  2  :  coYOr  with  a  cloud 
the  daughter  of  Son.  Under  this  expression,  and  the  similar  ones  which  follow,  daughter  of 
Judah,  daughter  of  Jerusalem,  is  included  inhabitants  of  all  classes  ;  no  principle  but  that  of 
pof^ic  license  apparently  regulating  the  employment  of  either  name.  The  storm-cloud  has  swept 
across  the  land  which  was  called  the  glory  of  aU  lands^  and  Ho  has  oaat  down  from  heaven 
thoae  arrow-like  lightnings  which  have  scathed,  discomfited,  and  overthrown  unto  the  earth 
the  glory  of  IsraeL  The  election  of  Israel  to  be  the  covenant  people  of  the  living  Qod  had 
given  it  a  position  as  high  above  that  of  all  other  peoples  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth, 
and  this  position  was  represented  by  a  visible  shrine — the  Temple.  It  was  V^e  holy  and  beauti- 
ful  himse  where  our  fathers  praised  Thee,  and  now  it  was  burned  up  with  fire.  Nor  did  He  recall 
any  past  manifestations  of  His  presence  to  stay  His  hand  from  working :  He  has  not  remem- 
bered TOb  footstool ;  the  footstool  of  our  Ood  is  closely  associated  with  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
(1  Chron.  xxviii  2 ;  Ps.  xcix.  1,  5).  The  Cherubim  stood  over  the  cover  of  the  ark,  the  mercy- 
seat,  and  as  Ood  siUeth  between  the  Cherubim,  His  feet  would  be  on  the  ark,  yet  He  let  this  holiest 
of  holy  things  be  destroyed  in  the  day  of  His  anger — the  day  which  broke  amid  the  sounds  of 
Divine  justice  going  to  punish  evil— tAe  great  day  of  Jehovah,  which  Zephaniah  predicted  ...  a 
day  of  wraih  ...  a  day  of  wasteness  and  desoUUion  ...  a  day  of  douds  and  thick  darkness. 
The  poet  "  could  not  have  better  expressed  tc\  the  people  the  heinousness  of  their  sins  than  bv 
laying  before  them  this  fact,  that  Grod  remenAered  not  His  footstool  in  the  day  of  His  anger 
{Calvin). 

(3)  Ver.  2.  Faint  adumbrations  of  the  concomitants  of  a  storm  still  flit  across  the  field  of 
vision.  As  a  sweeping  torrent  the  Lord  has  swallowed  up,  and  has  not  spared,  all  the  hahita- 
tiona  of  Jaeob,  including  all  sorts  of  country  residences,  and  pasture-lands  where  men  like 
Jacob  may  dwell  in  tents  and  feed  flocks ;  all  unfortified  and  unprotected  places,  as  distinguished 
from  fortressoH  in  following  parallel  line :  He  has  thrown  down  in  His  wrath  the  strongholds 
of  the  daughter  of  Jndah  ;  the  whole  military  power  has  gone  under,  also  the  governing  power 
he  has  cast  to  the  earth,  thus  making  them  lick  the  dust  and  be  trod  upon  by  passers-by ;  He 
has  profaned  the  kingdom,  the  royal  house,  and  its  princes  :  similarly  it  is  said  (Ps.  Ixxxix. 
i»9).  Thou  hast  profaned  Hit  erown  [eeuting  it]  to  the  ground — the  crown  of  His  anointed,  whom 
he  had  cast  off  and  rpeeted  (ver.  88).  The  tenor  of  Bible- teaching  is  to  the  effect  that  men  by 
sin  affect  the  materials  which  they  use,  and  so  not  only  the  sinners  themselves,  but  their 
dwellings,  their  goods,  their  plots  of  ground,  their  munitions,  their  governments,  are  scourged 

39 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTAR  T :  LAMENT  A  TIONS. 

by  the  wrath  of  God,  in  order  to  porify  them  from  the  pollution  which  hms  been  infiltrated  into 
them  by  human  jjuilt* 

0)  Ver.  8.  Three  forms  of  disaster  are  specified.  He  has  out  off  In  fierce  anger  eyerj 
horn  of  Israel :  the  horn  being  used  as  a  symbol  of  strength  or  power,  then  all  that  was  regarded 
as  a  strength  to  the  life  of  Israel,  whether  warlike  men  or  arsenals  of  offensive  and  defensive 
weapons,  has  perished.  Power  of  resistance  it  removed.  He  has  drawn  back  His  right  hand 
from  the  face  of  the  enemy ;  He  does  not  pluck  it  out  of  His  bosom  to  help  His  people,  and  to 
impede  and  rout  the  foes  in  their  attacks.  Aid  is  withheld.  And  He  has  bnxned  in  Jacob  like 
a  blazing  fire,  deTOoring  round  about :  His  anger,  as  it  were,  kindled  a  conflagration  which 
has  consumed  all  it  touched.  Consequent  on  strength  gone  and  help  refused,  there  is  blank 
devaMtation. 

(*1)  Ver  4.  If  a  human  enemy  has  wreaked  his  vengeance  on  Israel,  the  Lord  Himself  has 
turned  to  he  their  enemy,  and  fought  cLgaintt  them  as  an  armed  man.  He  has  bent  His  bow  as 
an  enemy  standing,  [as  to]  His  right  hand,  as  an  adversaxy.  This  ambiguous  phrase  seems 
to  convey  the  idea  that  the  Lord,  like  a  man  offoar^  had  taken  a  hostile  attitude  and  operation, 
so  that  He  has  slain  all  that  was  pleasant  to  the  eye,  everything  esteemed  was  deprived  of 
their  qualities  to  please.  On  the  tent  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  He  has  poured  out  as  fire  ffis 
fury.  Jerusalem  as  the  dwelling-place  of  its  inhabitants  has  been  searched  and  scorched  with 
the  spirit  of  justice  and  spirit  of  burning. 

The  preceding  highly  metaphorical  expressions  are  suggestive ;  they  show  that  the  poet  saw, 
what  the  men  of  his  day,  what  the  men  of  later  days  have  failed  to  see  aright,  that  the  course 
of  human  life  is  ajjlow  with  the  devouring  Jire  of  the  holiness  of  God.  The  light  of  Israel  is  for  a 
fire  and  his  Holy  One  for  aflame.  Jews  might  have  felt  that  the  Chaldeans  and  others  had  made 
their  land  as  a  desolate  vUderness ;  we  might  feel  that,  when  we  are  worsted  in  '*  the  struggle 
for  life,"  our  "environment "  has  been  unfavourable  to  us.  Our  eyes  are  hotden^  and  we  do  not 
perceive  that  the  righteousness  of  God  is  the  grand  factor  in  all  defeats,  all  cranhes,  all  panics, 
all  losses ;  using  bad  things,  as  fuel  is  u^ed,  to  produce  a  fierce  heat  which  shall  eat  away  all 
that  is  burnable.  Not  only  on  the  other  side  of  death  is  the  unquenchable  fire  scorching  sin  ; 
that  fire  is  kindled  and  burning  here  and  now.  No  screen  can  ward  off  the  indignation  of  the 
just  and  holy  Lord  ;  the  ashes  of  ruined  fortunes,  reputations,  impurities,  self-seekings,  prove 
that  the  breath  of  the  Lord  has  kindled  a  fire  to  run  through  human  society  as  intense,  as  over- 
whelming as  a  stream  of  liquid  lava.    For  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire, 

(il)  Ver.  5.  Hostilities  were  continued  in  other  methods.  The  Lord  has  become  as  an 
enemy,  has  swallowed  up  Israel ;  the  national  is  submerged.  This  is  indicated  by  material 
evidence ;  He  has  swallowed  up  all  her  palaces,  the  great  houses  of  the  daughter  of  Zion ;  He 
has  destroyed  all  His  strongholds,  the  fortified  places  which  had  been  garrisoned  hy  the  people, 
and  He  has  multiplied  in  the  daughter  of  Judah  moaning  and  bemoaning.  Two  words, 
which  are  derived  from  the  same  Hebrew  root,  and  similar  in  sound,  express  the  manifold  and 
intense  sorrows  which  had  been  experienced. 

{))  Ver.  6.  The  dwelling-place  of  Jehovah  on  Mount  Zion,  which  He  claims  as  His  own 
possession,  with  all  its  appointed  services,  has  shared  in  the  tribulations.  He  has  treated 
violently,  as  a  garden.  His  booth.  The  references  in  vers.  6  and  7  being  to  the  methods  of 
Divine  worship,  the  reference  here  will  be  to  the  Temple.  He  forsook  tl-e  tabei'narle  of  Shiloh^ 
the  tent  which  He  placed  among  m^n,  and  instead  of  this,  in  Salem  vmm  His  tabernacle^:  booth, 
but  it  also  had  come  to  be  only  a  temporary  habitation  for  the  mighty  God :  that  which  He  had 
sanctified  had  been  profaned  by  the  inroads  of  unsanctified  men.  As  a  bootJi  in  a  vineyai-d  is 
dismantled  when  the  vintage  is  ingathered,  so  the  stately  Temple  was  contumeliously  broken 
down.  The  Septuagint  reading.  He  tore  up  His  tabirnacle  as  a  vine,  harmonises  with  the  idea  of 
the  Hebrew  phrase,  viz.,  that  the  House  of  the  Lord  was  laid  waste.  Consequent  on  this.  He 
has  destroyed  his  [place  of]  solemn  assembly,  where  He  met  with  His  people  and  blessed 
them  ;  following  this  came  awful  manifestations  of  indifference  even  to  the  helps  to  serving  the 
Lord.  The  covenant  God  Jehovah  has  caused  to  be  forgotten  in  Zion  solemn  assembly  and 
sabbath ;  the  annual  and  weekly  services  were  no  longer  in  the  minds  of  His  professed  people. 
The  old  ritual  was  unavailable.  Communion  with  one  another  and  communion  with  God  through 
established  religious  forms  were  altogether  in  abeyance.  They  had  to  be  taught  that  that  which 
dccayetJi  and  waxeth  aged  is  to  be  replaced  by  a  new  covenant  in  which  the  service  of  men,  and 
the  service  of  God  would  not  be  by  ordered  rules,  but  by  love  in  the  spirit.  The  persons  also 
who  had  been  officially  prominent  in  Temple-services  were  swept  off  the  stage  ;  He  has  despised, 
set  no  store  by,  in  the  vehemence  of  His  anger,  king  and  priest.  The  priesthood  was  indis- 
pensable to  the  Temple- worship  till  there  ariseth  another  Priest,  made  not  after  the  law  of  a  carnal 
commandment,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life.  The  connection  of  royalty  with  the  Temple 
it  thus  explained  by  Oehler :  *'  The  Israelitish  kingdom,  especially  in  David  and  Solomon, 
bears  a  certain  sacerdotal  character,  inasmuch  as  the  king,  at  the  head  of  the  people  and  in  their 
name,  pays  homage  to  God  and  brings  back  again  to  the  peopla  the  blessings  of  God."  This, 
however,  is  defective  in  statement.  What  was  done  by  the  king  was  not  done  in  any  priestly 
capacity,  but  as  being  the  chief  member  of  the  sacerdotal  people.  Th«'y  wer^*  a  kingdom  of 
priests  unto  Jehovah.  Besides,  it  was  done  as  representative  of  the  Duvidic  monarchy,  with 
which  the  building  and  continuance  of  servioee  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  were  closely  linked 
40 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENT AT10N&  chap.  n. 


( Jer.  xxxiii.  21 ).  Viewed  in  this  light,  the  lamentation  is,  that  Jehovah  has  rejected  both  the 
royal  family  of  David  and  the  Levitical  priesthood. 

(T)  Ver.  7.  There  has  been  entire  desecration  of  the  holy  places.  The  Lord  has  omit  off 
his  altar,  the  appointed  erection  on  which  burwt-^fferingt  and  iaer}fices  were  presentt^d  to  Hitn, 
and  which  should  come  up  trt^  aeeeptanee  there.  There  was  no  standing  for  such  action  now. 
He  had  abandoned  it — its  fires  were  quenched  and  cold  :  he  has  abhornd  his  sanctuary,  ti.e 
whole  enclosure  of  the  holy  places.  But  there  all  is  not  still ;  He  has  pat  into  the  hand  of  her 
enemy  the  walls  of  her  palaces,  the  crowning  buildings  of  Mount  Zion  have  been  delivered 
up  to  hostile  people,  and  they  have  giren  Toioe  in  the  house  of  the  Lord ;  a  victorious  multi- 
tude made  within  the  glory -hallowed  precincts  such  a  jubilant  noise  as  [in]  a  day  of  a  solemn 
assembly,  but  the  clamour  was  the  clamour  of  ruthless  conquerors,  not  t)f  rejoicing  worshippers. 

(n)  Ver.  8.  Jeremiah  relates  (chap,  lit  14)  that  all  the  aitny  of  the  ChfitdmnSj  that  were 
with  the  captain  of  the  guards  brake  dimn  ail  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  round  about.  Thii«  was  from 
no  mere  chance  of  warfare,  no  shrewd  decision  of  the  commander  of  the  invaders  ;  it  was  from 
the  predetermination  of  the  GU)d  of  Israel.  Jehovah  has  purposed  to  destroy  the  wall  of  the 
daughter  of  Son.  It  was  carried  out  according  as  He  incited  or  restrained  the  agents  of  its 
accomplishment ;  he  has  stretched  out  the  [measuring]  line,  and  until  His  limitations  were 
reached  he  has  not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  overthrowing  Every  division  of  the  fortifica- 
tions has  suffered,  and  he  has  made  the  rampart  and  the  wall  to  lament ;  they  iimgq1«b 
together.  All  caJamities  have  their  methods  and  boundaries  fixed  by  the  All-wise.  They  do 
n(»t  form  a  chaos,  brought  about  by  natural  forces  or  human  power.  They  are  in  an  exact  order, 
and  proceed  to  a  verge  which  He  has  appointed.    They  are  pregnant  with  gigantic  issues. 

(b)  Ver.  9.  Traces  of  the  best  constructed  part  of  the  wall  have  disappeared,  covered 
with  debris.  Her  gates  have  sunk  into  the  earth ;  the  very  means  of  fastening  them  are  in 
fragments ;  he  has  destrojred  and  broken  her  bars.  Like  that  had  befallen  the  political  and 
religious  barriers  which  separated  her  from  other  peoples.  Her  king  and  princes  are  among 
the  nations,  swept  away  into  exile.  With  the  removal  of  civil  authorities  self-seeking  and 
anarchy  had  supervened.  God's  rule  of  life,  which  required  Temple  and  altar  for  its  material 
symbol,  exists  no  more  for  the  people  ;  there  is  no  law.  Still  more  sad,  the  proofs  of  the  Lord's 
guidance  had  been  withheld ;  even  her  prophets  find  no  vision  from  Jehovah  to  bring  help  and 
comfort.  There  might  be  prophet'*,  but  they  received  no  burden  of  the  Lord,  He  will  put 
aside  for  a  time  His  means  of  grace,  if  they  cease  to  answer  Divine  ends. 

(^)  Ver.  10.  Two  classes,  who  were  exponents  of  the  intelligence  and  joy  of  the  people, 
prostrated  like  the  rest,  are  no  longer  capable  of  acting  their  parts.  They  At  on  the  ground, 
are  silent,  the  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Son ;  they  exhibit  other  profound  tokens  of  over- 
whelming sufferings.  *' Small  griefs  are  eloquent — great  ones  are  dumb."  Also  among  the 
ruins  they  hang  down  their  heads  to  the  ground,  the  virgins  of  Jerusalem ;  the  song,  the 
timbrel,  the  dance,  have  all  been  abandoned  as  vain  things. 

The  retrospect  of  the  poet,  which  had  brought  before  him  one  sad  scene  after  another  in  the 
destruction  of  the  Jewish  state,  and  the  desperate  lot  of  various  classes  of  its  people,  produced 
a  turmoil  of  emotions  in  himself,  and  appeals  to  men  and  God  to  join  in  his  lamentations. 

(D)  Ver.  11.  So  exasperating  is  his  misery  that  he  feels  as  if  organic  parts  of  his  body  were 
dismembered.  My  eyes  fail  with  tears,  my  bowels  are  troubled,  my  liver  is  poured  upon 
the  ground — an  effect  of  terrible  grief,  showing  how  body  and  soul  are  sympathetic  with  each 
other  over  the  breach  of  the  daughter  of  my  people.  This  shattered  condition  was  replete 
with  the  harrowing  details  of  suffering,  as  when  the  young  children  and  the  sucklings  faint 
in  the  streets  of  the  dty. 

(^)  Ver.  12.  His  ears  heard  their  piteous  cravings,  while  to  their  mothers  they  are  saying. 
Where  is  com  and  wine,  solid  and  liquid  nourishment.  Even  when  listeuing,  his  eyes  saw  the 
older  children  faint  as  the  wounded  in  the  streets  of  the  city,  and  infants  in  arms  poured 
their  souls  into  their  mother's  bosom,  which  could  supply  no  aliment 

(D)  Ver.  18.  He  is  ready,  as  a  servant  of  the  All-merciful  and  All- wise,  to  speak  on  His 
behalf,  so  as  to  allev  iate  the  clamant  wretchedness  ;  but  he  feels  unable.  What  shall  I  testify 
to  thee  ?  No  message  is  given  to  him  from  the  Most  High,  and  no  resemblance  to  her  condi- 
tion is  perceptible  on  the  broad  surface  of  past  or  present  human  life.  What  liken  to  thee,  O 
daughter  of  Jerusalem  ?  The  case  is  unparalleled,  and  there  are  no  lessons  applicable.  What 
shall  I  compare  to  thee  and  comfort  thee  [with],  O  virgin  daughter  of  Zion  ?  For  great  is 
thy  breach  like  the  sea.  Who  will  heal  thee  7  Ruin  had  extended  as  far  as  to  the  horizon 
of  the  people's  existence,  and  to  the  deep  springs  of  thought.  True,  there  had  not  been  wanting 
men  who  professed  to  be  commissioned  by  Jehovah  to  declare  that  all  would  be  well  They 
healed  the  hurt — ^the  word  here  translated  h-eoich — of  the  daughter  of  my  people  lightly ^  saying^ 
Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace, 

(3)  Ver.  14.  The  Book  of  Jeremiah  contains  ample  evidence  as  to  who  those  miserable  com- 
forters  wera  It  shows  that,  during  the  period  just  preceding  the  overthrow  of  Judsea.  there 
were  a  number  of  persons  who  were  accustomed  glibly  to  say,  The  burden  of  Jehovah,  but  who 
were  mere  pretenders  to  divine  visions,  who  gave  chaff  and  not  wheat.  The  reason  lay  in  the 
character  of  the  people,  that  formed  its  own  instruments  in  politics  and  religion.  If  a  people 
prefer  to  have  sensational  statesmen,  such  statesmen  will  appear.     If  prophets  prophecy  falsely, 

41" 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 

it  is  because  the  peojAe  love  to  have  it  to.  They  fay  wUo  the  propheU,  Prophuy  not  wUo  n$  right 
ihingBt  speak  unto  U8  smooth  things,  prophesy  deceits.  They  got  what  they  wanted.  Thy  propliAts 
haTS  Men  for  thee,  and  the  result  is  Tanity  and  fooUilmeia,  unreal  and  unreasonable  thmgs. 
They  did  not  make  known  the  will  of  Crod  so  as  to  expose  the  evil  ways  and  doings  of  the  people, 
and  prepare  for  amendment.  They  haTe  not  oncoTered  thine  ini<iaity  to  turn  away  thy 
captiTity.  Instead  of  that,  their  boasted  visions  tended  to  produce  hordena  of  Tanity  and 
causes  of  banishment.  Tkei/  prophesy  a  lie  unto  you,  to  reuwve  fou  far  from  your  land,  and 
that  J  should  drive  you  out. 

(Q)  Ver.  15.  Casual  strangers  on  their  travels  felt  glad  at  sight  of  desolated  Jerusalem. 
Th^  clap  their  hands  at  thee,  all  who  pass  by  the  way,  and  add  scorn  to  gladness  ;  they 
hiss  and  wag  their  head.  They  use  sarcasm,  Is  this  the  dty  which  they  called  the  perfec- 
tion of  beanty,  a  Joy  to  the  whole  earth  ?  So  the  glorying  of  the  Jews  is  turned  into  a 
reproach  and  shame. 

(fi)  Ver.  16.  A  similar  but  wider  view  is  presented  than  in  the  preceding  verse.  Not 
strangers,  but  all  thine  enemies,  filled  with  mockery  and  exultation,  haTS  opened  their  month 
agai^  thee.  There  is  testimony  in  the  Psalms  as  to  how  Orientals  can  bdeh  out  ufilh  their 
mouth,  Abnipt  utterances  follow,  and  intimate  how  excited  and  impassioned  they  were.  We 
have  swallowed  np.  Hah  1  this  is  the  day  which  we  haTe  expected,  haTe  fonnd,  haTe  soon. 
Now  at  length  we  see  what  we  sought,  get  what  we  wanted. 

(V)  Ver.  17.  Whatever  are>the  calamities  suffered,  whateyer  the  taunts  to  which  the  people 
are  exposed  in  their  ruined  condition,  they  have  not  come  from  the  onslaught  of  ruthless  foes, 
but  from  God,  their  own  God.  That  was  the  final  fact  of  the  catastrophe  which  had  over- 
whelmed them.  It  is  not  the  generalisations,  called  "  laws,*'  which  make  history  what  it  is, 
but  the  will  of  **  the  living  Lord."  He  controls  all  existences,  and  His  methods  with  them  are 
always  definite  and  consistent.  Not  one  faiUth.  JehoTah  has  done  that  which  he  purposed ; 
he  has  fUfiUed  his  word  which  he  commanded  from  the  days  of  old.  Compare  Lev.  xxtl 
14  ff ;  Deut.  xxviii.  15  ff.  He  keeps  His  word.  His  order  has  been  faithfully  carried  out  in  the 
overthrow  of  Jerusalem,  and,  giving  entire  power  to  boasting  destroyers,  he  has  OTalted,  the 
horn  of  thine  adTcrsaries. 

(V)  Ver.  18.  Their  heart  cried  nnto  the  Lord.  The  cry  b  not  to  the  God  in  covenant 
with  Israel,  but  to  the  ruler  over  all  nations  and  all  matter.  Tet  the  pronoun  their  cannot 
refer  to  the  persons  last  rooken  of.  The  adversaries  were  not  likely  to  change  their  yaunts 
into  profound  sympathy.  It  is  appropriate  to  suppose  that  there  was  a  part,  at  any  rate,  of  the 
downtrodden  who  would  tell  their  heart-aches  to  the  only  Helper,  and  could  not  subdue  the 
longing  to  see  all  things  around  them  express  the  tokens  of  keenest  sorrow.  O  wall  of  the 
daughter  of  Zion,  let  tears  mn  down  like  a  torrent  day  and  night.  Bold  appeals  to  inani- 
mate objects  for  signs  of  interest  in  human  affairs  are  not  strange  to  prophets  of  Israel,  and 
the  call  upon  the  shattered  wall  of  Jerusalem  seems  grounded  on  the  idea  that  it  was  regarded 
as  a  mother  embracing  in  its  arms  the  city  with  its  blighted  hopes.  It  was  not  to  be  stemmed 
and  have  respite ;  let  not  the  pnpil  [Heb.  daughter]  of  the  eye  cease  from  shedding  tears. 

(P)  Ver.  19.  Sleep  is  to  be  interrupted  in  order  to  weep.  Arise,  cry  lond  in  the  night,  and 
as  its  hours  pass  on,  rouse  up  at  the  beginning  of  the  watches  into  which  the  night  is  divided. 
Hearts  that  cried  are  to  cast  away  all  reserve  before  the  Lord.  They  will  have  gone  a  long 
way  towards  receiving  help  when  they  recognise  that  He  who  **iB  strong  to  smite  is  also  strong 
to  save."  They  will  take  the  attitude  of  prayer,  Lift  np  thy  hands  to  Him,  and  the  first 
matter  to  request  will  be  the  life  Of  thy  young  children,  whose  sad  case  is  again  mentioned, 
faint  for  hunger  at  the  top  of  CTcry  street.  Dying  and  dead  little  ones  at  every  turn.  A 
sight  for  the  Creator  to  consider 

O)  Ver.  20.  The  prayer  is  put  into  words  correspondent  with  the  droumstanoes.  See, 
JehoTah,  and  behold  to  whom  thou  hast  done  this,  to  the  city  called  thine,  to  the  people 
whom  thou  hast  chosen  to  be  a  name  and  praise  to  thee.  How  shocking  are  the  consequences  ! 
See  if  women  eat  their  fruity  the  children  whom  they  carried.  The  last  word  relates  to 
that  which  is  spread — as  infants  on  the  knees  or  arms.  The  Revised  Version  translates  it 
dandled  in  the  hands,  which,  if  expressing  the  Idea,  is  too  special.  The  awful  incident  was  a 
punishment  threatened  (Deut  xxviii  56,  67  ;  Jer.  xix.  9).  See  if  there  are  slain  in  the  sanc- 
tuary of  the  Lord  priest  and  prophet.  His  own  holy  place  defiled  with  blood.  If  such 
spectacles  were  common,  as  they  were,  will  Qod  not  stay  His  hand  t 

(fi^)  Ver.  21.  From  the  massacre  in  the  Temple  to  the  general  slaughter  of  all  ages  and 
both  nexes  is  another  step  in  the  dismal  recital  The  youth  and  the  old  man  ...  my  Tlrgins 
and  choice  young  men,  were  killed.  It  was  dear  that  they  had  to  bear  the  anger  of  Jehovah 
— that  He  was  not  only  full  of  compassion,  but  in  righteousness  he  doth  judge  and  make  war 
upon  evil. 

(n)  Ver.  22.  Thou  hast  called  as  in  a  day  of  solemn  assembly,  summoning,  as  by 
tmmpet,  all  kinds  of  terrifying  agencies — men,  famine,  fire,  sword— my  tOTOrs  on  OTory  side, 
and  there  was  none  that  esca]^  or  remained  in  the  day  of  JehoTah's  anger.  Then,  in 
motherly  anguish,  she  laments  again  over  the  children  she  had  carried  and  brought  up,  whom 
the  enemy  had  cruelly  consumed.  So  "the  poem  condudes,  like  the  first,  with  deep  sorrow, 
regarding  which  all  attempts  at  comfort  are  qtiite  unavailing." 
42 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  il 

H0MILETIC8. 

The  Fierceness  of  the  Divine  Anger, 

(Verses  1-5.) 

How  wierd  and  sad  is  the  lonely  wail  of  the  night-wind !  How  depressing 
the  monotony  of  the  sobhing  sea !  How  heart-rending  the  ceaseless  moan  of  the 
helpless  sufferer !  All  the  varying  cadences  of  melancholy  seem  gathered  up  and 
interpreted  in  the  sorrowful  monody  of  the  tender-hearted  prophet  It  is  still  the 
voice  of  lamentation  that  we  hear :  the  strain,  like  the  theme,  is  the  same.  From 
his  elevated  rocky  grotto  Jeremiah  overlooked  the  ruined  city,  and  it  seemed  im- 
possible for  him  to  turn  away  his  gaze  from  the  scene  of  destruction  that  fascinated 
while  it  distressed  him.  In  this  chapter  he  describes,  with  vivid  realism,  the 
harrowing  circumstances  connected  with  the  siege  and  taking  of  the  city.  By  a 
lofty  flight  of  prophetic  imagination  he  descries  the  awful  form  of  the  Almighty 
hovering  over  Jerusalem,  wreaking  vengeance  on  the  obstinate  and  rebellious 
citizens.     In  this  paragraph  we  learn  that  the  fierceness  of  the  Divine  anger — 

L  Is  a  terrifying  reality.  '*  The  Lord  covered  the  daughter  of  Zion  with  a 
cloud  in  his  anger,  and  cast  down  the  beauty  of  Israel"  (ver.  1).  The  darkening 
cloud  that  portends  the  approaching  storm  fills  the  stoutest  heart  with  alarm,  and 
all  nature  cowers  with  fear  under  the  crash  of  the  dreadful  thunder.  The  prophet 
sees  the  Divine  anger  settling  upon  Jerusalem  like  a  dark  thunder-cloud,  and 
breaking  in  a  tempest,  by  which  the  Temple  is  levelled  to  the  ground.  It  is  not 
the  cloud  that  led  the  Israelites  from  bondage  to  freedom,  but  a  cloud  of  wrath 
sent  to  punish  for  the  aggravated  abuse  of  that  freedom.  The  cloud  no  longer 
guides  and  protects ;  it  is  now  charged  with  the  thunderbolt  of  retribution.  The 
anger  of  Gk)d  is  all  the  more  terrible  when  manifested  towards  those  who  once 
enjoyed  His  favour  and  compassion. 

II.  Is  irresistible  in  its  destmctiyeneBB  (vers.  1-5).  The  beauty  of  Israel  is 
deformed,  her  pride  humbled,  her  strength  paralysed,  her  city  reduced  to  ashes, 
and  her  strongholds  and  inhabitants  are  remorselessly  swept  away  Nothing  can 
withstand  the  Divine  power,  and  when  that  power  is  exerted  in  anger,  it  makes 
short  work  of  the  most  formidable  opposition.  Storm,  earthquake,  fire,  war,  and 
all  the  forces  of  the  universe,  obey  the  bidding  of  the  Divine  Word.  The  enemies 
of  God  will  be  completely  overthrown  by  the  fierceness  of  His  anger  (Exod.  xv.  7  ; 
Ps.  ii.  2-5,  xxi.  8-10,  Ixxix.  6 ;  Isa.  x.  6 ;  Jer.  x.  25 ;  Nah.  i  2 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  16). 

III.  Intensifies  the  misery  of  its  victiins.  ''He  hath  increased  in  the 
daughter  of  Judah  mourning  and  lamentation"  (ver.  5).  When  our  miseries 
come  upon  us  from  our  enemies,  we  are  not  surprised ;  it  is  what  we  expected. 
When  we  can  trace  them  as  the  direct  result  of  our  own  folly  and  sin,  we  know 
they  are  deserved,  and  we  strengthen  ourselves  to  endure  them  as  philosophically 
as  we  can ;  but  when  the  truth  dawns  upon  us  that  God  is  against  us,  and  it  is 
His  hand  that  smites  us,  we  are  startled  at  the  discovery,  and  our  distress  is  un- 
speakably increased.  It  is  a  bitter  ingredient  in  the  sufferings  of  the  disobedient 
to  know  that  he  has  provoked  the  anger  of  the  God  of  love.  The  suffering  Christ 
turns  away  for  us  the  fierceness  of  the  Divine  anger. 

LESSONa — 1.  Persistency  in  wrong-doing  rouses  the  Divine  anger,  2.  When 
the  Divine  anger  is  manifested,  it  works  terrible  havoc,  3.  Timely  repentance  averts 
the  worst  consequences  of  the  Divine  anger, 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  1,  2.  TheiBtorm  of  the  Divine  the  Lord  covered  the  daughter  of  Zion 
wrath:  1.  Overshadows  the  city  wnose  with  a  cloud  in  his  anger"  (ver.  1). 
ehis  call  far  vengeance.      "  How  hath      IL  Shatters  the  sanctuary  where  wor- 

43 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


ship  has  been,  profaned,  "  Cast  down 
from  heaven  unto  the  earth  the  beauty 
of  Israel,  and  remembered  not  his  foot- 
stool in  the  day  of  his  anger"  (ver.  1). 
III.  Destroys  the  homesteads  and  for- 
tresses of  a  rebellious  people.  "The 
Lord  hath  swallowed  up  all  the  habi- 
tations of  Jacob.  He  hath  thrown 
down  in  his  wrath  the  strongholds  of 
the  daughter  of  Judah"  (ver.  2).  IV. 
Dishonours  the  government  that  ignores 
the  claims  of  righteousness,  "  He  hath 
polluted  (profaned,  made  it  common  or 
unclean)  the  kingdom  and  the  princes 
thereof"  (ver.  2). 

Yer.  3.  The  defences  of  a  nation: 
L  Exposed  to  the  ravages  of  the  enemy 
wJien  the  Divine  protection  is  withdrawn, 
'*  He  hath  drawn  back  his  right  hand 
from  before  the  enemy."  II.  Deprived 
of  their  strength  when  assailed  by  the 
Divine  anger,  "He  hath  cut  off  in 
his  fierce  anger  all  the  horn  of  Israel. 
III.  Utterly  destroyed  by  the  wrath 
evoked  by  national  sins,  "He  burned 
against  Jacob  like  a  flaming  fire,  which 
devoureth  round  about." 

Yers.  4,  5.  Jehovali  as  an  enemy: 
I.  Formidable  to  all  who  obstinately 
resist  him,  '^He  hath  bent  his  bow 
like  an  enemy.  He  stood  with  his 
right  band  as  an  adversary"  (ver.  4). 
IL  Works  terrible  destruction,  "  Slew 
all  that  were  pleasant  to  the  eye.  He 
poured  out  his  fury  like  fire.  He  hath 
swallowed  up  Israel "  (ver.  4,  5).  IIL 
Means  augmented  distress  to  those  he 
punishes,  "He  hath  increased  in  the 
daughter  of  Judah  mourning  and  lamen- 
tation "  (ver.  5). 

ILLUBTBATION& — Neglsct  incniB 
wrath.  As  the  mariner  takes  the  first 
wind  to  sail,  the  merchant  the  first 
opportunity  of  buying  and  selling,  and 
the  husbandman  the  first  opportunity 
of  sowing  and  reaping,  so  should  young 
men  take  the  present  season,  the  pre- 
sent day,  which  is  their  day,  to  be 
good  towards  the  Lord,  to  seek  Him 
and  serve  Him,  and  not  to  put  off  the 
present  season,  for  they  know  not  what 
another  day,  another  hour,  another 
moment  may  bring  forth.  That  door 
of  grace  that  is  open  to-day  may  be 
44 


shut  to-morrow ;  that  golden  sceptre  of 
mercy  that  is  held  forth  in  the  Oospel 
this  day  may  be  taken  in  the  next  day ; 
that  love,  that  this  hour  is  upon  the 
bare  knee,  entreating  and  beseeching 
young  men  to  break  off  their  sins  by 
repentance,  to  return  to  the  Lord,  to 
lay  hold  on  His  strength  and  be  at 
peace  with  Him,  may  the  next  hour  be 
turned  into  wrath. — Brooks, 

—  Plutarch  writes  of  Hannibal,  that 
when  he  could  have  taken  Rome  he 
would  not,  and  when  he  would  have 
taken  Rome  he  could  not.  Many  in 
their  youthful  days,  when  they  might 
have  mercy,  Christ,  pardon,  peace, 
heaven,  will  not;  and  when  old  age 
comes  on  they  cannot,  they  may  not 
Gk>d  seems  to  say,  as  Theseus  once  said, 
"  Gk>  and  tell  Creon,  Theseus  offers  thee 
a  gracious  offer.  Yet  I  am  pleased  to  be 
friends  if  thou  wilt  submit — this  is  my 
first  message ;  but  if  this  offer  prevail 
not,  look  for  me  to  be  up  in  arms." 

—  Whatever  account  you  have  to 
settle  with  God,  settle  it  now.  There 
are  two  "nows"  in  Scripture  which 
should  never  be  separated.  One  stands 
out  in  the  brightest  rays,  the  other 
retires  into  deep  shadows.  **Now  is 
the  accepted  time."  **Now  they  are 
hid  from  Thine  eyes." —  Vaughan. 

Judgment  a  snxprise.  There  are 
sometimes  some  sad  awakenings  from 
sleep  in  this  world.  It  is  very  sad  to 
dream  by  night  of  vanished  joys,  to 
revisit  old  scenes  and  dwell  once  more 
among  the  unforgotten  forms  of  our 
loved  and  lost ;  to  see  in  the  dreamland 
the  old  familiar  look,  and  to  hear  the 
well-remembered  tones  of  a  voice  long 
hushed  and  stiU,  and  then  to  awake 
with  the  morning  light  to  the  aching 
sense  of  our  loneliness  again.  It  were 
very  sad  for  the  poor  criminal  to  wake 
from  sweet  dreams  of  other  and  happier 
days— days  of  innocence,  hope,  and 
peace,  when  kind  friends  and  a  happy 
home  and  an  honoured  or  unstained 
name  were  his ;  to  wake  in  his  cell  on 
the  morning  of  his  execution  to  the 
horrible  recollection  that  all  is  gone 
for  ever,  and  that  to-day  he  must  die 
a  felon's  death.  But  inconceivably 
more  awful  than  any  awakening  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAP.  n. 


aariUj  daybreak  has  ever  brought 
shall  be  the  awakening  of  the  self- 
deluded  soul  when  it  is  roused  in 
horror  and  surprise  from  the  dream 
of  life  to  meet  Almighty  God  in  judg- 
ment!— /.  Caird, 

Temporary  stomui.  It  is  a  dark 
and  cloudy  day  for  you.  A  storm  has 
burst  upon  you;  but  you  remember 
hoWy  after  the  storm,  the  bow  is  set  in 
the  doud  for  all  who  look  above  to  the 
Hand  that  smites  them.  The  storm  has 
come,  and  now  we  must  look  up  and 
wait  and  watch  in  prayer  and  faith  for 
the  rainbow  of  promise  and  comfort — 
Minigtering  Children. 

Ftolonged  misery.  When  water 
takes  its  first  leap  from  the  top,  it  is 
cool,  collected,  uninteresting,  mathe- 
matical ;  but  it  is  when  it  finds  that  it 
has  got  into  a  scrape,  and  has  further  to 
go  than  it  thought  for,  that  its  character 
comes  out ;  it  is  then  that  it  begins  to 
writhe  and  twisty  and  sweep  out  zone 
after  zone  in  wilder  stretchings  as  it  falls, 
and  to  send  down  the  rocket-like,  lance- 
pointed,  whizzing  shafts  at  its  sides, 
sounding  for  the  bottom. — Ruskin. 

There  la  mercy  in  every  stonn. 
Every  stroke  of  the  rod  is  but  the 
muffled  voice  of  love;  every  billow 
bears  on  its  bosom,  and  every  tempest 
on  its  wing,  some  new  and  rich  blessing 
from  the  better  land.  If  the  Lord  were 
to  roll  the  Bed  Sea  before  us  and  mar- 
shal the  Egyptians  behind  us,  and  thus, 
hemming  us  in  on  every  side,  should 
yet  bid  us  advance,  it  would  be  the 
duty  and  the  privilege  of  faith  instantly 
to  obey,  believing  that,  ere  our  feet 
touched  the  water,  God  in  our  ex- 
tremity woxdd  divide  the  sea  and  take 
us  dryshod  over  it  If  for  a  moment 
we  leave  the  path,  difficulties  throng 
around  us,  troubles  multiply,  the  smallest 
trials  become  heavy  crosses,  the  heart 
will  sicken  at  disappointment,  the 
Spirit  be  grieved^  and  God  disappointed. 
— Winsiow. 

OoodnesB  a  nation's  defence.  Abi- 
jah's  goodness  was  towards  the  Lord; 
his  goodness  faced  the  Lord ;  it  looked 
towards  the  glory  of  the  Lord.  It  is 
recorded  of  the  Catanenses  that  they 
made  a  stately  monument  to  two  sons 


who  took  their  aged  parents  upon  their 
backs  and  carried  them  through  the  fire 
when  their  father's  house  was  all  in  a 
flame.  These  young  men  were  good 
towards  their  parents ;  but  what  is  this 
to  Abijah's  goodness  towards  the  Lord  ? 
He  was  good  in  the  house  of  Jeroboam, 
who  made  all  Israel  to  sin ;  yet  Ab\jah, 
as  the  fishes  which  live  in  the  salt  sea 
are  fresh,  so^  though  he  lived  in  a  sea 
of  wickedness,  he  retained  his  goodness 
towards  the  Lord.  They  say  roses 
grow  the  sweeter  when  planted  by 
garlic.  They  are  sweet  and  rare  Chris- 
tians indeed  who  hold  their  goodness 
and  grow  in  goodness  where  wicked- 
ness sits  on  the  throne.  To  be  wheat 
among  tares,  com  among  chaff,  and  roses 
among  thorns,  is  excellent  To  be  a 
Jonathan  in  Saul's  court,  an  Obadiah  in 
Ahab's  court,  an  Obedmelech  in  Zede- 
kiah's  courts  and  an  Abijah  in  Jero- 
boam's court,  is  a  wonder,  a  miracle.  To 
be  a  Lot  in  Sodom,  an  Abraham  in  Chal- 
dea,  a  Daniel  in  Babylon,  a  Nehemiah 
in  Damascus,  and  a  Job  in  the  land  of 
TJz,  is  to  be  a  saint  among  devils.  The 
poets  affirm  that  Yenus  never  appeared 
so  beautiful  as  when  she  sat  by  black 
Vulcan's  side.  Gracious  souk  shine 
most  clear  when  they  are  set  by  black- 
conditioned  people.  Stephen's  face 
never  shone  so  angelically,  so  gloriously 
in  the  church  where  all  were  virtuous, 
as  before  the  council  where  all  were  very 
vicious  and  malicious.  So  Abijah  was 
a  bright  star,  a  shining  sun  in  Jero- 
boam's courts  which  for  profaneness  and 
wickedness  was  a  very  helL 

—  A  substantial  fence  has  been 
erected  enclosing  the  relic  of  the  Coven- 
anter's stone  on  the  summit  of  Duns 
Law.  On  this  historic  spot  the  stan- 
dard of  the  Covenanting  army  under 
General  Leslie  was  planted,  and  on  the 
stone  a  copy  of  the  National  League 
and  Covenant  signed  by  the  resolute 
leaders  on  the  6th  June  1639.  At  one 
time  the  stone  was  prominently  seen, 
but  it  is  now  so  much  reduced  by 
the  chipping  and  hacking  of  Yandalic 
visitors  as  to  be  scarcely  visible  above 
the  green  sward.  Scotland  has  good 
reason  to  be  proud  of  the  brave  exploits 
of  its  ancestors,  who,  whatever  their 

45 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n.  HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONX 

failings,  were  men  of  earnest  purpose,  is  to  rain  the  souls  of  men,  and  that  ha 
and  fought  fw  those  principles  of  right  does  it  in  a  deliberate,  calm,  systematic 
and  justice  which  helped  to  make  pos-  way.  He  walks  about  obserying  times, 
sible  the  national  life  of  to-day.  The  places,  circumstances,  characters — all 
records  and  memorials  of  their  deeds  with  a  view  to  devour.  He  does  as  a 
should  be  a  constant  stimulus  to  imi-  lion,  to  whom  he  is  compared.  Observe 
tate  their  noblest  qualities.  "  Remove  his  gentle  tread,  his  iiery,  searching 
not  the  ancient  landmarks  which  thy  eye,  his  subtle  plans,  his  secret  am- 
fathers  have  set" — The  Scottish  Pulpit,  bushes,  his  hidden  schemes,  his  con- 
Satan  an  enemy  :  but  what  of  cealed  name,  nature,  and  character ;  and 
Jehovah  ?  Satan  is  the  enemy  of  every  when  he  spies  one  of  whom  he  can 
saint,  and  he  is  an  indefatigable  enemy,  take  advantage,  see  how  the  lion-nature 
He  never  tires  in  his  temptations  to  is  developed  in  the  rush,  the  pounce, 
ensnare  souls  to  destroy  them.  He  the  seizure,  the  tearing,  the  destruction. 
'*  walketh  about  seeking  whom  he  may  But  what  must  it  be  to  the  sinner  to 
devonr."    This  denotes  his  main  object  find  an  enemy  in  Jehovah  t 


ffOMILETICS. 

The  Wreck  of  Reugious  OBDiNANOEa 

(Verses  6-9.) 

I.  The  Temple  te  completely  demolished  (vers.  6-8).  In  a  city  where  there 
are  many  temples  the  destruction  of  oue  creates  only  a  temporary  inconvenience. 
Jerusalem,  and  indeed  the  Jewish  nation,  had  but  one  temple,  and  it  had  the 
special  distinction  of  being  the  only  temple  in  the  world  dedicated  to  the  worship 
of  Jehovah.  It  was  always  in  the  past,  and  is  to  this  day,  reverently  referred  to 
as  ths  Temple.  It  was  idolised  by  the  Jew,  and  was  regarded  as  lieyond  the 
reach  of  possible  injury.  It  was  encircled  with  the  rampart  of  Omnipotence. 
When  menaced  by  the  enemy,  the  people  rallied  round  the  sacred  fane,  prepared 
to  sacrifice  everything  in  its  defence.  Here  they  made  their  last  stand,  and  fought 
with  the  fury  of  fanatics.  But  their  zeal,  bravery,  and  strategy  were  all  in  vain. 
In  their  blind  infatuation  they  saw  not  that  the  only  invincible  defence,  the  pre- 
sence of  Jehovah,  was  withdrawn.  The  Temple  was  doomed,  and  was  reduced  to 
ruin  with  the  same  reckless  indifierence  as  a  man  would  tear  down  a  temporary 
shelter  in  his  garden  (ver.  6).  The  gates,  walls,  palaces,  altar,  sanctuary,  were 
abandoned  to  utter  destruction  (vers.  7-9).  The  wreckage  of  such  a  temple  was 
not  only  a  metropolitan,  but  a  national  calamity.  Everything  was  gone  when  the 
Temple  was  gone. 

II.  The  religions  services,  formerly  observed  with  uninterrupted  regularity, 
axe  now  ntterly  neglected.  *'The  Lord  hath  cau.<ed  the  solemn  feasts  and  Sab- 
baths to  be  forgotten  in  Zion  "  (ver.  6).  The  annual  and  the  weekly  festivals  are 
no  longer  observed.  "  There  is  an  intensive  force  in  its  being  no  longer  Adonai, 
but  Jehovah,  who  lets  them  pass  into  oblivion.  He  had  once  instituted  them  for 
His  own  honour,  now  He  lets  them  lie  forgotten."  When  religion  is  neglected, 
all  days  are  alike ;  there  is  nothing  to  mark  ofif  Sabbath-days  from  week-days, 
sacred  days  from  common  days.  Life  is  reduced  to  the  dead  level  of  dull  mono- 
tony, and  the  days  drag  on  in  the  weary  routine  of  comfortless  and  aimless  labour. 

*'  He  liveth  long  who  liveth  w«U — 
All  else  is  being  flung  away ; 
He  liveth  longest  who  can  tell 

Of  tme  things  trulj  done  each  day.** 

Intellectual  pursuits  and  activity  are  a  poor  substitute  for  genuine  religion. 
Education  not  founded  on  religion  is  only  a  varnish.     Abolish  the  Sabbath  and 
46 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMTLETIC  COMMENT AR  Y:  LA  MENTATIONS,  CHAF.  n. 

the  decay  of  religion  begins.  A  poet  calls  the  Sabbath  "  Heaven  once  a  week." 
Day  of  rest,  of  days  the  beat. 

HL  The  principal  worshippers  are  in  exila  '*  Her  king  and  her  princes  are 
among  the  Gentiles  "  (ver.  9).  The  prophet  has  been  principally  occupied  with 
the  buildings  of  the  city  and  Temple.  Now  he  turns  to  the  people,  and  beginning 
with  their  temporary  rulers,  he  laments  the  sad  fate  of  the  king  and  princes  who, 
no  longer  seen  taking  their  part  in  the  Temple  service,  were,  like  many  of  their 
people,  captives  in  the  hands  of  the  heathen.  With  the  best  external  aids  it  is 
difficult  to  maintain  the  spirituality  of  worship ;  but  that  difficulty  is  increased 
when  all  external  accessories  are  withdrawn,  and  man  is  placed  in  the  midst  of 
irreligious  heathenism.  If  he  does  not  strive  to  propagate  what  religion  he  has, 
he  will  lose  it.  To  love  and  worship  God  we  must  know  Him,  and  this  we  can- 
not do  till  He  graciously  reveals  Himself.  The  astronomer  seeking  to  observe  a 
star,  can  do  nothing  till  he  directs  his  telescope  towards  the  star.  The  dim  light 
of  evening  is  with  him,  and  by  it  he  sets  the  telescope  and  guides  it  to  the  proper 
point  in  the  heavens.  But  when  he  has  pointed  it  to  the  star,  the  light  of  the 
star  streams  into  the  telescope,  lighting  it  up  with  a  new  and  brighter  illumina- 
tion. The  soul  of  man  is  a  telescope  by  which  he  is  seeking  to  see  and  know  God. 
The  general  illumination  of  the  heart  is  in  the  world.  All  pagans  have  it.  But 
when  man  has  adjusted  the  lenses  of  the  soul,  Grod  flashes  down  it,  and  produces 
an  image  of  Himself  in  the  poor  earthly  tube. 

lY.  The  Law  and  the  Prophets  are  discredited.  '<  The  law  is  no  more ;  her 
prophets  also  find  no  vision  from  the  Lord"  (ver.  9).  The  Jewish  law,  the 
Torah,  came  to  an  end  when  it  had  no  longer  a  local  habitation.  Its  enactments 
were  essentially  those,  not  of  a  catholic,  but  of  a  national  religion,  and  the  restora- 
tion of  the  nation  with  a  material  temple  was  indispensable  to  its  continued  exist- 
ence. It  was  only  when  elevated  to  be  a  catholic  religion  by  being  made  spiritual 
that  it  could  do  without  ark,  temple,  and  a  separate  people  (Jer.  iii.  16,  xxxi. 
31-34).  With  the  Torah  the  special  gift  of  prophecy  also  ceased,  since  both  were 
peculiar  to  the  theocracy ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  establishment  of  Christianity  that 
they  were  finally  withdrawn,  or  rather  merged  in  higher  developments  of  grace. 
Jeremiah  now  laments  over  the  temporary  removal  of  Judah's  special  privileges 
before  they  had  accomplished  their  office.  At  the  return  from  exile  they  were 
for  the  time  restored — Speaker's  Camm. 

It  is  a  grave  calamity  to  church  or  nation  to  be  deprived  of  men  of  insight  and 
inspiration.  These  men  give  direction  and  character  to  the  best  work  we  are 
capable  of  doing.  Much  of  the  work  of  the  world  is  done  in  a  perfunctory  man- 
ner— done  to  get  through  with  it,  done  to  get  it  off  one's  mind,  done  to  secure  the 
return  which  it  promisea  It  is  done  without  enthusiasm,  originality,  or  con- 
tagious zeaL  The  men  who  give  their  work  character,  distinction,  perfection,  are 
the  men  whose  spirit  is  behind  their  hands,  giving  them  a  new  dexterity.  There 
is  no  kind  of  work,  from  the  merest  routine  to  the  highest  creative  activity,  which 
does  not  receive  all  that  gives  it  quality  from  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  done  or 
fashioned.  The  highest  and  best  work  is  done  when  the  soul  receives  its  *'  vision 
from  the  Lord  "  and  is  animated  by  His  inspiration. 

Lbssons. — 1.  Rdigion  seeks  practical  expresttion  in  worship  and  service.  2. 
The  loss  of  religious  ordinances  is  a  national  calamity,  3.  The  abuse  of  religious 
opportunities  is  punished  by  their  withdrawal, 

QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Ver.  6.  "He  hath  violently  taken  away  Is  but  a  temporary  structure,  however 
his  tabernacle,  as  if  it  were  of  a  garden ;  elaborately  built.  2.  Is  desecrated 
He  hath  destroyed  His  places  of  the  when  a  false  worship  is  offered.  3. 
assembly."     The  earthly  temple:   1.     When  defiled,  is  suddenly  destroyed, 

47 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


CRAP,  a 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


as  a  man  may  tear  down  in  a  few  mo- 
menta a  fngile  hut  erected  for  his  tem- 
porary plaaanre  in  a  garden.  4  Ita 
deatraotion  auggesta  reflections  on  man's 
unfaithfulness  and  Gkxl'a  anger. 

— P«rT6rtadir0rahip:L/nooZ«M^^ 
lom  of  stated  privileges,  *'The  Lord 
hath  caused  the  solemn  feasts  and  Sab- 
baths to  be  forgotten  in  Zion."  IL 
Bouees  the  Divine  displeasure,  "The 
indignation  of  His  anger."  lU  Entails 
regal  and  eedesiastieal  dishonour,  ''And 
hath  despised  the  king  and  the  priest" 

Yer.  7.  ▲  daspiaed  aanctnary:  L 
Its  holiest  places  needed  with  disdain 
by  an  off  ended  Deity.  "The  Lord  hath 
cut  off  hia  altar;  he  hath  abhorred  his 
sanctuary."  IL  Completely  abandoned 
to  destruction,  "He  hath  given  up 
into  the  hand  of  the  enemy  the  woUs  of 
her  palace&"  IIL  The  mid  shouts  of 
its  destroyers  a  strange  contrast  to  the 
exultant  joy  of  former  worshippers. 
"  They  haye  made  a  noise  in  the  house 
of  the  Lordy  as  in  the  day  of  a  aolemn 
feast" 

Yer.  8.  The  im]ilacabl«  destroyer: 
L  Works  in  harmony  wUh  a  fixed  deter- 
mination, "The  Lord  hath  purposed 
to  destroy  the  wall  of  the  daughter 
of  Zion."  IL  Carries  out  his  purpose 
with  systematic  thoroughness,  "  He 
hath  stretched  out  a  line;  he  hath 
not  withdrawn  his  hand  from  de- 
stroying." IIL  Lays  the  strongest  de- 
fences in  lamentable  ruin,  "  Therefore 
he  hath  made  the  rampart  and  the  wall 
to  lament ;  they  languished  together." 

Yer.  9.  National  ruin  complete :  L 
When  aU  public  buildings  are  destroyed. 
"  Her  gates  are  sunk  into  the  ground ; 
he  hath  destroyed  and  broken  her  bars." 
IL  When  the  rulers  are  in  exile.  "  Her 
king  and  her  princes  are  among  the 
entiles."  IIL  When  religious  ordin- 
ances are  suspended.  "The  law  is  no 
more."  lY,  When  religious  teachers 
are  deprived  of  Divine  inspiration. 
"  Her  prophets  also  find  no  vision  from 
the  Lord." 

Illubtbationb.  —  Undercnrrenta 
canaa  wrecka.  A  ship  was  stranded  on 
the  island  of  Sanda,  in  the  Orkneys.  It 
was  a  mystery  to  the  captain  how  the 

48 


Tessel  got  there.  Being  foggy  at  the 
time,  he  carefully  consulted  his  chart, 
and  both  he  and  the  mate  worked  up 
the  position,  their  reckonings  exactly 
agreeing  as  to  latitude,  but  differing 
slightly  in  longitude,  llie  captain  had 
navigated  the  ship  for  ten  years  with- 
out any  misfortune.  He  attributed  the 
accident  to  the  force  of  an  undercurrent 
which  carried  him  unknowingly  out  of 
his  course,  and  learnt  afterwaids  from 
fishermen  in  the  locality  that  a  current 
was  frequently  felt  in  that  sea  as  far 
as  sixty  miles  from  land.  The  sea  of 
life  is  intersected  with  dangerous  under- 
currents, and  the  watchful  student  will 
be  careful  to  watch  their  tendency  and 
strength.  While  on  the  fringe  of  the 
current,  it  is  comparatively  easy  to 
escape,  but  if  we  drift  into  the  midst 
of  the  irresistible  swirl,  we  shall  be 
hurried  on  to  inevitable  disaster.  You 
have  seen  the  tiny  snowflakes  flutter 
about  the  railway  track,  like  lovely  bits 
of  down  shook  from  angelic  wings,  and 
you  have  seen  with  what  ease  the  proud 
locomotive  scatters  the  fleecy  morsels 
in  the  early  stages  of  the  storm;  but 
the  falling  atoms  increase  with  such 
persistent  rapidity  and  accumulative 
force,  that  the  panting  engine  is  at 
length  completely  strangled,  and,  utterly 
exhausted,  lies  buried  fathoms  deep 
beneath  the  crystal  mound. — T?ie  Scot- 
tish Pulpit 

Ordinances  help  religious  Ufe.  Grace 
is  like  a  spark  in  wet  wood,  that  needs 
continual  blowing.  Would  you  have 
and  keep  up  ardent  desires  1  Do  as 
they  that  would  keep  in  the  fixe;  cherish 
the  sparks  and  blow  them  up  to  a  flame. 
There  is  no  man  lives  under  the  means 
of  grace  and  under  the  discoveries  of 
Ood  and  religion  but  has  his  good 
moods  and  lively  motions.  The  waters 
are  stirred  many  times;  take  hold  of 
this  advantage.  Strengthen  the  things 
that  remain  and  are  ready  to  die,  and 
blow  up  these  sparks  into  a  flame.  Crod 
has  left  us  enkindling  means — prayer, 
meditation,  and  the  Word.  Observe 
where  the  bellows  blow  hardest^  and  ply 
that  course.  The  more  supematiual 
things  are,  there  needs  more  diligence 
to  preserve  them.     A  strange  plant 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAP.  n. 


needs  more  care  than  a  native  of  the 
soiL  Worldly  desires,  like  a  nettle, 
breed  of  their  own  accord,  but  spiritual 
desires  need  a  great  deal  of  cultivating. 
— Manton. 

—  The  Christian  is  compared  to  a 
merchantman  who  trades  for  rich  pearls; 
he  is  to  go  to  ordinances  as  the  mer- 
chant sails  from  port  to  port,  not  to  see 
places,  but  to  take  in  his  lading,  some 
here,  some  there.  A  Christian  should 
be  as  much  ashamed  to  return  empty 
from  his  traffic  with  ordinances  as  the 
merchant  to  come  home  without  his 
lading.  But,  alas  1  how  little  is  this 
looked  after  by  many  that  pass  for 
great  professors,  who  are  like  some  idle 
persons,  that  come  to  the  market  not  to 
buy  provision  and  carry  home  what 
they  want,  but  to  gaze  and  look  upon 
what  is  there  to  be  sold,  to  no  purpose  ! 
O  my  brethren,  take  heed  of  this! — 
OurnaU, 

The  earihly  temiile  and  perverted 
worship.  There  is  a  great  difference 
between  religiousness  and  religion. 
Man  is  a  religious  animal,  he  must  and 
will  worship  something.  But  the  reli- 
gion which  the  Bible  teaches  is  a  total 
change  of  the  heart,  and  of  the  aim  and 
purpose  of  life. — CaUkrqp. 

—  Believers  are  in  danger  of  seduc- 
tion into  the  sin  and  falsehood  of  the 
world.  The  world  threatens  believers 
not  only  with  its  enmity,  but  evermore 
with  its  temptations.  Believers  must 
be  warned  to  shun  the  idols  the  world 
worships,  and  they  are  warned  against 
love  to  the  world,  because  love  in  that 
way  very  easily  gets  associated  with 
sinful  lusts,  which  are  common  in  the 
world.  In  false  prophecy  it  is  shown 
that  the  devil,  who  was  a  murderer  and 
liar  from  the  beginning,  threatens  the 
Church,  not  only  with  the  deadly 
enmity  of  the  world,  but  also  with  its 
soul-destroying  lies.  We  cannot  show 
brotherly  love  to  false  teachers  without 
running  the  risk  of  making  ourselves 
partakers  in  their  sins. — Weiss. 

—  Means — the  table  of  the  Lord,  the 
pulpit,  the  pages  of  the  Bible,  the  family 
altar,  the  closet  oratory — are  of  no  value 
unless  as  putting  us  in  communication 
with  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  used  as  the 

49 


kite  which  the  philosopher  sends  up  to 
draw  down  the  lightnings  of  the  skies, 
or  the  bucket  which  the  cottager  sends 
down  to  draw  up  water  from  the  well. 
Then,  powerless  as  they  are  in  them- 
selves, they  become  the  blessed  and 
mighty  instrument  of  spiritual  good; 
the  sails  that  catch  the  wind  and  impel 
the  vessel  on ;  the  concave  mirror  that, 
placed  before  the  Sun  of  Righteousness, 
gathers  His  beams  into  its  burning  focus 
to  warm  the  coldest  and  melt  the  hardest 
heart ;  eagle-wings  to  raise  our  souls  to 
heaven;  conduits,  like  the  pipes  that 
bring  water  to  our  city  from  these  Pent- 
land  Hills,  to  convey  streams  of  grace, 
peace,  and  purity  firom  their  fountain 
in  heaven  to  our  souls  on  earth. — 
Guthrie. 

▲  despised  sanctnary.  Those  that 
turn  their  backs  on  God's  ordinances 
and,  in  rebellion  to  His  commandments, 
live  in  sins  against  conscience,  can  they 
wonder  that  He  hides  His  face  from 
them  when  they  turn  their  backs  on 
Him  1  When  we  sin,  we  turn  our  backs 
upon  G^  and  our  face  to  the  devil, 
the  world,  and  pleasure;  and  can  men 
wonder  that  God  suffers  them  to  melt 
and  pine  awayl  Let  us  do  as  the 
flowers  do,  turn  themselves  to  the  sua 
Let  us  turn  ourselves  to  God  in  medita- 
tion and  prayer,  striving  and  wrestling 
with  Him.  Look  to  Him,  eye  Him  in 
His  ordinances  and  promises,  and  have 
communion  with  Him  all  the  ways  we 
can.  Let  our  souls  open  and  shut  with 
Him.  When  He  hides  His  face,  let 
us  droop  as  the  flowers  do  till  the  sun 
comes  again.  So,  when  we  have  not 
daily  comfort  of  the  Spirit  in  peace  of 
conscience,  let  us  never  rest  seeking 
God's  face  in  His  ordinances  and  by 
prayer,  and  that  will  cheer  a  drooping 
soul  as  the  sunbeams  do  the  fla^Dg 
flowers. — Sibhes. 

Retribution  implacable.  Fatalism 
and  Atheism  are  preached  constantly 
amidst  the  plaudits  of  ignorant  English- 
men. How  many  politicians  deem  the 
matter  a  thing  of  the  slightest  conse- 
quence !  Hume  would  never  have  set 
cities  on  fire,  beheaded  or  hacked  to 
pieces  human  beings,  least  of  all  the 
refined,  the  noble,  the  educated;  but 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IL 


nOMILBTW  COMMENT  ART:  LAMENTATIONS, 


he  must  be  reckoned  among  those  who 
sneeringly  scattered  smouldering  embers 
and  bequeathed  to  others  death  by  the 
inevitable  conflagration.  Seldom  has 
the  logic  of  events  been  more  complete 
than  in  the  great  French  Revolution. — 
Bampton  Lecture. 

—  What  a  diabolical  invention  was 
the  "Virgin's  Kiss,"  once  used  by  the 
fathers  of  the  Inquisition  !  The  victim 
was  pushed  forward  to  kiss  the  image, 
when,  lo  t  its  arms  embraced  him  in  a 
deadly  embrace,  piercing  his  body  with 
a  hundred  hidden  knives.  The  tempt- 
ing pleasures  of  sin  offer  to  the  unwary 
just  such  a  virgin's  kiss.  The  sin  fid 
joys  of  the  flesh  lead,  even  in  this  world, 
to  results  most  terrible,  while  in  the 
world  to  come  the  daggers  of  remorse 
and  despair  will  cut  and  wound  beyond 
all  remedy. — Spurgeon, 

—  Crime  and  punishment  grow  out 
of  one  stem.  Punishment  is  a  fruit 
that  unsuspected  ripens  within  the 
flower  of  the  pleasure  that  concealed 
it. — Emerson, 

National  min.  The  whole  history 
of  Christianity  shows  that  she  is  in 
far  greater  danger  of  being  corrupted 
by  the  alliance  of  power  than  of  being 
crushed  by  its  opposition.  Those  who 
thrust  temporal  sovereignty  upon  her 


treat  her  as  her  prototypes  treated  her 
Author.  They  bow  the  knee,  and  spit 
upon  her ;  they  cry,  "  Hail  I "  and 
smite  her  on  the  cheek;  they  put  a 
sceptre  in  her  hand,  but  it  is  a  fragile 
reed;  they  crown  her,  but  it  is  with 
thorns ;  they  cover  with  purple  the 
wounds  which  their  own  hands  have 
inflicted,  and  inscribe  magnificent  let- 
ters over  the  cross  on  wliich  they  have 
fixed  her,  to  perish  in  ignominy  and 
pain. — Macaulay. 

—  Human  society  reposes  on  religion. 
Civilisation  without  it  would  be  like 
the  lights  that  play  in  the  northern 
sky — ^a  momentary  flash  on  the  face  of 
darkness  ere  it  again  settled  into  eter- 
nal night  Wit  and  wisdom,  sublime 
poetry  and  lofty  pliilosophy,  cannot  save 
a  nation,  else  ancient  Greece  had  never 
perished.  Valour,  law,  ambition,  can- 
not preserve  a  people,  else  Rome  had 
still  been  mistress  of  the  world.  The 
nation  that  loses  faith  in  God  and  man 
loses  not  only  its  most  precious  jewel, 
but  its  most  unifying  and  conserving 
force ;  has  before  it  a 

*•  Stygian  cave  forlorn 
Where  brooding  Darkness  spreads  his  jealous 

wings. 
And  the  night-raven  sings." 


H0MILETIC8. 

Voiceless  Woe. 

(Verse  10.) 

L  Too  deep  for  words.  "The  elders  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  sit  upon  the 
ground  and  keep  silence."  A  graphic  description  of  sympathy  and  sorrow.  The 
judges  and  magistrates,  accustomed  to  occupy  with  dignity  the  judgment-seats, 
the  thrones  of  the  house  of  David,  and  to  discourse  eloquently  on  important  points 
of  law,  now  sit  dejectedly  upon  the  ground,  without  uttering  a  word.  It  was 
thus  that  the  friends  of  the  afflicted  Job  silently  expressed  their  sympathy  (Job 
ii.  13).  There  is  a  moment  in  the  swing  of  a  great  sorrow  when  speech  seems 
impossible — when  words,  if  spoken,  would  grate  upon  the  ear  as  a  harsh  intrusion. 
We  prefer  to  be  left  alone  and  undisturbed  till  the  pressure  of  the  trial  is  relieved. 
We  are  distraught,  stunned,  and  want  time  to  come  to  ourselves.  The  most 
delicate  and  effectual  way  in  which  our  kindest  friends  can  help  us  is  to  be  silent. 
No  words  can  express  our  sorrow.  Small  griefs  are  eloquent  enough,  but  great 
ones  are  dumb. 

IL  Expressed  in  ahject  hmniliatioiL  "  They  have  cast  up  dust  upon  their 
heads ;  they  have  girded  themselves  with  sackcloth."  They  are  stripped  of  their 
robes  of  state,  and  all  their  judicial  dignities  and  prestige.  They  have  lost  their 
60 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CHAP.  n. 


offices  and  their  wealth.  Greatness  and  prosperity  are  exchanged  for  sackcloth 
and  ashes.  The  loss  of  worldly  goods  brings  sorrow  to  many.  An  old  Latin 
proverb  says,  "  Genuine  are  the  tears  shed  over  lost  property."  Those  who  have 
boasted  most  about  their  possessions,  and  carried  their  heads  high  in  times  of 
plenty,  feel  most  keenly  the  humiliating  straits  of  poverty.  But  how  crushing 
is  the  humiliation  when  we  realise  we  have  lost  all — our  wealth,  our  friends,  our 
national  status,  our  religion,  our  Grod  )     Such  a  woe  is  voiceless  indeed. 

III.  Overwhelina  the  soul  with  conBdous  shame.  *' The  virgins  of  Jerusalem 
hang  down  their  heads  to  the  ground.*'  Time  was  when  the  haughty  daughters 
of  Zion  courted  public  admiration  as  they  tripped  mincingly  along  the  streets  of 
Jerusalem,  decked  in  richest  apparel,  and  their  every  movement  musical  with 
tinkling  ornaments  (Isa.  iii.  16) ;  but  now  their  pride  is  humbled,  and  they  are 
bowed  to  the  earth  with  conscious  shame.  And  yet  it  is  from  this  broken  and 
dejected  condition  we  trace  the  beginning  of  better  things.  It  is  on  crushed 
grain  that  man  is  fed ;  it  is  by  bruised  plants  that  he  is  restored  to  health.  It 
was  by  broken  pitchers  that  Gideon  triumphed ;  on  broken  pieces  of  the  ship  that 
Paul  and  his  companions  were  saved.  It  was  by  the  bruised  and  torn  bodies  of 
the  saints  that  the  truth  was  made  to  triumph.  When  we  examine  the  process 
of  moral  reform  in  nations  and  individuals,  we  observe  how  effectually  God  has 
used  many  broken  things  in  the  rebuilding  of  a  shattered  character — broken 
earthly  hopes,  broken  bodily  health,  broken  fortunes,  broken  hearts.  "  A  broken 
and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise"  (Ps.  IL  17,  xxxiv.  18). 

Lbsbons. — 1.  The  greatest  sorrow  is  speechless.  2.  A  sense  of  sin  is  a  sense  of 
personal  helplessness,  3.  The  grace  of  God  can  change  tJie  greatest  woe  into  hope 
and  gladness. 


Illustrations.-  >The  loneliness  of 
woe.  You  are  tried  alone,  alone  you 
must  pass  into  the  desert,  alone  you 
must  be  sifted  by  the  world ;  there  are 
moments,  known  only  to  a  man's  own 
self,  when  he  sits  by  the  poisoned  springs 
of  existence,  "yearning  for  a  morrow 
whioh  shall  free  him  from  the  strife." 
Let  life  be  a  life  of  faith ;  do  not  go 
timorously  about  inquiring  what  others 
think,  what  others  believe,  and  what 
others  say.  God  is  near  you.  Throw 
yourself  fearlessly  on  Him.  Trembling 
mortal!  there  is  an  unknown  might 
within  your  soul  which  will  wake  when 
yon  command  it.  Every  son  of  man 
who  would  attain  the  true  end  of  his 
being  must  be  baptized  with  fire. — F, 
W.  Robertson, 

Dejection  and  deepair.  The  more 
sin  and  corruption  grow,  and  the  man 
becomes  fully  conscious  of  it,  the  more 
does  dejection  grow  also,  and  this 
changes  at  last  into  despair,  which  is  a 
state  of  entire  hopelessness,  where  all 
possibilities  have  vanished,  all  gates 
and  ways  are  closed  to  a  man.  There 
is  a  despair  for  a  hard  fate,  and  it  not 


seldom  happens  that  a  man,  in  conse- 
quence of  a  single  severe  stroke,  makes 
a  sudden  leap  from  his  natural  state  of 
security  into  a  state  of  despair,  be  it 
that  he  has  lost  a  beloved  human  being, 
or  his  means,  or  in  any  other  misfor- 
tune. Against  this  form  of  despair 
even  heathenism  had  a  remedy — re- 
signation, submission  to  the  inevitable. 
But  the  deepest  despair  is  when  a  man 
gives  up  hope,  not  merely  for  this  or 
that  which  he  called  his  own,  but  for 
himself  as  a  moral  being.  There  is  one 
sustaining  and  saving  power — faith  in 
God.  Despair  may  and  should  become 
the  transition  to  salvation,  if  the  man 
only  despairs  of  himself,  but  does  not 
give  up  his  Grod.  In  the  expression  of 
entire  inability,  of  deepest  helplessness 
— "  0  wretched  man  that  I  am  " — there 
is  latent  a  hope  of  redemption,  the  hope 
that  what  is  impossible  with  man  is 
possible  with  Gotl. — Martensen. 

The  ravages  of  suffering.     After  the 
relief  of  the  city  of  Paris,  the  stniin 

and  fatigue  through  which  M. had 

gone  told  seriously  upon  his  health. 
He  could  not  forget  the  horrors  he  had 

51 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CWAP.  It  HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 

iritnessed.  His  face  began  to  look  worn,  is  he  amidst  his  lovely  family !  I  won- 
fiis  hair  became  greyer.  He  looked  der  whether  he  has  a  coffin  in  any  cap- 
depressed.       His    usual   cheerful    and  board." 

buoyant  energy  disappeared,   and    he         Solitude  opinressivo.  When  Thomas, 

became  listless,  self-absorbed,  and  mel-  the  missionary  to  India,  reached  Cal- 

ancholy.  cutta,  he  was  oppressed  with  a  sense  of 

Depresaioii.       Just    before    George  loneliness.     He  put  an  advertisement 

Moore's  entrance  into  his  palatial  house  in  the  newspapers  asking  if  there  was 

in   Cumberland,  his   wife  died.     This  another  Christian  in  the  country,  and 

brought  an  almost  intolerable  sense  of  begging  for  an  interview.    But  there 

loneliness.     One  day,  going  to  see  an  was  no  answer  1 
intimftte  friend,  he  said,  "  How  blessed 


EOMILETICS. 

The  Utter  Exhaustion  of  Grief. 

(Verses  11,  12.) 

L  Because  of  the  luypelesBnees  of  the  desolation  endured.  "For  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  daughter  of  my  people"  (ver.  11).  The  desolation  is  complete.  Every- 
thing is  destroyed — Temple,  home,  army,  nation,  wealth,  food,  and  the  very 
capacity  to  rouse  themselves  from  the  torpor  of  despair.  When  the  light  of  hope 
is  quenched  it  is  impossible  to  put  forth  effort     Paralysis  is  destruction. 

II.  Because  of  tiie  heart-rending  spectacle  of  little  children  fainting  in  the 
streets  and  dying  in  their  mothers'  arms,  while  they  Tainly  moan  for  food. 
"  Because  the  children  and  the  sucklings  swoon  in  the  streets.  They  say  to  their 
mothers,  *  Where  is  com  and  winet'  when  their  soul  was  poured  out  into  their 
mother's  bosom"  (vers.  11,  12).  The  harrowing  details  here  given  are  the  most 
affecting  that  have  yet  been  depicted  by  the  graphic  and  versatile  pen  of  the  pro- 
phet. The  cry — an  oft-repeated  cry,  as  the  tense  means — of  the  children  for 
food,  which  the  mothers  were  powerless  to  supply,  only  added  to  the  tortures  they 
already  suffered.  So  completely  prostrate  were  they  with  their  misery,  that  they 
saw  their  children  die  with  indifference,  and  could  not  conceal  an  unnatural  relief 
when  they  heard  their  last  sob.  Excessive  grief  blunts  the  edge  of  the  finest 
natural  instincts. 

III.  Because  all  the  powers  for  expressing  emotion  are  completely  spent 
*'  Mine  eyes  do  fail  with  tears,  my  bowels  are  troubled,  my  liver  is  poured  upon 
the  earth  "  (ver.  1 1).  Jeremiah  employs  the  terms  in  ordinary  use,  and  as  they 
were  popularly  understood.  As  the  heart  was  regarded  by  the  Jews  as  the  seat 
of  the  intellect,  so  the  liver,  as  the  chief  of  the  large  viscera  classed  together  under 
the  name  of  botoels,  was  supposed  to  be  the  seat  of  the  emotions.  By  the  pouring 
out,  therefore,  of  the  liver  upon  the  ground  was  meant  that  his  feelings  had 
entirely  given  way  under  the  acuteness  of  his  sorrow,  and  he  could  no  longer 
restrain  them. — Speaker^s  Comm.  The  agony  of  grief  was  passed.  It  was  quelled 
by  sheer  exhaustion.  He  wept  till  he  could  weep  no  more.  Ho  grieved  till  he 
was  incapable  of  feeling  his  grief.  A  tearless  sorrow  is  the  most  dangerous,  and 
the  most  difficult  to  cure. 

LE880N& — 1.  There  is  a  limit  to  the  greatest  human  sorrow.  2.  There  is  a 
moment  in  the  escperience  of  the  sufferer  when  death  itself  is  toeleome.  3.  The 
greatest  sorrow  isapainfiU  testimony  to  the  desolating  power  of  sin. 


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


H0M7LBTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAF.  n. 


Illustrations — Chief  inrostratiiig. 
Late  in  the  afternoon  of  a  summer  day 
I  entered  a  quiet  graveyard  where  slept 
one  of  my  dearest  friends.  It  occupied 
the  brow  of  a  hill,  which,  with  many  a 
knoll  and  graceful  undulation,  sloped  to 
the  green  meadow,  watered  by  a  wind- 
ing stream,  now  catching,  at  its  repeated 
curyea,  the  rays  of  the  setting  sun.  On 
the  left  was  a  pleasant  wood,  where  the 
sturdy  pine  and  fruit-bearing  beech 
conc€Aled  narrow  paths  to  cool  caves 
and  mossy  banks.  White  birches  and 
the  trembling  aspen,  with  the  sweet- 
scented  willow,  grew  upon  the  rights 
and  from  beyond  rose  the  curling  smoke 
&om  the  cottage-houses.  A  robin  sang 
its  song  of  love  and  praise,  a  sparrow 
passed  me  bearing  food  to  its  little 
progeny,  and  the  chirp  of  the  merry 
gra^opper  mingled  with  the  hum  of 
hundreds  of  flitting  insects.  But  for 
this  peace-breathing  scene  I  had  no 
greeting.  The  wild  storm,  thunder, 
rain,  and  darkness  had  been  more  wel- 
come. Yielding  utterly  to  my  grief, 
I  threw  myself  upon  the  sod,  and  took 
no  heed  of  time.  There  came  over  mo 
a  sense  of  utter  and  hopeless  desolation ; 
an  agony  like  that  of  death  turned  to 
bitterness  the  blessings  of  my  lot 

—  Grief  is  a  flower  as  delicate  and 
prompt  to  fade  as  happiness.  Still  it 
does  not  wholly  die.  Like  the  magic 
rose,  dried  and  unrecognisable,  a  warm 
air  breathed  on  it  will  suffice  to  renew 
its  bloom. — De  Gasparin. 

Misery  makes  indelible  ImpresaionB. 
The  rapidity  with  which  ideas  grow  old 
in  our  memories  is  in  a  direct  ratio  to 
the  squares  of  their  importance.  Their 
apparent  age  runs  up  miraculously,  like 
the  value  of  diamonds,  as  they  increase 
in  magnitude.  A  great  calamity,  for 
instance,  is  as  old  as  the  trilobites  an 
hour  after  it  has  happened.  It  stains 
backward  through  aU  the  leaves  we 
have  turned  over  in  the  book  of  life 
before  its  blot  of  tears  or  of  blood  is 
dry  on  the  page  we  are  turning.  Did 
you  ever  happen  to  see  that  most  soft- 
spoken  and  velvet-handed  steam-engine 
at  the  Minti  The  smooth  piston  slides 
backwards  and  forwards  as  a  lady  might 
ilip  her  delicate  finger  in  and  out  of  a 


ring.  The  engine  lays  one  of  its  fingers 
calmly  but  firmly  upon  a  bit  of  metal ; 
it  is  a  coin  now,  and  will  remember  that 
touch,  and  tell  a  new  race  about  it, 
when  the  date  upon  it  is  crusted  over 
with  twenty  centuries.  So  it  is  that 
a  great  silent-moving  misery  puts  a  new 
stamp  on  us  in  an  hour  or  a  moment — 
as  sharp  an  impression  as  if  it  had 
taken  half  a  lifetime  to  engrave  it — 
Holmes, 

Distress  exbansting.  Distress  is 
trouble  of  a  mental  kind,  tending  to 
despair.  Tribulation  may  be  described 
as  the  "fighting  without,"  whilst  dis* 
tress  may  be  described  as  the  "fears 
within."  That  kind  of  trouble  is  in- 
dicated which  comes  upon  a  wrestler 
when  his  antagonist  hais  succeeded  in 
throwing  him  after  a  long  struggle, 
has  got  his  foot  on  him,  is  holding 
him  down,  and  all  seems  to  be  up  with 
him.  Before,  when  wrestling,  he  was 
troubled,  now  he  is  distressed.  Thus 
we  see  that  the  afflictions  contemplated 
by  the  terms  tribulation  and  distress 
are  no  light  ones ;  and  it  is  little  wonder 
that,  under  the  strain  of  such  untoward 
circumstances  of  outward  and  inward 
trouble,  the  Christian  should  lose  heart 
and  fear  the  worst 

Qrief excessivelyiiidiilged*  Ebenezer 
Adams,  an  eminent  member  of  the 
Society  of  Friends,  on  visiting  a  lady 
of  rank,  whom  he  found,  six  months 
after  the  death  of  her  husband,  seated 
on  a  sofa  covered  with  black  cloth  and 
in  all  the  dignity  of  woe,  approached  her 
with  great  solemnity,  and  gently  taking 
her  by  the  hand,  thus  addressed  her: 
"  So,  friend,  I  see,  then,  thou  hast  not 
yet  forgiven  God  Almighty."  This 
reproof  had  so  great  an  effect  on  the 
lady,  that  she  immediately  laid  aside 
her  violent  grief,  and  again  entered  on 
the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  life. 

The  core  of  excessive  sorrow.  A 
pale  mourner  stood  bending  over  the 
tomb,  and  his  tears  fell  fast  and  often. 
As  he  raised  his  humid  eyes  to  heaven, 
he  cried,  "My  brother!  O  my  brother." 
A  sage  passed  that  way  and  said,  "  For 
whom  dost  thou  mourn t"  "One," 
replied  he,  "  whom  I  did  not  sufficiently 
love  while  living,  but  whose  inestimable 

63 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CWAP.  IL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


worth  I  now  feel."     "What  wouldst  tunnelled  Alps   from   the  dark,  cold, 

thou  do  if  he  were  restored  to  theet"  stifling  air,  emerging  on  the  broad  light- 

The   mourner  replied   that    he   would  flooded  plains  of  Lombardy,  it  is  often 

never  offend  him  by  an  unkind  word,  by  a  way  which  they  know  not^  gloomy 

but  would  take  every  occasion  to  show  and  underground,  that  the  convoy  is 

his  friendship,  if  he  could  but  come  carried  which  God's  Spirit  is  bringing 

back    to  his  fond   embrace.     "  Then,  to  the  wealthy  place ;  and  your  present 

waste  not  thy  time  in  useless  grief."  grief  you  will  have  no  reason  to  r^ret 

said  the  sage ;  **  but  if  thou  hast  friends,  if  it  introduce  you  to  Ood's  friendship 

go  and  cherish  the  living,  remembering  and  to  joys  which  do  not  perish  in  the 

that  they  will  one  day  be  dead  also."  using.     Affliction  is  God's  message.— 

—  like  the  passengers  through  the  Hamilton, 


H0MILET1C8. 

Inexpressible  Buin. 

(Verse  13.) 

I.  Is  ixLComparable  with  any  ordinary  calamity.  "  What  thing  shall  I  take 
to  witness  for  thee  t  What  thing  shall  I  liken  to  thee )  What  shall  I  equal  to 
thee  t "  Great  as  may  be  our  distress,  it  is  some  comfort,  slight  though  it  be,  to 
know  there  are  others  more  or  less  unfortunate.  But  in  this  case,  the  prophet 
has  no  message  from  Jehovah  to  afllicted  Judah,  nor  can  he  offer  the  ordinary 
human  consolation  of  saying  that  others  have  had  equal  or  worse  sorrow  to  bear. 
The  lamentable  condition  of  Jerusalem  was  unparalleled  ;  there  had  been  nothing 
like  it.  No  city  had  been  so  highly  privileged  with  Divine  honours :  no  city 
had  been  so  signally  punished.  ^'  Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like 
unto  my  sorrow"  (chap.  L  12).  Jeremiah  had  exhausted  all  his  powers  of 
description.  Desperate  indeed  must  be  the  state  of  Judah  when  such  a  master 
of  similes  had  to  confess  his  inability  to  coin  an  adequate  comparison. 

IL  Is  measureless  as  the  illimitable  ocean.  "  For  thy  breach  is  great  like 
the  sea."  In  his  extremity  to  find  some  comparison,  the  prophet  mentions  the  sea, 
which,  on  account  of  its  vast  dimensions,  its  illimitable  depth  and  breadth,  could 
alone  furnish  a  fitting  emblem  of  the  magnitude  of  the  devastation  effected  by 
the  Chaldeans.  The  indefiniteness  of  the  figure  thus  used  reveals  at  once  the 
straits  to  which  the  writer  was  reduced,  and  the  utter  ruin  in  which  Judah  was 
overwhelmed.  Thou  hast  a  flood  of  afflictions,  a  sea  of  troubles,  an  ocean  of 
miseries. 

III.  Is  beyond  the  power  of  human  consolation  and  repair.  *'  What  shall 
I  equal  to  thee,  that  I  may  comfort  thee,  O  virgin  daughter  of  Zion?  who  can 
heal  thee  ?  "  Human  words  fail ;  human  help  is  powerless.  There  is  no  comfort 
in  man,  or  in  any  number  of  men.  If  there  is  to  be  any  relief  or  restoration, 
it  must  come  from  God.  He  alone  can  change  ruin  into  prosperity,  misery  into 
joy,  darkness  into  light.  A  traveller  in  Madeira  set  off  one  morning  to  climb  the 
summit  of  a  lofty  mountain  to  gaze  upon  the  distant  scene  and  enjoy  the  balmy 
air.  He  had  a  guide,  and  they  had  with  difiiculty  ascended  some  two  thousand 
feet,  when  a  thick  mist  was  seen  descending  upon  them,  obscuring  the  heavens. 
The  traveller  thought  there  was  no  hope  left  but  to  retrace  their  steps  or  be  lost 
But  as  the  cloud  came  nearer  and  darkness  enveloped  them,  the  guide  stepped  on 
before,  penetrating  the  mist,  calling  out  every  now  and  then,  "  Press  on,  master, 
press  on ;  there's  light  beyond ! "  They  did  press  on,  and  in  a  few  minutes, 
emerging  from^  the  thick  mist,  found  themselves  gazing  upon  a  scene  of  tran- 
scendent beauty.  Above,  the  sky  was  bright  and  cloudless ;  below,  the  almost 
level  cloud  through  which  they  had  passed  was  silvered  with  the  rays  of  the  son. 
64 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  tOMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CHAP.  U. 


like  a  field  of  untrodden  snow.  In  the  darkest  experiences,  if  we  will  but  listen, 
we  may  hear  the  voice  of  our  Divine  Guide  exclaiming,  "  Press  on,  press  on ; 
there  is  light  beyond  1 " 

Lbssons. — 1.  Orecd  indeed  is  tite  calamity  that  baffles  human  ingenuity  to 
describe,  2.  The  nation  is  utterly  undone  when  smitten  by  the  hand  of  God. 
3.  God  alone  can  repair  the  damage  His  righteous  anger  has  inflicted. 


Illubtbations.  —  Drifting  to  min. 

Two  or  three  miles  above  the  falls  of 
I<fiagara  an  Indian  canoe  was  one  day 
observed  floating  quietly  along,  with 
its  paddle  on  its  side.  At  first  it  was 
supposed  to  be  empty.  No  one  could 
imagine  a  man  would  expose  himself 
to  such  well-known  danger ;  but  a  turn 
of  the  current  revealed  an  Indian  lying 
asleep  at  the  bottom.  The  spectators 
were  shocked,  and  shouted  to  rouse 
him,  but  in  vain.  It  seemed  more  like 
deaUi  than  sleep  which  held  him.  All 
hope  of  rescue  was  gone,  and  they  hur- 
ried along  the  shore  in  alarm  to  see  the 
end.  It  soon  came,  for  the  torrent  was 
now  rolling  so  rapidly  that  they  could 
scarcely  keep  pace  with  the  object  of 
their  interest.  At  length  the  roar  of  the 
water,  which  had  been  hitherto  almost 
buried  within  the  high  banks  below, 
by  a  sudden  change  of  the  wind  broke 
npon  them  with  double  violence.  This 
dreadful  noise,  with  which  the  Indian 
ear  was  so  familiar,  did  at  last  arouse 
him.  He  was  seen  to  start  up  and 
snatch  his  paddle.  But  it  was  too  late. 
The  same  dinning  sound  which  had 
roused  him  from  insensibility  told  him 
at  the  same  time  that  it  was  in  vain  to 
seek  safety  now  by  paddling,  nor  indeed 
had  he  time  to  try.  Upright  as  he  stood 
he  was  swept  over  the  awful  precipice, 
and  the  boat  and  its  occupant  were  seen 
no  more. 

Bnin  and  responsibility.  Julian  the 
Apostate  had  for  his  coat  of  arms  on  his 
escutcheon  an  eagle  struck  through  the 
heart  with  a  shait  feathered  from  her 
own  wing,  with  the  motto,  **  Our  death 
flies  to  us  with  onr  own  feathers,  and 
our  wings  pierce  us  to  the  very  heart." 
The  moral  is,  that  if  a  man  receives 
injury,  he  alone  has  caused  it,  and  is 
alone  to  blame. 

TJnntteraUe  niin.     Every  man  feels, 


and  not  strangely,  that  there  never  were 
such  experiences  of  life  as  his  own.  No 
joy  was  ever  like  our  joy,  no  sorrow 
ever  like  our  sorrow.  Indeed,  there  is 
a  kind  of  indignation  excited  in  us 
when  one  likens  our  grief  to  his  own. 
The  soul  is  jealous  of  its  experiences, 
and  does  not  like  pride  to  be  humbled 
by  the  thought  that  they  are  common. 
For  though  we  know  that  the  world 
groans  and  travails  in  pain,  and  has 
done  so  for  ages,  yet  a  groan  heard  by 
our  ear  is  a  very  different  thing  from 
a  groan  uttered  by  our  mouth.  The 
sorrows  of  other  men  seem  to  us  like 
clouds  of  rain  that  empty  themselves  in 
the  distance,  and  whose  long- travelling 
thunder  comes  to  us  mellowed  and  sub- 
dued ;  but  our  own  troubles  are  like  a 
storm  buisting  right  overhead  and  send- 
ing down  its  bolts  upon  us  with  direct 
plimge.  — Beecher, 

Bnin  the  pnnidiment  for  sin.  Fear- 
ful it  is  to  consider  that  sin  does  not 
only  drive  us  into  calamity,  but  it 
makes  us  also  impatient,  and  embitters 
our  spirit  in  the  sufferance:  it  cries 
aloud  for  vengeance,  and  so  torments 
men  before  the  time  with  such  fearful 
outcries  and  horrid  alarms,  that  their 
hell  begins  before  the  fire  is  kindled. 
It  hinders  our  prayers,  and  consequently 
makes  us  hopeless  and  helpless.  It 
perpetually  affrights  the  conscience,  un- 
less by  its  frequent  stripes  it  brings 
a  callousness  and  an  insensible  damna- 
tion upon  it.  It  makes  us  lose  all  that 
Christ  purchased  for  us — all  the  bless- 
ings of  His  providence,  the  comforts  of 
His  Spirit,  the  aids  of  His  grace,  the 
light  of  His  countenance,  the  hopes  of 
His  glory. — Jeremy  Taylor. 

—  The  pain,  the  disappointment^  the 
dissatisfaction  that  wait  on  an  evil 
course,  show  that  the  soul  was  not 
made  to  be  the  instrument  of  sin,  but 

55 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ohip.il 


HOMTLBTW  OOMMBNTART:  LAMENTATIONS. 


its  lofty  avenger.  The  desolated  affec- 
tions, the  haggard  countenance,  the 
pallid  and  sunken  cheek,  the  sighings 
of  grief,  proclaim  that  these  are  ruins 
indeed;  but  they  proclaim  that  some- 
thing noble  has  fallen  into  ruin,  pro- 
claim it  by  signs  mournful  yet  venerable, 
like  the  desolation  of  an  ancient  temple, 
like  its  broken  walls  and  fallen  columns, 
and  the  hollow  sounds  of  decay  that 
sink  down  heavily  among  its  deserted 
recesses. — Dewey, 

Halidess  ruin  appeals  to  onr  sym- 
pftthj.  Helplessness  appealing  to  our 
pity  begets  affection.  In  one  of  the 
cottages  of  my  country  parish  dwelt  a 
poor  idiot  child,  horrible  to  all  eyes 
but  her  parents,  and  so  helpless  that, 
though  older  than  sisters  just  blooming 
into  womanhood,  she  lay,  unable  either 
to  walk  or  speak,  a  burden  on  her 
mother's  lap  almost  the  whole  day  long 
— a  heavy  handful  to  one  who  had  the 
cares  of  a  family,  and  was  the  wife  of 
a  hard-working  man,  and  a  most  pain- 
ful contrast  to  the  very  roses  that  flung 
their  bright  clusters  over  the  cottage 
window,  as  well  as  to  the  lark  that, 
pleased  with  a  grassy  turf,  carolled 
within  its  cage.  Death,  in  most  in- 
stances an  unwelcome  visitor,  came  at 
length — to  her  and  to  their  relief.  Re- 
lief I  so  I  thought ;  and  when  the  father 
came  with  an  invitation  to  the  funeral, 
so  I  said.  Though  not  roughly,  but  in- 
advertently spoken,  the  word  jarred  on 
a  tender  chord;  and  I  was  more  than 


ever  taught  how  helplessness  begets 
affection  in  the  very  measure  and  pro> 
portion  of  itself,  when  he  burst  into 
a  fit  of  sorrow,  and,  speaking  of  his 
beautiful  boys  and  blooming  girls,  said, 
<<  If  it  had  been  God's  will,  I  would 
have  parted  with  any  of  them  rather 
than  her." — Guthrie, 

Ko  luype  hat  in  Gk>d.  Tlie  ninth 
capital  in  the  Ducal  Palace  at  Venice 
is  decorated  with  figures  of  the  eight 
virtues — Faith,  Hope,  Charity,  Justice, 
Temperance,  Prudence,  Humility,  and 
Fortitude.  The  virtues  of  the  fourteenth 
century  are  somewhat  hard- featured, 
with  vivid  and  living  expression,  and 
plain  everyday  clothes  of  the  timei 
Charity  has  her  lap  full  of  apples,  and 
is  giving  one  to  a  little  child,  who 
stretches  his  arm  for  it  across  a  gap 
in  the  leafage  of  the  capital.  Fortitude 
tears  open  a  lion's  jaws ;  Faith  lays  her 
hand  on  her  breast  as  she  beholds  the 
cross;  and  Hope  is  praying,  while  above 
is  a  hand  seen  emerging  from  sunbeams 
— the  hand  of  Cod,  and  the  inscription 
above  is  Spes  optima  in  Deo.  This  de- 
sign is  rudely  imitated  by  the  fifteenth 
century  workmen :  the  virtues  have  lost 
their  hard  features  and  living  expres- 
sion ;  they  have  now  all  got  Soman 
noses,  and  have  had  their  hair  curled. 
Their  actions  and  emblems  are,  how- 
ever, preserved  until  we  come  to  Hope 
— she  is  still  praising,  but  she  is  prais- 
ing to  the  sun  only :  the  hand  of  God 
is  gone ! — Rwikin. 


H0MILETIC8. 

False  Prophets. 

(Verse  14.) 

L  Are  self-deluded.  '*  Thy  prophets  have  seen  vain  and  foolish  things  for 
thee."  Thy  prophets — they  were  certainly  not  God's  prophets.  Their  authority 
was  self-assumed,  and  they  ingratiated  themselves  into  the  favour  of  the  people  by 
prophesying  only  what  was  agreeable  to  their  hearers.  They  indulged  so  lavishly 
in  lies  and  deceit,  that  they  almost  persuaded  themselves  that  what  they  uttered 
was  truth.  But  they  were  deluded,  and  their  delusion  was  self-induced.  An 
inveterate  habit  of  lying  vitiates  the  moral  sense ;  it  becomes  difficult  to  appre- 
ciate what  is  true.  A  lie  poisons  the  atmosphere  wherever  it  circulates.  It  has 
no  legs  and  cannot  stand,  but  it  has  wings  and  can  fly  far  and  wide. 

n.  Have  no  insight  into  the  real  cause  of  national  calamities,  and  their 
ttafhlng  is  powerless  to  prevent  them.  "They  have  not  discovered  thine 
56 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMENTJJLT:  LAMENTATIONS. 


QBAP.  n. 


iniqnitjy  to  turn  away  ih j  captivity."  The  Syiiao  renders  the  words  thus :  They 
have  noi  disclosed  to  thee  thy  sins^  thai  so  thou  mighiest  repent,  and  I  might  have 
turned  away  thy  captivity.  They  were  so  demoralised  by  the  habitual  practice  of 
falsehood,  that  they  were  incompetent  to  judge  the  cause  and  drift  of  the  national 
troubles.  They  could  not  see  that  disobedience  to  (xod  was  at  the  root  of  the 
general  distress ;  or,  if  they  did,  they  saw  so  little  evil  in  it^  or  danger  from  it^ 
that  they  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  alarm  the  people  by  any  words  of  warning. 
Had  they  been  able  to  read  the  signs  of  the  times  and  to  act  with  promptness 
and  fidelity  in  urging  the  people  to  repentance,  Israel's  chastisement  might  have 
been  averted.  When  responsible  leaders  are  unfaithful,  and  abuse  their  trust  by 
deceiving  others,  the  misguided  nation  rushes  on  to  its  doom. 

III.  Invent  messai^  fiill  of  deoeil  "  But  have  seen  for  thee  false  burdens 
and  causes  of  banishment."  The  word  burdens  does  not  mean  here  prophecies 
of  a  minatory  character,  for  evidently  the  false  prophets  assured  the  people  of 
prosperity  and  deliverance.  The  word  is  used  in  a  contemptuous  sense.  The 
bvrdens,  so  different  from  the  Divine  message  laid  as  a  burden  on  the  conscience 
of  the  genuine  prophet^  were,  in  this  case,  mere  pretence,  false,  empty,  and  utterly 
inadequate  to  remove  *'  the  causes  of  banishment"  The  false  prophets,  in  their 
attempt  to  account  for  the  captivity,  invented  any  cause  but  the  real  one — the 
apostasy  of  the  people.  Deceit  produces  darker  shades  of  deceit.  One  lie  must 
be  quickly  thatched  with  another,  or  it  will  soon  rain  through.  The  way  of  false- 
hood is  tortuou&  A  deaf  and  dumb  boy  being  asked,  "  What  is  truth  f  "  replied  by 
thrusting  his  finger  forward  in  a  straight  line.  When  asked,  "  What  is  falsehood  t  ** 
he  made  a  zigzag  motion  with  his  finger.  The  result  of  false  teaching  is  disinte- 
gration, banishment^  a  driving  out.  Every  lie,  great  or  small,  is  the  brink  of  a 
precipice,  the  depth  of  which  nothing  but  Omniscience  can  fathom.  The  poet 
Campbell  calls  it,  ''The  torrent's  smoothness,  ere  it  dash  below." 

LE8S0N& — 1.  The  true  prophet  receives  his  commission  directly  from  Ood. 

2.  While  the  prophet  is  faithful  to  his  Divine  calling  he  is  preserved  from  error. 

3.  The  false  prophet  deceives  himself  as  well  as  others. 


IliLUSTRATIOlfS. — ^A  fiJsO  propll«t 

**  T^  bigot  theologiao,  in  minute 
Diitinotions  skilled,  and  doctrinet  anrednoed 
To  praotioe ;  in  debate  how  load  !  how  loDff  I 
How  dexterous  !  in  OhristiAn  love,  how  odd ! 
His  Tain  conceits  were  orthodox  alone. 
The  immutable  and  heavenly  truth  reTcaled 
By  God  was  nought  to  him ;  he  had  an  art^ 
A  kind  of  hellish  ohann,  that  made  the  Ups 
Of  truth  speak  falsehood;   to  his  liking 

turned 
The  meaning  of  the  text ;  made  trifles  seem 
The  marrow  of  salvation  ; 
Proved  still  his  reasoning  besti  and  his  beUef, 
Though  propped  on  fancies  wild  as  mad- 
men s  dreams, 
Most  rational,  most  Scriptural,  most  sound ; 
With  mortal  heresy  denouncing  aU 
Who  in  his  arguments  could  see  no  force. 
He  proved  aU  creeds  false  but  his  own,  and 

found 
At  last  his  own  most  false — most  falser 


Ha  spent  his  time  to  prove  aU  others  so.** 

—PoOok. 

False    doctrine.      A  man  holding 
false  and  pemicions  doctrines  preached 


at  a  village  chapel,  and  endeavoured  to 
convince  a  large  congregation  that  there 
is  no  punishment  after  death.  At  the 
close  of  the  discourse  he  informed  the 
people  he  would  preach  there  again  in 
four  weeks,  if  they  wished.  A  respect- 
able merchant  rose  and  said,  ''Sir,  if 
your  doctrine  is  true,  we  do  not  need 
you ;  and  if  it  is  false,  we  do  not  want 
you." 

False  teaching  dangerons  when 
mixed  with  trnth.  Falsehood  is  never 
so  successful  as  when  she  baits  her 
hook  with  truth.  No  opinions  so  fatally 
mislead  us  as  those  that  are  not  wholly 
wrong,  as  no  watches  so  effectually 
deceive  the  wearer  as  those  that  are 
sometimes  right — Oolton. 

—  Error  is  never  so  dangerous  as 
when  it  is  the  alloy  of  truth.  Pure 
error  would  be  rejected ;  but  error  mixed 
with  truth  makes  use  of  the  truth  as  a 
pioneer  for  it^  and  gets  introduction 

67 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  n. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMBNTAT10N8, 


where  otherwise  it  >voukl  have  none. 
Poison  is  never  so  dangerous  as  when 
mixed  up  with  food ;  error  is  never  so 
likely  to  do  mischief  as  when  it  comes 
to  U8  under  the  pretensions  and  patron- 
age of  that  which  is  true. — Cumming, 

Faith  in  flalsehood  disastroiui. — 
When  the  English  army  under  Harold, 
and  the  Norman  under  William  the 
Conqueror,  were  set  in  array  for  that 
fearful  conflict  which  decided  the  fate 
of  the  two  armies  and  the  political  des- 
tinies of  Great  Britain,  William,  per- 
ceiving that  he  could  not  by  a  fair 
attack  move  the  solid  columns  of  the 
English  ranks,  had  recourse  to  a  false 
movement  in  order  to  gain  the  victory. 
He  gave  orders  that  one  flank  of  his 
army  should  feign  to  be  flying  from  the 
field  in  disorder.  The  officers  of  the 
English  army  believed  the  falsehood, 
pursued  them,  and  were  cut  ofi".  ^ 
second  time  a  false  movement  was  made 
in  another  part  of  the  field.  The  Eng- 
lish again  believed,  pursued,  and  were 


cut  ofL  By  these  moyements  the  for- 
tunes of  the  day  were  determined. 
Although  the  English  had  the  evidence 
of  their  senses,  yet  they  were  led  to 
believe  a  falsehood.  They  acted  in 
view  of  it.  The  consequence  was  the 
destruction  of  a  great  part  of  their 
army,  and  the  establishment  of  the 
Korman  power  in  England.  It  is  an 
incontrovertible  fact  that  the  whole 
heathen  world,  ancient  and  modem, 
have  believed  in  and  worshipped  un- 
holy beings  as  gods.  In  consequence 
of  believing  falsehood  concerning  the 
character  of  God,  all  heathendom  at  the 
present  hour  is  filled  with  ignorance, 
impurity,  and  crime. — /.  B.  Walker. 
Falsehood. 

**  I  scorn  this  hated  scene 

Of  masking  and  disuse, 
Where  men  on  men  still  gleam 

With  falseness  in  their  eyes : 
Where  all  is  counterfeit, 

And  truth  hath  never  say  ; 
Where  hearts  themselTes  do  cheat, 

Concealing  hope's  decay."— ifoCAerweU. 


HOMILETICS. 

Thb  Heartless  Triumph  of  the  Soorneb. 

(Verses  15-17.) 

L  Expressed  in  aggravated  taunts  (ver.  15).  The  conquerors  heap  insult 
upon  insult  on  the  fallen  city.  They  employ  all  the  familiar  signs  expressive  of 
contempt  and  derision.  They  clap  their  hands,  they  hiss,  they  wag  their  heads, 
and  with  a  scornful  curl  of  the  lip  they  ask,  **  Is  this  the  city  that  men  call  the 
perfection  of  beauty,  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth  ? "  Jerusalem  had  acquired  a 
world-wide  renown.  It  was  the  pride  of  the  Jew,  the  dread  of  its  subject  tribes, 
the  envy  of  surrounding  nations.  No  city  had  been  so  signally  honoured  of 
Heaven  ;  and  now  that  it  was  prone  in  the  dust,  its  foes  united  in  a  wild  chorus 
of  fiendish  jubilation.  How  vividly  does  this  verse  remind  us  of  the  scene  around 
the  cross  of  the  world's  Redeemer  1  (Matt,  xxvii.  39-44 ;  Mark  xv.  29-32  ;  Luke 
xxiii.  35-37).  It  is  heartless  and  wicked  to  make  sport  of  the  miseries  of  others, 
and  is  a  cruel  aggravation  of  those  miseries.  The  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  short 
Their  hollow-ringing  laughter  is  as  **  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot."  Their 
taunts  and  gibes  fall  back  upon  themselves.  Our  unkind  words  come  home 
to  roost. 

II.  Savagely  exalts  in  the  havoc  that  has  been  ardently  desired  (ver.  16). 
The  intensity  of  the  enemy's  exultation  is  shown  by  the  heaping  up  of  unconnected 
words,  with  each  of  which  its  own  proper  object  must  be  supplied.  We  have 
found  what  we  sought,  have  seen  what  we  looked  for ;  our  hopes  and  longings  are 
all  fulfilled. — Speaker's  Commentary,  The  enemies  of  Zion  eagerly  watched  for 
her  downfall,  they  earnestly  desired  it,  they  maliciously  helped  to  bring  it  about ; 
and  now  it  had  come,  their  maddened  hilarity  and  scorn  knew  no  bounds.  The 
truly  brave  never  exult  over  the  defeat  of  their  worst  foes.  Thev  have  often  been 
58 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CHAP.  n. 


known  to  weep  over  the  devastation  they  have  themselves  created.  It  is  inhuman 
to  chuckle  over  the  suflferings  of  others.  It  is  a  depth  of  demoralisation  reached 
only  by  the  cowardly  and  craven-hearted. 

III.  The  fulfilment  of  BiYine  threatenings  against  national  nnfaithfolness 
(ver.  17).  The  ruin  of  Jerusalem,  over  which  her  adversaries  so  savagely  rejoiced, 
was  no  accidental  or  unforeseen  event.  It  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine 
purpose,  of  which  Israel  had  been  so  often  forewarned  from  the  days  of  old.  It 
was  distinctly  foretold  that  if  Israel  forsook  Jehovah  and  lapsed  into  idolatry, 
they  would  be  punished  with  all  the  miseries  of  a  siege,  ending  in  national  over- 
throw (Lev.  xxvL  14-39;  Dent  xxviii.  15-68).  The  contemptuous  scorn  of 
their  enemies  emphasised  their  punishment,  and  testified  to  the  exactness  with 
which  the  Divine  threatenings  against  disobedience  had  been  fulfilled.  The 
Divine  word,  whether  in  threat  or  promise,  never  fails.  God  is  unchangeably 
faithful  both  in  mercy  and  in  judgment. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  wicked  ever  glocU  over  the  downfall  of  the  good,  2.  The  gibes 
of  the  seomer  are  a  bitter  ingredient  in  the  punishment  of  the  unfaithful.  3.  The 
taunts  of  the  wicked  have  no  power  to  injure  the  truly  righteous. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  15,  16.  The  world's  treatment 
of  its  suffering  Redeemer  :  1.  A  wild 
tempest  of  unreasoning  scorn,  hatred, 
and  exultation.  2.  A  mournful  evi- 
dence of  the  intense  acrimony  of  sin. 
3.  Does  not  prevent  the  unselfish  work- 
ing out  of  its  sublime  redemption 

Yer.  17.  The  Biyine  threatenings  of 
judgment :  I.  Unaffected  by  the  lapse 
of  time.  "  He  hath  fulfilled  His  word 
that  He  had  commanded  in  the  days  of 
old."  IL  Are  carried  out  with  relent- 
less certainty.  "  He  hath  thrown  down 
and  hath  not  pitied."  IIL  Always  finds 
agents  iDilling  to  execute  them.  "He 
hath  caused  thine  enemy  to  rejoice  over 
thee  ;  He  hath  set  up  the  horn  of  thine 
adversaries." 

Illustrations.  —  Trinmph  prema- 
ture. During  the  reign  of  Henry 
VIII.,  the  Pope,  angry  at  the  English 
monarch's  resistance,  called  a  council 
in  Rome,  at  which  it  was  resolved  that 
the  Emperor  of  (xermany  should  invade 
England,  and  that  Henry  should  be 
deposed.  So  rejoiced  was  the  Papal 
party,  that  they  illuminated  Rome ; 
cannons  were  fired,  bonfires  lighted, 
and  great  bodies  of  men  paraded  the 
streets  shouting,  "  The  Empire  and 
Spain."  Already,  in  their  eager  expec- 
tation, England  was  a  second  Nether- 
lands, a  captured  province  under  the 


regency  of  Catherine  or  Mary.     How 
bitterly  these  expectations  were  over- 
thrown history  too  well  declares. 
Scorn,  not  to  be  dreaded. 

**  Ridicule  is  a  weak  weapon  when  levelled  at 
a  strong  mind ; 

But  common  men  are  cowards,  and  dread 
an  empty  laugh. 

Betray  mean  terror  of  ridicule,  thou  shalt 
fbad  fools  enough  to  mock  thee ; 

But  answer  thou  their  laughter  with  con- 
tempt, 

And  the  scoffers  will  lick  thy  feet." 

— Tupf&r, 

A  scoffer  nonplussed.  On  a  certain 
occasion,  in  the  presence  of  a  vast  and 
brilliant  assemblage,  a  person  more 
noted  for  his  self-esteem  than  for  his 
learning  was  speaking  against  the  Chris- 
tian religion  in  terms  of  the  severest 
scorn  and  derision.  The  celebrated  Dr. 
Belknap,  overhearing  the  orator,  stepped 
up  to  him  and  asked,  "  Well,  sir,  have 
you  found  a  religion  that  is  better?" 
The  scofier,  considerably  abashed  by 
this  unlooked-for  question,  was  forced 
to  acknowledge  that  thus  far  he  had 
not.  "Well,"  responded  the  Doctor, 
"  when  you  have,  let  me  know,  and  I 
will  join  you  in  adopting  it."  The 
rebuke  was  as  wise  as  it  was  just. 

Sarcasm  destrosrs  fHendship.  Life 
is  full  of  paradoxes.  There  are  some 
slight  causes  which  will  destroy  the 
strongest  friendship.     Great  causes  will 

59 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  n. 


EOMILETW  COMMESTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


not  always  impair  it  A  sarcastic  and 
disparaging  speech  made  by  a  friend 
concerning  his  friend  in  liis  absence, 
and  repeated  by  some  mischief-maker, 
will  invariably  disturb  friendship;  while 
an  angry  altercation,  or  some  injury  to 
person  or  to  property,  will  often  leave 
friendship  unharmed.  When  aliena- 
tion begins,  it  increases  at  a  very  rapid 
rate.  Ihe  rust  spot  multiplies  apace. 
The  mildew  spreads  quickly.  The  rift 
in  the  lute  becomes  longer  and  longer. 
— S,  Martin. 

The  Redeemer's  sufferings  tmique. 
Did  Christ  then  merely  suffer  as  any 
other  man  has  done?  Suffering  is  a 
question  of  nature.  The  educated  man 
suffers  more  than  the  uneducated  man ; 
the  poet  probably  suffers  more  than  the 
mathematician ;  the  commanding  officer 
suffers  more  in  a  defeat  than  the  com- 
mon soldier.  The  more  life  the  more 
suffering,  the  billows  of  sorrow  being 
in  proportion  to  the  volume  of  our 
manhood.  Now  Jesus  Christ  was  not 
merely  a  man.  He  was  man,  and  by 
the  very  compass  of  His  manhood  He 
suffered  more  than  any  mortal  can  en- 
dure. The  storm  may  pass  as  fiercely 
over  the  shallow  lake  as  over  the  At- 


lantic, but  by  its  very  volume  the  latter 
is  more  terribly  shaken.  No  other  man 
had  come  with  Christ's  ideas;  in  no 
other  man  was  the  element  of  self  so 
entirely  abnegated ;  no  other  man  had 
offered  such  opposition  to  diabolical 
rule.  All  these  circumstances  combine 
to  render  Christ's  sufferings  unique,  yet 
not  one  of  them  puts  Christ  so  far  away 
as  to  prevent  us  finding  in  His  suffering 
unfailing  solace  and  strength.  —  Dr. 
Parker, 

Bivine  pnxiislunent  certain.  Those 
who  made  light  of  the  invitation  to  the 
supper  mentioned  in  the  Gospel  were 
shut  out  The  sceptical  Pilate  ended  a 
miserable,  hopeless  life  by  suicide.  The 
rich  man  went  on  living  splendidly, 
giving  banquets,  pampering  his  body, 
until  one  day  he  died  and  was  buried, 
and  awoke  in  torment  to  know  its 
reality  at  last  The  people  in  Noah's 
days  lived  securely  and  indifferent, 
'*  until  the  flood  came  and  took  them 
all  away."  On  the  inhabitants  of 
Sodom  the  sun  was  shining  when  Lot 
went  out  of  the  city ;  but  the  same  day 
it  rained  fire  and  brimstone,  and  de- 
stroyed them  alL 


E0MILETIC8. 

A  Call  to  Prater. 

(Verses  18, 19.) 

I  Addressed  to  a  city  suffering  the  miseries  of  a  desolating  siege.  **  Their 
heart  cried  unto  the  Lord,  O  wall  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  !  "  (ver.  18).  It  sounds 
strange  thus  to  appeal  to  the  wall  of  Zion — to  pray  so  passionately  that  tears  may 
run  down  like  a  river.  But  this  is  quite  after  the  manner  of  Jeremiah  and  other 
sacred  writers  (com p.  ver.  8 ;  Isa.  xiv.  31 ;  Jer.  xxii.  29 ;  Hab.  ii.  11 ;  Luke  xix. 
40).  Carried  away  with  an  outburst  of  sorrow,  "  the  prophet  suddenly  addresses 
the  wall,  which  had  so  long  been  their  shelter  and  defence,  and  bids  it,  as  the 
representative  of  the  people  who  had  dwelt  secure  under  its  protection,  to  shed 
floods  of  tears  on  their  behalf.  Broken  up  by  the  enemy,  it  could  be  their  guar- 
dian no  longer,  but  by  its  ruins  it  might  still  cry  unto  the  Lord  in  their  behalf." 
However  great  may  be  our  distress,  it  is  always  wise  to  promptly  obey  the  sum- 
mons to  pray.     Prayer  brings  moral  strength  and  brightens  the  hope  of  rescue. 

XL  To  be  mingled  with  mnch  weeping.  ^'  Let  tears  run  down  like  a  river 
day  and  night ;  give  thyself  no  rest ;  let  not  the  apple  of  thine  eye  cease  "  (ver. 
18).  Like  a  river,  a  brook,  or  torrent,  rushing  along  furiously  at  one  time  and 
afterwards  dried  up.  In  the  nature  of  things  weeping  cannot  be  incessant.  Like 
a  torrent,  it  gushes  out  in  floods  of  tears,  and,  though  ceasing  at  intervals,  it  is  in 
this  instance  to  be  often  repeated.  Reasons  for  frequent  weeping  will  be  found 
60 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMIIETIQ  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CHAP.  TI. 


Suffering  is  apt  to  stupify  and 
Prayer  is  the  more  genuine  when 


in  the  prolonged  continuance  of  the  misery. 
harden,  if  the  heart  is  not  softened  with  tears, 
accompanied  with  godly  sorrow. 

III.  To  be  ezpresaed  with  lond  cries  thronghont  the  night-watches. 
**  Arise,  cry  out  in  the  night ;  in  the  beginning  of  the  watches  pour  out  thine 
heart  like  water  before  the  face  of  the  Lord"  (ver.  19).  At  the  beginning  of 
each  night-watch  means  all  the  night  through.  There  are  crises  in  life,  times  of 
trouble  and  peril,  when  the  time  usually  devoted  to  sleep  may  be  fitly  employed 
in  earnest,  agonising  prayer.  Such  a  time  had  come  in  the  history  of  Judah ; 
such  a  time  comes  to  most.  There  is  a  pathetic  tenderness  of  sorrow  in  the 
night-moanings  and  cries  of  the  soul,  and  it  is  then  we  are  often  conscious  of  the 
special  nearness  of  Divine  help. 

*' Hours  spent  with  pain  and  Thee 
Lost  hours  have  never  seemed ; 
No  I  those  are  lost  which  bat  might  bt 
From  earth  f(ir  heaven  redeemed* 

For  weeping,  wakeful  eyes 

Instinctive  look  above, 
And  catch,  through  openings  in  the  Mm^ 

Thy  beaims,  unslnmbering  Love  1 " 

IV.  To  be  offered  especially  on  behalf  of  perishing  children.  "  lift  up  thy 
hands  towards  Him  for  the  life  of  thy  young  children  that  faint  for  hunger  at  the 
top  of  every  street''  (ver.  19).  Among  the  most  heart-rending  miseries  of  the 
siege  was  the  spectacle  of  little  children  prostrate  in  the  streets  slowly  dying  of 
starvation.  You  cannot  enter  a  street  in  any  part  of  the  city  hut  this  sad  sight 
meets  the  eye.  The  lifting  up  of  the  hands  is  not  only  the  attitude  and  symbol 
of  prayer,  but  indicates  earnestness  in  supplication.  The  sulTerings  of  helpless 
children  appeal  to  the  hardest  heart,  and  when  it  is  impossible  to  render  any 
other  help,  we  are  called  upon  to  pray  for  them.  When  our  children  are  in  ex- 
tremity, so  are  we.  Prayer  is  the  only  refuge,  apart  from  which  there  is  nothing 
but  wretchedness  and  despair. 

Lbssons. — 1.  Our  daily  necessities  are  a  constant  cdU  to  prayer,  2.  Misery 
finds  rdief  in  prayer.     3.  The  young  should  ever  be  the  subject  of  earnesi  prayer. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yer.    19.    A  night  of  prayer :    1. 

Necessary  in  circumstances  of  special 
peril.  2.  Often  characterised  by  in- 
tense earnestness.  3.  Familiar  to  many 
an  anxious  mother  pleading  for  the 
salvation  of  her  child. 

—  Watch-Night  service.  I.  Jt  is 
never  too  soon  to  pray.  There  is  no 
reason  why  you  should  delay  to  the 
morning  light.  "  In  the  beginning  of 
the  night-watches  pour  out  thine  heart 
like  water  before  the  face  of  the  Lord." 
How  many  young  persons  imagine  that 
religion  is  a  thing  for  age,  or  at  least 
for  maturity  !  They  do  not  want  their 
young  shoulders  galled  with  an  early 
burden ;  they  do  not  think  it  is  true 
that  "  it  is  good  for  a  man  to  bear  the 


yoke  in  his  youth;"  and  they  forget 
that  that  ''yoke  is  easy"  and  that 
"  burden  is  light"  God  hears  children. 
He  called  Samuel  when  he  was  but  a 
child.  We  have  had  our  Josiahs,  we 
have  had  our  Timothys  ;  we  have  seen 
those  in  early  youth  brought  to  the 
Saviour.  Young  man,  it  is  not  too 
soon.  II.  It  is  not  too  late  to  cry  to 
the  Lord.  If  the  sun  be  set  and  the 
watches  of  the  night  have  commenced 
their  round,  the  mercy-seat  is  open. 
No  shop  is  open  so  late  as  the  House  of 
Mercy.  The  devil  has  two  tricks  with 
men.  Sometimes  he  puts  their  clock  a 
little  backward,  and  says,  "Stop  1  there 
is  time  enough  yet;"  and  when  that 
does  not  answer,  he  turns  the  hands  on, 

61 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  II. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


and  cries  out,  "  Too  late  I  too  late  ! " 
Within  another  fifteen  minutes  another 
year  shall  have  come ;  but  if  the  Si)irit 
of  God  calls  you  this  year,  He  will  not 
call  you  too  late  in  the  year.  If  to  the 
last  second  you  should  live,  if  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  calls  you  then,  He  will  not 
have  called  you  too  late.  The  darkness 
of  night  is  gathering ;  it  is  coming  on, 
and  you  are  near  death.  Arise,  sleeper, 
arise!  Thou  art  now  taking  the  last 
nap  of  death.  III.  We  cannot  pray 
too  vehemently.  "  Gt-y  out  in  the  night." 
God  loves  earnest  prayers.  He  loves 
impetuous  prayers,  vehement  prayers. 
Let  a  man  preach,  if  he  dare,  coldly 
and  slowly,  but  never  let  him  pray  so. 
Those  who  cry  with  weak  voices,  who 
do  not  cry  aloud,  must  not  expect 
to  get  a  blessing.  When  you  go  to 
Mercy's  gate,  do  not  give  a  gentle  tap 
like  a  lady,  do  not  give  a  single  knock 
like  a  beggar,  but  take  the  knocker  and 
rap  hard  till  the  very  door  seems  to 
shake.  Rap  with  all  your  might,  and 
recollect  that  God  loveth  those  who 
knock  hard  at  Mercy's  gate.  IV.  We 
cannot  pray  too  simply,  "Pour  out 
your  hearts  before  Him."  Not  pour 
out  your  fine  words,  not  pour  out  your 
beautiful  periods,  but  pour  out  your 
hearts,  "  I  dare  not,"  says  one ;  "  there 
is  black  stuff  in  my  heart."  Out  with 
it,  then ;  it  is  better  out  than  in.  "I 
cannot  pray  as  I  could  wish,"  says 
another;  **my  crying  out  is  a  feeble 
one."  When  you  pour  out  water,  it 
does  not  make  much  noise.  So  you 
can  "  pour  out  your  heart  like  water," 
and  it  will  run  away,  and  you  can 
scarcely  know  it.  There  is  many  a 
prayer  uttered  in  a  garret,  down  in  a 
cellar,  or  in  some  lonely  place  where 
the  cobbler  sits  mending  his  shoes  be- 
neath a  window,  which  the  world  does 
not  hear,  but  the  Lord  hears  it.  Pour 
out  your  heart  like  water  by  confessing 
your  sins,  by  begging  the  Lord  to  have 
mercy  on  you  for  Christ's  sake.  And 
when  it  is  all  poured  out.  He  will  come 
and  fill  it  again.  Listen  for  one  mo- 
ment to  the  ticking  of  that  clock.  It 
is  the  beating  of  the  pulse  of  eternity ; 
it  is  the  footstep  of  death  pursuing  you. 
Time  is  precious,  and  when  we  have 
62 


little  of  it,  it  is  more  precious.  You 
will  soon  enter  another  year.  This 
year  will  have  gone  in  a  few  seconds. 
Where  will  the  next  year  be  spent  % — 
O,  H.  Spurgeon. 

Illustrations. — ^A  mute  summons 
to  prayer.  Venice  may  well  call  upon 
us  to  note  with  reverence,  that  of  all 
the  towers  which  are  still  seen  rising 
like  a  branchless  forest  from  her  islands, 
there  is  but  one  whose  office  was  other 
than  that  of  summoning  to  prayer,  and 
that  one  was  a  watch-tower  only. — 
— Buskin, 

Tearful  intercession  irresistible. 
Miss  Gratz — supposed  to  have  been  the 
original  of  Rebecca  in  "  Ivanhoe  " — was 
nursing  her  grandfather  in  his  last  ill- 
ness. Calling  her  to  him  one  day,  he 
said,  "  What  can  I  do  for  you,  my  dear 
child  ?  "  Turning  upon  him  her  beau- 
tiful eyes  filled  with  tears,  she  said  in 
a  tone  of  earnest  entreaty,  "Grand- 
father, forgive  Aunt  Shinah."  This 
was  a  daughter  who  had  been  long 
estranged  because  of  her  marriage  with 
a  Gentile.  The  old  man  sought  his 
grand-daughter's  hand,  pressed  it,  and, 
after  a  silence,  said  in  a  broken  voice, 
"Send  for  her."  In  due  course  the 
lady  came,  received  her  father's  forgive- 
ness and  blessing,  and  when,  a  few 
days  later,  he  breathed  his  last,  the 
arms  of  his  long-estranged  child  were 
about  him,  while  Bebecca  Gratz  sat 
silently  at  his  side. 

Prayer  necessary  for  service.  Bees 
suffer  sadly  from  famine  during  the 
dry  years  which  occasionally  occur  in 
the  southern  and  middle  portions  of 
California.  If  the  rainfall  amounts 
only  to  three  or  four  inches,  instead  of 
from  twelve  to  twenty,  as  in  ordinary 
seasons,  then  sheep  and  cattle  die  in 
thousands,  and  so  do  these  small  winged 
cattle,  unless  they  are  carefully  fed  or 
removed  to  other  pasturea  No  flowers, 
no  honey ;  no  rain,  no  food.  They  who 
teach  others  must  themselves  feed  on 
the  truths  they  declare.  Failure  to 
commune  with  God  will  give  the 
poverty-stroke  to  our  endeavours  to 
bless  man. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAF.  II. 


Sorrow  drives  men  to  prayer. 

••  *  There  is  no  God,'  the  foolish  saith. 
But  none  *  There  is  no  sorrow ; ' 
And  Nature  oft  the  cry  of  faith 

In  bitter  need  will  borrow  : 
Eyes  which  the  preacher  could  not  school, 

By  way^'ide  graves  are  raised. 
And  lips  say  *  God  be  pitiful,  * 
Who  ne'er  said  *  God  be  praised  ! ' 
Be  pitiful,  O  God  ! " 

— Mr»,  Browning, 

"Jesus,  pitying  Saviour,  hear  me  ; 

Draw  Thou  near  me  ; 
Tom  Thee,  Lord,  in  grace  to  me ; 

For  Thou  knowest  all  my  sorrow ; 
Night  and  morrow 

Doth  my  cry  go  up  to  Thee. 

Peace  I  cannot  find  :  O  take  me, 

Lord,  and  make  me 
From  the  yoke  of  evil  free  ; 

Calm  this  longing  never-sleeping, 
Still  my  weeping, 

Grant  roe  hope  once  more  in  Thee." 
— Tersteegtn. 

Symjiathy  with  youth  George 
Moore,  merchant  and  philanthropist, 
was  the  constant  resort  of  young  men 
wanting  situations.  If  he  could  not 
provide  for  them  in  liis  own  warehouse, 
ho  endeavoured  to  find  situations  for 
them  amongst  his  friends.  He  took 
no  end  of  trouble  about  this  business. 
After  his  young  friends  had  obtained 
employment,  he  continued  to  look  after 
them.  He  took  down  their  names  and 
addresses  in  a  special  red  book  kept 
for  the  purpose,  and  repeatedly  asked 
them  to  dine  with  him  on  Sunday  after- 
noons. He  usually  requested  that  they 
should  go  to  some  church  or  chapel  in 
the  evening. 


A  mother's  prayer.  After  Augus- 
tine had  lost  faith  in  Manichseism,  he 
found  himself  in  the  same  situation  as 
he  was  ten  years  before.  There  was 
the  same  longing  after  truth,  but  linked 
now  with  a  feeling  of  desolation,  a 
bitter  sense  of  deception,  and  a  large 
measure  of  scepticism.  He  was  no 
longer  at  ease  in  Carthage,  and  resolved 
on  a  journey  to  Rome,  where  he  ven- 
turetl  to  hope  for  a  more  brilliant  and 
profitable  career  as  a  rhetorician.  His 
mother  wished  either  to  prevent  his 
going,  or  to  go  with  him.  While  she 
spent  a  night  in  the  Church  of  the 
Martyr,  praying  and  wrestling  with 
God  in  tears  to  prevent  the  voyage, 
Augustine  sailed  for  the  coast  of  Italy, 
and  his  deceived  mother  found  herself 
the  next  morning  alone  on  the  sea-shore. 
She  had  learned,  however,  the  heavenly 
art  of  forgiving,  and  believing  also 
where  she  could  not  see.  In  quiet 
resignation  she  returned  to  the  city,  and 
continued  to  pray  for  the  salvation  of 
her  son.  Though  meaning  well,  she 
this  time  erred  in  her  prayer,  for  the 
journey  of  Augustine  was  the  means 
of  his  salvation.  The  denial  of  the 
prayer  was,  in  fact,  the  answering  of  it. 
Instead  of  the  husk,  God  granted  rather 
the  substance  of  her  petition  in  the  con- 
version of  her  son.  "  Therefore,"  says 
he,  "  hadst  Thou,  0  God,  regard  to  the 
aim  and  essence  of  her  desires,  and 
didst  not  do  what  she  then  prayed  for, 
tlint  Thou  mightest  do  for  me  what  she 
continually  implored." — Schc^. 


HOMILETICS. 

A  Pratek  for  Divine  Compassion. 

(Verses  20-22.) 

I  Bemlnding  Jehovah  of  His  former  favour  to  the  sufferers.  "Behold,  0 
Lord,  and  consider  to  whom  Thou  hast  done  this  "  (ver.  20).  The  prophet  seems 
to  feel  that  if  God  would  only  look  and  recall  to  mind  who  they  were  who  were 
suffering,  He  would  surely  have  pity.  They  are  not  the  heathen,  but  His  own 
people,  the  seed  of  Abraham,  whom  He  raised  from  obscurity  and  endowed  with 
unexampled  blessings.  Their  present  misery  was  all  the  more  painful  to  endure 
when  contrasted  with  their  former  affluence  and  power,  and  would  surely  move 
the  compassion  of  Him  who  had  so  often  interposed  on  their  behall  It  is  a  great 
help  in  prayer  to  remind  God  of  His  former  loving-kindness.  Every  blessing  we 
receive  from  Gtxl  increases  His  interest  in  our  welfare.  £very  act  of  disobedience 
is  a  sin  against  Infinite  Love. 

63 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAF.  IL  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 

IL  Uttered  f^om  the  midst  of  appalling  distress  (vers.  20,  21).  In  these 
yerses  we  have  a  vivid  description  of  the  suffering  and  desolation  occasioned  hj 
the  siege.  In  the  extreme  exigencies  of  famine  the  most  horrible  cannibalism 
was  practised :  the  pangs  of  hunger  devoured  maternal  affection,  and  mothers 
devoured  their  newly-born  infants.  Even  this  had  been  predicted  as  the  fruit  of 
disobedience  (Deut  xxviii.  53).  How  little  do  we  appreciate  the  great  goodness 
of  God  in  providing  daily  food  for  ourselves  and  our  children  !  Everywhere  in 
the  city  were  visible  the  most  ghsistly  scenes  of  indiscriminate  massacre — "  priest 
and  prophet,  young  and  old,  virgins  and  young  men,"  lay  in  promiscuous  heaps 
of  the  slain.  If  prayer  can  reach  heaven,  it  must  surely  be  when  ascending  from 
the  midst  of  anguish  like  this.  The  greater  the  distress  we  are  in,  the  more  ui^nt 
and  importunate  should  be  our  prayers. 

III.  Wrong  firom  a  people  terrified  with  startling  proofii  of  the  Divine 
anger.  "  Thou  hast  called  as  in  a  solemn  day  my  terrors  round  about,  so  that  in 
the  day  of  the  Lord's  anger  none  escaped  or  remained  "  (ver.  22).  Jeremiah  had 
often  threatened  the  terrors  of  God's  wrath  in  the  destruction  of  the  nation,  if  the 
people  persisted  in  idolatry  ;  but  they  heeded  not.  They  made  jests  of  his  warn- 
ings, and  their  earnest  repetition  only  increased  their  ridicule.  But  when  they  saw 
Jerusalem  hemmed  round  by  the  victorious  Chaldeans,  and  the  utter  ruin  that 
followed,  they  then  saw  the  portentous  meaning  of  "  the  terrors  "  that  had  been 
so  often  threatened  and  so  recklessly  despised.  The  anger  of  the  Lord  became 
to  them  a  solemn  reality,  and,  overwhelmed  with  confusion  and  fear,  they  cry  for 
help.  Whatever  impels  the  soul  to  pray  is  a  blessing.  The  beginning  of  prayer 
may  rise  from  our  fears ;  but  as  we  persevere,  it  will  be  actuated  by  nobler  motive& 
All  that  prayer  can  do  is  to  bring  our  case  before  Cbd.  We  must  then  leave  it 
there  with  Him,  and  say,  "  Thy  will  be  done." 

LEssoNa — 1.  The  fined  aj^pecU  of  the  helpless  U  to  God.  2.  When  distress 
induces  prayer,  deliverance  is  at  hand,  3.  Jehovah  is  graciously  moved  to  help  by 
human  entreaty. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Ver.  20.  "Behold,  0  Lord,  and  con-  soaring  eagle  mounting  upward  in  its 

sider  to  whom  Thou  hast  done  this."  flight,  and  with  steady  gaze  pursuing 

The  Divine  pity  :    1.    Earnestly  im-  the  track  till  lost  to  all  below.     It  is 

plored  by  a   suffering  people.     2.  In-  the  roving  wanderer  looking  towards 

voked  on  the  ground  of  fonHer  kind-  his  abiding-place,    where  are  all    his 

nesses,  which,  it  is  acknowledged,  have  treasures  and    his    gold.      It    is   the 

been  abused.     3.  Is  never  appealed  to  prisoner  pleading  for  release.     It  is  the 

in  vain.  mariner  of  a  dangerous  sea,  upon  the 

Yer.  22.  The  tyranny  of  fear:  1.  reeling  topmast^   descrying  the   broad 

Realised   when    beset  by   a   powerful  and  quiet  haven  of  repose.     It  is  the 

enemy.     2.  When  the  enemy  is  sum-  soul,    oppressed    by   earthly   soarings, 

moned  and  directed  by  One  whom  we  escaping  to  a  broader  and  purer  sphere, 

have   consciously  offended.     3.  When  and  bathing  its  plumes  in  the  ethereal 

we  are  witnesses  of  cruelties  we  are  and  eternal. — WeUs. 

powerless  to  prevent  Yearning  for  Gk)d. — When  my  blood 

flows  like  wine,  when  all  is  ease  and 

Illustrations. — Prayer.   It  is  help-  prosperity,  when  the  sky  is  blue  and 

lessness   casting  itself   on   power.      It  birds  sing  and  flowers  blossom,   and 

is  infirmity  leaning   on   strength,  and  my  life  is  an  anthem  moving  in  time 

misery  wooing  bliss.     It  is  the  flight  of  and   tune,   then  this  world's  joy  and 

the  soul  to  the  bosom  of  God,  and  the  affection  suffice.     But  when  a  diange 

spirit    soaring   upward    and    claiming  comes,  when  I  am  weary  and  disap- 

nativity  beyond  the  stars.     It  is  the  pointed,  when  the  skies  lower  into  a 
64 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


somLre  night,  when  there  is  no  song  of 
bird,  and  the  perfume  of  flowers  is  but 
their  dying  breath,  when  all  is  sun- 
setting  and  autumn,  then  I  yearn  for 
Him  who  sits  with  the  summer  of  love 
in  His  soul,  and  feel  that  all  earthly 
affection  is  but  a  glow-worm  light  com- 
pared to  that  which  blazes  with  such 
effulgence  in  the  heart  of  God.  — 
Beecher, 

Divine  compassion.  We  often  suffer 
more  on  account  of  other's  troubles  than 
they  themselves  do  in  those  troubles, 
for  both  love  and  sorrow  take  their 
measure  as  much  from  the  capacity  of 
the  nature  that  experiences  them  as 
from  the  power  of  the  externally  ex- 
citing cause.  How  much  one  suffers 
with  or  for  another  does  not  depend 
altogether  upon  how  much  that  other 
is  suffering,  but  upon  how  much  that 
nature  which  sympathises  has  with 
which  to  suffer.  Cfod  feels  with  us, 
so  that  our  experiences  throw  their 
waves  npon  the  shore  of  His  soul.  He 
carries  us  so  near  to  His  heart  that  all 
our  feelings  which  are  of  any  moment 
produce  their  effects  in  some  degree  in 
His  bosom.  It  seems  very  strange  that 
the  Maker  of  all  the  earth  should  per- 
mit Himself  to  be  a  participant  in  all 
the  petty  experiences  that  belong  to  any 
human  life.  No  man  would  have  dared 
to  conceive  such  an  idea  of  God,  and  to 
have  believed  any  such  thing  as  that, 
if  it  had  not  been  revealed  in  unequi- 
vocal TrCrma 

The  compassion  of  Jeans.  Luther 
said,  "I  would  run  into  the  arms  of 
Christ  if  He  stood  with  a  drawn  sword 
in  EUs  handa"  John  Butterworth, 
reading  this,  resolved  to  do  likewise, 
and  found,  as  every  venturing  sinner 
does,  no  sword  in  the  hands  of  Jesus, 
but  open  arms  and  a  hearty  welcome. 
Christ's  proclamation,  for  ever  sounding 
forth  to  every  burdened  heart,  is  "  Come 
unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
He  demonstrated  His  marvellous  com- 
passion by  dying  for  us.  He  will  not 
now  repulse  the  approach  or  disregard 
the  cry  of  the  needy. 

The  influence  of  fear.  There  is  a 
virtuous  fear,  which  is  the  effect  of 
65 


faith ;  and  there  is  a  vicious  fear,  which 
is  the  product  of  doubt.  The  former 
leads  to  hope,  as  relying  on  God,  in 
whom  we  believe ;  the  latter  inclines 
to  despair,  as  not  relying  on  God,  in 
whom  we  do  not  believe.  Pei-sons  of 
the  one  character  fear  to  lose  God  ;  j»er- 
sons  of  the  other  character  fear  to  fiinl 
Him. — PascaL 

.  Slavish  and  filial  fear.  There  are 
two  kinds  of  fear — one  full  of  suspicious 
watchfulness,  of  anxious  apprehension, 
of  trepidation,  terror,  and  dismay;  the 
other  such  as  can  dwell  in  the  same 
heart  with  confidence  and  love,  and  is 
but  another  form  of  reverence.  Filial 
fear  of  God  is  a  duty ;  slavish  and  ser- 
vile dread  of  Him  is  a  sin.  Filial  fear 
shrinks  from  sin ;  servile  fear  only  from 
the  smart  of  punishment.  Filial  fear 
keeps  men  from  dei^arting  from  the 
living  God,  servile  fear  drives  them 
from  Him.  By  filial  fear  men  are  made 
like  the  man  Christ  Jesus ;  by  servile 
fear  they  may  be  scared  from  iniquity, 
as  the  wolf  from  the  shecpfold  by  the 
shepherd's  gun ;  but  it  does  no  more  to 
make  them  holy  than  the  fright  does 
to  destroy  the  wolfs  ferocity.  Filial 
fear  animates  us  to  avoid  whatever 
would  be  offensive  to  our  Heavenly 
Father,  and,  if  the  expression  may  be 
allowed,  to  consult  His  feelings  and 
desires ;  but  servile  fear,  as  it  springs 
from  selfishness,  causes  us  only  to  care 
for  ourselves,  and  at  best  makes  us  not 
better,  but  only  a  little  more  prudent 
than  the  devil — Bertram, 

The  greatest  fear.  When  a  city  is 
compassed  round  about  with  a  wall  that 
is  impregnable,  it  will  be  opened  still 
towards  heaven,  and  therefore  cannot 
be  out  of  danger  if  God  be  an  enemy. 
For  all  their  walls  and  bars,  God  could 
rain  fire  and  brimstone  upon  the  Sodo- 
mites out  of  heaven.  Alexander  asked 
the  Scythians  what  they  were  most 
afraid  of,  thinking  they  would  say  of 
himself,  who  was  so  victorious  every- 
where. But  they  answered  scoffingly 
they  were  most  afraid  lest  heaven  should 
fall  upon  theuL  We,  indeed,  need  not 
fear  anything  but  this  only,  lest  the 
heaven  should  fall  upon  us,  lest  God 
should  be  our  enemy. — J.  Stoughton, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CHAPTER  III. 
An  Ideal  Representation  of  National  Sorrow. 

The  middle  elegy  is,  not  only  in  structure  but  also  in  tone,  readily  distinguished  fnmi  tha 
tther  four.  An  element  of  personality  is  manifest  in  it  which  is  not  in  them.  The  poet  con- 
centrates in  hiutself  all  forms  of  the  calamities  which  he  laments.  Some  of  theee  seem  too 
sharp  and  heavy  to  be  experienced  by  a  single  individual,  and  the  doubt  is  turned  into  a  cer- 
tainty wiien  he  associates  himself  once  and  again  with  others.  He  is  a  member  of  a  body.  In 
this  feature  a  significant  proof  is  indicated  of  that  unfolding  form  of  prophecy  in  which  the 
whole  community  of  Israel,  or  an  undefined  part  of  it,  is  regarded  as  represented  by  a  special 
person — the  Servant  whose  experiences  are  hardly  so  much  his  own  as  those  of  his  people.  He 
stands  apart  from  them  by  the  peculiarities  of  bis  condition,  but  he  draws  to  himself  all  their 
sorrows  and  pains,  and  that  burden  impels  him  to  act  as  an  advocate  on  their  behalf  before 
Jehovah.  As  we  read  such  things  we  are  reminded  of  the  resemblance  which  they  bear  to  the 
course  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah.  He  was  "  separated  "  from  his  nation,  but  became  a  partici- 
pant of  the  terrible  doom  he  announced.  He  would  not  stand  off  from  his  people  when  he 
might  have  gone  \vith  the  Babylonian  Captain  of  the  Guard.  It  was  his  pure  eonseience  and 
sensitive  heart  which  realised  the  fierce  anger  of  the  Lord  against  the  sins  which  had  corrupted 
the  conscience  and  heart  of  his  fellow-couutrymen.  It  was  for  their  sakes,  he  said.  My  heart  %$ 
faint  witJiin  m^.  .  .  .  For  the  hurt  of  the  cUtughtrr  of  my  people  am  I  hurt ;  I  am  Uack,  His 
position  was  a  forecast  of  that  mightier  Servant  who  came  not  to  be  served  but  to  terve,  and  to 
give  His  life  a  ransom  for  many. 

The  progress  of  the  poem  presents  a  strange  tumult  of  thought.  There  is  arraignment  of 
Ood's  dealings  and  acknowledgment  of  His  mercies  ;  impatience  at  his  sufferings,  which  does 
not  crowd  out  his  patience  ;  wonder  why  the  Lord  should  send  such  punishments,  and  confes- 
sion of  sins  with  little  hope  that  it  would  pave  the  way  for  pardon.  Yet  is  not  this  a  true 
portrait  of  each  soul  that  is  striving  against  sin  in  himself  and  others  t  Without  fighting,  tntkin 
fears. 

The  first  part  of  the  chapter  sets  forth  the  soul-sufferings  of  the  godly  in  their  cheerless 
and  hopeless  misery  (vers.  1-18) ;  then  it  ascends  to  hope  by  meditation  on  the  compassion  of 
God  (vers.  19-39) ;  next  is  the  recognition  of  God's  justice  in  the  punishment,  but  the  intensity 
of  which,  through  the  malice  of  enemies,  the  Loixi  cannot  pass  by  (vers.  40-54) ;  and  last* 
prayer  that  He  would  send  help  and  take  vengeance  on  the  enemy  (vers.  55-66). 

(K)  Ver.  1.  The  authur  writes  as  if  his  own  person  was  the  object  on  which  all  the  troubles 
had  been  inflicted.  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of  his  wrath.  The 
repression  of  the  name  of  the  wielder  of  the  rod  is  remarkable  in  view  of  its  reiteration  in 
Chapter  II.  That  here  it  was  of  set  purpose  seems  proved  by  the  persistent  omission  till  ver. 
18,  and  is  probably  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  poet's  wish  to  indicate  a  sort  of  climax  to  a  soul- 
struggle  in  which  he  could  not  take  the  name  of  Jehovah  till  all  appeared  lost.  The  rod  signifief 
the  means  b^  which  the  affliction  was  produced,  and  is  illustrated  by  the  phrase,  The  Assyrian 
is  the  9'od  of  mine  anger  (Isa.  x.  6). 

Ver.  2.  The  unnamed  had  accumulated  affliction.  He  has  led  and  caused  me  to  walk  In 
darkness  and  not  in  light,  in  perplexity  as  well  as  misery. 

Ver.  3.  And  it  was  continuously  carried  on.  Surely  against  me  he  tnms  his  hand  again 
and  again  all  the  day. 

O)  Ver.  4.  Details  as  to  how  the  writer  suffered.  My  flesh  and  my  skin  he  has  worn  ont, 
he  has  broken  my  bones.    Bodily  exhaustion  and  racking  pains  consume  the  vital  forces. 

Ver.  5.  Obstruction  is  placed  so  that  I  may  not  find  a  change.  He  has  bnilded  against  me, 
shut  me  in  as  if  He  was  besieging  me  behind  and  before  with  hurting  and  wearying  obstacles, 
gall  and  trayaiL 

Ver.  6.  Darkness  was  added.  He  has  made  me  to  dwell  in  dark  places,  dismal  and  with- 
out hope,  as  those  in  which  lay  the  for  ever  dead,  those  who  had  gone  into  Sheol,  and  for 
whom  there  is  no  way  of  return. 

(3)  Ver.  7.  Freedom  is  taken  away  by  close  confinement  and  a  heaTy  chain. 

Ver.  8.  Prisoner  though  I  am,  I  can  make  entreaties  for  relief.  I  cry  and  call  for  help, 
but  no  rf  sprinse  is  given  ;  he  shutteth  out  my  prayer ;  he  had  used  means  to  prevent  the  peti- 
tions reaching  him,  as  if  the  barriers  were  not  fabricated  by  the  sins  of  the  petitioner  1 

Ver.  9.  As  a  traveller,  I  am  brought  to  a  standstill.  He  has  fenced  up  my  ways  with  hewn 
stone,  and  there  is  a  necessity  to  turn  aside  to  crooked  paths,  which  lead  to  and  fro  without 
purpose. 

(1)  Ver.  10.  Difficulties  had  been  embarrassing,  but  dangers  were  also  added.  In  the  crooked 
paths  the  bear  and  the  lion  lurked,  and  he  is  there,  like  them,  lying  in  wait  for  me. 

Ver.  11.  I  wandered  aimlessly.  He  has  led  me  astray  and  then  he  has  tom  me  In  pieosSi 
'  has  made  me  desolate,  left  me  mangled  and  alone. 

Ver.  1*2.  Not  only  such  rending  as  that  by  beasts  of  prey  has  distressed  me,  but  also  mali 
C6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTA  R  V:  LAMENTATIONS,  ohap.  ni. 


treatment  by  men.     I  have  been  treated  an  the  quarry  of  a  hunter.    He  set  me  as  a  mark  for 
the  arrow. 

(H)  Ver.  13.  There  is  no  miss  when  God  aims  at  a  mark.  He  has  made  the  sona  of  his 
qniyer  to  enter  into  my  reins  ;  the  central  points  of  vital  action  were  sore  wounded. 

Ver.  1 4.  The  figure  is  hardly  changed.  Perhaps  a  laughing-stock  to  all  my  people,  their 
song  all  the  day,  may  be  regarded  as  the  shaft  which  went  to  the  quick.  Jeremiah  calls  a 
deceiving  tongtie  a  deadly  arrow  (ix.  8).  They  who  should  have  stood  by  him,  as  partaking  of 
the  same  afflictiuuM,  hurled  at  him  bolts  of  ridicule  in  jaunty  songs.  Another  reading  ascribes 
the  mocking  to  all  peojpUt,  not  to  his  fellow-countrymen. 

Ver.  15.  The  nutriment  and  comfort  which  I  needed  were  replaced  by  adversities  which  I 
endured  to  the  utmost  extent  bearable.  He  has  filled  me  with  bitternesses— different  kinds 
of  sufferings— and  sated  me  with  wormwood. 

(1)  Ver.  16.  In  respect  to  mt-ans  of  nourishment,  I  have  been  still  further  exasperated.  Also 
ha  has  broken  my  teeth  with  gravel ;  either  that  which  was  chewed  was  full  of  gritty  sand, 
or  for  bread  he  had  stones  given  him.  A  strange  work  for  the  Father  1  He  has  covered  me 
with  ashes,  I  am  one  who  mourneth  in  bitterness. 

Ver.  17.  Notwithstanding  all  my  afflictions,  I  might  have  been  calm  and  hopeful,  but  the 
culminating  point  of  all  I  have  to  sustain  is  the  conviction  that  I  am  put  far  from  God.  Is  it 
not  a  piteous  condition  which  may  extort  complaint  of  Thyself  ?  Thon  hast  cast  off  my  SOUl 
from  peace.  So  dense  is  this  outer  darkness,  that  any  recollection  of  ever  being  in  comfort  has 
faded  away,  I  forget  good. 

Ver.  18.  This  reads  like  an  account  of  the  climax  to  the  trials  undergone.  I  said,  as  if 
talking  to  myself,  Hy  strength  is  perished,  and  my  expectation  from  Jehovah.  The  future 
U  void  of  good.  I  am  unable  to  look  for  anything  from  Him.  In  Jah  Jehovah  is  everlasting 
strength,  but  I  do  not  perceive  it.     I  have  lost  the  direction  towards  Him. 

This  recalling  of  the  name  at  last  seems  to  turn  the  current  of  thought  I  must  not  let  go 
trust  in  Him.     I  must  tell  Him  the  desires  of  my  heart. 

The  soirow  aecording  to  God  is  a  product  of  His  wisdom  and  love.  ''Sorrow  is  God's  last 
message  to  man ;  it  is  God  speaking  in  emphasis.  He  who  abuses  it  shows  that  he  can  shut 
his  ears  when  God  speaks  loudest.  Therefore  heartlessness  or  impenitence  after  sorrow  is  more 
dangerous  than  intemperance  in  joy ;  its  results  are  always  more  tragic.  .  .  .  God's  wrath  is 
an  ennobling,  not  a  stupefying  doctrine  "  (Smith).  Nor  is  it  discouraging  to  leal-hearted  men, 
though  menacing. 

(T)  Vers.  19-21.  The  name  of  Jehovah  is  as  a  rallying-call  to  reject  the  rash  expression  of 
despair  just  heard,  and  stirs  up  thoughts  of  what  God's  character  is.  The  author  begins  to  feel 
that  he  can  have  recourse  to  a  prayer  to  be  remembered,  and  so  these  verses  mark  the  passage 
from  hopeless  bafSings  with  no  small  storm  to  the  hopeful  sound  of  a  favouring  breeze. 

Ver.  19.  Semember  my  aflSiction  and  my  homelessness,  the  wormwood  and  the  gall; 
a  reminiscence  of  salient  points  in  the  sufferings  he  had  passed  through,  and  which  might  evoke 
the  compassion  and  power  of  the  All-merciful. 

Ver.  20.  The  correct  translation  of  this  verse  is  uncertain,  and  preference  is  given  to  this. 
Bemembering,  thon  wilt  remember  all  those  things ;  also  [that]  my  soul  is  cast  down  in 
me.  I  am  haivy  laden,  I  have  no  might  Either  I  shall  be  overwhelmed  and  sink  inio  deep 
mire  wJiere  there  is  no  standing,  or  else  out  of  weakness  be  made  strong  by  Thee.  It  would  be 
like  Thee  to  make  haste  to  hdp  me, 

Ver.  21.  This  I  will  bring  back  to  my  heart,  this  thought,  that  Thou  wilt  not  be  alwags 
wroth,  for  the  spirit  would  fail  before  Thee  and  the  souls  which  thou  hast  made,  has  taken  full 
possession  of  my  inner  man ;  therefore  I  will  hope.  There  must  be  a  blessing  in  store,  for 
God  pities  and  Grod  rules  in  exhaustless  grace.  Out  of  the  darkest  depression  He  can  lift  to  a 
light  in  which  I  may  walk  and  never  be  ashamed  of  my  hope, 

(n)  Ver.  22.  The  hopefulness  which  had  begun  to  lift  a  desponding  soul  points  to  the 
groimd  on  which  it  may  become  secure.  Its  hazy  outlook  is  seeming  to  clear,  and,  as  in  all 
true  ideas  of  human  relationship  to  God,  that  which  is  felt  as  a  privilege  for  the  individual  is 
regarded  to  be  a  privilege  for  all  souls  also  who  seek  the  Lord.  One  voices  the  confession  of 
the  remnant  of  Israel  thus :  Jehovah's  mercies,  not  in  one  form,  but  in  many  forms  they 
affect  men,  and,  whether  shown  to  individuals  or  communities,  they  counteract  the  wasting 
tendencies  of  evil.  A  striking  proof  of  His  varied  graciousness  is  manifest  in  that  we  are  not 
consumed.  More  will  follow.  His  continuous  action  is  a  token  that  His  nature  and  name  is 
the  All-gracious ;  for  his  oompassions  fail  not 

Ver.  28.  Every  day  sees  some  renewal  of  them  ;  there  is  "  daily  help  for  daily  needs, '*  as 
great  is  thy  faithfolness.     God  is  faithful  to  all  that  He  has  promised  in  creation  and  graoe. 

Ver.  24.  This  perception  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  pitying,  and  trustworthy,  leads  on,  not 
merely  to  verbal  profession  of  the  knowledge  of  GUx),  but  to  an  acceptance  of  Himself  as  the 
dear  and  only  treasure  of  the  heart  Hy  p<^on  is  Jehovah.  None  in  heaven  for  Him ;  none 
on  earth  desired  with  Him. 

(td)  Ver.  25.  Such  an  acceptance  suggests  more  knowledge.  Qood  is  Jehovah  to  them 
that  wait  for  him,  to  a  sonl  that  seeks  him.  He  is  ready  to  respond  to  those  who  feel  need 
of  Him  and  foster  longings  after  Himself, 


Digitized  by 


67 

Google 


CHAP.  in.  BOMILBTW  COMMSNTART:  LAMENTATIONS. 


Ver.  26.  So  when  the  gracionsness  of  the  Lord  is  perceived,  and  its  proflfen  yielded  to,  blessed- 
nens  Ib  not  far  off.  Good  it  is  both  to  wait  and  be  silent  for  the  salvation  of  Jehovah.  There 
is  to  be  no  striving,  nor  crying,  nor  oausiiig  the  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street.  Confidence  in 
His  power  to  save  hushes  fears  and  doubts,  and  enables  us  calmly  to  meet  the  events  of  life.  Ht 
will  in  no  wiu  Uave  or  forsake  those  who  wait  for  Him. 

Ver.  27.  Good  is  it  for  a  man  to  bear  a  yoke,  that  is,  anything  by  which  he  will  be  trained 
for  his  Owner,  and  to  do  his  Owner's  work.  Teaching  may  do  so  ;  affliction  may  do  so.  Both 
the  one  and  the  other  show  to  a  man  what  he  is — ignorant,  weak,  with  more  that  is  bad  than 
he  had  believed  he  had.  God  speaks  in  both  methods  as  issues  of  His  love,  and  to  obtain 
veaselt  unto  honour ^  sanctified,  meet  for  the  Master's  ust.  The  phrase  in  his  yonth  does  not 
mean  that  the  poet  was  still  a  young  man.  He  might  be  an  aged  man,  looking  back  on  the 
experiences  of  his  life,  and  conscious  of  the  value  of  the  discipline  he  had  been  subjected  to 
when  the  dew  of  youth  was  upon  him.  He  is  blessed  who,  in  earlier  years,  has  been  drawn  or 
driven  to  look  into  the  face  of  realities,  and  to  learn  something  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ 
before  he  has  been  in  grip  with  temptations  from  the  clamant  huts  cf  theJUsh  and  of  the 
viind. 

(^)  Ver.  28.  A  yoke  is  not  of  itself  beneficial ;  it  must  be  borne  along  with  desires  and 
efforts  to  reach  to  its  purpose.  **  Sinoe  it  is  good  for  man  that  he  should  learn  to  endure  suffer- 
ing, let  him  sit  still  and  bear  it  patiently  ;  ...  let  him  sit  solitary,  as  becomes  those  in  sorrow, 
and  be  silent  without  murmuring  when  God  puts  such  a  burden  on  him.** — KeH,  The  fogs  of 
the  world,  if  a  man  enters  into  them,  may  veil  the  waymarks  of  God. 

Ver.  29.  Let  him  put  his  mouth  in  the  dost—significant  of  being  humbled  wider  tfte 
mighty  hand  of  Ood — indulging  in  no  whimpers,  framing  no  self-excuses,  making  no  boasts, 
only  waiting  to  hear  vfhat  God  the  Lord  unU  tpeak,  and  by  no  means  despairing  of  help  for 
every  time  of  need.    It  may  be  there  is  hope. 

Ver.  30.  Let  him  give  his  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  him,  as  was  similarly  enforced  in  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount  (Matt.  v.  89).  and  involving  the  wider  application,  when  reviled  not  to 
revile  again.  Exemplified  by  Job,  by  the  prophetic  Servant  of  Jehovah,  by  the  greatest  of  all 
Sufferers.  The  gradation  is  perceptible  '*  The  sitting  alone  and  in  silence  is  comparatively 
the  easiest.  It  is  harder  to  place  the  mouth  in  the  dust  and  yet  cling  to  hope ;  it  is  most 
difficult  of  all  to  give  the  cheek  to  the  smiter,  and  to  satiate  oneself  with  dishonour"  {NaegeL), 
be  filled  fall  with  reproaches. 

(3)  Ver.  31.  For  this  silent  waiting  on  the  Lord,  amid  humiliations  and  soom,  there  is  all* 
sufficient  strength.  It  is  in  the  Lord  Himself,  in  the  belief  that  He  is  at  work ;  that,  what- 
ever our  tribulations  are,  however  bitter  ingredients  we  must  drain  out  of  our  cup,  whatever 
the  moral  conflicts  and  self-condemnations  we  must  pass  through.  He  will  not  put  us  away. 
The  Lord  will  not  cast  off  for  ever ;  there  will  be  an  end  of  tears  and  isolation  on  account  of 
the  absent  Friend. 

Ver.  82.  His  providences  may  distress  us.  Physical  pains,  social  struts,  national  demoralisa- 
tion, and  inward  unrest,  blame,  forebodings,  may  overwhelm  us.  These  are  goads  by  which 
He  is  thrusting  us  from  a  wrong  way  into  a  right,  but  "it  is  love  that  bruises  us."  Tet  hit 
will  have  compassion  according  to  the  mnltitnde  of  his  mercies. 

Ver.  83.  He  would  rather  not  produce  suffering.  His  heart  is  not  in  doing  so.  He  has  a 
distinct  end  in  view  to  be  reached  through  tribulation.  For  he  afflicts  not  willingly,  nor 
grieves  the  children  of  men.  Child  and  adult,  Israelite  and  heathen,  will  meet  trouble^ 
but  not  one  is  outside  the  sympathy  of  God.  We  can  supplement  this  from  a  later  teacher, 
who  tells  us  that  our  Father  chastises  for  our  profit^  that  we  may  he  partakers  of  His  holiness, 

(^)  Vers.  84-36.  The  Lord  does  not  afflict  willingly,  yet  He  is  not  indifferent  to  the  injustioe 
of  man  to  man.  All  the  details  of  human  procedure  are  regarded  by  Him,  and  he  would  have 
men  to  know  that  He  is  on  C^  throne  judging  right,  that  they  may  trust  Him  entirely,  and 
that  t^ere  is  no  evil  needing  to  be  grieved  over  but  sin.  Such  is  the  intimation  in  this  triad 
of  verses,  the  three  parts  of  which  depend  on  the  last  clause :  To  trample  under  his  feet — 
the  feet  of  the  oppressor — all  prlscmefs  of  the  earth;  an  allusion  to  the  cruelties  of  the 
Chaldeana  Jews  in  exile,  Jews  in  prisons,  yes,  and  outraged  captives  everywhere,  are  referred 
ta  Be  hears  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner.  To  turn  aside  the  riight  of  a  man,  that  which  is 
grounded  in  the  far-reacbing  nature  of  things  formed  by  the  Righteous  One,  before  the  face  of 
the  Most  High.  This  phrase  is  illustrated  by  the  wilderness  legislation  as  to  matters  of  tres- 
pass, The  cause  of  both  parties  shall  eome  before  [Ood]  EUhim,  he  whom  Slohim  shall  condemn, 
&c  (Exod.  xxiL  9).  The  phraseology  obviously  designates  judges  as  acting  in  place  of  the 
Judge  ofaUthe  earth,  and  is  found  used  in  later  times  (Ps.  Ixxxii.  6).  To  subvert  a  man  in 
his  cause,  to  act  unfairly  towards  another  in  the  ordinary  pursuits  of  life,  the  Lord  approveth 
not  Questioning  this  translation,  Eeil  renders,  Doth  not  the  Lord  look  [to  such  ddngs  as 
these]? 

(D)  Ver.  87.  The  reason  for  not  mentioning  any  name  of  God,  as  in  vers.  1-17,  is  now 
wholly  dispensed  with,  and  He  is  presented  as  oonditionating  all  events.  He  observes  man's 
dealhigs  with  his  neighbours.  He  provides  that  every  transgression  and  ditobedienee  reoewe  a 
jutt  recompense  of  reward.  No  injustice  is  permissibla  If  a  man  or  nation  oould  devise  and 
carry  out  their  own  commands,  then  evil  or  good  woold  oome  in  q^te  ol  Ood.    But  wlM  ia  iM 

fiS 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT AR  Y:  LAMENT  A  TIONS.  chap.  m. 


that  saith  and  it  comes  to  pass,  Tmless  the  Lord  has  commanded  [it]  7  His  will  is  supreme. 
So  it  follows  : — 

Ver.  88.  From  the  month  of  the  Most  High  does  not  the  evil  and  the  good  come  ?  It  is 
a  term  of  the  age-lasting  problem.  He  lets  evil  be  done  and  punishes  the  evil-doer.  He  must 
work  out  His  will,  for  He  works  within  us  to  will  and  do  that  which  is  good.  In  both  good 
and  evil  we  are  in  close  contiguity  with  God. 

Ver.  89.  The  right  interpretation  partly  depends  on  whether  or  not  we  read  this  verse  as 
one  question.  Both  the  Authorised  Version  and  the  Revised  Version  take  the  former  coursa 
The  Hebrew  renders  this  doubtful.  It  would  warrant  a  division.  For  what  should  a  living 
man,  one  in  life's  school,  and  with  all  the  possibilities  of  the  education  he  is  receiving  from  the 
Lord,  complain?  Let  everyone  come  to  a  more  manly  position,  and  they  would  see  it  needful 
to  sigh  over  their  sins.  Sin  brings  on  men  the  evils  really  to  be  lamented,  and  the  space  given 
should  be  filled  up  with  repentance, 

(J)  Ver.  40.  The  remnant,  who  were  referred  to  in  ver.  22,  carry  out  here  the  suggestion 
just  made,  that  sighing,  not  over  sufTerings  but  over  sins,  is  the  becoming  utterance  for  every 
one.  The  sorrows  and  pains  endured  were  resultants  from  the  sins  of  all  the  people,  and  thus 
a  joint  resolve  and  confession  iH  made.  Only  as  men  see  that  they  have  strayed  like  lost  iheep 
will  they  truly  say.  Let  us  search  and  tzy  onr  ways,  yet  not  delay  in  that  effort,  however 
genuine  it  may  be,  but  let  ns  return  unto  JehoTah,  the  whole  way  back,  with  no  halt  half-way, 
with  no  reserves  for  self. 

Ver.  41.  Such  a  return  merges  into  soul-moving  prayer — prayer  that  is  not  only  "  the  motion 
of  a  hidden  fire  trembling  in  the  breast "  or  "  the  upward  glancing  of  an  eye,''  but  also  mani- 
fests itself  by  some  outwardness.  The  emotion  is  the  chief  element  in  any  suitable  external 
gesture.  Let  us  lift  up  our  hearts  with  our  hands  unto  God  in  the  heavens,  satisfied  that 
our  help  is  not  sent  from  any  earthly  sanctuary,  but  from  wUfiin  the  veiL 

Ver.  42.  A  vision  of  God  throws  a  white  light  upon  the  dark  records  of  past  life.  In  that 
light  men  are  forced  to  pass  God's  judgment  on  themselves.  /  have  brought  up  children,  and 
Ihey  have  rebelled  against  me.  God's  rule  and  man's  treason  are  confronted,  and  man  is  con- 
demned to  suffer.  As  for  us,  We  have  transgressed  and  rebelled ;  as  for  Thee,  Thou  hast 
not  pardoned ;  a  phrase  which  intimates  that  He  would  scourge  into  the  way  of  righteousness, 
if  no  other  method  avails;  and  that  Israel  was  then  under  His  chastising  rod.  He  is  ready  to 
pardon,  and  the  withholding  pardon  is  not  His  desire,  but  a  "  natural  sequence "  of  baffled 
instructions  and  warnings — of  a  deadened  spiritual  faculty  which  turns  His  grace  into  a 
penalty. 

(D)  Ver.  48.  Thou  hast  covered  with  anger,  whether  Himself  or  us  is  not  dear,  but  as 
the  next  clause,  and  pursued  us,  mentions  the  latter,  it  may  be  preferable  to  regard  the  people 
as  wrapped  round  with  a  garment  woven  in  the  loom  of  wrath,  and  which  marked  them  out  as 
the  objects  to  be  chased  for  punishment. 

Ver.  44.  There  had  been  cries  for  relief  (ver.  41),  but  unavailing,  for  Thou  hast  oOTWred 
Thyself  with  a  cloud ;  douds  and  darkneu  are  round  about  Him  when  He  displays  His  royal 
righteousness  and  judgment  in  burning  up  His  adversaries  (Ps.  zcvii.  2,  8).  That  cloud  is  a 
burier  [preventing]  prayer  from  passfiig  through  to  His  mercy-seat 

Ver.  45.  Troubles  are  accumulated  upon  the  nation.  Rejected  prayers  signify  condemnation 
of  their  religiousness.  It  is  not  the  act,  but  the  motive  and  purpose  which  determine  the  rela- 
tion of  the  worshipper  to  the  Worshipped.  Ritual  may  be  punctiliously  carried  out,  and  hide 
God  instead  of  helping  to  reveal  Him.  When  He  hides  His  face,  they  are  troubled,  and,  as  if 
He  would  exhibit  a  striking  illustration  before  the  world  of  what  will  result  from  disobedience 
to  His  will.  Thou  hast  made  us  the  offsoouring  and  refuse  in  the  midst  of  the  peoples. 
Treated  as  worthless,  like  Paul  and  his  brethren  in  Christ  (1  Cor.  iv.  18),  but  these  were  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  who  loved  them, 

(D)  Vers.  46-48  present  significant  intimations  of  their  base  condition.  Knemlei  making 
sport  of  them,  fear  and  pit&Us  surrounding  them,  and  the  oft-recurring  feeling  of  utter 
destruction  instigating  tears  shed  as  copiously  as  rivers  of  water. 

(y )  Ver.  49.  The  excessive  weeping  is  continuous.  BUne  eye  poureth  down  tears,  and  that 
without  interruption.  Nor  will  the  sound  of  weeping  be  stanched,  except  when  his  under- 
current of  hope  reaches  its  terminus. 

Ver.  50.  Till  Jehovah  looks  down  and  beholds  from  heaven.  When  He  sees  the  bearing 
and  result  of  afflictions  on  His  Name's  glory,  then  He  hears  the  sighing  of  the  prisoner.  For 
Jle  wiU  not  contend  for  ever,  neither  will  He  be  alufays  wroth. 

Ver.  51.  Bfyond  what  the  eye  shows  externally  it  exerts  influence  upon  the  inward  paH, 
Mine  eye  hurts  my  soul:  not  in  the  rather  j«june  sense  that  the  flood  of  tears  had  made  the 
eye  painful,  and  that  pain  was  felt  in  the  soul ;  but  the  soul  was  pained  because  of  the  eye 
beholding  the  sad  lot  of  the  more  delicate  and  defenceless  part  of  the  population,  the  daughtm 
of  myeity. 

(Y)  Ver.  52.  They  have  hunted  me  down  Uke  a  bird  is  hunted  when  pursued  with  the 
eagerness  of  those  who  are  my  enemies  without  cause,  and  who  will  not  relax  efforts  till  they 
eatch  the  quarry. 

Ver*  58.  He  was  baled  to  prison  by  them.    They  have  oat  off  my  life  in  the  pit.    Shut  in 

69 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  m.  EOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTA TI0N8. 


from  all  activities  and  society,  he  was  as  a  man  dead,  as  in  a  tomb  over  which  they  have  CMt  a 
itone  on  ma.  Taking  stich  illustrations  to  be  chiefly  figurative,  yet  here  the  tirst  clause  is  a 
probable  allusion  to  the  treatment  of  Jeremiah  (chap,  xxzviii.  6),  and  the  second  may  refer  to  an 
unmentioned  incident  of  the  same  time,  for  which  corroboration  may  be  found  in  the  case  oi 
Daniel  (chap,  vl  17.) 

Ver.  54.  The  peril  was  aggravated  by  waters  that  flowed  over  my  head ;  the  plural 
perhaps  indicating  the  influx  of  a  spring  and  the  condensation  of  vapour  in  the  closeness  of  a 
pit.  In  a  state  so  desperate  to  the  eyes  of  flesh,  I  said,  I  am  cat  off  a«  a  man  thcU  hat  no  kdp 
(Ps.  Ixxxviil  4),  as  He  was  who  became  sin  for  us  (Imi.  liii.  8). 

The  remaining  verses  of  the  chapter  take  the  form  of  prayer,  as  at  the  close  of  Chapters  I. 
and  II.  In  it  there  are  thanksgivings  for  relief  (vers.  55-58),  an  appeal  because  of  the  evil 
which  enemies  had  done  and  were  doing  (vers.  59-63),  and  a  call  for  recompense  therefor  (vers. 
64-66). 

(p)  Ver.  55.  I  called  upon  thy  name,  O  Jehovah,  asking  with  some  true  idea  of  what  the 
words  and  works  of  the  (ii)d  of  Israel  revealed  concerning  Himself,  suggestive,  too,  of  the 
manner  in  which  the  Lord  Jesus  would  have  His  friends  to  pray — Atk  the  Father  in  My  name 
— out  of  the  depths  of  the  pit  into  which  he  had  been  thrown. 

Ver.  56.  A  more  true  position  is  secured  than  that  which  was  held  previously  (vers.  8  and 
44).  My  voice  thou  heajrdest  at  that  time  when  I  besought  thee  with  my  spirit  and  voice. 
Hide  not — close  not— thine  ear  at  my  breathing — my  sighing  for  relief — at  my  cry.  It  is 
questionable  if  the  rendering,  Hide  not  thine  ear  for  my  ery  for  rdief^  is  not  rather  an  explana- 
tion than  a  fair  version. 

Ver.  57.  Thou  drewest  near  in  the  day  I  called  npon  thee.  Only  spiritual  apprehensiim 
of  God  as  He  who  is  behind  all  events  and  pUnteous  in  mercy  can  bring  a  conviction  ef  accepted 
prayer.     The  heart  is  then  in  a  state  to  hear  His  comforting  words,  T^on  saidst,  Fear  not. 

(1)  Ver.  58.  There  were  rights  to  be  maintained,  wrongs  to  be  redressed,  and  in  both  help 
was  received  from  a  present  God.  Thon,  O  Jehovah,  hast  pleaded— contended  for— the 
causes  of  my  sonL  One  thing  had  hurt  his  soul  (ver.  51).  but  others  also  saddened  and 
weakened  thought  and  effort,  and  the  Lord  had  counteracted  them.  He  had  also  interfered 
when  hope  of  living  was  cut  oflf.  Then  hast  redeemed  my  life  by  Thy  power  over  all. 

Ver.  59.  Trials  are  not  things  of  the  past  only.  Under  their  continuous  pressure  endurance 
is  sought  for  in  the  truth  that  the  eye  and  ear  of  the  Lord  are  ever  open  for  all  sights  and 
rounds.  Then,  O  Jehovah,  hast  seen  my  wrong,  that  which  is  done  to  me,  and  that  sight 
forms  a  plea  for  the  righteous  sentence  of  Him  who  sitteih  on  the  throne  judging  right. 

Ver.  60.  There  was  the  keenest  of  vengeance  in  the  treatment  to  which  the  Lord's  servant 
was  subjected,  and  there  were  devices  against  me ;  but  it  was  a  certain  fact  that  the  All- 
seeing  One  had  observed  every  secret  or  open  scheme. 

(t^)  Ver.  61.  The  revengeful,  bad  feeling  expressed  itself  in  reviling  words,  nioa  hati 
heard  their  reproach,  O  Jehovah,  and  all  the  evil  machinations  they  framed  agidnst  me. 

Ver.  62  is  a  variant  expression  of  the  idea  of  the  former  verse,  Thou  Jiast  heard  the  words 
of  the  lips  of  those  that  rose  np  against  me,  and  their  meditatipn,  which  occupied  their 
minds  all  the  day. 

Ver.  63.  Their  downsitting  and  their  uprising  behold  thou,  all  their  proceedings  when  at 
rest,  and  when  they  get  up  to  do  what  they  resolve.  In  hilarious  and  scornful  mood  they  taunt 
and  deride  me  ;  I  am  their  song.  It  was  not  a  momentary  outburst  of  passion,  not  one  hour's 
lapse  into  jocoseness,  but  the  tenor  of  the  life  which  was  manifested. 

(n)  Ver.  64.  The  evil  life  cannot  pass  without  condemnation.  Thou  wilt  render  a  recom- 
pense to  them,  O  Jehovah.  A  man  may  pray  that  revilings  and  machinations  may  be 
thwarted,  not  from  a  desire  for  personal  revenge,  but  from  the  knowledge  that  striving  with  the 
Maker  incurs  guilt  and  Axes  the  destiny  of  the  striver  according  to  the  work  of  their  hands, 
reaping  what  they  sow  (2  Tim.  iv.  14). 

Ver.  65.  Thou  wilt  give  them  blindness  [Heb.  a  covering]  of  heart,  that  which  is  tamed 
into  a  veil  (2  Cor.  iiL  14)  by  their  not  becoming  aona  of  the  light,  by  their  walking  in  darkness 
into  the  ditch.     Thy  curse  to  them.     Cursed  be  t?ie  man  who  make^  flesh  his  arm. 

Ver.  66.  Evil  sfuUl  slay  the  wicked.  Thou  wilt  pursue  them  in  anger  and  destroy  them,  so 
that  the  wricked  may  be  no  more  in  Thy  dominion  under  the  heavens  of  Jehovah.  So  Ut  tkin4 
enemies  perisli,  0  Jehovah,  and  thy  wiU  be  done,  as  in  heaven  so  on  eartJu 


HOMILETICS. 

The  Man  of  Affliction. 

(Verses  1-3.) 

It  18  given  to  some  men  to  catch  and  idealise  the  poetic  instinct  of  a  nation, 
to  gather  to  a  focus  the  ideas  that  have  been  dimly  floating  in  the  national  mind, 
70 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  ohap.  hl 

and,  in  words  of  burning  passion,  to  express  what  all  have  been  vaguely  feeling, 
but  none  have  been  able  hitherto  to  clothe  in  fitting  speech.  Another  class  of 
men  represent  the  chivalric  and  military  characteristics  of  a  nation ;  another  the 
judicial  and  ruling  types.  Jeremiah,  distinguished  as  poet,  prophet^  and  patriot, 
acquired  immortal  distinction  in  the  annals  of  the  Hebrew  nation  as  the  Man  of 
Sorrow.  In  him  the  unparalleled  sufferings  of  Judea  seemed  concentrated  and 
individualised.  His  mournful  dirge,  sung  in  the  minor  key,  gave  voice,  with 
lavish  variety  of  imagery  and  felicity  of  phrase,  to  the  overwhelming  anguish  of  a 
distracted  and  ruined  people.  In  this  sublime  elegy  the  poet-prophet  touches  the 
deepest  woe  of  the  sufferer  in  all  ages,  and  provides  it  with  adequate  expression. 
Ewald  justly  remarks  :  "  Very  probably  the  prophet  draws  much  of  what  he  says 
from  his  own  experience,  but  the  whole  that  he  sets  forth  is  more  than  his  own 
personality ;  it  is  the  type  and  pattern  of  every  individual.  And  here,  therefore, 
is  the  summit  and  tuniing-point  of  the  whole  Book  of  Lamentations."  When  the 
soul  finds  words  in  which  to  breathe  out  its  sorrow,  the  oppression  is  already  re- 
lieved.    The  hope  of  deliverance  begins  to  dawn.     Observe  in  this  paragraph — 

L  That  the  man  of  afEUction  regards  his  sufferings  as  the  result  of  the 
Divine  anger.  "  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen  affliction  by  the  rod  of  His  wrath  " 
(ver.  I).  It  is  the  rod  of  His  anger  to  chastise  and  correct,  not  the  sword  to 
utterly  destroy.  Even  in  the  manifestation  of  His  wrath  God  seeks  to  restore  the 
sinner.  The  last  stroke  of  His  anger  must  be  painful,  alarming,  crushing ;  the 
more  so  that  it  is  felt  to  be  so  just  Behind  the  dark  frown  of  the  Almighty  the 
light  of  mercy  shines.  "  He  doth  not  afflict  willingly,  nor  grieve  the  children  of 
men."  The  most  hopeful  feature  of  affliction  is  the  moment  when  the  sufferer 
recognises  the  hand  of  God  in  it ;  when  he  acknowledges  it  as  the  fruit  of  personal 
sin.  Then  it  is  that  wrath  gives  place  to  mercy :  punishment  is  disarmed  by 
pardon.  Sin  is  antagonism  to  God,  and  merits  nothing  but  wrath.  A  genuine 
repentance  is  the  open  door  of  escape. 

n.  That  the  man  of  affliction  is  plunged  into  bewildering  gloom.  ''He 
hath  led  me  and  brought  nie  into  darkness,  but  not  into  light "  (ver.  2).  The 
darkness  of  suffering  had  a  realistic  meaning  for  Jeremiah,  as  he  remembered  the 
miseries  of  his  incarceration  in  the  dungeon  (Jer.  xxxvil  15,  16 ;  xxxviii.  6,  10- 
13).  '  But  the  language  is  a  metaphorical  description  of  afflictions  in  general,  and 
is  frequently  employed  in  Scripture.  In  the  most  graphic  and  explicit  terms  the 
prophet  foretold  the  experience  he  here  describes  (Jer.  xiii.  15,  16).  Suffering 
is  a  dark  enigma  that  baffles  the  wisest  to  solve.  It  is  an  aggravation  of  suffering 
when  it  has  to  be  endured  in  darkness.  We  have  heard  of  a  strong  man  who  had 
braved  all  kinds  of  dangers  by  land  and  sea,  who  was  absolutely  afraid  of  being 
alone  in  the  dark :  he  had  no  fear  of  anything  he  could  see,  but  was  in  mortsd 
dread  of  the  unseen.  Darkness  overawes  the  most  volatile.  A  party  of  courtiers 
of  Louis  XV.  were  once  gathered  round  Cassini  to  witness  an  eclipse  from  the 
terrace  of  the  Paris  observatory,  and  were  laughing  at  the  populace,  whose  cries 
were  heard  as  the  light  began  to  fade,  when,  as  the  unnatural  gloom  came  quickly 
on,  silence  fell  on  them  too,  the  panic- terror  striking  through  their  laughter.  There 
is  nothing  so  distressing,  so  oppressive,  so  bewildering,  so  hopeless  to  contend 
with,  as  darkness. 

Ill  That  the  man  of  affliction  is  smitten  with  repeated  strokes  of  the  Divine 
Handr  *'  Surely  against  me  is  He  turned  ;  He  turneth  His  hand  against  me  all 
the  day"  (ver.  3).  It  is  not  one  stroke  of  affliction,  but  many,  and  these 
frequently  repeated.  Trouble  never  comes  alone;  it  is  often  attended  with  a 
crowd  of  ills.  Before  we  can  recover  from  one  calamity  we  are  stricken  with 
another.  It  may  be  difficult  to  find  the  kind  heart  behind  the  strong  hand ;  but 
it  is  there.  Not  one  blow  more  than  is  necessary  will  be  permitted  to  fall. 
The  most  prolonged  and  reiterated  suffering  will  cease  as  soon  as  its  purpose  is 
answered.     While  it  continues  there  should  be  prayerful  searchings  of  heart 

71 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  in. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY;  LAMENTATIONS, 


Lessons. — 1.  Tlie  fact  of  suffering  iesitfies  to  the  fad  of  sin.  2.  Much  of  our 
suffering  occasioned  by  witnessing  the  sufferings  of  others,  S.  Suffering  is  a  hUss- 
ing  when  U  brings  us  nearer  to  God, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  1.  Ecce  homo.  L  Consider 
the  generality  of  affliction  in  the  nature 
thereof  We  met  all  generally  in  the 
first  treason  against  ourselves  in  Adam's 
rebellion  ;  and  we  met  all,  too,  in  the 
second  treason — the  treason  against 
Jesus  Christ.  All  our  sins  were  upon 
His  shoulders.  All  the  evils  and  mis- 
chiefs of  life  come  for  the  most  part 
from  this — that  we  think  to  enjoy  those 
things  which  God  hath  given  us  only 
to  use.  Ill,  Consider  affliction  as  bear- 
ing on  man,  "  I  am  the  man  that  hath 
seen  affliction."  It  was  that  man  that  is 
denoted  and  signified  in  that  name  that 
hath  lain  under  affliction,  and  therefore 
no  kind  of  man  was  likely  to  escape. 
Man  carries  the  spawn  and  seed  and 
eggs  of  affliction  in  his  own  flesh,  and 
his  own  thoughts  make  haste  to  hatch 
them  and  bring  them  up.  We  make 
all  our  worms  snakes,  all  our  snakes 
vipers,  all  our  vipers  dragons  by  our 
murmuring.  III.  Consider  affliction  in 
its  special  application  to  one  man.  That 
man  the  prophet  Jeremiah,  one  of  the 
best  of  men.  As  he  was  submitted  to 
these  extraordinary  afflictions,  we  see 
that  no  man  is  so  necessary  to  God  as 
that  God  cannot  come  to  His  ends  with- 
out that  man.  God  can  lack  and  leave 
out  any  man  in  His  service.  The  best 
of  our  wages  is  adversity,  because  that 
gives  us  a  true  fast,  and  a  right  value 
of  our  prosperity.  Jeremy  had  it ;  the 
best  of  his  rank  must.  No  man  is  ex- 
cused of  subsequent  afflictions  by  prece- 
dent, nor  of  falling  into  more  by  having 
borne  some  already.  Our  afflictions 
are  as  beggars ;  they  tell  others,  and 
send  more  after  them.  When  the  hand 
of  God  was  ujxyn  Jeremiah  he  declared 
God*s  handwriting ;  not  only  to  his  own 
conscience  by  acknowledging  that  all 
these  afflictions  were  for  his  own  sins, 
but  by  acknowledging  to  the  world  that 
God  had  laid  such  and  such  afflictions 
upon  him.  St.  Ambrose,  in  a  journey 
from  Milan  to  Rome,  passed  some  time 
72 


one  evening  with  his  host,  who  bragged 
he  had  never  had  any  cross  in  his  life. 
Ambrose  at  once  removed  to  another 
house,  protesting  that  either  the  man 
was  very  unthankful  to  God  that  would 
not  take  knowledge  of  His  corrections, 
or  that  God*s  measure  was  by  this  time 
full,  and  would  surely,  soundly,  and 
suddenly  pour  down  all  together.  IV. 
Consider  the  weight  and  vehemence  of 
afflictions,  1.  They  are  aggravated  in 
that  they  are  the  Lord'a  They  are  in- 
evitable ;  they  cannot  be  avoided ;  they 
are  just,  and  cannot  be  pleaded  against ; 
nor  can  we  ease  ourselves  with  any  ima- 
gination of  our  innocency,  as  though 
they  were  undeserved.  2.  They  are  in 
His  rod.  Our  murmuring  makes  a  rod 
a  staff,  and  a  staff  a  sword,  and  that 
which  God  presented  for  physic,  poison. 
3.  They  are  inflicted  by  the  rod  of  His 
wrath.  Though  there  be  properly  no 
anger  in  God,  yet  God  is  said  to  do  a 
thing  in  anger  when  He  does  it  so  as 
an  angry  man  would  do  it.  It  is  the 
highest  extent  of  affliction  that  we  take 
God  to  be  angrier  than  He  is.  V. 
Consider  the  comforts  we  have  in  afflic- 
tions, "  I  am  the  man  that  hath  seen 
affliction.*'  1.  That  we  see  our  afflic- 
tions, we  understand,  consider  them. 
We  see  that  affliction  comes  from  God, 
and  that  it  is  sent  that  we  may  see  and 
taste  the  goodness  of  God.  2.  That, 
though  afflicted,  we  still  retain  our 
manhood.  God  may  mend  thee  in 
marring  thee  ;  He  may  build  thee  up  in 
dejecting  thee  ;  He  may  infuse  another 
manhood  into  thee,  so  that  thou  canst 
say,  "  I  am  that  Christian  man ;  I  am 
the  man  that  cannot  despair  since 
Christ  is  the  remedy."  3.  That  the  rod 
of  God's  wrath  is  also  the  rod  of  His 
comfort  and  strength  (Micah  vii  14; 
Ps.  xlv.  6 ;  Ps.  xxiii.  4). — Donne, 

—  €k>d  and  human  sufferixig  :  1. 
Often  brought  into  strange  relationship. 
2.  Suffering  is  a  significant  revelation 
of  how  God  views  human  sin.    S.  Sof* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIO  COMMBNTART:  LAMBNTATI0N8. 


CHAP.  in. 


fering  may  draw  man  nearer  to,  or  drive 
him  farther  from,  God. 

Vers.  2,  3.  The  mystery  of  snffer- 
ing.  I.  Impossible  to  adve  by  human 
speculatians,  *^  Into  darkness,  but  not 
into  light."  II.  Increased  by  the  diffi- 
culty of  accounting  for  the  part  God 
takes  in  it.  '*He  hath  led  me  and 
brought  me  into  darkness,  but  not 
into  light"  (ver.  2).  III.  Intensified  by 
the  apparent  persistency  of  the  Divine 
severity.  "  Surely  against  me  is  He 
turned;  He  tumeth  His  hand  against 
me  all  the  day  '*  (ver.  3). 

Illustrations. — Gk>d'8  anger  man's 
heaviest  affliction.  Grod's  anger  exerts 
itself  by  embittering  afflictions  Every 
affliction  is  of  itself  a  grievance,  and  a 
breach  made  upon  our  happiness ;  but 
there  is  sometimes  a  secret  energy  that 
so  edges  and  quickens  its  afflictive  opera- 
tion that  a  blow  levelled  at  the  body 
shall  enter  into  the  very  souL  What 
is  the  reason  that  David  is  sometimes 
so  courageous  that  '*  though  he  walks 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death,  he  fears  no  evil/'  and,  at  another 
time,  Grod  no  sooner  '*  hides  His  face, 
but  he  is  troubled  **  f  What  is  the  cause 
that  a  man  sometimes  breaks  through  a 
greater  calamity,  and  at  another  time 
the  same  person  fails  and  desponds  under 
a  loss  of  the  same  nature  1  Whence  can 
this  be,  but  that  God  infuses  some  more 
grains  of  His  wrath  into  the  one  than 
into  the  other  1 — South. 

—  The  Divine  anger.  Anger  is  the 
whetstone  of  strength;  in  an  equality 
of  other  terms,  it  will  make  a  man  pre- 
vail. Nothing  is  able  to  stand  before 
a  fire  which  is  once  enraged;  so  is  it 
when  the  fire  of  the  Lord's  revenge 
breaks  forth  upon  the  enemies  of  His 
Son.  Add  hereunto  our  disposition  and 
preparedness  for  the  wrath  of  God.  Far 
easier  is  it  to  make  a  print  in  wax  than 
in  an  adamant ;  to  kindle  a  fire  in  dry 
stubble  than  in  green  wood.  Wicked 
men  have  fitted  themselves  for  wrath, 
and  are  procurers  and  artificers  of  their 
own  destruction. — Bishop  Reynolds. 

Darkness  and  danger.  Sailing  once 
along  a  coast  where  a  friend  had  suffered 
shipwreck,  the  scene  which  recalled  his 


danger  filled  as  with  no  fear ;  because, 
while  his  ship,  on  the  night  she  ran 
ashore,  was  cutting  her  way  through 
the  densest  fog,  we  were  ploughing  the 
waters  of  a  silver  sea,  where  noble  head- 
lands, pillared  cliffs,  scattered  islands, 
and  surf-beaten  reefs  stood  bathed  in 
the  brightest  moonshine.  There  was 
no  danger  just  because  there  was  no 
darkness. — Guthrie. 

Darkness  precedes  light.  The  Lord 
ofttimes  makes  everything  as  dark  as  it 
can  become,  just  that  presently  the  light 
may  shine  more  brilliantly.  li^hmael 
faints  before  Hagar  finds  the  well. 
Joseph  is  left  in  prison  and  oblivion 
before  being  raised  to  dignity.  The 
Assyrian  host  surrounds  Jerusalem  ere 
they  are  smitten  by  the  angel  Jere- 
miah sinks  into  the  pit  before  he  is 
placed  on  a  rock.  Violent  persecution 
of  the  Christians  preceded  the  triumph 
of  the  Gospel  Mediaeval  darkness  pre- 
ceded the  dawn  of  the  Beformation. — 
Oosterzee. 

Affliction  ripens  character.  There 
is  a  certain  mellowness  which  affliction 
sheds  upon  the  character,  a  softening 
that  it  effects  of  all  the  rougher  and 
more  repulsive  asperities  of  our  nature, 
a  delicacy  of  temperament  into  which  it 
often  melts  and  refines  the  most  un- 
gainly spirit.  It  is  not  the  pride  of 
aspiring  talent  that  we  carry  to  heaven 
with  us  ;  it  is  not  the  lustre  of  a  super- 
iority which  dazzles  and  commands  that 
we  bear  with  us  there.  It  is  not  the 
eminence  of  any  public  distinction  or 
the  fame  of  lofty  and  successful  enter- 
prise ;  and  should  these  give  undue  con- 
fidence to  man  or  throw  an  aspect  of 
conscious  and  complacent  energy  over 
him,  he  wears  not  yet  the  complexion 
of  Paradise ;  and  should  God  select  him 
as  His  own,  He  will  send  some  special 
affliction  that  may  chasten  him  out  of 
all  which  is  uncongenial  with  the  place 
of  blessedness,  and  at  length  reduce  him 
to  its  unmingled  love  and  its  adoring 
humility.  The  character  is  purified  by 
the  simple  process  of  passing  through 
the  fire.  "  And  when  He  has  tried  me, 
I  shall  come  forth  as  gold." — Chalmers. 
Suffering  a  mystery.  As  the  Egyp- 
tian  who  carried  something  wound  up 

73 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ifL  HOMILETW  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  LAMENT  A  TION& 


in  his  napkin  answered  him  who  de-  pose  kept  from  us,  to  the  end  that  we 

manded  what  it  was,  that  he  covered  it  should  not   be  too  curious  to  inquire 

to  the  end  that  no  man  should  see  it;  after  it;  that  it  is   far  better  to   be 

BO  likewise  must  we  learn  that  if  there  utterly  ignorant  herein  than  to  have  aU 

be  an}  thing  hidden  and  laid  up  in  the  the  knowledge  thereof  that  may  be. — 

works  and  dealings  of  Grod,  it  is  of  pur-  Cawdray, 


EOMILETIGS. 

The  Bbwtlderment  of  Gbief. 

(Verses  4-9.) 

I  Is  accompanied  with  intense  physical  suffering.  '*  My  flesh  and  my  skin 
hath  He  made  old ;  He  hath  broken  my  bones  "  (ver.  4).  The  skin  is  wrinkled 
and  worn,  in  this  case  not  with  age,  but  with  excessive  grief ;  and  the  sufFering 
which  in  the  preceding  verses  was  represented  as  a  slow  wasting  of  strength,  has 
now  reached  the  stage  of  acute  pain,  such  as  is  caused  by  the  breaking  of  bones. 
It  is  a  pitiable  sight  to  see  a  nation  or  an  individual  growing  prematurely  old. 
This  is  not  done  by  hard,  honest,  healthy  work,  but  by  sorrow  and  suffering. 
The  strongest  and  most  beautiful  physical  form  rapidly  shrinks  and  withers  under 
the  stroke  of  a  great  and  overwhelming  grief.  A  sudden  calamity  has  been  known 
to  turn  the  hair  grey  in  a  single  night,  and  to  impose  the  wreck  of  years  on  the 
bewildered  and  moaning  sufferer. 

II.  Is  as  of  one  immured  in  prison,  from  which  all  efforts  to  escape  are 
ftitile  (vers.  5,  7,  9).  The  prisoner  is  enclosed  and  fenced  in  with  a  solid  wall  as 
of  hewn  stone,  but  it  is  a  wall  of  bitterness  and  weariness.  There  are  paths,  dark 
and  tortuous,  and  as  he  gropes  along  them  with  the  dim  hope  of  finding  an  outlet, 
he  finds  himself  in  a  maze  which  brings  him  back,  after  long  and  weary  wandering, 
to  the  place  whence  he  started.     Like  Byron's  Prisoner  of 'Chillon — 

"  It  was  liberty  to  stride 
Along  my  cell  from  side  to  side, 
And  up  and  down,  and  then  athwart^ 
And  tread  it  over  every  part  ; 
And  round  the  pillars  one  by  one, 
Returning  where  my  walk  begun.** 

Grief  fetters  the  soul  as  with  a  heavy  chain.  It  may  chafe  and  fret  and  tug  to 
very  weariness  in  the  effort  to  obtain  release ;  but  in  vain  :  the  bondage  remains. 
If  we  walk  in  the  crooked  paths  of  sin,  we  shall  ultimately  find  ourselves  enclosed 
within  the  crooked  paths  of  sorrow,  from  which  we  shall  be  powerless  to  escaf>e. 

III.  Is  as  of  one  buried  in  a  dismal  sepulchra  '*  He  hath  set  me  iu  dark 
places,  as  they  that  be  dead  of  old  "  (ver.  6).  Grief  has  worn  down  the  sufferer  to 
the  semblance  of  a  skeleton,  and  he  regards  himself  as  a  corpse  laid  in  the  dark 
chambers  of  the  grave— dead,  buried,  and  forgotten. 

**  For  all  was  blank  and  bleak  and  grajt 
It  was  not  night,  it  was  not  day, 
It  was  not  even  the  dungeon -light^ 
So  hateful  to  my  heavy  sight, 
But  vacancy  absorbing  space, 
And  fixedness  without  a  place  ; 
There  were  no  stars,  no  earth,  no  time, 
No  check,  no  change,  no  good,  no  crim«  ; 
But  silence  and  a  stirless  breath, 
Which  neither  was  of  life  nor  death  ; 
A  sea  of  stagnant  idleness, 
Blind,  bonndlesfl,  mute,  and  motionless  !  *' — ByrWL 

74 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


cHAF.  m. 


Excessive  grief  darkens  and  dulls  every  faculty,  and  robs  life  of  all  its  charm. 
There  are  some  sorrows  from  which  death  is  a  merciful  release. 

lY.  The  loudest  calls  for  help  are  disregarded.  ''Also  when  I  cry  and 
shouty  he  shutteth  out  my  prayer  "  (ver.  8).  The  walls  of  his  prison  are  so  thick 
that  Uie  loudest  cries  cannot  pierce  them ;  they  are  unheard  and  unheeded.  It 
intensifies  the  bewilderment  of  grief  when  the  most  earnest  cries  for  help  bring 
no  relief.  A  short  time  ago  the  dead  body  of  a  stalwart  Scotch  shepherd  was 
found  buried  in  the  snow  on  the  Ayrshire  hills,  within  a  short  distance  of  his 
own  home.  Two  days  before,  when  walking  homewards,  he  was  overtaken  with 
a  snowstorm,  and  it  is  supposed  must  have  been  dazed  by  the  fury  of  the  tenijiest, 
and  lost  his  way.  It  is  distressing  to  think  of  his  desperate  struggles  for  life  and 
his  exhausting  shouts  for  help,  but  all  in  vain.  It  is  a  painful  phase  in  the 
mystery  of  suffering  when  God  seems  so  indiflferent  to  our  prayers,  and  so  slow  to 
help.  But  even  in  this  we  are  led  by-and-bye  to  recognise  the  Divine  justice  and 
mercy. 

Lessons. — 1 .  The  body  sympathises  with  the  sufferings  of  the  soul.  2.  Mwh 
of  the  suffering  of  life  must  he  home  alone.  8.  It  is  the  bitterest  ingredient  in 
suffering  when  there  is  no  prospect  of  relief 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  4-6.  The  ravages  of  sorrow : 

I.  Destroy  the  freshness  and  bloom  of 
yovih,  ''My  flesh  and  my  skin  hath 
He  made  old."  II.  Inflict  acidest  pain, 
"He  hath  broken  my  bones"  (ver.  4). 
TTT.  Oppress  the  soul  toith  bitterness  and 
toil.  "He  hath  builded  against  me, 
and  compassed  me  with  gall  and  travel " 
(ver.  5).  IV.  Overshadow  the  individual 
life  with  the  gloom  of  the  grave,  "  He 
hath  set  me  in  dark  places,  as  they  that 
be  dead  of  old"  (ver.  6). 

Vers.  7-9.  A  baffled  sufferer:  I. 
He  is  enclosed  and  fettered.  "  He  hath 
hedged  me  about  that  I  cannot  get  out ; 
He  hath  made  my  chain  heavy  "  (ver. 
7).  II.  His  cries  for  help  are  unavail- 
ing. "  Also  when  I  cry  and  shout,  He 
shutteth  out  my  prayer  "  (ver.  8).  III. 
He  is  in  a  maze  of  tortuous  paths,  from 
which  there  is  no  outlet.  "  He  hath  in- 
closed my  ways  with  hewn  stone.  He 
hath  made  my  paths  crooked  "  (ver.  9). 

Illustrations.  —  Oaxises    of  grief 

We  fancy  that  all  our  affictions  are 
sent  us  directly  from  above ;  sometimes 
we  think  it  in  piety  and  contrition,  but 
oftener  in  moroseness  and  discontent. 
It  would  be  well,  however,  if  we  at- 
tempted to  trace  the  causes  of  them ; 
we  should  probably  find  their  origin 
in  some  region  of  the  heart  which  we 
never  had  well  explored,  or  in  which 


we  had  secretly  deposited  our  worst 
indulgences.  The  clouds  that  intercept 
the  heavens  from  us  come  not  from  the 
heavens,  but  from  the  earth. — Landor. 

A  great  sorrow.  Henry  I,  on  his 
return  from  Normandy,  was  accom- 
panied by  a  crowd  of  nobles  and  his 
son  William.  The  White  Ship,  in  which 
the  prince  embarked,  lingered  behind 
the  rest  of  the  royal  fleet,  while  the 
young  nobles,  excited  with  wine,  hung 
over  the  ship's  side  taunting  the  priest 
who  came  to  give  the  customary  bene- 
diction. At  last  the  guards  of  the 
king  s  treasure  pressed  the  vessel's  de- 
parture, and,  driven  by  the  arms  of 
fifty  rowers,  it  swept  swiftly  out  to  sea. 
All  at  once  the  ship's  side  struck  on  a 
rock  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour,  and 
in  an  instant  it  sank  beneath  the  wavea 
One  terrible  cry,  ringing  through  the 
stillness  of  the  night,  was  heard  by  the 
royal  fleet,  but  it  was  not  till  the  morn- 
ing that  the  fatal  news  reached  the 
king.  He  fell  unconscious  to  the 
ground,  and  rose  never  to  smile  again  / 

Secret  grief  If  the  internal  griefs 
of  every  man  could  be  read,  written  on 
his  forehead,  how  many  who  now  excite 
envy  would  appear  to  be  objects  of 
pity  I — Metastasio. 

Grief  irksome,  bat  needftiL  A  friend 
was  asked  concerning  a  beautiful  horse 
feeding  on  the  pasture  with  a  clog  on 

75 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  in. 


H0M1LET1C  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


its  foot,  "Wliy  do  you  clog  such  a 
noble  animal t."  The  reply  was,  "I 
would  a  great  deal  sooner  clog  him  than 
lose  him ;  he  is  given  to  leap  hedges." 
That  is  why  God  clogs  His  people.  He 
would  rather  clog  them  than  lose  them  ; 
for  if  He  did  not,  they  would  leap  and 
be  gone. — Sturgeon, 

The  snfferer  baffled  by  temptatioiL 
A  time  of  affliction  is  a  time  of  tempta- 
tion. Satan  will  not  be  wanting  in 
any  opportunity  or  advantage  of  setting 
upon  the  soul.  When  Pharaoh  heard 
that  the  people  were  entangled  in  the 
wilderness,  he  pursued  them ;  and 
when  Satan  sees  a  soul  entangled  with 
its  distresses  and  troubles,  he  thinks  it 
his  time  and  hour  to  assault  it.  He 
seeks  to  winnow,  and  comes  when  the 
com  is  under  the  flaiL  Beckon,  there- 
fore, that,  when  trouble  cometh,  the 
prince  of  this  world  cometh  also.  Then 
is  the  time  to  take  the  shield  of  faith, 
that  we  may  be  able  to  quench  his  fiery 
darts.  If  they  be  neglected,  they  will 
inflame  the  soul. — John  Otoen, 

Grief,  its  uses.  What !  would  you 
choose  that  you  alone  may  fare  better 
than  all  God's  saints  t  that  God  should 
strew  carpets  for  your  nice  feet  only,  to 
walk  into  your  heaven,  and  make  that 
way  smooth  for  you  which  all  patriarchs, 


prophets,  evangelists,  confessors,  Christ 
Himself,  have  found  rugged  and  bloody  ! 
Away  with  this  self-love,  and  eome 
down,  you  ambitious  sons,  of  Zebedee, 
and,  ere  you  think  of  sitting  near  the 
throne,  be  content  to  be  called  unto  the 
cross.  Now  is  your  trial.  Let  your 
Saviour  see  how  much  of  His  bitter 
portion  you  can  pledge.  Then  shall 
you  see  how  much  of  His  glory  He  can 
afford  you.  Be  content  to  drink  of  His 
vinegar  and  gall,  and  you  shall  drink 
new  wine  with  Him  in  His  kingdom. — 
BisJiop  HaU. 

—  As  snow  is  of  itself  cold,  yet 
warms  and  refreshes  the  earth,  so  afflic- 
tions, though  in  themselves  grievous, 
yet  keep  the  soul  of  the  Christian  warm 
and  make  it  fruitful  Let  the  most 
afflicted  know  and  remember  that  it  is 
better  to  be  preserved  in  brine  than  to 
rot  in  honey. — Salter, 

—  After  a  forest  fire  has  raged 
furiously,  it  has  been  found  that  many 
pine  cones  have  had  their  seeds  released 
by  the  heat,  which  ordinarily  would 
have  remained  unsown.  The  future 
forest  sprang  from  the  ashes  of  the 
former.  Some  Christian  graces,  such  as 
humility,  patience,  sympathy,  have  been 
evolved  ^om  the  sofferihgs  of  the  saints. 
The  furnace  has  been  used  to  fructify. 


E0MILETI08. 

Jehovah  as  a  Fob; 

(Verses  10-13.) 

I.  Is  aware  of  every  efEort  to  escape  out  of  His  power.    **He  was  unto  me 

as  a  bear  lying  in  wait,  and  as  a  lion  in  secret  places"  (ver.  10).  The  afflicted 
one  compares  himself  to  a  fugitive  striving  to  escape  from  his  miseries,  but  baffled 
at  every  turn.  Finding  his  way  blocked  up  by  a  solid  wall,  he  plunges  into  the 
uncertain  paths  of  the  forest,  only  to  find  himself  exposed  to  the  rapacity  of  beasts 
of  prey.  In  every  direction  he  is  menaced  with  enemies ;  to  turn  back  is  as 
dangerous  as  to  press  forward.  Exhausted  and  bewildered,  he  is  ready  to  sink 
with  terror  and  despair.  Woe  to  the  man  who  has  made  an  enemy  of  Jehovah ! 
His  most  frantic  efforts  to  escape  are  in  vain.  He  is  everywhere  threatened  by 
the  law  he  has  violated,  and  its  penalties  lie  about  his  path  like  wild  beasts,  ready 
to  seize  him  as  their  victim. 

II.  Alarms  by  the  suddenness  and  violence  of  His  attack.  '*He  hath 
turned  aside  my  ways,  and  pulled  me  in  pieces.  He  hath  made  me  desolate " 
(ver.  11).  The  figure  of  the  lion  is  still  maintained.  Aware  of  its  presence,  the 
startled  fugitive  turns  aside,  only  to  find  himself  suddenly  poimced  upon  and  torn 
in  pieces,  so  that,  i^tupified  with  terror  and  pain,  he  is  powerless  ~to  flee.     "  He 

76 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  m. 

hath  made  me  desolaie^^  a  favourite  word  with  Jeremiah,  occurring  more  than  forty 
times  in  his  Prophecy,  and  five  times  in  Lamentations  (ch.  i.  4, 13, 16;  iv.  6;  v. 
18).  The  root  meaning  of  the  word  is  appalled,  astonied,  stupified,  struck 
dumh  with  terror.  The  impenitent  wicked  are  every  moment  in  imminent  peril« 
The  doom  of  destruction  is  already  declared  against  the  workers  of  iniquity,  and 
that  destruction  shall  come  '*  unawares,  as  a  whirlwind,  suddenly  and  swiftly  "  (c/. 
Ps.  XXXV.  8;  Prov.  i.  27,  x.  29,  xxi.  15;  1  Thesa  v.  8;  2  Pet  iL  1).  Christ 
is  the  refuge  of  the  sinner,  immediately  accessihle,  and  in  Him  there  ]»  invulner^ 
able  security. 

IIL  Is  an  unerring  marlnnnan.  ''He  hath  bent  His  bow,  and  set  me  as  a 
mark  for  the  arrow''  (ver.  12).  The  simile  of  the  lion  naturally  suggests  that  of 
the  hunter.  When  the  smitten  fugitive  is  under  the  paw  of  the  lion,  the  hunter 
comes,  but  not  to  deliver  him.  It  is  not  the  beast  of  prey,  but  the  poor  mangled 
victim  which  is  the  mark  for  his  arrows.  The  Mohammedan  Caliph  Aaly  was 
once  asked,  "If  the  heavens  were  a  bow  and  the  earth  the  cord  thereof,  if  cala- 
mities were  arrows,  man  the  butt  for  those  arrows,  and  the  holy  blessed  God  the 
unerring  marksman,  where  could  the  sons  of  Adam  flee  for  succour  1 "  The  Caliph 
repHed,  "  The  children  of  Adam  must  flee  unto  the  Lord."  This  was  the  state  of 
unhappy  Judah ;  this  is  the  state  of  the  man  who  wickedly  defies  God.  There  is 
no  escape  but  by  a  penitent  return  to  Him  whose  bow  is  already  bent  to  punish, 
and  whose  arrow  reaches  its  mark  with  unerring  precision. 

lY.  Can  inflict  aentest  pain.  *'  He  hath  caused  the  arrows  of  His  quiver  to 
enter  into  my  reins  " — my  heart  (ver.  13).  God  has  many  arrows ;  they  are  swift 
in  their  passage,  unerring  in  their  aim,  and  pierce  deep.  None  can  wound  as  God 
can.  In  the  region  where  the  greatest  sin  against  Him  has  been  committed — in 
the  heart — there  the  arrows  of  His  judgment  penetrate  and  produce  the  keenest 
anguish.  "These  immediate  blows  of  God  upon  the  soul  seem  to  be  those  things 
called  in  Psalm  xxxviiL  2  God's  arrows;  they  are  strange,  sudden,  invincible 
amazements  upon  the  spirit^  leaving  such  a  damp  upon  it  as  defies  the  faint  and 
weak  cordials  of  all  creature  enjoyments.  The  wounds  which  €k)d  Himself  makes 
none  but  Gknl  Himself  can  cure." 

Lbssons. — 1.  It  is  vain  for  the  sirmer  to  defy  Jehovah.  2.  Sin  cannot  evade 
either  detection  or  punishment,  3.  The  ordy  hope  of  the  sinner  is  to  penitently 
implore  the  mercy  ^Jehovah. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  10, 11.  The  dangers  of  a  sinftil  arrows  of  His  quiver  to  enter  into  my 

life.     L  The  agents  of  punishment  are  reins"  (ver.  13). 
always  at  hand,    "  He  was  unto  me  as 

a  bear  lying  in  wait,  and  as  a  lion  in  Illustrations. — Jehovah  a  foe  to 

secret  places"  (ver.  10).     II.  There  is  all  sin.     God  Himself,  we  have  dways 

no    escape  from  punishment  for   sin,  understood,  hates  sin  with  a  most  au- 

"He  hath  turned  aside  my  ways  and  thentic,  celestial,  and  eternal  hatred — a 

pulled  me  in  pieces"  (ver.  11).     IIL  hatred,  a  hostility  inexorable,  unappeas- 

The  punishment  for  sin  is  sudden  and  able,  which  blasts  the  scoundrel,  and  all 

appalling,     **  He  hath  made  me  deso-  scoundrels  ultimately,  into  black  anni- 

late"  (ver.  11).  hilation  and  disappearance  from    the 

Vers.  12, 13.  The  certainty  of  punish-  sum  of  things.    The  path  of  it  is  the 

ment.     L  Because  Oodisjust     11.  Be-  path  of  a  flaming  sword.     He  that  has 

cause  Ood  is  unerring  in  His  treatment  eyes  may  see  it  walking,   inexorable, 

of  sin,     "He  hath  bent  His  bow  and  divinely  beautiful  and  divinely  terrible, 

set  me  as  a  mark  for  the  arrow"  (ver.  througli  the  chaotic  gulf  of  human  his- 

12).    m.  The  punishment  will  be  pain-  tory,  and  everywhere  burning,  as  with 

fully  recdised.     "He  hath  caused  the  unquenchable  flre,  the  fidse  and  the 

77 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


HOMJLETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


dead  worthy  from  the  true  and  life- 
worthy,  making  all  human  history  and 
the  biography  of  every  roan  a  God's 
cosmos  in  place  of  a  devil's  chaos.  So 
it  is  in  the  end ;  even  so  to  every  man 
who  is  a  man,  and  not  a  mutinous  beast, 
and  has  eyes  to  sea — Carlyle, 

The  dangers  of  vHjl  The  favourite 
sport  of  Canada  in  winter  is  tobogan- 
ning.  Some  of  the  slides  are  very  steep 
and  look  very  dangerous,  and  the  sensa- 
tion of  rushing  down  the  hill  on  the 
thin  strips  of  basswood  is  one  never  to 
be  forgotten.  "How  do  you  like  itt** 
a^ked  a  Canadian  girl  of  an  American 
visitor,  whom  she  had  steered  down 
the  steepest  slide.  '*  Oh,  I  would  not 
have  missed  it  for  a  hundred  dollars !  ^ 
"You'll  try  it  again,  won't  your  "Not 
for  a  thousand  dollars  I " 

—  Mr.  Rusk  in  speaks  in  his  "  Love's 
Meinie  "  of  the  little  crake,  a  bird  which 
lays  her  eggs  on  an  inartificially  con- 
structed platform  of  decayed  leaves 
or  stalks  of  marsh  plants,  slightly  ele- 
vated above  the  water.  "How  ele- 
vated I  cannot  find  proper  account; 
that  is  to  say,  whether  it  is  hung 
to  the  stems  of  growing  reeds  or  built 
on  hillocks  of  soil;  but  the  bird  is 
always  liable  to  have  its  nest  overflown 
by  floods." 

The  degradation  of  sin.  When  the 
followers  of  Ulysses  degraded  them- 
selves by  the  misuse  of  pleasures  until 
they  fell  to  the  level  of  the  brutes,  it  is 
said  that  Circe,  touching  them  with  her 
wand,  turned  them  into  swine.     She 


brought  to  the  surface  the  inner  ugliness, 
revealed  the  animal  that  ruled  within. 

The  UttemesB  of  sin.  There  is 
more  bitterness  following  upon  sin's  end- 
ing than  ever  there  was  sweetness  flow- 
ing from  sin's  acting,  Yoo  that  see 
nothing  but  toeU  in  its  commission  will 
suffer  nothing  but  imm  in  its  conclusion. 
You  that  sin  for  your  profits  will  never 
profit  by  your  sins. — Dyer. 

Divine  Judgment  a  painftd  reality. 
That  which  comes  immediately  from 
Gkxi  has  most  of  God  in  it.  As  the 
sun  when  he  darts  his  beams  in  a  direct 
perpendicular  line  does  it  most  forcibly 
because  most  immediately,  there  are 
terrors  upon  the  mind  which  flow  im- 
mediately from  Gk>d,  and  are  not  weak- 
ened or  refracted  by  passing  through 
the  instrumental  conveyance  of  a  second 
cause,  for  that  which  passes  through  a 
thing  is  contracted  according  to  the 
narrowness  of  its  passage.  The  terrors 
here  spoken  o(  not  being  inflicted  by 
the  intermediate  help  of  anything,  but 
being  darted  forth  from  Gkxl  Himself, 
are  by  this  incomparably  more  strong 
and  piercing.  When  God  wounds  a 
man  by  the  loss  of  an  estate,  of  his 
health,  of  a  relation,  the  smart  is  but 
commensurate  to  the  thing  which  is 
lost,  poor  and  finite.  But  when  He 
Himself  employs  His  whole  omnipo- 
tence, and  is  Himself  both  the  archer 
and  the  arrow,  there  is  as  much  differ- 
ence between  this  and  the  former  as 
when  a  house  lets  fall  a  cobweb  and 
when  it  falls  itself  upon  a  man. — 3(mttk 


E0MILETIC8. 
Complex  Phases  of  Distress. 

(Verses  14-17.) 

L  The  snfferer  is  the  subject  of  ridicule.     ''  I  was  a  derision  to  all  my 

people,  and  their  song  all  the  day  "  (ver.  14).  Dropping  the  use  of  metaphor  for 
the  nonce,  the  prophet  plainly  indicates  in  these  words  what  the  arrows  were  that 
pierced  him  to  the  quick.  They  were  the  darts  of  ridicule,  sharpened  with  envy 
and  poisoned  with  rancour — a  ridicule  all  the  keener  as  coming  from  his  own 
people,  and  revealing  the  base  treachery  that  had  been  all  along  cherished  under 
the  mask  of  professed  friendship.  It  is  a  deep  wound  to  a  sensitive  heart  to 
discover  the  fickleness  of  perverse  human  nature.  The  very  people  who  smile 
upon  and  flatter  us  in  our  prosperity  are  the  first  to  curl  the  lip  of  scorn  and  to 
join  those  who  make  sport  over  our  misfortunes.  The  idol  of  the  crowd  to-day 
78 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  ohap.  in. 


may  be  the  execration  of  the  crowd  to-morrow.  It  is  a  part  of  the  suffering  of 
the  unfaithful  to  have  to  endure  the  contempt  of  God  and  man,  and  the  sting  of 
the  distress  is  the  consciousness  that  it  is  self-induced  and  richly  deserved. 
Where  shall  he  look  for  sympathy  and  help!  Not  from  man.  His  only  refuge 
is  in  God. 

XL  The  sufferer  is  satiated  with  pain  and  snnk  in  abject  humiliation. 
"  Ho  hath  filled  me  with  bitterness,  He  hath  made  me  drunken  with  wormwood. 
He  hath  also  broken  my  teeth  with  gravel  stones,  He  hath  covered  me  with 
ashes*'  (vers.  15,  16).  He  is  as  one  glutted  with  bitter  food  and  stupified  with 
nauseous  drink&  An  Arabic  poet  describes  a  man  grievously  aflBicted  as  •*  a 
pounder  of  wormwood."  His  food  is  so  mingled  with  the  grit  of  the  ashes  in 
which  it  is  baked  that  his  teeth  are  broken  in  eating  it,  and  he  is  himself  smotliered 
with  t}ie  ashes  into  the  midst  of  which  he  has  been  thrown  down.  To  the 
Oriental  mind  this  is  a  graphic  description  of  acute  suffering  and  shame.  Vanity, 
pride,  and  disobedience  end  in  humiliation  and  trouble.  '*  It  seems  appointed," 
says  Lange,  *'  that  much  of  the  highest  instruction  should  come  to  us,  even  in  the 
Bible,  through  the  sufferings  and  struggles  of  individual  men."  The  anguish  of 
the  prophet  was  a  type  of  the  sulferings  of  a  rebellious  nation. 

UI.  The  sufferer  is  robbed  of  happiness.  ''  Thou  hast  removed  my  soul  far 
off  from  peace  "  (ver.  17).  Peace  in  Hebrew  has  the  wider  signification  of  wel- 
fare, happiness.  Hence  it  was  their  salutation  in  life,  ''  Peace  be  to  thee,"  and 
in  death  was  engraved  upon  their  sepulchres,  "  In  peace."  Peace  with  God  is  the 
source  of  permanent  and  overflowing  happiness,  and  its  possession  is  conditioned 
on  the  obedience  of  faith,  for  **  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  Grod, 
and  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God."  How  great  is  the  loss  when  our  peace 
is  gone  and  our  happiness  takes  wing !  It  is  the  loss  of  that  we  most  highly 
prize  and  diligently  seek  after,  for  happiness  is  the  object  of  universal  search. 
Rob  a  man  of  his  peace,  and  what  is  there  left  to  live  for  t  The  soul,  unloosed 
from  her  old  moorings,  is  tossed  about  like  a  helpless  ship  in  the  troubled  sea 
which  cannot  rest  Life  is  an  intolerable  burden,  and,  swung  in  a  whirl  of  black 
despair,  the  soul  cries  out  with  the  distracted  patriarch,  "Oh,  that  I  might  have 
my  request,"  &c.  (Job  vi.  8-10). 

lY.  The  sufferer  loses  the  very  idea  of  good.  "I  forgot  prosperity* 
(ver.  17).  I  forgot  what  good  is,  lost  the  very  idea  of  what  it  means.  There  is 
no  enjoyment  in  the  present ;  there  is  no  hope  in  the  future.  It  is  impossible  to 
conceive  a  more  pitiable  and  forlorn  condition.  The  prophet  has  surely  reached 
the  bottom  of  his  despair ;  there  is  no  lower  depth.  This  is  the  fate  of  the  man 
who  tries  to  live  without  God.  His  views  of  right  and  wrong,  of  liberty  and 
bondage,  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  are  utterly  confounded.  It  is  a  dangerous 
experiment  for  any  man  to  try.  Christ  is  the  Hope  of  humanity.  To  be  without 
Him  is  to  be  without  Gk)d,  and  to  be  in  the  condition  of  the  Ephesians  of  a  former 
age,  "  Having  no  hope  and  without  God  in  the  world  "  (Eph.  ii.  12). 

Lbssons. — 1.  It  is  a  painful  experience  to  meet  with  acorn  where  we  eagpected 
sympathy.  2.  There  is  always  something  to  modify  the  happiness  of  life.  3.  It 
is  one  of  the  saddest  results  of  suffering  when  the  soul  loses  faith  in  goodness. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yen.  14,  15.  Bidicule:  1.  Is  hard  Yer.  17.  The  loss  of  happiness:  L 
to  bear  when  coming  from  our  enemies.  Is  the  loss  of  peace.  IL  Is  the  loss  of 
II.  Has  a  special  aggravation  when  it  is  true  notions  of  goodnesa  III.  Is  the 
exultingly  employed  against  us  by  those  fate  of  the  obstinately  unbelieving, 
we  had  loved  and  trusted.  III.  Over- 
whelms its  victim  by  its  bitterness  and  Illustrations  — Triumph  over  ridi- 
ceaseless  outflow.  cula      A  pious  poor  man  was  much 

79 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ni. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMBNTATIONX 


ridiculed  on  account  of  his  religion. 
Being  asked  if  these  daily  persecutions 
did  not  make  him  ready  to  give  up 
his  profession,  he  replied,  "  No !  Our 
minister  once  said  in  his  sermon  that  if 
we  were  so  foolish  as  to  permit  such 
people  to  laugh  us  out  of  religion  till  at 
last  we  dropped  into  hell,  they  could 
not  laugh  us  out  again.'' 

—  What  would  the  nightingale  care 
if  the  toad  despised  her  singing  t  She 
would  still  sing  on,  and  leave  the  cold 
toad  to  his  dank  shadowa  And  what 
care  I  for  the  sneers  of  men  who  grovel 
upon  earth  f  I  will  still  sing  on  in  the 
ear  and  bosom  of  God. — Beecher, 

Treachery  has  no  pity.  Sir  Anthony 
Kingston,  the  provost-marshal  of  the 
Protector,  the  Earl  of  Hertford,  sent 
word  to  the  mayor  of  Bodmin  that  he 
would  dine  with  him.  He  had  a  man 
to  hang  too,  he  said,  and  a  stout  gallows 
must  be  ready.  The  dinner  was  duly 
eaten  and  the  gallows  prepared.  **  Think 
you,"  said  Kingston  as  they  stood  look- 
ing at  it,  "think  you  is  it  strong 
enough  t "  "  Yea,  sir,"  quoth  the  mayor, 
"  it  is."  "  Well,  then,"  said  Sir  An- 
thony, "get  up;  it  is  for  you."  The 
mayor,  greatly  abashed,  exclaimed  and 
protested.  "  Sir,"  said  Kingston, 
"  there  is  no  remedy ;  ye  have  been  a 
busy  rebel,  and  this  is  appointed  for 
your  reward  ; "  and  so,  without  respite 
or  stay,  the  mayor  was  hanged. 

Suffering  and  its  compensations. 
Should  the  Empress  determine  to  banish 
me,  let  her  banish  me ;  "  The  earth  is 
the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof."  If 
she  will  cast  me  into  the  sea,  let  her 
cast  me  into  the  sea ;  I  will  remember 
Jonah.     If  she  will  throw  me  into  a 


burning  fiery  furnace,  the  three  children 
were  there  before  me.  If  she  will  throw 
me  to  the  wild  beasts,  I  will  remember 
that  Daniel  was  in  the  den  of  lions.  If 
she  will  condemn  me  to  be  stoned,  I 
shall  be  an  associate  of  Stephen,  the 
proto-martyr.  If  she  will  have  me  be- 
headed, the  Baptist  has  submitted  to 
the  same  punishment  If  she  will  take 
away  my  substance,  "  naked  came  I  out 
of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall 
I  return  to  it." — Ohryaostom, 

The  best  work  comes  ont  of  distress. 
The  people  of  Verona,  when  they  saw 
Dante  in  the  streets,  used  to  say,  "  See, 
there  is  the  man  that  was  in  hell!" 
Ah  yes !  he  had  been  in  hell — ^in  hell 
enough,  in  long  severe  sorrow  and 
struggle,  as  the  like  of  him  is  pretty 
sure  to  have  been.  Commedias  that 
come  out  divine  are  not  accomplished 
otherwise.  Thought,  true  labour  of 
any  kind,  highest  virtue  itself,  is  it 
not  the  daughter  of  pain  t  Bom  as  out 
of  the  black  whirlwind ;  true  effort^  in 
fact,  as  of  a  captive  struggling  to  free 
himself :  that  is  thought.  In  all  ways 
we  are  to  become  perfect  through 
suflFering. — Oarlyle, 

Happiness  depends  on  Qod.  Solon 
said,  **  No  man  ought  to  be  called  happy 
till  he  dies,  because  he  knows  not  what 
his  life  is  to  be."  But  the  Christian 
may  always  call  himself  happy  here 
because  wherever  his  tent  is  carried,  he 
need  never  pitch  it  where  the  cloud 
does  not  move  and  where  he  is  not 
surrounded  by  a  wall  of  fire.  "  I  will 
be  a  wall  of  fire  round  about  them,  and 
their  glory  in  the  midst "  They  cannot 
dwell  where  God  is  not  householder, 
warder,  and  bulwark  of  salvation. 


EOMILETICa. 
Thb  Dawn  of  Hon. 


(Verses  18-21.) 

L  Begins  to  appear  when  the  sonl  has  reached  tlie  verge  of  despair.    *<I 

said,  My  strength  and  my  hope  is  perished  from  the  Lord  "  (ver.  18).  When  things 
get  to  the  worst  they  begin  to  mend.  For  some  time  the  affairs  of  the  prophet 
had  been  sinking  into  ever-deepening  gloom.  His  peace  and  happiness  had  departed, 
the  memory  ihat  they  ever  existed  had  perished,  and  now  dark  doubts  about  the 
Divine  goodness  had  finished  the  degenerating  process.  It  was  a  oritioal  moment 
80 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H0M1LBTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  OMAr.  in. 

The  soul  oscillated  between  utter  collapse  and  the  beginning  of  recovery.  It  ia  a 
mercy  the  soul  is  not  left  to  itself  in  its  weakest  moments.  Help  was  at  Imnd, 
and  hope  began  to  dawn.  All  the  time  the  soul  was  expressing  the  utmost 
de^ipondencj,  it  was  struggling  against  despair,  and  feeling  for  some  ground  of  con- 
fidence and  hope.  It  begins  to  appear  that,  after  all,  trouble  is  God's  method  of 
making  known  His  righteousness  and  love.     A  way  out  of  the  dungeon  is  opening. 

XL  Indicated  by  the  inrayer  of  the  soul  for  the  Divine  pity.  ^'Eemem- 
bering  mine  affliction  and  my  misery,  the  wormwood  and  the  gall"  (ver.  19). 
Remember.  It  is  a  prayer  to  Jehovah,  beseeching  compassion  for  the  soul  that 
has  supped  its  fill  of  misery,  which  it  has  found  as  bitter  as  wormwood  and  galL 
There  is  hope  for  man,  for  the  worst  of  men,  when  he  begins  to  pray.  It  is  the 
first  step  upward  in  the  pathway  of  deliverance.  It  may  seem  a  cry  of  despair, 
but  it  is  a  cry  that  appeals  to  the  Divine  pity,  and  not  in  vain.  The  powers  of 
Omnipotence  are  put  into  operation  for  the  soul's  rescue. 

UI.  Evident  by  the  flEtct  of  the  soul's  voluntary  homiliation.  "  My  sonl 
hath  them  still  in  remembrance  and  is  humbled  in  me  "  (ver.  20).  It  is  borne  in 
upon  the  sufferer  that  his  extraordinary  afflictions  are  the  consequences  of  sin. 
The  mind  oppressed  and  crippled  by  a  morbid  contemplation  of  its  miseries  is  now 
transferred  to  a  consideration  of  their  cause,  and  reflection  upon  its  transgressions 
bows  the  soul  in  conscious  shame.  A  change  of  theme  is  a  relief  to  the  mentally 
distressed.  The  moment  the  soul  becomes  concerned  about  its  sins,  it  becomes 
anxious  about  their  removal.     This  anxiety  is  the  dawn  of  hope. 

lY.  Strengthened  by  the  recollection  that  prayer  and  penitence  are  the 
conditions  of  deliveranca  *'  This  I  recall  to  my  mind,  therefore  have  I  hope  " 
(ver.  21).  He  has  seen  his  error  in  murmuring  against  the  bitterness  of  his 
adversity.  Complaints  only  increased  his  misery,  but  did  nothing  towards  remov- 
ing it.  He  now  recalls  how  a  sight  of  his  sins  had  humbled  him,  and  led  him  to 
pray  for  mercy,  and  knowing  that  God  hears  the  cry  of  the  sincerely  penitent,  he 
begins  to  cherish  the  hope  of  pardon  and  deliverance.  It  is  in  this  way  that  Gkxl 
deals  with  the  sinners  of  to-day.  While  men  concentrate  their  thoughts  upon 
their  misfortunes,  and  rail  against  the  Providence  whose  laws  they  have  so  reck- 
lessly broken,  they  shut  themselves  off  from  God  and  from  hope ;  but  when  they 
acknowledge  and  grieve  over  their  sins,  and  pray  to  God  for  the  mercy  provided 
for  all  men  in  Christ  Jesus,  they  receive  not  oidy  the  hope,  but  the  assurance  of 
salvation. 

LS880N& — 1.  Hope  %8  the  last  link  between  sanity  and  utter  mental  eottapee. 
2.  The  greaiegt  eufferer  is  never  whoUy  teithaut  hope.  3.  AU  true  r^orm  mutt 
begin  in  hope. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VEBSES. 

Vers.  18, 10.  Lost  hope  restored.    L  hope.     Memory  is  veiy  often  the  ser- 

Hope  has  its  highest  realisation  in  God.  vant  of  despondency.     She  stands  like 

11.  When  sin  divorces  the  soul  from  a   handmaiden,   clothed  in   sackcloth, 

God,  its  hope  perishes.  III.  Only  as  the  presenting    to  her    master   a    cup  of 

soul  returns  to  God  is  its  hope  restored,  mingled   gall    and    wormwood.     Like 

Vers.  20,  21.  The  office  of  memory:  Mercury,  she  hastes  with  winged  heel 

I.  Plays  an  important  part  in  our  men-  to  gather  fresh  thorns  with  which  to  fill 

tal  and  spiritual  history.     IL  Helps  us  the  uneasy  pillow,  and  to  bind  fresh 

to  realise  the  nature  and  aggravation  of  rods  with  which  to  scourge  the  already 

our  sins.      III.  Should  lead  us  to  a  bleeding  heart     There  is,  however,  no 

wise  and  timely  humiliation  on  account  necessity  for  this.     Wisdom  will  trans- 

of  sin.     IV.  Prepares  the   way  for  a  form  memory  into  an  angel  of  comfort 

brighter  and  more  hopeful  future.  She  need  not  wear  a  crown  of  iron ;  she 

Ver.  21.  Memory,  the  handmaid  of  may  encircle  her  brow  with  a  fillet  of 

81  f 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAT,  nu 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS. 


gold,  all  spangled  with  stars.  We  lay 
it  down  as  a  general  principle,  that  if 
we  would  exercise  our  memories  we 
might,  in  our  darkest  distress,  strike 
a  match  which  would  instantaneously 
kindle  the  lamp  of  comfort.  I.  Apply 
this  principle  to  the  believer  in  deep 
troubla  The  chapter  contains  a  list 
of  matters  the  recollection  of  which 
brouj^ht  comfort  to  Jeremiah.  1.  The 
fact  that,  hotoever  deep  our  affliction^  it  is 
of  the  Lord^»  mercy  we  are  not  consumed. 
When  you  are  kindling  your  household 
fire,  before  which  you  hope  to  sit  down 
with  comfort,  you  do  not  expect  first  to 
kindle  the  lumps  of  coal,  but  you  set 
some  lighter  fuel  in  a  blaze,  and  soon 
the  more  solid  material  yields  a  genial 
glow  ;  so  this  thought,  which  may  seem 
so  light  to  you,  may  be  as  the  kindling 
of  a  heavenly  fire  of  comfort  to  you  who 
are  now  shivering  in  your  grief.  2. 
His  compassions  fail  not.  This  again  is 
not  a  very  high  step,  bat  still  it  is  a 
little  in  advance  of  the  other,  and  the 
weakest  may  readily  reach  it.  3. 
The  Lord  is  my  portion.  One  of  our 
kings,  high  and  haughty  in  temper,  had 
a  quarrel  with  the  citizens  of  London, 
and  thought  to  alarm  them  by  a  dread- 
ful threat  that  would  cow  the  spirits  of 
the  bold  burghers,  for  if  they  did  not 
mind  what  they  were  at,  he  would  remove 
his  court  from  Westminster.  Where- 
upon the  doughty  Lord  Mayor  begged 
to  inquire  whether  his  Majesty  meant 
to  take  the  Thames  away,  for  so  long 
as  the  river  remained,  his  majesty  might 
take  himself  where  he  pleased.  Even 
80  the  world  warns  us,  you  cannot  hold 
out,  you  cannot  rejoice ;  this  trouble 
shall  come  and  that  adversity  shall  be- 
fall. We  reply.  So  long  as  you  cannot 
take  our  Lord  away,  we  will  not  com- 
plain. We  have  now  advanced  to  some 
degree  of  hope,  but  there  are  other  steps 
to  ascend.  4.  The  Lord  is  good  unto 
them  that  xoaitfor  Him,  to  the  soul  that 
seeketh  Him.  Let  Him  smite  never 
so  hard,  yet  if  we  can  maintain  the 
heavenly  posture  of  prayer,  we  may 
rest  assured  that  He  will  turn  from 
blows  to  kisses  yet  Bunyan  tells 
us  that  when  the  city  of  Mansoul 
was  besieged,  it  was  the  depth  of 
82 


winter  and  the  roads  were  very  bad; 
but  even  then  prayer  could  travel  them. 
No  enemy  can  barricade  the  road  to  the 
King.  We  are  getting  into  deeper 
water  of  joy ;  let  us  take  another  step. 

5.  It  is  good  that  a  man  should  bear  the 
yoke  in  his  youth.  Wliy  should  I  dread 
to  descend  the  shaft  of  affliction  if  it 
leads  me  to  the  gold  mine  of  spiritual 
experience  1  Why  should  I  cry  out  if 
the  sun  of  my  prosperity  goes  down,  if 
in  the  darkness  of  my  adversity  I  shall 
be  the  better  able  to  count  the  starry 
promises  with  which  my  faithful  (Jod 
has  been  pleased  to  gem  the  sky.  Many 
a  promise  is  written  in  sympathetic 
ink,  which  you  cannot  read  till  the 
fire  of  trouble  brings  out  the  charac- 
ters. One  step  more,  and  surely  we 
shall  then  have  good  ground  to  rejoice. 

6.  The  Lord  mil  not  cast  off  for  ever. 
Who  told  thee  that  the  night  would 
never  end  in  day  1  Who  told  thee  that 
the  sea  would  ebb  out  till  there  should 
be  nothing  left  but  a  vast  tract  of  mud 
and  sandf  Who  told  thee  that  the 
winter  would  proceed  from  frost  to  frost, 
from  snow,  and  ice,  and  hail,  to  deeper 
snow  and  yet  more  heavy  tempest  t 
Knowest  thou  not  that  day  follows 
night,  that  flood  comes  after  ebb,  the 
spring  and  summer  succeed  to  winter  t 
Hope  thou  then !  Hope  thou  ever,  for 
God  fails  thee  not.  Thus  memory  may 
be,  as  Coleridge  calls  it,  "  the  bosom- 
spring  of  joy."  IT.  To  the  donbtiiig 
Ohxistian  who  has  lost  his  evidences 
of  salvation:  1.  Call  to  remembrance 
matters  of  the  past.  At  the  south  of 
Africa  the  sea  was  generally  so  stormy 
when  the  frail  barks  of  the  Portuguese 
went  sailing  south  that  they  named  it 
the  Cape  of  Storms ;  but  after  that  cape 
had  been  well  rounded  by  bolder  navi- 
gators, they  named  it  the  Cape  of  Gk)od 
Hope.  In  your  experience  you  had 
many  a  Cape  of  Storms,  but  you  have 
weathered  them  all,  and  now  let  them 
be  a  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  you.  2. 
Recall  the  fact  that  others  have  found  the 
Lord  true  to  them,  3.  Remember  that 
if  you  look  within  you  will  see  somefcUni 
traces  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  hand.  The 
complete  picture  of  Christ  is  not  there, 
but  cannot  you  sec  the  crayon  sketch, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIG  GOMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


the  outline,  the  charcoal  marks  t  Where 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  has  done  as  much 
4S  that,  He  will  do  more.  4.  Reeolleet 
that  Jems  Christ  came  into  the  world  to 
s(we  sinners.  If  I  am  not  a  saint,  I  am 
a  sinner ;  and  if  I  may  not  go  to  the 
throne  of  grace  as  a  child,  I  will  go  as 
a  sinner.  III.  A  few  words  to  seekers. 
Oh,  that  I  had  a  voice  like  the  trumpet 
of  God  that  shall  wake  the  dead  at  last  1 
If  I  might  only  have  it  to  utter  one 
sentence,  it  would  he  this  one,  "In 
Christ  is  your  help  found."  As  for 
you,  there  never  can  he  found  anything 
hopeful  in  your  human  nature.  It  is 
death  itself  it  is  Rottenness  and  corrup- 
tion. Turn,  turn  away  your  eyes  from 
this  despairing  mass  of  hlack  depravity 
and  look  to  Christ. — (7.  H.  Spurgeon, 

ILLUSTRATION& — The  xoisery  of  hope- 
lessness. Ahraham  Lincoln,  when  a 
young  man,  was  subject  to  terrihle  fits 
of  depression.  In  one  of  his  letters  he 
writes :  *'  I  am  now  the  most  miser- 
able being  living.  If  what  I  feel  were 
equally  distributed  to  the  whole  human 
family,  there  would  not  be  one  cheerful 
face  on  earth.  Whether  I  shall  ever 
be  better  I  cannot  tell ;  I  awfully  for* 
bode  I  shall  not  To  remain  as  I  am 
is  impossible ;  I  must  die  or  be  better." 

Hope  presupposes  fkith.  They  can- 
not exist  apart  Hope  is  the  balloon  of 
the  soul,  soaring  majestically  into  the 
heavens,  scanning  scenes  of  beauty  and 
grandeur  never  beheld  by  our  earth- 
bound  senses,  and  faithfully  reporting 
to  the  soul  the  state  of  affairs  in  the 
skies ;  but  it  is  a  captive  balloon,  and 
the  connecting  cords  are  firmly  held  in 
the  hand  of  faith.  The  loftiest  flights 
and  the  swing  of  what  may  seem  the 
most  eccentric  gyrations  of  hope  are 
held  in  check  by  the  friendly,  the  sym- 
pathetic, and  unswerving  grasp  of  faith. 
«« My  dear  Hope,"  says  Faith,  "  it  is  very 


nice  for  you  to  be  up  there  basking  in 
the  cloudless  sunshine  and  drinking  in 
the  melody  of  the  ascending  lark  as  it 
ripples  up  the  heights ;  and  I  like  you 
to  be  there.  I  could  never  get  there 
myself;  and  you  tell  me  of  thing3  I 
should  never  otherwise  know,  and  they 
do  me  good.  But  remember,  I  cannot 
let  you  go.  We  are  necessary  to  each 
other,  and  cannot  do  without  each  other. 
If  you  were  to  break  away  from  me,  you 
would  vanish  like  vapour  into  space,  and 
I  should  be  left  forlorn  and  powerless." 

Hope  clings  to  ns  to  the  last.  When 
John  Knox  lay  dying,  one  of  the  friends 
around  his  death-bed  asked  the  ques- 
tion, "  Hast  thou  hope  t "  The  veteran 
reformer  was  too  weak  to  speak — the 
moment  for  speech  was  gone ;  but  the 
expiring  saint  raised  his  finger  and 
pointed  upwards,  and  so  passed  triumph- 
antly to  the  skies. 

Grayer  a  preparation  for  conflict. 
A  soldier  in  the  Confederate  army  was 
once  asked  what  was  the  secret  of  Stone- 
wall Jackson's  influence  over  his  men. 
"  Does  your  general  abuse  you,  swear 
at  you  to  make  you  march  t "  "  Swear !  '* 
answered  the  soldier.  "  No ;  Ewell 
does  the  swearing ;  Stonewall  does  the 
praying !  When  Stonewall  wants  us  to 
march,  he  looks  at  us  soberly,  just  as  if 
he  were  sorry  for  us,  and  says,  *  Men, 
we've  got  to  make  a  long  march.'  We 
always  know  when  there  is  going  to  be 
a  long  march  and  right  smart  fighting, 
for  old  Jack  is  powerful  on  prayer  just 
before  a  big  fight" 

Memory  of  victory  inspiring.  Dur- 
ing the  last  days  of  William  IV.  the 
anniversary  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo 
occurred.  Rousing  himself  upon  re- 
membrance of  it,  the  dying  King 
requested  that  some  of  the  French 
standards  taken  there  should  be  brought 
to  him,  which  when  he  looked  at  and 
handled  he  said,  **  I  feel  much  better." 


EOMIZ£TI08. 

Tn   DlVINB   FAITHFULNBS& 

(Vers.  22-24.) 

I  Evidenced  in  onr  preservation  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  afflictions.  **It 
is  cxf  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not  consumed  "  (ver.  22).     The  same  Divine 

-      83 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  TTi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARf:  LAMENTATIONS. 

power  that  called  us  into  being  is  exerted  every  moment  to  sustain  tliat  being. 
The  enemies  of  our  life  threaten  us  every  moment.  We  walk  in  the  midst  of 
secret  and  unsuspected  dangers.  A  whiff  of  subtle  and  mysterious  vapour,  and 
the  throb  of  life  is  for  ever  stilled;  the  crumbling  of  a  few  inches  of  shale 
beneath  our  feet,  and  we  are  precipitated  into  the  abyss  of  death ;  the  slightest 
overbalance  on  the  slippery  deck,  and  we  are  immersed  in  a  watery  grave ;  the 
accidental  divergence  of  the  knife  or  firing  of  the  rifle,  and  we  receive  our  death- 
wound  ;  the  horse  stumbles,  and  the  rider  lies  dead  at  its  feet;  the  lightning 
flashes,  and  the  unsuspecting  passer-by  is  stricken  into  a  livid  corpse ;  the  careering 
locomotive  leaves  the  metals,  and  many  homes  are  darkened  with  desolation  and 
sorrow ;  the  volcano  opens  its  treacherous  side,  and  thousands  are  swallowed  into 
the  depths  of  its  burning  lava.  How  unfathomable  is  the  mercy  and  how  on- 
deviating  the  faithfulness  that  have  spared  us  to  this  hour !  "  One  shall  be  taken 
and  another  left;''  but  how  is  it  that  others  are  taken  and  we  are  leftt  How  is 
it  that  we  have  been  to  so  many  funerals,  and  no  one  has  yet  been  to  ours  t 

n.  Revealed  in  its  greatness  by  the  daily  renewal  of  the  Divine  merdas. 
"  They  are  new  every  morning ;  great  is  thy  faithfulness  "  (ver.  23).  Our  wants 
are  constant ;  so  is  the  Divine  provision.  The  arrest  in  the  outflow  of  Divine 
mercies  for  a  single  day  would  mean  unspeakable  suffering  to  millions.  The 
Divine  supply  is  ever  ahead  of  our  daily  needs.  Every  Divine  blessing  has  the 
freshness  and  the  fragrance  of  the  morning  about  it.  ''They  are  new  every 
morning" — unfailing  as  the  morning  dawn,  bright  and  joyous  as  the  morning 
sunshine,  brilliant  and  sparkling  as  the  morning  dew,  sweet  and  invigorating  as 
the  morning  air.  Every  new  day,  as  it  pours  its  cornucopia  of  gifts  upon  the 
WjDrld,  is  an  infallible  witness  to  the  Divine  faithfulness. 

ILL  Is  the  assured  foundation  of  the  soul's  hope.  ^'  The  Lord  is  my  portion, 
therefore  will  I  hope  in  Him  "  (ver.  24).  The  hope  of  the  prophet  began  to  dawn 
amidst  the  deepest  gloom  when  he  remembered  that  Grod  answered  prayer  (ver. 
21) ;  but  now  it  is  strengthened  and  confirmed  when  he  is  assured  of  the  con- 
stancy of  the  Divine  mercy.  Israel's  hope  of  help  from  Egypt,  or  from  any  of 
her  professed  allies,  was  shattered,  that  she  might  be  taught  to  seek  refuge  alone 
in  God.  Amid  the  wreckage  of  all  earthly  hopes  the  soul  finds  a  sure  foundation 
for  hope  and  confidence  in  the  unchangeable  mercy  and  faithfulness  of  GkxL 

Lessons. — 1.  Affliction  which  reveals  the  fickleness  of  earthly  things  also  reveals 
the  unchanging  faithfulness  of  God.  2.  Daily  mercies  are  constant  reminders  of 
the  Divine  faithfulness,  3.  The  Divine  faithfulness  is  at  once  the  hope  and  satis- 
faction of  the  souL 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  22,  23.     The  views  of  a  saint  But  for  the  daily  renewal  of  (Sod's 

in  his  afflictions.     He  contemplates —  mercy  to  His  people  they  would  have 

1.  TTie  lightness  of  his  affliction  in  been  utterly  cut  off.     His  faithfulness 
comparison  of  his  deserts,  to  the  covenant  was  great  beyond  all 

2.  The  multitude  of  the  mercies  yet  human  parallel     No  new  day  would 
continued  to  him,  ever  brighten  and  glow  over  the  cowed, 

3.  The  unchangeahleness  of  God  under  comfortless,  half-relenting  remnant  of 
all  His  dispensations.  the  holy  seed,  but  for  God's  readiness 

4.  The  beauty  of  religion  as  displayed  to  forgive.      They  had  sinned  away 
in  these  views,  their  covenant  birthright^   but  GUxi's 

They  compose  the  mind,  elevate  the  compassion  hovered  near  to  restore  it 

soul,  and  honour  God. — Simeon.  again.     And   is  it  not  ever  so   with 

Yer.    23.    Dasrsjoing   mercies.      I.  God's  people  1     In  times  of  ohastise- 

These  words  seem  to  speak  of  the  in-  ment  and  in  times  of  prosperity  alike 

exhaustible  loealth  of  God's  forgiveness,  they  need  to  be  ever  encircled  by  God's 
84 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  OOMMSNTART:  LAMSNTATJ0N8. 


OHAP.  ra. 


forgiving  grace.  Close  by  one  of  the 
great  cities  of  the  East  there  is  a  large 
stretch  of  grass  that  is  always  green. 
Sometimes  the  showers  are  rare  and 
scanty,  and  the  thermometer  mounts  to 
an  appalling  height,  and  one  wonders 
to  see  the  grass  green  and  lush  as 
though  it  were  growing  in  some  English 
meadow.  It  is  kept  so  by  a  heavy  dew 
that  never  fails  to  fall  in  the  night- 
time. And  so  with  our  life  of  conse- 
cration. There  is  no  dawn  without 
the  dew  of  abounding  love  and  com- 

rion  descending  to  keep  it  green. 
These  words  seem  to  suggest  (he 
resourcefulness  of  Divine  Providence, 
The  mercy  that  is  ever  fresh  to  pardon 
is  ever  fresh  to  guide  and  shape  the 
circumstances  in  the  midst  of  which 
the  pardoned  life  is  spent  The  text  is 
in  direct  conflict  with  the  clock-work 
theory  of  the  universe.  Providence 
gloriee  in  freshness  and  originality — ^it 
abhors  unintelligent  routine.  The  tied- 
up  helm  and  the  sail  square-set  to  the 
wind  are  no  types  of  God's  providential 
methods  of  dealing  with  us.  Life  is 
full  of  bends  and  rapids  and  shallows 
and  whirlpools,  and  an  automatic  pro- 
vidence will  not  meet  the  terrific  emer- 
gencies of  its  swiftly  passing  moments. 
Sail  and  helm  alike  are  in  His  hand, 
and  answer  to  His  touch  through  every 
flashing  second.  Astronomers  at  one 
time  puzzled  themselves  over  a  problem 
in  solar  physics.  How  was  the  heat  of 
the  sun  maintained!  It  seemed  a 
natural  inference  that,  as  it  was  always 
giving  off  heat  in  stupendous  volumes, 
ultimate  exhaustion  must  one  day  come. 
Within  recent  times  the  suggestion  has 
found  wide  acceptance  that  the  sun  is 
constantly  drawing  meteors,  asteroids, 
and  comets  to  itself,  and  that  the  heat 
is  maintained  by  the  impact  of  these 
bodies  as  they  fall  into  the  sun.  Things 
oome  to  us  from  time  to  time  that  seem 
out  of  all  accord  with  the  harmonies 
around  ua  Strange  difficulties,  stum- 
bling-blocks, tribulations,  start  up  in 
the  path  of  our  daily  life.  These  things 
are  drawn  into  the  circle  of  God's  con- 
trol and  government  for  their  solution, 
and  it  is  in  this  way  that  the  very 
glory  of  God's  providence  is  maintained. 


m  These  words  seem  to  suggest  the 
unfailing  truth  and  faUhftdness  of  Ood 
in  His  relation  to  His  people.  Go<l's 
renewed  mercies  are  linked  with  the 
morning  because  the  return  of  the  day 
is  one  of  the  most  perfect  and  intel- 
ligible symbols  of  constancy  to  be  found 
in  the  economy  of  Nature.  The  rains 
may  come  and  go  upon  a  system  to 
which  science  has  found  no  clue. 
Winter  sometimes  pushes  itself  far  on 
into  the  spring.  A  late  spring  and  an 
early  autumn  may  squeeze  out  the  sum- 
mer. A  flood  may  quite  change  the 
face  of  a  country.  Islands  have  been 
known  to  disappear  in  some  of  the  con- 
vulsions of  Nature.  The  mariner  has 
looked  for  his  landmark,  and  it  is  gona 
Empires  may  rise  and  perish  with  no 
hope  of  a  resurrection  other  than  an 
ignoble  disinterment  at  the  hands  of 
the  archssologist.  But  no  ill  chance  can 
befall  the  day-spring.  And  as  infallibly 
as  the  welcome  day-dawn  steals  at  its 
own  hour  into  our  homes,  so  infallibly 
do  the  Divine  compassions  arise  upon 
the  lowly  and  the  contrite.  God 
reflects  the  benignity  of  His  own  face 
into  the  flush  of  dawn,  and  makes  it 
the  parable  of  a  faithfulness  upon  which 
you  can  always  count.  lY.  These 
words  suggest  the  unfailing  promptness 
of  Ood's  ministrations.  "  His  mercies 
are  new  every  morning ; "  that  is,  just 
as  soon  as,  or  even  before,  we  begin  to 
need  them.  We  receive  our  salvation, 
guidance,  and  defence,  not  of  our  own 
work,  but  of  His  free  love.  If  it  were 
of  our  own  work,  we  must  needs  wait 
for  the  nightfall  before  we  could  receive 
any  recompense.  Wages  are  paid  at 
sunset.  But  it  is  all  His  gift  So  the 
mercy  in  which  we  rejoice  comes  to  us 
with  the  dawn,  before  we  have  done  a 
solitary  stroke  of  work.  The  regular 
tions  of  the  court  at  Pekin  are  so  framed 
as  to  give  to  the  Chinese  Empire  an 
example  of  promptness  and  despatch. 
The  emperor  always  receives  his  cabinet 
ministers  and  councillors  at  three  or 
four  o'clock  in  the  morning — long  before 
day- dawn.  And  00  God  awaits  His 
servants  with  new  pardons,  new  coun- 
sels, new  honours  in  His  kingdom, 
long  before  the  day-dawn.      An    in- 

86 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  in. 


EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


genioiis  botanist,  by  watching  the  hours 
at  which  certain  flowers  opened,  hit 
upon  ihe  pretty  conceit  of  con:>tructing 
what  he  called  a  flower-clock.  God's 
matcliless  mercies,  like  circles  of  thick- 
set bloom  that  break  into  splendour 
with  a  rhythm  that  never  halts,  are 
measuring  out  the  successive  hours  of 
our  life.  No  winter  comes  to  blast  the 
flowers,  and  the  clock  is  never  behind 
time.  V.  These  words  suggest  the.  per- 
petual  freshness  of  the  Divine  Nature, 
God's  compassions  are  unceasingly  new 
because  they  well,  pure  and  fair,  out 
of  the  stainless  and  infinite  depths  of 
His  Fatherhood.  They  have  the  ever- 
renewed  and  living  sweetness  of  His 
own  spring-like  nature  in  them.  His 
daily  mercies  come  to  us  clothed  with 
the  enkindled  grace  of  His  own  match- 
less smile,  and  full  of  the  light  of  an 
immortal  May-time.  He  cannot  give 
or  do  without  putting  the  buoyancy  of 
His  own  untiring  and  eternal  youth 
into  each  boon  and  act. — T,  O,  Selby, 

Ver.  24.  (Compared  with  Deut. 
xxxii.  9).  Ohoice  portions.  L  The 
Lord's  portion  is  His  people.  1.  T?ie 
Church  of  God  is  the  Lord^s  own  peculiar 
and  special  property.  As  a  king  may 
have  ample  possessions,  to  all  of  which 
he  has  undoubted  right,  but  still  has 
royal  demesnes  and  crown-lands  which 
are  in  a  very  special  sense  his  own,  so 
hath  the  Lord  of  all  a  peculiar  interest 
in  His  saints.  They  are  His  by  sove- 
reign choice,  by  purchase  and  by  con- 
quest. 2.  The  saints  are  tits  objects  of 
the  Lord's  especial  care.  The  Lord  is 
the  eternal  watcher  of  the  universe  and 
never  sleeps;  yet  in  a  very  distinct 
sense  He  is  the  guardian  of  His  Church. 
S.  T/ie  Church  is  the  object  of  the  Lord's 
special  joy.  I  do  not  read  that  God 
delighteth  in  the  cloud-capped  moun- 
tains or  in  the  sparkling  stars,  but  I  do 
read  that  He  delighteth  in  the  habitable 
parts  of  the  earth,  and  His  delights  are 
with  the  sons  of  men.  4.  Ood^s  people 
are  His  everlasting  possession.  He  will 
never  sell  His  people  at  any  price,  nor, 
if  He  could  have  better  people  instead, 
would  He  change  them.  They  are  His 
for  ever.  IL  The  Lord  is  my  portion. 
I.  True  believers  hm^e  the  Ijord  as  their 
66 


sole  portion,  St.  Augustine  was  wont 
very  often  to  pray,  "Lord,  Give  me 
thyself."  A  less  portion  than  this 
would  be  unsatisfactory.  2.  As  God  is 
our  only  portion,  so  He  is  our  own  por- 
tion, l3o  not  be  satisfied  with  generals ; 
come  to  particulars.  Men  go  to  hell 
in  bundles,  but  they  go  to  heaven 
separately.  3.  Tlie  Lord  is  to  His 
people  an  inherited  jtortion.  We  owe 
it  to  the  fact  of  our  birth — a  child  of 
God  by  being  bom  in  the  image  of  His 
son.  4.  This  heritage  is  ours  by  choice. 
We  have  chosen  Grod  to  be  our  portion. 
Better  to  have  Christ  and  a  fiery  faggot 
than  to  lose  Him  and  wear  a  royal 
robe.  5.  Ood  is  His  peoples  settled 
portion.  The  covenant  of  day  and 
night  may  be  broken,  the  waters  may 
again  cover  the  earth,  sooner  than  the 
decrees  of  grace  be  frustrated.  The 
Lord  is  my  aU-sufficient  portion.  God 
fills  Himself.  If  He  is  all-suflBcient  in 
Himself,  Ho  must  be  all-sufficient  for 
us. — C,  H.  Spurgeon. 

IiiLusTRATiONa  —  Divliid  fkithftil- 
ness.  Visiting  a  dying  Christian 
woman,  Dr.  John  Brown  once  said 
to  her,  "  What  would  you  say,  Janet, 
if,  after  Gkxi  has  done  so  much  for 
you,  He  should  let  you  drop  into  hell  t " 
She  calmly  replied,  "E'en  as  He  likes; 
but  He'll  lose  more  than  I  will" 

—  You  may  be  feint  and  weary,  but 
my  GUxl  cannot.  I  may  fluctuate  and 
alter  as  to  my  frames  and  feelings,  but 
my  Redeemer  is  unchangeably  the  same. 
I  might  utterly  fail  and  come  to  nothing 
if  left  to  myself;  but  I  cannot  be  so 
left  to  myself,  for  the  Spirit  of  Truth 
hath  said,  "I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee."  He  will  renew  my 
strength,  either  by  changing  my  weak- 
ness into  strength,  or  by  enduing  me 
with  His  own  power.  He  is  wise  to 
foresee  and  provide  for  all  my  dangeia 
He  is  rich  to  relieve  and  succour  me  in 
all  my  wants.  He  is  faithful  to  perfect 
and  perform  all  His  piomise& — Ambrose 
SerU. 

Divine  Providence.  It  is  the  fault 
of  the  present  day  to  think  and  to  act 
as  if  man  could  do  everything,  and  to 
forget  God's  special  providence.    Hence 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILBTIO  COMMENT JLRT:  LAMENT  A  TIONS.  chap.  m. 

that  busybodine.«8  which  distinguishes  served  God  faithfully,"  he  would  say 
the  religious  world,  and  prevents  that  when  night  found  them  supperless  in 
depth  of  piety  which  is  the  result  of  the  waste.  **Look  at  the  eagle  over- 
sober,  calm  reflection,  and  which  shows  head  !  God  can  feed  us  through  him, 
itself  in  doing  calmly  and  unostenta-  if  He  will ! " — and  once,  at  least,  he 
tiously,  not  what  seems  likely  to  he  owed  his' meal  to  a  large  fish  that  the 
attended  with  the  greatest  results,  hut  scared  bird  let  fall. 
simply  the  duty  our  hand  findeth  to  Want  anticipated.  The  wood- 
do. — Dean  Hook.  piercing  bee  will  make  a  tunnel  in  a 

—  Those  believers  who  watch  provi-  tree-trunk  twelve  or  fifteen  inches  long 

dences  will  never  lack  providences  to  and  half  an  inch  wide,  which  is  divided 

watch. — FlaveU.  into  ten  or  twelve  cells.     An  egg  with 

Divine  snpply  in  emergencies.     St.  a  store  of  pollen  and  honey  is  deposited 

Cuthbert  of  Lindisfame  was  often  in  in  each   cell,   so  that  as  soon  as  the 

great  poverty  and  pinched  for  food,  young  bee  is   bom  it  has  its  dinner 

'*  Never  did  man  die  of  hnnger  who  awaiting  it  I — RuskifL 


E0MILETIC8. 

Thbeb  Gbades  of  Goodniss. 

(Vers.  25-27.) 

L  There  is  the  goodness  of  Jehovah  to  those  who  cling  to  Him.  '^The 
Lord  is  good  unto  them  that  wait  for  Him,  to  the  soul  that  seeketh  Him  "  (ver. 
25).  Gkxl  is  absolutely  and  supremely  good — ^good  in  Himself,  good  in  all  things, 
good  at  all  timea  If  He  is  good  to  all,  then  He  must  be  especially  so  to  those 
who  wait  on  Him  in  conscious  dependence  and  earnestly  supplicate  His  help. 
There  are  mysteries  about  the  Divine  procedure  which  we  cannot  fathom,  and 
we  are  sometimes  tempted  to  questiim  the  goodness  of  God.  But  clearer  light 
dispels  our  doubts,  and  the  more  completely  we  trust  in  Him  the  more  real  and 
tender  and  potent  does  His  goodness  become.  We  never  know  God  aright  till  we 
trust  Him  fully. 

II.  There  is  the  goodness  of  patient  and  micomplaining  waiting  for  Gk>d's 
time  of  deliverance.  "  It  is  good  that  a  man  should  both  hope  and  quietly  wait 
for  the  salvation  of  the  Lord "  (ver.  26).  To  indulge  in  querulous  complaints 
only  increases  the  irritation  of  our  sufferinga  Murmuring  begets  murmuring, 
and  we  are  apt  to  blame  every  one  but  ourselves.  The  more  we  grumble,  the 
farther  are  we  Hway  from  goodness.  It  is  only  when  we  are  silent  and  abstain 
from  complaining  that  we  begin  to  see  that  our  deliverance  must  come  from  God, 
and  that  it  is  our  wisdom  to  bide  His  time  and  humbly  submit  to  His  method. 
The  soul  attains  goodness  by  exercising  an  active  and  larger  faith  in  the  Divine 
goodness.  A  clearer  apprehension  of  goodness  in  God  begets  a  corresponding 
goodness  in  the  soul  that  sees  it. 

III.  There  is  the  goodness  of  being  accustomed  to  the  hnrden  of  suffering 
early  in  )ifa  **  It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he  bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth  *'  (ver. 
27).  Youth  is  the  perio<l  of  enjoyment,  and  it  has  a  pleasure  all  its  own,  with 
its  bright  and  gay  romancing,  its  poetic  dreams  of  beauty  and  delight,  its  relish- 
able  love  of  work,  its  daring  enterprise  and  bold  ambitions,  its  soaring  hopes  and 
confident  prophecies,  its  sparkling  wit  and  brimming  fun — brilliant  and  harmless 
as  tropical  lightning ;  buoyant,  radiant,  joyous  youth-time,  when  every  sense  is 
steeped  in  the  intoxicating  nectar  of  innocent  rapture,  when  the  whole  world 
shines  with  the  golden  glory  of  perpetual  summer,  and  when  life  is  one  long, 
sweet  poem,  set  to  the  enchanting  movements  of  exquisite  music.     But  youth  has 

87 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


also  its  burdens  and  responsibilities,  and  its  bappiness  is  not  destroyed  but  inten- 
sified when  it  learns  to  bear  witb  bravery  the  disappointments  and  afflictions  of 
life.  The  youth  who  has  known  little  of  suffering  is  ill  prepared  for  the  stern 
realities  of  ordinary  life.  Ejirly  sorrow  brings  early  comfort  and  peace  and 
strength.     The  best  that  is  in  man  is  tested  and  perfected  by  misfortune. 

LB3SON8. — 1.  God  is  good  in  Himself  inherently  and  essentially,  2.  Man  i$ 
good  only  in  the  degree  in  which  he  receives  Divine  grace  and  submits  to  the  Divine 
discipline. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yer.  25.  The  Divine  goodne8&     1. 

A  grand  reality.  2.  CJontinually  mani- 
fested. 3.  Specially  revealed  to  the 
earnest  seeker. 

Yer.  26.  The  adTrantages  of  a  state 
of  expectation.  1.  It  seems  implied 
that  our  incapacity  of  looking  into  the 
future  has  much  to  do  with  the  produc- 
tion of  disquietude  and  unhappiness. 
2.  And  yet  the  possession  of  this  power 
of  anticipating  the  future  would-  be  in- 
calculably more  detrimental  3.  Our 
ignorance  of  what  shall  happen  stimu- 
lates exertion.  We  are  so  constituted 
that  to  deprive  us  of  hope  would  be  to 
make  us  inactive  and  wretched.  4.  It 
is  for  our  advantage  that  salvation,  in- 
stead of  being  a  thing  of  certainty  and 
present  possession,  must  be  hoped  and 
quietly  waited  for.  5.  If  true  believers 
were  withdrawn  from  earth  at  the  mo- 
ment of  their  becoming  such,  the  in- 
fluences of  piety  which  now  make 
themselves  felt  through  the  mass  of  a 
population  would  be  altogether  de- 
stroyed, and  the  world  deprived  of 
that  salt  which  alone  preserves  it  from 
total  decomposition.  6.  No  fair  ex- 
planation can  be  given  of  the  text 
unless  you  bring  into  the  account  the 
difference  in  the  portions  to  be  assigned 
hereafter  to  the  righteous.  7.  The 
continuance  of  the  justified  on  earth 
affords  them  opportunity  of  rising 
higher  in  the  scale  of  future  blessed- 
ness. 8.  Being  compelled  to  hope  and 
to  wait  is  a  good  moral  discipline,  so 
that  the  exercises  prescribed  are  cal- 
culated to  promote  holiness  and  ensure 
happiness.  9.  It  is  good  as  affording 
time  in  which  to  glorify  God.  10. 
Religion  gives  a  character  to  hope  of 
which  otherwise  it  is  altogether  desti- 
tute. Hope  is  a  beautiful  meteor ;  but 
88 


nevertheless  this  meteor,  like  the  rain- 
bow, is  not  only  lovely  because  of  its 
seven  rich  and  radiant  stripes ;  it  is  the 
memorial  of  a  covenant  between  man 
and  his  Maker,  telling  us  that  we  are 
bom  for  immortality,  destined,  unless 
we  sepulchre  our  greatness,  to  the 
highest  honour  and  noblest  happinesa 
— Henry  Melville. 

Hope  and  patience.  L  Whal  is 
meant  by  the  salvation  of  the  Lord? 
Qod's  salvation  is  used  very  frequently 
in  the  Bible  for  His  interposition  to 
save  the  soul  of  man  from  sin.  It  is 
not  this  salvation  which  is  here  spoken 
of,  for  though  a  man  may  be  encouraged 
to  hope,  he  cannot  be  urged  quietly  to 
wait  for  it  The  language  of  the  chapter 
is  not  that  of  a  man  ignorant  of  God. 
It  is  the  salvation  which  a  man  needs 
in  any  crisis  of  life,  where  he  suffers 
under  trial,  or  is  threatened  with  it 
Our  strength  and  resources,  all  possible 
expedients,  have  been  brought  into 
exercise.  The  last  reserve  has  been 
thrown  into  the  battle,  and  yet  it  goes 
against  us.  It  is  then  the  case  rises 
distinctly  into  the  salvation  of  the  Lord. 
A  man  who  has  faith  only  in  worldly 
resources  is  powerless  here.  He  must 
give  up  in  despair,  or  cast  himself  on  a 
blind  chance.  But,  for  a  believing 
man,  there  is  still  a  duty  and  a  stay. 
When  he  cannot  take  a  step  farther  in 
human  effort,  there  is  a  pathway  to  the 
skies,  and  his  heart  can  travel  it.  IL 
What  is  meant  by  these  exercises  of  the 
soul  towards  OocTs  salvation — to  hope 
and  quietly  wait  f  1.  The  foundation 
of  hope  lies  in  desire.  But  desire  may 
pursue  things  that  can  never  be  objects 
of  hope  to  us.  We  can  only  hope  for 
that  which  is  felt  to  be  possible  and 
reasonable.    The  next  ebment  is/v£ft* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CHAP.  TIL 


But  we  beliove  in  many  things  in 
regard  to  which  we  do  not  hope.  Hope 
is  faith  with  desire  pointing  out  the 
objects.  A  third  element  to  make  our 
hope  strong  is  imaginatiofL  While  sin 
has  made  this  world  a  charnel-house  of 
corraption  or  a  storehouse  of  vanities, 
purity  can  fill  its  treasury  with  divine 
aspirations  which  are  as  grand  as  they 
are  transcendently  real  II.  Quiet  wUt- 
ing.  It  is  termed  in  the  'R\h\^  patience. 
It  is  the  part  of  hope  to.  seek  the 
future;  it  is  the  duty  of  patience  to 
rest  calmly  in  the  present,  exercising 
faith,  and  giving  calm  attention  to 
duties.  The  tamest  and  most  insignifi- 
cant of  daily  duties  may  be  made  noble 
and  divine  when  the  thought  of  God 
and  the  will  of  Christ  are  carried  into 
them.  IIL  Consider  the  benefit  of  unit- 
ing these — both  to  hope  and  quietly  ioait 
1.  The  one  is  needful  to  save  the  other 
from  sinking  into  sin.  2.  To  raise  the 
other  to  its  full  strength.  3.  It  is  good 
now  in  the  depth  of  the  soul,  in  the 
conscious  assurance  that  it  is  better  to 
rest  in  the  hardest  of  God's  ways  than 
to  wander  at  will  in  our  own.  4.  It  is 
good  in  the  enhancement  of  every  bles- 
sing for  which  we  have  to  wait  Be- 
tween your  use  of  the  means  and  the 
result  which  you  desire  there  is  still  a 
gulf  of  separation,  on  the  brink  of 
which  Patience  must  sit  and  look 
across,  waiting  God's  time  and  way  to 
pass  it — John  Ker^  D.D, 

Yer.  27.  Youth  tflie  proper  season  of 
dlBdplina  L  In  the  principles  of 
true  religion.  II.  In  the  arts  of  honest 
industry. — Berriman, 

The  best  burden  for  yoxmg  shoul- 
ders. The  bullocks  have  to  bear  the 
yoke.  They  go  in  pairs,  and  the  yoke 
is  borne  upon  their  shouldera  If  the 
bullock  is  not  broken  in  when  young, 
it  will  never  make  a  good  ploughing 
ox.  So  it  is  good  for  us  when  young 
to  learn  obedience,  to  acquire  know- 
ledge, and  to  encounter  difficulties  and 
troubles.  L  It  is  good  to  be  a  Christian 
while  you  are  young.  1.  The  man  whose 
heart  is  conquered  by  Divine  grace 
early  is  made  happy  soon.  2.  Is  saved 
from  a  thousand  snares.  3.  Is  saved  from 
Having  bis  shoulders  galled  with  the 


devil's  yoke.  4.  Gives  him  longer  time 
in  which  to  serve  God.  5^  Enables 
him  to  be  well  established  in  Divine 
things.  JL  It  is  good  for  young  Chris- 
tians that  they  bear  the  yoke  of  Jems. 
1.  They  render  to  Jesus  complete  obe- 
dience from  the  very  first.  2.  They 
attain  dear  instruction  in  Divine  truth. 
3.  They  serve  Christ  early.  4.  It  is 
good  to  meet  with  difficulties  and  per- 
secution in  youth.  IIL  Practically  we 
are  all  of  ua  in  our  youth.  1.  Bearing 
the  yoke,  the  old  Adam  is  kept  in 
check.  2.  We  are  helpful  to  others 
who  have  known  affliction.  3.. Will 
makeheaven  all  the  sweeter. — Spurgeon. 

Illustrations.  —  The  goodness  of 
God  experienced  A  German  just  con- 
verted was  greatly  surprised  at  the 
goodness  of  God  to  him,  which  he  now 
realised.  One  day  he  was  overheard  in 
prayer  saying,  "  O  Lord  Jesus  I  I  did 
not  know  Thou  wert  so  good ! "  How 
general  is  this  ignorance ! 

Patience  conquers.  Twenty -five 
years  ago  the  founder  of  a  college  for 
negroes  in  America  was  hunted  like  a 
wild  beast  through  the  region  where 
his  name  is  now  spoken  by  men  of  all 
parties  with  reverence.  Lloyd  Garrison 
was  nearly  murdered  by  an  infuriated 
mob  for  championing  the  emancipation 
of  the  slaves,  and  years  afterwanls,  in 
the  same  city,  was  made  the  recipient 
of  its  highest  honours.  Time  fights 
against  every  tyranny,  and  in  favour 
of  the  tyrannised.  To  endure  is  to 
oonquer. 

Fellow-Bnfferlng  silences  complaints. 
During  one  of  the  campaigns  in  the 
American  civil  war,  when  the  winter 
weather  was  very  severe,  some  of  Stone- 
wall Jackson's  men,  having  crawled 
out  in  the  morning  from  their  snow- 
laden  blankets,  half-frezen,  began  to 
abuse  him  as  the  cause  of  their  suffer- 
ings. He  lay  close  by  under  a  tree, 
himself  covered  with  snow,  and  heani 
all  this ;  but,  without  noticing  it,  pre- 
sently crawled  out  too,  and,  shaking 
off  the  snow,  made  some  jocular  remark 
to  the  nearest  men,  who  had  no  idea 
he  had  ridden  up  in  the  night  and  lain 
down  amongst  them!      The  incident 

89 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  m,  EOMTLETW  COMMENT AR  7:  LAME  NT  A  TION& 


ran  through  the  army  in  a  few  hours,  so   boldly,   insomuch  that  they  would 

and  reconciled  his  followers  to  all  the  sometimes  from  the  walls  beseech  the 

hardships  of  the  expedition,  and  fully  Achseans  to  retire  for  a  while  and  be 

re-established  his  popularity.  quiet  spectators  of  their  fight  with  the 

Skill  acquired  iir  youth.     Livy  says  Roman  guards, 

that  at  the  siege  of  Sam&  one  hundred  A  brave  youth.     William  Hunter,  a 

slingers   were   brought  from    ^Egeum,  London  apprentice,  was  in  1555  ordered 

PatrsB,  and  Dyms.    These  men,  accord-  by  a  priest  to  attend  mass.   He  refused, 

ing  to  the  practice  of  that  nation,  were  and  one  day  was  found  reading  the 

exercised  from  their  childhood  in  throw-  Bible  in  Brentwood  Church.     He  fled, 

ing  with  a  sling  into  the  open  sea  the  His  father  was  seized,  and  to  release 

round  pebbles  which  strew  the  shore,  him  the  boy  returned  and  surrendered. 

Being  accustomed  to  drive  their  missiles  He  was  imprisoned  for  nine  months, 

through  circular  marks  of  small  circum-  then  offered  a  bribe  by  Bishop  Bonner 

ference  placed  at  a  great  distance,  they  if  he  would  recant.     To  all  he  opposed 

not  only  hit  the  enemy's  heads,  but  a  courageous  resistance,  and  was  burned 

any  part  of  their  faces  they  aimed  at.  at  the  stake  in  his  native  village,  re- 

These  slings  checked  the  Sameans  from  taining  to  the  last  his  religious  sturdi- 

sallying  out   either  so  frequently  or  ness  and  bravery. 


EOMIZJETICS. 

Bbsignation. 

(Vers.  28-30.) 

L  Should  be  bone  in  silence,  recognising  the  hand  of  Ood  in  affliction. 
^'He  aitteth  alone  and  keepeth  silence,  because  He  hath  borne  it  upon  Him" 
(ver.  28).  It  is  difficult  for  an  active  spirit  to  settle  down  contentedly  and  in 
silence  in  any  kind  of  circumstances.  We  cannot  rid  ourselves  of  the  idea  that 
something  is  to  be  done,  and  we  must  do  it.  If  our  misfortunes  come  as  the 
result  of  our  own  folly,  we  feel  we  must  do  something  to  repair  the  damage,  little 
dreaming  how  utterly  useless  are  all  our  endeavours.  When  at  length  the  truth 
dawns  upon  us  that  God  is  at  work  in  connection  with  our  sufferings,  the  seal  is 
at  once  subdued  into  silence  and  patiently  waits  the  issue.  Something  like  this 
was  once  the  experience  of  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  xxxix.  9). 

II.  Should  be  borne  with  reverential  humility,  knowing  there  is  hope  of 
deliverance.  "  He  putteth  his  mouth  in  the  dust,  if  so  be  there  may  be  hope  " 
(ver.  29).  The  putting  the  mouth  in  the  dust  indicates  how  completely  the  soul 
is  prostrated  before  God  in  humility  and  reverential  silence.  The  soul  can  bear 
any  burden  when  it  knows  that  the  hand  of  God  imposes  it,  and  that  He  has  still 
hold  of  it.  While  we  are  conscious  God  is  in  touch  with  our  burden,  there  is 
always  hope  of  its  removal  It  is  when  God  leaves  us  to  our  fate  that  hope 
dies.  Resignation  is  no  evidence  of  hopelessness,  but  rather  an  evidence  how 
firmly  our  hope  is  grounded.  We  could  not  so  completely  cease  from  all  personal 
effort  were  we  not  so  fully  assured  of  Divine  deliverance. 

III.  Should  be  borne  without  resentment,  not  shrinking  i^m  the  bitterest 
dregs  of  the  cup.  ''He  giveth  his  cheek  to  him  that  smiteth  him;  he  is  filled 
full  with  reproach "  (ver.  30).  We  are  to  be  resigned,  but  not  insensible ;  sub- 
missive, but  not  apathetic.  We  are  keenly  alive  to  the  reproaches  heaped  upon 
us  by  our  enemies.  Our  very  resignation  is  offensive  to  them,  and  is  made  a 
handle  of  scorn.  It  is  hard  to  bear  the  jeers  of  others  without  retaliation.  When 
our  sufferings  come  through  our  fellow-men,  it  is  but  human  to  resent  their  attacks 
with  indignation— to  meet  scorn  with  scorn.  But  when  we  are  sensible  our 
troubles  come  from  God,  we  can  more  readily  submit,  and  we  have  grace  given  to 

90 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JBOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTAJLT:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OBAP.  m. 


bear,  without  resentment,  all  that  it  may  please  Him  to  impose  upon  us.    Behind 
the  divine  severity  there  is  unspeakable  gentleness. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  greatest  sorrow  must  be  borne  dhne  and  in  silence,  2.  Mur- 
muring  and  resentment  will  increase,  fnU  not  relieve  our  sufferings,  3.  A  spirit  of 
humble  resignation  secures  the  Divine  compassion  and  help. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.    28-30.    Silent  Buffering.    L 

Not  the  less  acute  because  endured  in 
silence  (ver.  28).  IL  Is  bearable  when 
the  soul  has  a  glimmering  of  hope  (ver. 
29y  in.  Shows  that  the  sufferer  has 
exhausted  every  possible  ground  for 
complaint  (ver.  30). 

Yer.  28.  Retirement  and  silence. 

"What  then  should  be  «  sinner's  coarse? 
Silence  to  all  save  himself  and  his  Grod. 

And  so  also  our  Lord  *  became  dumb ; ' 
He  still  waited  upon  his  Father  ; 

He  made  as  if  He  had  nothing  to  say. 
How  much  more  should  we  be  silent  in  our 
gmlt! 
ThoQ  bast  sinned  in  company, 
Learn  to  do  without  company  at  alL 

Thou  hast  dealt  rudely  with  thy  God, 
Be  content  to  be  rudely  dealt  witL 

Thou  hast  forsaken  Him, 
Be  content  to  be  forsaken. 

Thou  hast  sinned  in  talk. 
Be  content  to  keep  silence. 

Thou  hast  sinned  in  selfish  wayi^ 
Be  content,  nay  be  glad,  to  be  overlooked. 

To  be  disappointed — ^forgotten. 
The  less  thou  art  able  to  retire  at  fixed  times. 
Be  the  more  watchful  to  do  so  at  occasional 
times. 
Thou  hast  sinned  in  boasting. 
Be  sometimes  silent,  even  from  good  words. 

Thou  hast  sinned  by  cowardice. 
Force  thyself  to  speak — in  truthfulness  to 

confess. 
Accept  bereavements,  separationa,  estrange 

ments. 
As  qnwrtunitiea  of  penance  assigned  by 
Him. 
That  He  may  open  thy  mouth  at  last^ 

To  shew  forth  His  praise, 
And  nothing  but  His  praise." 

SOU. 

Illustrations. — ^Resignation  to  the 
wiU  of  Qod.  A  remarkable  instance  of 
Christian  resignation  was  discovered  on 
one  particular  occasion  in  the  conduct 
of  Archbishop  Fen^on.  When  his 
illustrious  and  hopeful  pupil,  the  Duke 
of  Burgundy,  lay  dead  in  his  coffin,  and 
the  nobles  of  his  court,  in  all  the  pomp 
of  silent   sadness,   stood  azonnd,   the 


Archbishop  came  into  the  apartment, 
and  having  fixed  his  eyes  for  some  time 
on  the  corpse,  broke  out  at  length  in 
words  to  this  effect — "There  lies  my 
beloved  prince,  for  whom  my  affections 
were  equal  to  the  tenderest  regard  of 
the  tenderest  parents.  Nor  were  my 
affections  lost;  he  loved  me  in  return 
with  all  the  ardour  of  a  son.  There  he 
lies,  and  all  my  worldly  happiness  lies 
dead  with  him.  But  if  the  turning  of 
a  straw  would  call  him  back  to  life,  I 
would  not  for  ten  thousand  worlds  be 
the  turner  of  that  straw  in  opposition 
to  the  will  of  God." 

Soul-growth  aided  by  silence.  Some 
of  the  best  and  most  beautiful  works 
are  perfected  in  silence.  In  the  making 
of  plate-glass  the  process  of  pouring  the 
melted  material  is  so  delicate,  requiring 
such  care  and  steadiness,  that  the  men, 
impressed  with  the  great  danger  of 
carelessness,  usually  preserve  silence 
during  the  process. 

Humility  a  help  to  knowledge. 
When  the  recent  military  expedition 
went  to  Lower  Egypt,  it  was  found  that 
only  the  smallest  boats  could  go  great 
distances  up  the  Nile.  There  are  some 
truths  that  are  only  revealed  to  those 
who  grow  in  loneliness  and  self-for- 
getfulness — secret  teachings  which  are 
reserved  for  those  who  are  intensely 
childlike  in  spirit.  "Blessed  are  the 
poor  in  spirit." 

Heroic  endoranoe.  One  of  the 
secrets  of  Victor  Hugo's  power  over  the 
French  people  was  l^eir  memory  of  the 
following.  When  the  disasters  of  the 
Franco-German  war  were  falling  thickly, 
and  the  iron  band  was  closing  round 
Paris,  word  came  that  Victor  Hugo  was 
coming  to  the  city.  He  came  at  the 
very  moment  that  the  investmenc  was 
complete,  with  the  last  train,  the  last 
breath  of  free  w.    On  the  way  he  had 

91 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  III.  HOMILETIC  COMMBNTAMT:  LAMENTATIONS. 

Been  the  Bavarians,  seen  villages  burned  ovation  was  given  him  by  the  people, 
with  petroleum,  and  he  came  to  im-  and  they  never  forgot  his  voluntaiy 
prison  himself  in  Fazia.     A  memorable     aharing  of  their  aafferingap 


HOMILETICa. 

Ths  Tendbrnbss  of  God. 

(Vers.  31-38.) 

I.  Sean  in  the  limitation  of  pnniahment.  ''For  the  Lord  will  not  cast  off 
for  ever"  (ver.  31).  (jod  has  no  delight  in  inflicting  punishment  His  righteous- 
ness imposes  on  Him  the  necessity  of  punishing  sin.  But  punishment  has  its 
limits;  and  when  those  limits  are  exceeded,  justice  degenerates  into  cruelty. 
The  tenderness  of  God  is  a  universal  safeguard  against  unduly  prolonged  punish- 
ment (Ps.  Ixxvii.  7-9). 

II.  Seen  in  the  abundant  manifestation  of  mercy.  "But  though  He  cause 
grief,  yet  will  He  have  compassion  according  to  the  multitude  of  His  mercies  *• 
(ver.  32).  Even  in  chastisement  mercy  triumphs  over  justica  Mercy  provide! 
a  means  of  escape,  not  from  justice,  but  from  the  worst  consequences  of  trans- 
gression. "  All  the  souls  that  were,  were  forfeit  once ;  and  He  that  might  the 
vantage  best  have  took  found  out  the  remedy/'  "  God  be  merciftd  to  me  a  sinner," 
is  the  leading  idea  of  inscriptions  on  thousands  of  gravestones  in  the  stately 
cathedral  and  the  village  churchyard,  and  bear  silent  testimony  to  the  deepest 
convictions  of  mankind.  The  mercy  of  God  will  be  conspicuous  to  the  universe, 
and  the  theme  of  endless  adoration. 

III.  Seen  in  tSie  reluctance  with  which  He  inflicts  chastisement.  "For 
He  doth  not  afflict  willingly  nor  grieve  the  children  of  men''  (ver.  33).  GUxl 
never  afflicts  willingly — lit,  from  his  heairL  The  heart  of  God  is  love,  and  love 
has  no  pleasure  in  the  sufferings  of  others,  and  is  not  eager  to  impose  suffering. 
That  Cfod  afflicts  at  all,  and  that  He  does  it  with  so  much  reluctance,  should 
intensify  the  conviction  that,  not  only  is  chastisement  necessary,  but  that  it  is 
evidently  intended  to  lead  to  a  greater  good.  The  prophet  dwells  on  the  tender- 
ness of  God  to  enforce  complete  resignation  to  the  Divine  arrangements. 

Lbssons. — 1.  Ood  never  punUhes  beyond  ths  absolute  necessity  of  the  case. 
2.  He  sympatJUsea  with  the  eufferer  Hie  justice  compels  Him  to  chaetise.  3.  He 
is  ever  slow  to  wrath. 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  81-36.  Oomfort  for  the  sor-  ship  He  sustains  to  His  people.    He  it 

rowftiL     I.  A  cheering  assurance  given,  their  father.     An  earthly  parent  has  to 

1.    That  God's  abandonment  of  His  chastise  his  ofispring,  but  He  does  it 

people  is  only  temporary.      "For  the  with  reluctance.     3.    Their  sufferings 

Lord  will  not  oast  off  for  ever."     2.  are  attended  with  many  alleviations. 

That  the  favour  with  which  He  will  Had  He  any  pleasure  in  punishing  us, 

visit  them  will  be  signal  and  abundant  so  much  mercy  would  not  be  mingled 

"  But  though  He  caui^  grief,  yet  will  with  judgment     4.  The  object  He  has 

He  have  compassion  according  to  the  in  view  in  afflicting  His  children :   it 

multitude  of  His  mercies.''     II.   An  is  for  their  profit,  that  they  may  be 

important  reason  adduced,     ''For  He  partakers   of    His    holiness.      5.    His 

doth  not  afflict  willingly."    This  may  readiness  to   remove    His   chastening 

be  inferred:  1.  From  Hiib character.    He  lumd  when  the  visitation  has  answered 

is  a  God  of  love.    2.  From  the  relation^  the  end  intended.     IIL   A   gradom 
»2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


oup.  m 


UmUaHon  mthjoin&dL  Whenever  God 
afflicts,  it  is :  1.  Within  the  bounds  of 
moderation.  To  "crush"  expresses 
-what  is  extreme  and  def^tructive  (Isa. 
xxvii.  8 ;  Jer.  x.  24,  xlvi.  28).  2.  Never 
in  violation  of  the  principles  of  equity. 
**To  subvert  a  man  in  his  cause  the 
Lord  approveth  not."  He  is  the 
righteous  Lord,  who  loveth  righteous- 
ness, and  all  He  doeth  is  in  accordance 
therewith. — Expository  Outlines. 

Vers.  31-33.  AfUctions  not  aed- 
dentaL  This  apparent  contradiction 
between  the  Divine  compassion  and 
our  human  griefs,  between  what  we 
desire  and  need  and  what  we  feel  to  be 
real,  is  to-day  what  it  has  been  from 
the  beginning,  the  standing  problem, 
the  bitter  tragedy  of  human  life.  It 
has  but  one  solution.  There  is  a  mis- 
chief in  man's  nature  producing  discord 
in  his  condition,  begetting  the  necessity 
and  the  mercy  of  a  Divine  chastening ; 
and  this,  both  in  the  end  it  contem- 
plates and  in  the  methods  it  employs, 
is  a  providence  of  compassion.  I.  The 
fad  thai  grief  is  the  heritage  of  man. 
Life  is  still  the  natural  history  of  sor- 
row— man's  life  the  bitterest  of  all. 
There  are  troubles  that  belong  to  the 
lot  of  individual  man,  and  in  this  form 
they  are  the  impartial  inheritance  of 
the  race.  There  are  troubles  which 
afflict  the  community,  which  fall  upon 
the  mass  in  its  aggregation  of  families, 
neighbourhoods,  communities,  and  na- 
tions The  great  and  good,  the  beau- 
tiful and  the  wise^  the  aged  and  the 
young,  all  races  and  all  conditions  of 
men,  have  gone  down  under  this  terrible 
Euroclydon  of  grief.  These  facts  are  a 
difficulty  to  the  Christian  philosopher, 
but  they  are  equally  so  to  the  sceptic. 
II.  Divine  compassion  in  its  relation  to 
suffering.  1.  All  human  sufifering  comes 
within  the  foreknowledge  and  is  under 
the  control  of  God.  2.  Many  of  our 
troubles,  probably  most  of  them,  have 
their  causes  in  ourselves.  3.  There  are 
troubles  and  afflictions,  and  these  not 
few,  which  we  must  consider  only  as 
the  punishment  of  sin.  Strife  is 
tlie  essence  of  sin.  It  is  self-will 
pitted  in  avowed  antagonism  to  GU)d. 
God  will  not  vacate  His  sovereignty 


because  man  rebela  He  cannot  be  de- 
feated or  bribed,  or  bought  off  from  His 
purpose,  even  by  prayer.  The  bitter, 
bitter  cup  must  be  drunk;  the  chas- 
tisement must  come.  But  with  all  this, 
there  comes  also  the  presence  of  an 
infinite  compassion.  He  succours  His 
children  while  the  law  oppresses  them. 
He  delivers  them  speedily  when  its 
mission  is  accomplished. — /.  Burton. 

Vers.  32,  33.  Gk>d  the  consolation 
of  the  afflicted.  I  A  revealed  fact, 
"God  doth  not  willingly  afflict  the 
children  of  men."  This  fact  rests  upon 
another  fact — the  teaching  of  Scripture 
regarding  the  providence  of  God.  A 
particular  and  special  providence  is  the 
sole  ground  of  prayer ;  prayer  being  the 
basis  of  all  true  religion.  When  the 
mind  dwells  upon  the  special  providence 
of  God,  it  learns  the  more  difficult  task 
of  submitting  to  all  afflictive  dispensa- 
tions with  thanksgiving.  11.  The  pa^ 
sage  appears  to  stand  opposed  to  the 
omnipotence  of  God.  God  is  Almighty, 
but  He  has  willed  to  set  limits  to  the 
exercise  of  His  omnipotence.  He  abides 
by  the  laws  He  has  himself  enacted. 
The  law  connects  life  and  happiness 
with  obedience.  But  the  law  would 
cease  to  exist  if  life  and  happiness  were 
dispensed  also  to  the  disobedient.  Tlie 
law  was  magnified  when  God  Himself, 
in  the  person  of  His  Son,  yielded 
obedience  to  it.  Grod  wiU  not  by  His 
omnipotence  overrule  or  supersede  the 
freedom  of  the  human  will.  If  we  be 
not  true  to  ourselves,  He  will  at  length, 
after  trial,  leave  ub  to  our  own  devices. 
It  is  an  awful  thought  that  a  man  may 
outlive  the  day  of  grace.  He  may  re- 
main a  thing  upon  earth  to  subserve 
some  purpose  in  the  providence  of  God, 
but  as  a  person  his  trial  may  have  ceased. 
If  one  of  the  purposes  of  affliction  is  to 
correct  and  amend  us,  one  of  the  means 
of  avoiding  affliction  must  be  to  en- 
deavour to  shape  our  lives  according  to 
the  law  of  God.  When  afflictions  do 
come,  it  is  an  ineffable  consolation  to 
be  assured  all  things  are  ordered  by 
God  for  our  good.  III.  The  histories 
of  good  men  Ulustraie  the  truth  of  the 
text.  We  learn  why  afflictions  were 
imposed  upon  them.     Study  the  livee 

93 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ni.  HOMILETW  COMMENT AR  Y :  LAMENT!  TIONS. 

of  Jacob,   Joseph,    David,    Job,  and  Psalms  he  could  never  understand  till 

Christ— TF.  F.  Hook,  D,D.  he   had    been    afflicted.       Butherfoid 

declared  he  had  got  a  new  Bible  through 

lUiUflTRATiOKS. — OlutstiBeBient      a  the  furnace.     ]£urd  weather  tries  what 

yroof  ti  Qod's  tenderness.    It  is  true  health  we  have ;   afflictions  try  what 

to  be  struck  once  in  anger  is  feaiiuL  sap    we    have,   what   grace   we  have. 

Gbd's  displeasure  is    more  than   His  Withered  leaves  soon  fall  off  in  windy 

blow.     Fear  not ;  these  stripes  are  the  weather ;  rotten  boughs  quickly  break 

tokens  of  His  love.     He  is  no  son  that  with  heavy  weights. 

is  not  beaten,  yea,  till  he  smart  and  cry,  Afllictlons  overrnled.     Artists  and 

if  not  till  he  bleed     No  parent  corrects  composers  have  often  been  helped  in 

another's    child;   and  he  is   no   good  their  studies  by  their  physical  infir- 

parent  that  corrects  not  his  own.  0  rod  mities.     Bach*s  blindness,  Beethoven's 

worthy  to  be  kissed,  that  assures  us  of  deafness,    making    society  and    social 

His  love,  of  our  adoption ! — Bp.  Hall,  distractions  almost    impossible,   drove 

"Heaven   ii    not   alwayi   angry  when  He  them  in   upon  their  own  genius,  and 

strikes,  compelled  them  to  listen  to  the  voice 

But  most  obastises  tboee  whom  most  He  ^f  Qod  within  them.     Some  beauties 

likes.  —Pomfret.  ^£  character  and  achievement  can  only 

AiBiction  GKmI's  messenger.     Luther  be  secured  by  retirement  and  solitude, 

used  to  say  there  were  many  of  the  and  affliction  often  compels  to  this. 


HOMILETICS. 

Gk)D  AND  Human  Wbongu 

(Vera  34-36.) 

L  Ck)d  approves  not  wanton  cmolty  towards  prisoners  of  war.    ''To  crush 

under  His  feet  all  the  prisoners  of  the  earth  "  ^ver.  34).  Jeremiah  was  probably 
a  daily  witness  of  cruelties  suffered  by  the  captives.  One  of  the  greatest  borrora 
of  ancient  warfare  was  the  inhuman  treatment  of  prisoners.  Any  exception  to 
this,  history  does  not  fail  to  record  as  a  remarkable  example  of  clemency  and 
forbearance.  Few  men  can  be  trusted  with  unrestricted  power.  Where  there  is 
no  fear  of  immediate  consequences  to  himself,  man  r.ipidly  develops  into  a 
monster  of  cruelty.  The  helplessness  of  captives  appeals  to  the  pity  of  the 
tyrant.  Every  act  of  inhumanity  God  not  only  disapproves,  but  wUl  certainly 
punish. 

II.  Ood  approves  not  the  base  attempt  to  procure  an  unjust  sentence 
before  any  legal  tribunal  "To  turn  aside  the  right  of  a  man  before  the  face  of 
the  Most  High''  (ver.  35),  of  a  superior,  or  before  a  legal  tribunal  acting  in  the 
name  of  God  (£xod.  xxi.  6 ;  xxiL  8,  9).  An  oppressor  who  would  hesitate  to 
commit  an  act  of  cruelty  in  public  does  not  scruple  to  stoop  to  the  basest  arts  in 
secret  to  pervert  the  course  of  justice.  Happy  is  the  nation  where  tlie  judgment- 
seat  is  beyond  the  reach  of  corruption. 

IIL  Ood  approves  not  the  perversion  of  justice  in  any  case,  or  in  any 
degree.  "  To  subvert  a  man  in  his  cause,  the  Lord  approveth  not "  (ver.  36). 
Ko  act  of  wrong,  whether  open  or  secret,  can  escape  the  All-seeing  Jehovah,  nor 
can  it  escape  punishment  Tyranny  is  not  supreme,  and  its  reign  is  always  short- 
lived. God  is  the  implacable  foe  of  all  injustice ;  and  the  oppressed  everywhere 
are  sure  to  be  relieved  and  vindicated. 

LsasoNS. — 1.  MarCs  inhumanity  to  man  makes  countless  thousands  mourn, 
%  God  is  not  an  indifferent  spectator  of  the  wrong  inflicted  by  one  mam  tgxm 
mnoiher.    3.  Ood  will  certainly  interfere  to  redress  aU  human  wrongs^ 
94 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  OOMMSNTAMT:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAP.  BL 


OEBM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yeis.  34-36.  The  Bitine  character. 
1.  Gives  dignity  ilnd  significance  to 
every  legal  tribunal  2.  Is  a  perpetual 
protest  against  eyery  act  of  cruelty  and 
injustice.  3.  Is  a  guarantee  that  justice 
will  be  ultimately  triumphant. 

Illustrations. — The  beginning  of 
wrong.  An  old  writer  says,  '*  A  man 
who  goes  to  law  finds  the  court  full  of 
invisible  hooks.  First  his  cloak,  then 
the  skirts  of  his  coat,  then  his  sleeves, 
till  everything  is  torn  from  him,  and, 
like  a  gypsy,  he  escapes  because  there 
is  no  further  hold  upon  him."  The 
youth  who  crosses  the  threshold  of  the 
court  of  vice  will  find  those  invisible 
hooks  sharper  and  in  greater  abundance 
than  in  courts  of  law.  Once  caught, 
he  will  be  hooked  in  every  direction. 
One  tempter  will  succeed  another,  each 
handing  him  over  to  the  next.  Thus 
snared  and  dragged  from  vice  to  vice, 
until  denuded  of  every  virtue,  he  will 
at  last,  in  all  probability,  perish  in  un- 
utterable woe. — Dr.  Wise. 

Justice  expedited.  Juvenalis,  a 
widow,  complained  to  Theodoric,  king 
of  the  Romans,  that  a  suit  of  hers  had 
been  in  court  three  years.  The  king 
being  informed  who  were  her  judges, 
gave  orders  that  they  should  give  all 
expedition  to  the  poor  woman's  cause, 
and  in  two  days  it  was  decided  to  her 
satisfaction.  Theodoric  then  sum- 
moned the  judges  before  him,  and  in- 
quired how  it  was  that  they  had  done 


in  two  days  what  they  had  delayed  for 
three  years.  **  When  I  put  you  in 
office,"  said  the  king,  '*  did  I  not  con* 
sign  all  pleas  and  proceedings  to  you  t 
You  deserve  death  for  having  delayed 
that  justice  for  three  years  which  two 
days  could  accomplish."  He  commanded 
them  to  be  beheaded. 

Iidufltice  and  anger.  There  is  an 
anger  that  is  damnable :  it  is  the  anger 
of  selfisliness.  There  is  an  anger  that 
is  majestic  as  the  frown  of  Jehovah's 
brow  :  it  is  the  anger  of  truth  and  love. 
If  man  meets  wiUi  injustice,  it  is  not 
required  that  he  shall  not  be  roused  to 
^  meet  it ;  but  if  he  is  angry  after  he  has 
*  had  time  to  think  upon  it,  that  is  sin- 
ful The  flame  is  not  wrong,  but  the 
coals  are. — Beeeher, 

Suffering  preferred  to  iAjn8tice. 
While  Athens  was  ruled  by  the  thirty 
tyrants,  Socrates  was  summoned  to  the 
senate-house  and  ordered  to  go  with 
some  other  persons  to  seise  one  Leon, 
a  man  of  rank  and  fortune,  whom  they 
determined  to  put  out  of  the  way  that 
they  might  enjoy  his  estate.  The  com- 
mission Socrates  flatly  refused,  and,  not 
satisfied  therewith,  added  also  his 
reasons  for  such  refusal  '^  I  will  never 
willingly,"  said  he,  "  assist  in  an  un- 
just act."  Cherides  sharply  replied, 
^'Dost  thou  think,  Socrates,  to  talk 
always  in  this  style  and  not  to  suffer  t" 
"  Far  from  it,"  added  he,  "  I  expect  to 
suffer  a  thousand  ills,  but  none  so  great 
as  to  do  uigustly." 


EOMILETICS. 

Tee  Diviks  Bctle  Absoluts  and  UNiYBRsiL 

(Vers.  37-39.) 

I  nat  nothing  happena  without  the  DlTine  knowledge  and  aanetion. 

^  Who  is  he  that  saith  and  it  cometh  to  pass  when  the  Lord  commandeth  it  not  t " 
(yer.  37).  The  curse  causeless  does  not  come.  Somehow,  somewhere,  and  for 
some  purpose,  there  is  running  all  through  the  seething  mass  of  what  appears  to 
us  little  else  than  a  complex  of  sorrowful  accidents,  the  activity  of  a  prescient 
foreknowledge,  a  permissiye  providence,  a  governing  will  **  We  see  only  results. 
To  God,  the  beginning,  with  its  antecedents  all  hidden  and  remote,  is  a  presence. 
The  wildest  freaks  of  chance,  as  they  seem,  the  most  exorbitant  anomalies  in 

95 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORAP.  m. 


BOMIIETTC  COMMENT AMT:  LAMENTATIONS. 


natme.  the  elightest  incidents  in  the  confititntion  of  mind  or  matter,  storm, 
earthquake  and  fires,  the  shoot  of  an  avalanche,  the  dropping  of  a  leaf,  the 
wanderings  of  a  comet,  the  hirth,  life,  history,  and  death  of  a  man,  all  come 
within  the  foreknowledge  and  are  beneath  the  sovereign  sweep  of  the  purposes 
of  God." 

II.  That  tlie  mingling  of  advanity  and  prosperity  ia  in  hannony  with  the 
administration  of  infinite  wisdom.  ''Oat  of  the  mouth  of  the  Most  High 
proceedeth  not  evil  and  good  f ''  (ver.  38).  If  the  life  of  man  was  an  uninter- 
rupted series  of  calamities,  we  might  gravely  question  the  wisdom  and  goodness 
of  the  Great  Ruler ;  but  the  evil  and  the  good  are  so  nicely  balanced  one  over 
against  the  other,  that  when  God  has  finished  His  work  there  shall  be  no  just 
ground  for  complaint  (Eccles.  vii  14).  The  old  divines  used  to  say,  "God  is  too 
wise  to  err,  too  good  to  be  unkind.** 

in.  That,  while  life  is  continued,  man  should  not  mnrmnr  over  his 
pnniahmenti  but  repent  of  the  sins  which  made  that  punishment  neceraary. 
"Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain,  a  man  for  the  punishment  of  his  sins?*' 
(ver.  39V  The  word  living  is  emphatic,  and  implies  that  while  God  spares  man's 
life  he  has  no  room  to  murmur.  Life  is  a  boon  that  transcends  in  significance 
any  amount  of  temporary  suflfering.  Life  is  a  grand  opportunity  for  repentance, 
reform,  and  the  accomplishment  of  noblest  purposes.  Every  moment  in  life 
spent  in  complaining  is  worse  than  wasted.  When  we  understand  how  com- 
pletely the  Divine  mind  is  governing  everything,  we  begin  to  grasp  the  true 
significance  of  life. 

Lbbsons. — 1.  The  government  of  the  world  i$  in  the  hands  of  a  tnse  a$id 
loving  God,  2.  Affliction  when  used  aright  may  be  an  unspeakable  blessing.  3. 
Ltfe  is  a  gift  fraught  with  great  moral  issues. 


OEBM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERaJLb. 


Yet.  39.  Oomplaint  under  afiiietion. 
L  Some  complaints  allowable,  1.  It  is 
lawful  to  express  what  we  feel  and 
suffer  ii  those  ways  Nature  prompts  us. 
2.  May  complain  to  friends,  relations, 
and  aoquaintancea  3.  To  God  as  well 
as  to  men.  IL  Complaints  prompted 
by  impatience  with  God's  dealings  con- 
demned. 1.  It  is  long  before  God  takes 
the  rod  in  hand  to  correct  2.  He  is 
soon  prevailed  with  to  lay  it  aside.  3. 
He  lays  no  more  on  us  than  our  sins 
deserve.  4.  We  enjoy  many  mercies 
in  the  meantime  by  which  the  bitter- 
ness of  affliction  is  allayed.  5.  God 
has  a  sovereignty  of  power  and  do- 
minion to  deal  with  us  as  He  pleaseth. 
IIL  Complaints  may  be  silenced:  1. 
By  keeping  alive  in  your  heart  a  sense 
of  God's  love  in  every  dispensation. 
2.  By  labouring  to  have  a  fresh  re- 
membrance of  your  sins.  3.  By  con- 
sidering the  extreme  danger  of  quar- 
relling with  and  opposing  God. — 
Oonani. 
96 


Illustrations.  —  Spiritual  insii^t 
into  the  Divine  rule.  Tliero  seems  to . 
be  in  religious  men  a  prophetic  faculty 
of  insight  into  the  true  bearings  of 
outward  things — an  insight  which  puts 
to  shanie  the  sagacity  of  statesmen,  and 
claims  for  the  sons  of  Gkni,  and  only 
for  them,  the  wisdom  even  of  the 
world.  Those  only  read  the  world's 
future  truly  who  have  faith  in  principle 
as  opposed  to  faith  in  human  dexterity; 
who  feel  that  in  human  things  there 
lies  truly  and  really  a  spiritual  nature,  a 
spiritual  connection,  aspiritual  tendency, 
which  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  cannot 
alter  and  scarcely  can  affect.— i^ou^e. 

Submission  to  God's  wilL  Stone- 
wall Jackson  was  once  asked,  "Sup- 
pose, in  addition  to  blindness,  you  were 
condemned  to  be  bedridden  and  racked 
with  i^ain  for  life;  you  would  hardly 
call  yourself  happy  then  t "  He  paused, 
and  said  with  great  deliberateness, 
"Yes,  I  think  I  could.  My  faith  in 
the  Almighty  wisdom  is  absolute,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMTLETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  m. 

why  should  this  accident  change  itt*'  A  life  well  lived.  Tyndale's  work 
Touching  him  upon  a  tender  point —  was  done.  He  lived  to  see  the  Bihle 
his  impatience  of  anything  bordering  no  longer  carried  by  stealth  into  his 
on  dependence — the  test  was  pushed  country,  where  the  possession  of  it  was 
further.  "  If,  in  addition  to  blindness  a  crime,  but  borne  in  by  the  solemn 
and  incurable  infirmity  and  pain,  you  will  of  the  king — solemnly  recognised 
had  to  receive  grudging  charity  from  as  the  Word  of  the  Most  High  €k>d. 
those  on  whom  you  had  no  claim,  what  And  then  his  occupation  in  this  earth 
then! "  There  was  a  strange  reverence  was  gone.  His  eyes  saw  the  salvation 
in  his  lifted  eye,  and  an  exalted  ex-  for  which  he  had  longed,  and  he  might 
pression  over  his  whole  face,  as  he  depart  to  his  place. '  He  was  denounced 
replied  with  slow  deliberateness.  "  If  to  the  Eegent  of  Flanders ;  he  was  en- 
it  was  God's  will,  I  think  I  could  lie  ticed  by  the  suborned  treachery  of  a 
there  content  a  hundred  years  1 "  miserable  £nglish  fanatic  beyond  the 
Evil  ovemilecL  Henry  the  Eighth's  town  under  whose  liberties  he  had  been 
divorce  of  Queen  Catherine,  and  the  secured;  and,  with  the  reward  which 
refusal  of  the  Pope  to  sanction  it,  led  has  been  held  fitting  by  human  justice 
indirectly  to  the  English  Reformation  for  the  earth's  great  ones,  he  passed 
and  to  the  flinging  off  of  the  Papal  away  in  smoke  and  flame  to  his  rest 
temporal  ecclesiastical  power.  — Froude. 


HOMILETICS. 
Bbpentancb. 
(Vers.  40-42.) 

L  Begins  in  strict  self-examination.  *^Let  us  search  and  try  our  ways" 
(ver.  40).  The  discovery  of  ourselves  is  the  discovery  of  sin.  We  never  know 
how  sinful  we  are  till  we  thoroughly  investigate  our  own  hearts.  The  more  we 
search,  the  more  we  see,  and  the  conviction  of  our  sin  becomes  an  intolerable 
reality. 

11.  InTohres  a  turning  to  God.  "And  turn  again  to  the  Lord"  (ver.  40). 
The  preposition  is  forcible,  implying  "  Let  us  go  back ;  not  half  way,  but  the 
whole."  A  repentance  that  spends  itself  in  emotions  and  tears  is  ineffective. 
Sorrow  for  sin  is  but  a  symptom  of  repentance.  Genuine  repentance  prompts  to 
immediate  and  active  moral  reformation.  Sin  drives  us  from  Qod :  repentance 
brings  us  back  to  Him. 

IIL  Is  accompanied  with  earnest  prayer.  "Let  us  lift  up  our  heart  with 
our  hands  unto  God  in  the  heavens  "  (ver.  41).  In  real  prayer  the  outward  form 
is  the  expression  of  the  feeling  of  the  heart.  The  heart  lifts  up  the  hands,  and 
then  with  them  rises  in  prayer  to  God.  Deep  emotion  will  find  its  own  way  of 
expression.  Repentance  reveals  the  need  of  help  and  forgiveness,  and  prayer  is 
the  expression  of  that  need. 

ly.  Includes  confession  of  sin.  ''  We  have  transgressed  and  have  rebelled  " 
(ver.  42).  The  spell  of  hardness  with  which  the  soul  was  bound  is  broken  when 
it  is  brought  to  the  point  of  full  and  free  confession  of  sin.  There  is  often  much 
humbling  to  be  done  before  this  point  is  reached.  Confession  of  sin  is  an 
important  proof  of  the  genuineness  of  repentance,  especially  when  attended  with 
the  other  signs  referred  to. 

y.  Must  be  genuine  and  complete  to  secure  forgiveness.  "Thou  hast  not 
pardoned  "  (ver.  42).  Why  t  Not  because  God  is  not  merciful ;  not  because  He 
is  unwilling  to  forgive  ;  not  because  the  opportunity  is  inappropriate  :  but  because 
there  is  a  lack  of  reality  and  sincerity  in  the  penitent.  The  prescription  of 
repentance  is  a  revelation  of  forgiveness.  God  does  not  mock  the  sinner  by 
97  o 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CITAP.  m. 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  lAMENTATIOyS, 


nrging  to  repentance  and  then  withholding  forgiveness.  If  there  is  no  eagemeM 
for  forgiveness,  it  is  because  there  is  something  radically  defective  in  the 
repentanca 

Lessons. — 1.  Suffering  should  lead  to  reflection,  2,  No  amount  of  repentance 
•an  merit  forgiveness.  3.  Ood  pardons  only  the  jpenitent,  not  because  of  their 
penitence,  but  for  His  mercy's  sake. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yer.  40.  The  duty  of  self-reflec- 
tion.  I.  Its  usefulness.  1.  Teaches 
us  to  know  ourselves.  2.  "We  discover 
our  sins.  3.  Provides  good  company 
and  comfortable  employment  IL  lis 
neglect  mischievous.  1.  Hardens  the 
heart  2.  A  daily  increase  of  sin.  3. 
Renders  a  man  the  more  unwilling  to 
reckon  with  himself.  IlL  Demands 
diligence.  1.  There  is  a  natural  reluc- 
tance to  attend  to  the  duty.  2.  Many 
sins  not  easily  discovered,  unless  dili- 
gent search  is  made.  3.  A  convenient 
time  should  be  set  apart  for  the  work. 

4.  Affliction  a  time  for  heart-searching. 

5.  Let  not  the  difficulty  of  the  work 
discourage  you.  6.  A  work  that  must 
be  often  repeated.  IV.  Leads  to  re- 
pentance. "  Turn  again  to  the  Lord." 
Sin  is  an  aversion  and  turning  away 
from  God  ;  repentance  is  a  returning  to 
Him.  1.  Repentance  must  be  speedy. 
2.  Thorough.  3.  Resolute  and  stead- 
fast— Conant. 

Yer.  41.  The  snUimity  of  devotion. 
The  finest  and  most  sublime  sensations 
of  which  the  soul  is  susceptible  are  con- 
nected with  the  principle  of  devotion. 
I.  Thesublimest  books  existing  are  those 
from  which  we  learn  our  faith.  The 
writings  of  the  inspired  penmen  abound 
with  passages  for  which  no  parallel 
can  be  found  in  the  productions  of 
mere  genius.  Rousseau  once  exclaimed, 
"The  majesty  of  the  Scriptures  fills 
me  with  astonishment ;  the  holiness  of 
the  Gospel  speaks  to  my  very  heart 
Behold  the  books  of  the  philosophers, 
with  all  their  pomp,  how  little  are  they 
in  comparison  1  Is  it  possible  that  a 
book  at  once  so  wise  and  so  sublime 
should  have  been  the  production  of 
mere  men  t "  II.  SoTne  of  the  situations 
of  real  life  prove  the  intimate  connection 
bettcecn  devotion  and  the  sources  of  sub- 
lime feeling.  I.  In  studying  the  char- 
98 


acter  of  God  and  the  works  of  Nature. 
2.  In  the  changing  circumstances  of 
life,  in  adversity  or  prosperity,  the  pro- 
per operation  of  religious  thought  is  to 
call  up  sublime  and  fervent  feelings. 
IIL  Consider  the  subject  of  adoratitm — 
Oody  whether  worshipped  in  private  or 
in  public.  If  it  be  objected  that  in 
such  an  account  of  the  effects  of  devout 
feeling,  we  place  religion  too  much 
under  the  dominion  of  the  imagination, 
it  may  be  answered  that  though  the 
abuse  of  a  thing  is  dangerous,  we  are 
not  therefore  to  relinquish  its  use.  It 
is  the  soul  that  truly  feels ;  imagination 
is  the  effort  of  the  soul  to  rise  above 
mortality.  Imagination  as  well  as 
reason  is  frequently  appealed  to  in 
Scripture.  — Nares. 

Illustrations.  —  Repentance   and 
confession. 

Father,  I  soaroely  dare  to  pmy. 

So  clear  I  see,  now  it  is  done, 
Ttitit  1  have  wasted  half  my  day. 

And  left  my  work  but  just  began  t 

So  clear  I  see  that  things  I  thought 
Were  right  or  harmless  were  a  sin  | 

So  dear  I  see  that  I  have  sought, 
Unconscioos,  selfish  aims  to  win : 

So  clear  I  see  that  I  have  hurt 

The  souls  I  might  have  helped  to  save ; 

That  I  have  slothful  been,  iner6. 
Deaf  to  the  calls  Thy  leaders  gmveii 

In  outskirts  of  Thy  kingdom  vast. 
Father,  the  humblest  spot  give  me 

Set  me  the  lowliest  task  Thou  hast» 
Let  me,  repentant,  work  for  Thee. 

Repentance  and   forgiveness.    No 

repentance  is  acceptable  with  God,  but 
what  is  built  or  leans  on  the  faith  of 
forgiveness.  We  have  a  cloud  of  wit- 
nesses to  this  truth  in  the  Scripture. 
Many  there  have  been,  many  are  re- 
corded, who  have  been  convinced  of 
sin,   perplexed  about  it,  sorry  for  it, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMJLETia  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


ORAP.  m. 


who  have  made  open  confession  and 
acknowledgment  of  it,  who,  nnder  the 
present  sense  of  it,  have  cried  out  oven 
to  God  for  deliverance,  and  have  yet 
come  sliort  of  mercy,  pardon,  and  ac- 
ceptance with  God.  The  cases  of  Cain, 
Pharaoh,  Saul,  Ahah,  Judas,  and  others 
might  be  insisted  upon. — John  Oioeii. 

Death  bed  repentance.  The  English 
proverb  says,  "  The  river  past  and  God 
forgotten,'*  to  express  with  how  mourn- 
ful a  frequency  He  whose  assistance 
was  invoked — it  may  have  been  ear- 
nestly— in  the  moment  of  peril,  is  re- 
membered no  more,  so  soon  as  by  His 
help  the  danger  has  been  surmounted. 
And  the  Italian  form  of  it  sounds  a 
still  greater  depth  of  ingratitude  :  "  The 
peril  past,  the  saint  mocked" — the 
vows  made  to  him  in  peril  remaining 
unperformed  in  safety. — Trench, 

—  There  is  one  case  of  death-bed 
repentance  recorded,  that  no  one  should 
despair,  and  only  one,  that  none  should 
pn-sume. — Attgtutine, 

Bepentaace  most  be  sincere.  Lor- 
enzo de'  Medici  lies  dying  in  the  city 
of  Florence ;  in  the  terrors  of  death  he 
has  sent  for  the  one  man  who  had 


never  yielded  to  his  tlireats  or  caressea 
— the  brave  Savonarola.  Lorenzo  con- 
fesses that  he  has  heavy  on  his  soul 
three  crimes — the  cruel  sack  of  Vol  terra, 
the  theft  of  the  public  dower  of  young 
girls,  by  which  many  were  driven  to  a 
wicked  life,  and  the  blood  shed  after 
the  conspiracy  of  Pazzi.  He  is  greatly 
agitated,  and  Savonarola,  to  keep  him 
quiet,  keeps  repeating,  ^  God  is  merci- 
ful,'' "  God  is  good."  "  But,"  he  added, 
*'  there  is  need  of  three  things.''  ''  And 
what  are  they,  father?"  "First,  you 
must  have  a  great  and  living  faith  in 
the  mercy  of  God."  "This  I  have,  the 
greatest"  "  Second,  you  must  restore 
that  which  you  have  wrongfully  taken, 
or  require  your  children  to  restore  it  for 
you."  Lorenzo  looks  surprised  and 
troubled ;  but  he  forces  himself  to  com- 
pliance, and  nods  his  head  in  sign  of 
assent  Then  Savonarola  rises  to  his  feet, 
and  stands  over  the  dying  prince.  "  Last, 
you  must  give  back  their  liberties  to 
the  people  of  Florence."  Lorenzo,  sum- 
moning up  all  his  remaining  strength, 
disdainfully  turns  his  back,  and,  with- 
out uttering  another  word,  Savonarola 
departs  without  giving  him  absolution. 


ffOMIZJETICS. 

Thb  Tension  of  Prolonged  Suffering, 

(Verses  43-47.) 

L  Poeten  exaggerated  views  of  Qod's  nnpitying  anger.  "Thon  hast 
covered  with  anger  and  persecuted  us  ;  Thou  hast  slain.  Thou  hast  not  pitied  " 
(ver.  43).  The  people  had  acknowledged  their  sin  and  repented ;  but  no  relief 
came.  Not  only  were  they  not  pardoned,  but  it  seemed  as  if  the  Divine  wrath 
was  more  relentless  than  ever.  The  Chaldeans  are  still  wrecking  the  holy  city, 
and  tiie  citizens  are  being  ignominiously  dragged  into  captivity.  The  cloud  of 
the  Divine  anger,  instead  of  vanishing,  thickens  into  darker  threatenings  of  ven- 
geance. This  is  one  of  the  unvarying  phases  of  continued  suffering^-every  afflic- 
tion is  magnified  into  disproportionate  dimensions. 

U.  Indnces  the  hasty  conolnsion  that  prayer  is  useless.  <'Thou  hast 
covered  Thyself  with  a  cloud,  that  our  prayer  should  not  pass  through  "  (ver.  44). 
A  deity  so  densely  veiled  is  unapproachable.  The  veil  is  a  cloud  of  wrath,  and 
the  suffering  suppliant  \a  stricken  with  terror  and  dismay.  Prayer  can  never 
pierce  so  dense  a  cloud,  and  it  is  useless  to  try.  The  tension  of  prolonged  suffer- 
ing is  apt  to  shake  one's  confidence  in  the  utUity  of  prayer,  and  suggest  the  doubt 
whether  God  is  after  all  a  prayer-hearing  God.  It  is  a  great  calamity  when  the 
soul  restrains  prayer. 

in.  Creates  the  imiiression  that  the  sufferer  is  utterly  despised  and 
seemed.     '*  Thou  hast  made  us  as  the  off-scouring  and  refuse  in  the  midst  of  the 

99 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  HI. 


BOMTLBTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


people.  All  our  enemies  have  opened  their  mouths  against  us  "  (vera.  45,  46). 
There  is  nothing  so  depressing  as  suffering,  and  the  suflFerer  is  often  the  prey  of 
Belfniepreciation  and  false  imaginings,  haunted  with  the  idea  that  he  is  the  sport 
and  laughing-stock  of  others.  It  is  the  effect  of  sin  to  lower  ns  in  our  own 
estimation,  and  it  is  a  part  of  its  punishment  that  we  sink  in  the  estimation  of 
others. 

IV.  Inteiudfles  the  feeling  of  hopeless  ruin.  ''  Fear  and  a  snare  is  come  upon 
us,  desolation  and  destruction  "  (ver.  47).  The  Hght  of  hope,  that  flickered  for  a 
moment  (ver.  21),  is  extinguished,  and  the  sufferer  relapses  into  dull,  dead  hope- 
lessness (ver.  11).  The  enemy  has  completely  hemmed  in  the  city  with  his  forces ; 
his  grip  tightens,  strategy  and  bravery  succeed,  the  city  falls,  and  is  ahandoned 
to  riot  and  destruction.  The  protection  of  Jehovah  is  withdrawn,  and,  what  is 
the  most  disheartening  revelation  of  all.  He  now  appears  as  an  angry  foe,  Hope 
perishes  when  we  discover  that  God  is  against  us. 

LEssoNa — 1.  Excessive  suffering  is  apt  to  impair  the  moral  vision.  2.  It  is  a 
calamity  to  lose  faith  in  prayer  when  we  most  need  its  solace.  8.  The  outlook  i$ 
not  always  so  deiperate  as  it  appears  to  the  despondent  sufferer. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  43-47.  The  pitilessness  of  the 
Divine  answer :  L  As  it  appears  to  the 
abject  sufferer  (ver.  47).  IL  Seen  in 
its  relentless  persecution  (ver.  43).  HL 
In  its  apparent  indifference  to  human 
entreaty  (ver.  44).  lY.  In  abandoning 
its  victims  to  the  contempt  and  derision 
of  others  (vers.  45,  46). 

Illustrations. — Anger  restrained 
more  terrible.  Writing  upon  the 
symbolical  carvings  of  the  ducal  palace 
at  Venice,  Mr.  Buskin  remarks  that 
there  is  a  figure  of  Anger  represented 
by  a  woman  tearing  open  her  dress  at 
her  breast  Giotto  represents  this  vice 
under  the  same  symbol,  but  it  is  the 
weakest  of  all  the  figures  in  the  Arena 
ChapeL  The  Wrath  of  Spencer  rides 
upon  a  lion,  brandishing  a  firebrand,  his 
garments  stained  with  blood.  Rage,  or 
Furor,  occurs  subordinately  in  other 
placea  It  occurs  to  me  very  strange 
that  neither  Giotto  nor  Spencer  should 
have  given  any  representation  of  the 
restrained  anger  which  is  infinitely  the 
most  terrible ;  both  of  tiiem  make  him 
violent^  God's  forbearance  of  sin  is 
restrained  anger — not  therefore  less, 
but  more  terrible.  The  future  retribu- 
tion is  not  less,  but  more  awful,  since 
it  is  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb.  Anger 
now  restrained  will  be  direr  when  once 
revealed.  Long-suffering  is  a  sign  of 
suppressed  indignation. 
100 


Perverted  views  of  sniferlng.  That 
extraordinary  sufferings  indicated  extra- 
ordinary sins  was  contradicted  by  the 
Book  of  Job.  So  also  consistent  Phari- 
saism saw  in  the  lowliness  of  Jesus  His 
nnworthiness,  in  His  defencelessness 
His  guilt,  and  after  having  crucified 
Him,  in  His  cross  His  curse;  whilst 
Jesus  recognises  therein  His  own  glori- 
fication and  tiie  salvation  of  the  world. 
The  clouds  that  are  the  precursors  of  a 
storm  do  not  appear  so  black  to  us 
when  they  hang  immediately  over  our 
heads  as  when  we  see  them  rising  np 
at  the  edge  of  the  horizon.  It  is  easier 
to  know  the  worst  than  to  dread  the 
worst.  All  misfortunes  appear  more 
formidable  at  a  distance  than  when  we 
actually  come  to  grapple  with  them. 

Unjustifiable  depression.  In  a  fit 
of  dejection  Dean  Hook  once  wrote — 
"  My  life  has  been  a  failure.  I  have 
done  many  things  t^^lerably,  but  no- 
thing well.  As  a  parish  priest,  as  a 
preacher,  and  now  as  a  writer,  I  am 
quite  aware  that  I  have  failed,  and  the 
more  so  because  my  friends  contradict 
the  assertion." 

God  does  hear  prayer.  There  is  no 
such  thing  in  the  long  history  of  God's 
kingdom  as  an  unanswered  prayer. 
Every  true  desire  from  a  child's  heart 
finds  some  true  answer  in  the  heart  of 
God.  Most  certain  it  is  that  the  prayer 
of  the  Church  of  God  since  creation  has 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENT  ART:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  tii. 

not  been  the  cry  of  orphans  in  an  empty  He  spoken  in  ignorance  of  God  or  of 

home  without  a  Father  to  hear  or  an-  His  brethren  when  He  says,  *'  Ask  and 

swer.     Jesus  Christ  did   not  pray   in  receive,  that  your  joy  may  be  full" — 

vain  or  to  an  unknown  GUxl,  nor  has  Norman  MadeocL 


HOMILETICS. 

A  Sympathetic  Natubi. 

(Verses  48-51.) 

I.  Is  pained  by  the  evidences  of  national  distress  ereryivliere  visibla 

''Mine  eye  affecteth  mine  heart  because  of  all  the  daughters  of  my  city"  (ver. 
51).  What  I  see  I  feeL  I  see  nothing  but  misery,  and  I  feel  nothing  but  pain. 
Amid  the  general  suffering,  the  tender  heart  of  the  prophet  mourned  oyer  the  ciniel 
fate  of  the  Jewish  maidens.  This  is  a  subject  to  which  he  often  refers  (ch.  i.  4, 
18;  ii.  10,  21 ;  v.  11).  **  Jeremiah  suffered  not  in  his  own  person,  being  under 
the  protection  of  the  Divine  Being ;  but  though  he  dwelt  securely  from  the  hand 
of  mortality,  yet  he  was  filled  with  the  bowels  of  sympathy.  Though  he  wrote 
of  the  Jews'  desolations,  yet  he  named  them  Jeremiah's  Lamentations." 

II.  Is  aggravated  in  its  grief  because  God,  who  sees  the  caUmity,  does  not 
at  once  remove  it.  ''  Till  the  Lord  look  down  and  behold  from  heaven  "  (ver. 
50).  While  the  Lord  looks  down.  He  sees  all  this  suffering ;  every  feature  of 
it  is  fully  known  to  Him.  Why  does  He  not  interfere?  How  can  He  be  so  in- 
different to  the  agonies  of  His  people  ^  The  prophet's  heart  is  breaking,  and  it  is 
a  mystery  and  an  addition  to  his  pain  that  Jehovah  does  not  haste  to  the  rescue. 
Sympathy  is  not  always  wise.  Our  emotions  are  apt  to  swamp  our  judgment 
God  knows  infallibly  how  much  suffering  is  necessary,  and  when  the  right  moment 
is  come  for  Him  to  interpose. 

ILL  Expresses  its  sorrow  in  a  copions  outflow  of  tears.  "  Mine  eye  runneth 
down  with  rivers  of  water,  without  any  intermission  "  (vers.  48, 49).  The  measure 
of  our  being  is  our  capacity  for  sorrow  or  joy.  A  certain  traveller  states  that  the 
shadow  cast  by  Mount  Hermon  at  some  periods  is  as  much  as  seventy  miles  long. 
A  sensitive  nature  is  susceptible  of  great  sorrow,  and  has  manifold  ways  of  express- 
ing the  same.  While  the  cause  of  sorrow  remains,  the  sympathetic  heart  will 
mourn. 

LsssoNa — 1.  OaUom  indeed  is  the  heart  that  can  witness  suffering  without 
emotion.  2.  The  heart  that  loves  intensely  suffers  intensely.  3.  A  symjpailietic 
natwre  finds  a  merciful  relief  in  tears. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES, 

Ver.  51.  Sin  the  cause  of  suffering :  Gifts  from  the  hand  are  silver  and  gold  ; 

L  To  the  patriot,  as  he  sees  its  effect  but  the  heart  gives  that  which  neither 

upon  the  nation.     IL  To  the  philan-  silver  nor  gold  can  buy.     To  be  full  of 

thropist,  as  he  observes  the  mischief  goodness,  full  of  cheerfulness,  full  of 

it  works  in  the  world.    'IIL  To  the  in-  sympathy,  full  of  helpful  hope,  causes  a 

dividual  believer,  as  he  is  conscious  of  man  to  carry  blessings  of  which  he  is 

its  presence  in  his  own  heart  himself  as  unconscious  as  a  lamp  of  its 

own  shining.     Such  an  one  moves  on 

Illustrations. — The  power  of  sym-  human  life  as  stars  move  on  dark  seas 

patliy.     Happy   is  the  man  who  has  to   bewildered   mariners;   as   the   sun 

that  in  his  soul  which  acts  upon  the  wheels,  bringing  all  the  seasons  with 

dejected  as  April  airs  upon  violet  roots,  him  from  the  south. — Beecher. 


Digitized  by 


101 

Google 


imAF.  IX.  ffO}frLETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMSNTATT0N8. 

Grief  leaves  its  mark.     Sir  Walter  '*  Had  I  been  there   with  my  brave 

Scoti  says  of  himself  after  a  sore  be-  Franks,   I   would   have   avenged   His 

reavement,  '^I  was  broken-hearted  for  wrongs/' 

two  years ;    and  though    handsomely  The  relief  of  tears.     A  maniac  while 

pieced  again,  the  crack  will  remain  to  listening  to  a  thrilling  recital  was  moved 

my  dying  dw  "  to  tears      Lifting  her  withered  finger 

Practical    sympathy.       When    St  she  exclaimed, '' Do  you  see  that  tear  f 

Reray  was  preaching  before  King  Clovis  It  is  the  first  tear  that  I  have  shed 

of  France,  telling  with  passionate  pathos  for   seven   years,   and   it  will    relieve 

the  story  of  Christ's  suffering  and  death,  my  poor  burning  head.     I  have  often 

the  monarch  suddenly  sprang  from  his  wished  that  I  could  weep,  but  I  could 

throne,  and,  grasping  his  spear,  cried,  nof 

HOMILETICS. 

A  Faithful  Pkophet  in  Trouble. 

(Verses  52-58.) 

I  Omally  treated  by  his  enemies.  ^'  Mine  enemies  chased  me  sore  like  a 
bird,  without  cause  :  I  am  cut  off'*  (vers.  52-54).  In  these  verses,  and  to  the 
end  of  the  chapter,  Jeremiah  deals  with  his  own  personal  afflictions.  Without 
the  least  provocation,  he  was  treated  with  the  most  malignant  enmity.  He  wai 
harassed,  as  a  bird  is  tired  out,  and  at  length  run  down  by  continuous  pursuit 
He  is  overwhelmed  with  trouble,  and  is  as  one  imprisoned  in  a  dungeon,  shut  off 
from  the  current  of  active  life.  He  acknowledged  the  righteousness  of  the  Divine 
dealings,  but  he  was  keenly  alive  to  the  unrighteousness  and  undeserved  cruelty 
of  his  persecutora  Had  he  been  the  aggressor,  he  might  have  expected  retalia- 
tion, but  he  was  oppressed  without  cause.  His  enemies  were  actuated  by  sheer 
hatred.  His  only  fault  was  his  faithfulness  to  God  and  to  his  own  conscience. 
Simple  goodness  often  rouses  the  wanton  animosity  of  the  wicked. 

II.  Seeks  refuge  in  prayer.  ''  I  caUed  upon  Thy  name,  0  Lord ;  hide  not 
Thine  ear  at  my  cry  "  (vers.  55,  56).  It  is  a  relief  to  turn  from  the  cruelty  of 
man  to  the  compassion  and  power  of  God.  The  soul  is  never  so  helpless  but  that 
it  can  pray.  When  we  can  do  nothing  else,  we  can  pray.  Prayer  is  the  language 
of  need,  and  we  are  comforted  with  the  assurance  that  God  will  hear,  and  not  only 
hear  but  help.  It  seemed  at  one  time  that  prayer  was  useless  (ver.  44) ;  but  better 
thoughts  prevailed,  and  the  soul  discovered  that  the  cry  for  help  was  not  in  vain. 
*'  Prayer  is  the  breath  of  the  new  man,  sucking  in  the  air  of  mercy  in  petitions 
and  returning  it  in  praises ;  it  is  both  the  evidence  and  the  maintenance  of  the 
spiritual  life.'' 

IIL  Rescued  by  Divine  aid.  "  Thou  drewest  near  in  the  day  that  I  called 
upon  Thee  ;  Thou  saidst^  Fear  not  0  Lord,  Thou  hast  pleaded  the  causes  of  my 
soul ;  Thou  has  redeemed  my  life  "  (vers.  57,  58).  When  we  draw  near  to  God 
in  prayer.  He  draws  near  to  us.  Our  troubles  are  overwhelming  when  Gkxi  is 
absent  and  we  are  left  to  ourselvea  With  His  manifested  presence  our  troubles 
vanish,  and  we  are  inspired  with  strength  to  endure  and  to  triumph. 

Lbssons. — 1.  Fidelity  makes  many  enemies,  2.  Thfi  nation  that.tU-usea  ii$ 
best  men  courts  its  own  ruin,     3.  The  Lord  is  ever  on  the  side  of  the  faithful. 

QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  54-57.  The  eflcacy  of  prayer,  spondency.     IL  The  remedy  open  to 

I.  These  words  show  to  what  a  state  them.       Prayer    expressed     in     cries, 

God's  most  favoured  servants  may  be  groans,   breathings,   sighp.      III.    The 

reduced — extreme   suffering,  tears,  de-  efficacy  of  that  remedy  whenever  it  is 

102 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETia  COMMBNTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


ORAP.  HL 


applied.  "Thou  drewest  near  in  the 
day  that  I  called  tipon  Thee;  Thou 
saidsty  Fear  not."  In  these  words  we 
hear  the  consolatory  voice  of  God. 
Marvellous  condescension  ;  certainty  of 
help  and  deliverance. — Simeon, 

Ver.  57.  A  wonder  explained  lyy 
greater  wonders.  I.  An  explanation 
of  this  wonder,  God  doth  draw  neap 
to  men.  1.  Men  have  ever  heen  in  the 
thoughts  of  God.  2.  God  came  tenderly 
near  in  nature.  3.  The  Lord  Jesus  was 
specially  near  in  tlie  days  of  His  life  on 
earth.  4.  He  came  still  nearer  to  us 
in  His  death.  5.  In  heaven  He  is  per- 
petually near  us.  6.  Jesus  may  well 
come  near  to  His  people,  for  there  is  a 
mystical  union  which  ensures  it  U. 
Consider  the  wonder  itseHf.  1.  By  no 
means  is  this  wonder  at  all  contrary  to 
expectation.  2.  God  draws  near  by 
strengthening  us  to  bear  up  under  pres- 
sure. 3.  By  vouchsafing  a  doubly 
vivid  sense  oi  His  love.  4.  By  grant- 
ing a  sensible  assurance  of  His  sym- 
pathy. 5.  By  speedy  and  remarkable 
deliverance  out  of  trouble.  6.  The 
text  indicates  surprise  concerning  the 
memorable  graciousness  of  God.  7.  The 
promptness  of  God.  8.  The  extreme 
tenderness  of  God. — C.  H,  Spurgeon, 

Yer.  58.  CKnI  pleading  for  saints 
and  saints  pleading  for  God.  L  The 
Divine  pleading,  I.  The  Lord  pleads 
our  cause  in  the  court  of  Providence  by 
silencing  enemies  and  by  raising  up 
friends  for  His  people.  2.  He  pleads 
for  them  in  the  court  of  Divine  law. 
3.  In  the  court  of  conscience.  4.  In 
the  court  of  heaven.  5.  And  at  the 
last  great  day  of  judgment.  II.  // 
the  Lord  hath  pleaded  the  causes  of  owr 
sovly  we  should  plead  His  cause  while  we 
have  breath  to  pray,  1.  This  is  the 
life-work  of  the  Christian.  2.  Should 
be  done  in  witnessing  for  Christ  by  our 
consistency  of  conduct.  3.  We  can  all 
plead  for  Christ  in  a  private  way.  Be 
it  mine  to  weep  for  the  sins  of  the 
time  and  prophesy  against  them.  Be 
it  yours  in  your  own  private  walk  and 
conversation  to  rebuke  private  sin,  and 
by  your  loving  earnestness  to  make 
Jesus  Christ  dear  to  many  souls  ! — C. 
H.  Spmrgeon. 


Illustrations.  —  Faithftiliiess  in 
service.  If  you  and  I  show  that  we 
attach  importance  to  the  solemn  per- 
formance of  even  the  slightest  duty 
connected  with  our  dear  Master's  ser- 
vice ;  that  we  consider  even  the  office 
of  doorkeeper  in  His  house  an  office  of 
honour;  that,  convinced  of  His  pre- 
sence, we  are  as  devout  in  offering  the 
prayers  when  only  two  or  three  are 
present  as  when  there  are  two  or  three 
hundred— we  shall  find  His  blessing  at- 
tending us,  and  we  shall  be  the  means 
of  converting  others. — Dean  Hook, 

—  A  carpenter  was  once  asked, 
Why  he  troubled  to  finish  off  a  certain 
magistrate's  bench  so  carefully!  His 
reply  was,  "  I  can't  do  otherwise ;  be- 
sides, I  may  have  to  sit  on  it  one  of 
these  days.** 

Faithful  to  death.  When  Commo- 
dore Joseph  Smith  saw  by  the  first 
despatch  that  reached  Washington  from 
Fortress  Monroe  that  the  Congress^  on 
which  his  son  was  commander,  had 
shown  the  white  flag,  he  said,  '*  Then 
Joe's  dead."    It  was  sa 

Prayer  an  ever-open  reftige.  St. 
Cuthbert  was  once  in  a  snowstorm  that 
drove  his  boat  on  the  coast  of  Fife. 
''  The  snowstorm  closes  the  road  along 
the  shore,"  mourned  his  comrades ; 
"  the  storm  bars  our  way  over  the  sea." 
''  There  is  still  the  way  of  heaven ;  that 
lies  open,'*  said  the  devoted  saint 

Divine  aid  works  a  marrellons 
diange.  Probably  there  is  nowhere  on 
the  globe  so  marked  a  climatic  boun- 
dary as  that  of  the  Cascade  Mountains  in 
both  Washington  Territory  and  Oregon. 
West  of  this  boundary  the  winters 
are  mild  and  the  summers  cool  and 
showery;  east  of  it  the  winters  are 
sharp  and  dry  and  tiie  summers  very 
hoi  On  one  side  are  gigantic  firs  and 
cedars,  while  on  the  o&er  all  are  of 
poor  size  and  conditiotL  Even  the 
flowers  are  of  new  species,  and  all  the 
atmospheric  conditions  are  changed. 
The  line  that  lies  between  the  unsaved 
and  the  saved,  once  crossed,  what  changes 
are  manifest!  "If  any  man  be  in 
Jesus  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creation ;  old 
things  have  passed  away ;  lo^  all  things 
have  become  new." 

lOS 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  m.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTABT:  LAMENTATIONS. 

HOMILETICS. 

A  OoNnDBNT  Appeal  to  Divinb  Jusnoi. 

(Verses  59-66.) 

L  That  Jehovah  recognises  the  wrongs  suffered  lyy  His  servants.    ''  O  Lord, 

Thou  has  seen  my  wrong ;  judge  Thou  mj  cause  "  (ver.  59).  It  seemed  at  times 
as  if  the  chosen  people  were  forgotten  and  left  to  the  mercy  of  their  oppressors. 
Years  passed  away,  and  still  there  was  no  prospect  of  rescue.  The  valiant  stand 
made  by  the  prophet  inyolved  him  in  great  and  unjust  suffering,  and  it  seemed  as 
if  Heaven  was  indifferent  to  the  issue.  But  things  are  not  what  they  seem.  All 
the  time  the  eye  of  Jehovah  was  watching  the  struggle  and  noting  every  act  of 
injustice  and  wrong.  Every  pang  of  suffering  is  faithfully  registered.  When  the 
soul  is  conscious  that  Jehovah  is  cognisant  of  its  distress,  it  is  nerved  with  courage 
and  patiently  waits  God's  time  of  deliverance. 

U.  That  Jehovah  infallibly  observes  the  cmel  plottlngs  and  malidoos 
reproaches  of  His  people's  enemies.  "Thou  hast  seen  all  their  vengeance.  Thou 
hast  heard  their  reproach,  O  Lord,  and  all  their  imaginations  against  me,"  &c. 
(vers.  60-63).  Not  a  single  movement,  not  a  word  of  scorn  of  His  enemies 
escapes  the  eye  and  tiie  ear  of  Jehovah.  How  vain  and  foolish  their  opposition 
appears  to  Him  1  Their  cleverest  combinations  are  but  the  work  of  helpless 
imbeciii  .  ;  their  wildest  rage  is  but  a  momentary  flash  of  aimless  malignity.  In 
a  moment  their  schemes  are  shattered  and  their  revilings  for  ever  silenced.  God 
is  so  strong  in  conscious  righteousness  that  He  can  afford  to  bide  His  time.  It  is 
a  mistake  to  regard  His  long-suffering  patience  as  a  sign  of  apathy. 

m  That  Jehovah  will  vindicate  the  wrongs  of  His  servants  by  punishing 
their  oppressors.  **  Render  unto  them  a  recompense,  O  Lord,  according  to  the 
work  of  their  hands,"  &c.  (vers.  64-66).  The  imprecatory  form  of  these  words 
are  uttered  by  Jeremiah  in  his  prophetical  character.  He  calls  for  the  vengeance 
upon  his  enemies  which  their  iniquities  have  deserved,  and  which  Divine  Justice 
is  certain  to  render.  The  versions  and  the  Targum  all  render  these  verses  not  as 
imperatives,  but  as  futures — Thou  sliaU  render  unto  them  a  recompense^  ^c  It 
is  an  unalterable  principle  of  the  Divine  government  to  punish  all  evil-doers. 
The  sufferings  they  have  inflicted  on  others  shall  be  meted  out  to  them  with  swift 
and  terrible  retribution.  "  Under  the  heavens  of  the  Lord  "  there  is  no  place  of 
escape  for  the  workers  of  iniquity.  The  wrongs  of  God's  servants  shall  be  re- 
dressed, and  His  honour  and  justice  universally  vindicated. 

Lbssonb. — 1.  The  Divine  patience  mth  evil-doers  must  not  he  construed  as 
meaning  indifference,  2.  It  is  an  aggravation  of  suffering  when  we  know  it  is 
unjust,  3.  Vengeance  against  all  workers  of  iniquity  may  be  sajdy  left  in  the 
hands  of  Ood. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  59-63.   The  Divine  slowness     with  God.    A  pure  manhood  is  in  har- 

to  pnnish.     I.  Does  not  arise  from  in-     mony  with  all  that  is  Godlike  in  thought 

difference  to  human  wrongs,      "Thou     and   sentiment,   and   with  all  that  is 

has  seen  my  wrong"  (ver.  59).     IL  Is     Christly  in  character  and  work.     It  is 

not  from  tcant  of  knowledge  of  all  the     in  harmony  with  the  works  of  God,  with 

anions  of  the  wicked  (vers.    60-63).      all  that  is  beautiful  in  nature.     It  is 

III.    Indicates  thai  God  is  so  strong     in  harmony  with  the  providence  of  God, 

and  man  is  so  weak    lY.  Affords  every     with  all  that  is  happy  or'  sad  in  the 

opportunity  for  the  exercise  of  merdy  to     discipline  of  life  ;  and  supremely  it  is 

the  truly  penitent,  in  harmony  with  the  inspired  truth  of 

Ver.  63.  A  godly  life  the  music  of     God  as  revealed  in  hisiory,  character, 

society.     I.  Like  music,  a  godly   life     and  precept.     2.  It  is  in  harmony  with 

is  harmonious,     1.   It  is  in  harmony     itself.     All  the  truer  sympathies  of  a 

104 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAP.  UL 


devout  heart,  all  the  higher  faculties  of 
a  pnre  mind  exist  in  a  condition  of  self- 
harmony.  Living  in  communion  with 
the  Supreme  Being,  the  good  man  ob- 
tains true  concord  in  the  exercise  of 
prayer:  Ahd  thus  attuned  by  devo- 
tioDy  every  power  of  his  soul  joins 
in  ^6  hymn  of  life.  8.  It  is  in  har- 
mony with  the  highest  good  of  the 
raca  A  godly  man  is  ever  the  foremost 
to  aid  any  philanthropic  enterprise 
for  the  real  welfare  of  others.  All 
the  strongest  impulses  of  his  nature 
prompt  him  to  sympathetic  action  for 
the  unfortunate.  Consequently  his 
time,  money,  and  influence  are  made  sub- 
servient to  the  common  good  of  men. 
IL  Like  music,  a  godly  life  is  cheer- 
ing. When  we  have  been  oppressed 
with  care,  when  the  great  mystery  of 
life  has  come  heavily  upon  our  souls, 
what  hope  and  comfort  have  been  im- 
parted by  contact  with  a  happy,  pious 
spirit,  ni.  Like  musiCf  a  godly  life 
is  inspiring.  When  men  would  have 
given  up  the  conflict  of  life  in  despair, 
how  often  has  the  word  and  life  of  a 
Christian  filled  them  with  new  courage ; 
and  how  frequently  are  careless  souls 
awakened  to  a  sense  of  duty  by  the 
moral  earnestness  of  the  godly  around 
them.  rV.  Like  music^  a  godly  life  is 
calming.  What  a  quieting  influence 
has  the  life  of  a  good  man  upon 
those  around  him.  His  presence  sub- 
due anger;  by  his  smile  the  deepest 
unrest  is  removed  He  calms  the 
passions  of  the  unholy  and  soothes  the 
sorrow  of  the  troubled  V.  Are  our 
lives  morally  musical  f  Are  they  in 
harmony  with  God  and  all  His  works  f 
Are  our  dispositions  in  the  home,  in 
business,  and  in  the  varied  scenes  of  life 
kindly  t  If  so,  then  are  we  the  joy,  the 
inspiration,  and  the  quietude  of  many 
lives  around  us  that  might  otherwise  be 
sad,  monotonous,  and  unpeaceful. — The 
Lay  Preacher. 

Vers.  64-66.  Divine  punishment : 
L  Is  proportioned  to  human  sin.  "A 
recompense  according  to  the  work  of 
their  hands'*  (ver.  64).  IL  Afflicts  the 
chief  instrument  of  human  sin,  "  Give 
them  sorrow  of  heart "  (ver.  65) — blind- 
ness   of    hearty    obstinacy,    hardness. 


III.  Is  an  appalling  reality,  '*  Perse- 
cute and  destroy  them  in  anger  "  (ver. 
66). 

Ver.  65.  God  can  entangle  the  head 
that  thinks  itself  clearest,  and  sink  the 
heart  that  thinks  itself  stoutest 

Illustrations.— It  Is  best  alwmys 
to  do  justly.  Writing  on  the  question 
of  just  treatment  between  the  Southern 
and  Northern  States  of  America,  and 
especially  of  the  black  race,  G.  W.  Cable 
said :  '*  But  it  is  sometimes  said,  Will  not 
this  tend  eventually  to  amalgamation  ? 
Idle  question  1  Will  it  help  the  matter 
towithholdmen'smanifestrights?  What 
can  we  do  better  for  the  remotest  future 
than  to  be  just  in  the  present,  and  leave 
the  rest  to  the  Divine  Rewarder  of 
nations  that  walk  uprightly  1 " 

Justice  between  man  and  man.  The 
doctrine  which  bases  all  the  relations  of 
employer  and  employed  upon  self-in- 
terest is  a  doctrine  of  the  pit ;  it  has 
been  bringing  hell  to  earth  in  large  in- 
stalments for  a  great  many  yeara  You 
can  have  hell  in  your  factory,  or  you  can 
have  heaven  there,  just  as  you  please. 
If  it  is  hell  that  you  want,  build  your 
business  on  the  law  of  hell,  which  is — 
Every  man  for  himself  and  the  devil 
take  the  hindmost.  Out  of  that  will 
come  fightings  perennial  and  unrelent- 
ing. If  it  is  heaven  that  you  want^ 
then  build  your  business  on  the  law 
of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  which  is — 
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself. 
That  will  put  you  in  the  path  of  peace. 

Beligion  and  Justice.  In  the  year 
813  the  Doge  Angelo  Participazio  took 
vigorous  means  for  the  enlargement  of 
the  small  group  of  buildings  which  were 
to  be  the  nucleus  of  the  future  Venice. 
For  the  offices  of  religion  he  built  the 
church  of  St  Mark,  and  on  or  near  the 
spot  where  the  Ducal  Palace  now  stands 
he  built  a  palace  for  the  administration 
of  justice.  Observe  that  piety  towards 
God  and  justice  towards  man  have  been 
at  least  the  nominal  purposes  of  every 
act  and  institution  of  ancient  Venice. 
— Ruskin. 

Wrong-doing  brings  its  own  retri- 
bution. Cosimo  L,  of  Florence,  was  a 
ferocious,  cruel  tyrant,  murdering  his 

105 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  m. 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


own  son  in  the  presence  of  his  mother. 
After  a  few  years  he  married  a  wicked 
hut  heautiful  woman,  who  had  heen 
a  former  partner  in  sin  with  him, 
and  in  his  last  days,  hroken  with 
decrepitude,  was  helpless  in  her  des- 
potic hands.  For  two  years  after 
the  palsy  had  deprived  him  of  speech 
or  movement,  he  lay  dying,  bereft  of 
everything  but  a  torturing  memory  of 
his  cruelty  and  wickedness. 

—  The  Jews  have  a  tradition  that 
Cain  was  doomed  to  carry  Abel's  corpse 
for  a  hundred  years. 

The  JQBt  and  the  nnjnst.  Such 
being  our  unjust  man,  let  us  place  by 
his  side  a  man  of  true  simplicity  and 
nobleness,  resolved,  as  ^schylus  says, 
not  to  seem,  but  to  be  good.  We  must 
certainly  take  away  the  seeming;  for 
if  he  be  thought  to  be  a  just  man,  he 
will  have  honours  and  gifts  on  the 
strength  of  this  reputation,  so  that  it 
will  be  uncertain  whether  it  is  for  jus- 
tice's sake  or  for  the  sake  of  the  ^ts 
and  honours  that  he  is  what  he  is. 
Yes,  we  must  strip  him  bare  of  every- 
thing but  justice,  and  make  his  case 
tiie  reverse  of  the  former.  Without 
being  guilty  of  one  unjust  act,  let  him 
have  the  worst  reputation  for  injustice, 
so  that  his  virtue  may  be  thoroughly 
tested  and  shown  to  be  proof  against 
infamy  and  all  its  consequences ;  and 
let  him  go  on  to  the  day  of  his  death 
steadfast  in  his  justice,  but  with  a  life- 


long reputation  for  injustice.  They 
who  prefer  injustice  above  justice  will 
say  that  in  such  a  situation  the  just 
man  will  be  scourged,  racked,  fettered, 
will  have  his  eyes  burnt  out,  and  at 
last,  after  suffering  every  kind  of  tor- 
ture, will  be  crucified ;  and  thus  learn 
that  it  is  best  to  resolve,  not  to  be,  but 
to  seem  just — Plato's  Republic 

Injustice  not  to  be  hwrtily  resented. 
When  Aristides,  the  Athenian  general, 
sat  to  arbitrate  a  difference  between  two 
persons,  one  of  them  said,  *'  This  fellow 
accused  thee  at  such  a  time."  To  whom 
Aristides  answered,  **  I  sit  not  to  hear 
what  he  has  done  against  me,  but 
against  thee."  That  was  a  noble  reply 
of  Philip  the  Grood  when  urged  by  hu 
courtiers  to  punish  a  prelate  who  had 
done  him  great  injustice,  he  declined, 
saying,  '*It  is  a  fine  thing  to  have 
revenge  in  one's  power ;  but  it  is  a  finer 
thing  not  to  use  it." 

God  frustrates  the  sehemes  of  the 
wicked.  All  the  plots  and  contriyances 
of  wicked  men,  all  their  turning  of 
things  upside  down,  are  treated  as  the 
potter's  clay  ;  for  when  they  think  they 
have  brought  all  to  maturity,  ripeness, 
and  perfection,  when  they  look  upon 
their  business  as  good  as  done,  on  a 
sudden  all  their  labour  is  lost ;  for  Gkxi, 
who  stands  by  all  the  while  and  looks 
on,  will,  with  one  small  touch,  with  the 
least  breath  of  His  mouth,  blast  and 
break  all  in  pieces. — EdUfk 


106 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  ohaf.  it. 


CHAPTER  IV. 
Zion's  Pitiful  Estate. 

Thb  first  half  of  thii  obapter  is  occupied  with  details  oonneoted  with  the  nithleM  overthrow 
and  harrowing  incidents  in  the  oonquest  of  Jerusalem.  Distinot  and  vigorous  expression  is 
thereafter  given  to  the  intense  conviction  that  the  tem£o  disasters  were  traceable  to  the 
iniquities  of  the  people,  and  especially  of  the  ruling  classes.  They  suffered  from  the  anger  of 
the  Lord ;  but  He  would  not  contend  for  ever.  There  is  hope  that,  after  metinff  out  justice 
to  oppressors,  He  would  arise  wnd  have  merey  upon  Zion,  for  the  time  to  favour  her :  yea,  the 
$et  time  had  eome.  The  shadows  of  the  niffht  were  very  dense,  but  streaks  across  them  betoken 
to  the  spiritual  eye  that  day  is  breaking,  the  day  of  restoration. 

(K)  Yer.  1.  How  is  the  gold  dimmed*  Not  a  mere  diminution  of  its  brightness,  but  a  tarnish- 
ing which  lowered  the  estimate  of  the  ore.  The  moft  pore  gold  changed ;  something  more 
than  an  alteration  in  the  appearance  of  the  purified  metal  is  observed.  The  alteration  is  not  in 
its  substance,  but  in  its  depreciated  value.  The  stonet  of  the  sanctnary — not  only  were 
precious  stones  worn  on  the  garments  of  the  Bigh  Priest,  but  the  Temple  also  was  garnished  for 
btoMJLy  with  them— are  poured  out  at  the  head  of  every  street.  If  this  is  regarded  as  having 
reference  to  the  costly  stones  of  the  House  of  the  Lord,  the  objection  naturally  arises  that  no 
enemy  would  be  so  reckless  as  to  strew  such  precious  material  all  over  the  city.  Rather  the 
whole  verse  is  to  be  considered  as  a  figurative  representation  of  the  sad  lot  of  Jerusalem,  not  of 
its  buildings  but  of  its  inhabitants,  which  will  be  told  of  in  some  verses  following.  A  similar 
comparison  is  made  by  the  prophet  Zechariah,  who  foretells  that  the  torn  of  Zion  thaU  hea$^ 
itonea  of  a  erotm^  only  not  oast  down,  as  here,  but  lifted  on  high  (Zeob.  ix.  16). 

(3).  Yer.  2  defines  the  objects  of  which  the  preceding  verse  was  an  Ulustration.  The 
predous  sone  of  Son,  grouping  all  the  people  together,  a  kingdom  of  priette,  an  hdy  naUon, 
comparable  to»  weighed  in  one  scale  against  fine  gold  in  the  other,  he  is  astonished  to  see  as 
in  utter  contrast  with  what  they  were.  Three  varieties  of  gold  are  mentioned — gr>ld,  pure  gold, 
fine  gold — as  if  the  sons  of  Zion  were  precious  beyond  the  most  precious  things  ;  but  the  o^mtrast 
between  the  high  estimate  and  the  degraded  reality,  between  what  the  Lord  formed  them  to  be 
and  foes  had  reduced  them  to,  forces  out  the  cry,  How  are  they  reckoned  at  earthen  pitchers, 
made  from  ignoble  materials  by  human  hands,  and  easily  broken  to  pieces  (Jer.  xix.  11). 

Their  humiliating  condition  is  evidenced  in  children,  adults,  nobles,  and  mutherc*. 

(3).  Yer.  3.  Beasts  of  prey  show  affection  for  their  brood.  Even  the  Jackals  draw  ont — 
present — the  breast ;  a  familiar  fact^  testifying  that  they  were  true  to  their  instincts,  they 
snckle  their  whelps;  but  in  miserable  contrariety  to  this,  the  daughter  of  my  peofde  has 
become  otherwise  ;  unwilling  to  give  nourishment  to  their  babes,  they  show  themselves  orael, 
like  ostriches  In  the  desert.  This  arraignment  of  the  wild  birds  is  according  to  ideas  current 
at  the  time,  and  reported  in  the  Book  of  Job.  She  leatfeth  her  egos  on  the  earth  .  .  .  she  is 
hardened  agatnet  her  young  ones,  as  if  they  were  not  hers  (chap,  xzxix.  14, 16).  Later  observa- 
tions require  some  modification  of  this  account  of  the  habits  of  the  ostrich ;  but  the  writers 
of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  had  not  a  knowledge  of  Nature  beyond  their  times. 

This  fearful,  unnatural  result  of  the  extreme  trials  of  the  Israelites  had  its  correlated  feature. 

(1).  Yer.  4.  The  tongue  of  the  sucking  child  cleayeth  to  the  roof  of  his  month,  because 
of  getting  no  milk.  The  yonng  children  ask  bread,  and  no  one  divides  to  them  the  cakes  in 
which  form  it  was  made. 

(n)  Yer.  5.  Adults  also  are  distressed.  They  that  did  feed  delicately,  in  the  fastidiousness 
of  luxuiy,  are  desolate  in  the  streets,  with  no  one  to  serve  them,  with  no  means  to  satisfy 
hunger,  perishing.  They  that  were  brought  np  In  scarlet^  those  of  the  wealthy  classes, 
accustomed  to  use  the  most  expensive  cloth,  lay  themselves,  in  sheer  despair,  on  the  dirt-heaps 
which  have  accumulated  in  the  ruined  city.  Like  Dives,  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  Unen,  faring 
sumptiumsLy  every  day,  they  too  are  in  darkness— only  they  in  the  visible,  he  in  the  invisible 
world. 

())  Yer.  6.  Those  awful  distresses  were  due  to  the  way  in  which  the  people  had  lived.  The 
crying  wickedness  of  Sodom  is  again  and  again  denounced  by  prophets  as  a  warning  to  the 
Israelite^.  Here  that  wickedness  is  minified,  and,  from  the  long  drawn  out  sufferings  of  the 
latter,  it  is  implied  that  the  iniquity — not  tfie  punishment  of  the  iniquity,  a  translation  which 
has  not  been  established  from  the  usage  of  the  two  corresponding  Hebrew  words  elsewhere— of 
the  daughter  of  my  people  is  greater  than  the  sin  of  Sodom.  The  Cities  of  the  Plain  had 
not  the  advantage  which  the  Jews  had,  who  were  intrusted  vfith  the  oracles  of  Ood,  and  their  guilt 
was  less.  The  supreme  authon^  of  Jesus  Christ  stands  behind  the  declaration  that  it  would 
be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Uomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  those  who  refused 
the  light  of  life.  Moreover,  Sodom  was  destroyed  by  a  sudden  stroke — no  protracted  sufferings, 
no  starved,  wailing  children,  no  mothers  eating  their  own  infants,  overthrown  as  in  a  moment, 
and  by  forces  in  which  no  human  agency  had  any  part;  hands  did  not  encircle  her.  No 
enemies  brandished  their  swords  against  her  inhabitants,  investing  her  on  every  side.  God 
can  paralyse  all  industries  and  destroy  a  community  without  man's  aid.    The  gmund  of  this 

107 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  IT.  HOMILBTIC  aOMMBNTART:  ULMBNTATI0N8. 


preferenoe  of  Sodom  is  that  a  tronUe  direct  from  God  is  more  bearable  tban  one  inflicted  by 
man,  and  was  expressed  by  King  David,  Ld  me  faU  into  ike  hand  of  Jekovah  .  ,  ,  let  wu  noi 
fall  into  the  hand  of  man  (1  Ohron.  xxl  18). 

(l)  Ver.  7.  Men  under  religious  vows  oonld  not  have  been  so  numerous  as  to  form  a  con- 
spicuous element  in  tbe  population.  Nor  is  there  any  reason  to  suppose  that  they  were  noted 
for  a  fine  physique.  Besides,  the  Hebrew  word  is  not  confined  to  those  who  are  professed 
Nazarites,  but  applies  to  such  as  were  distinguished  from  others.  So  Joseph,  in  Jacob's  djriog 
forecasts,  is  described  as  him  titat  wa»  natvn,  ieparate  from  [mai^.  that  i$  prinoe  among]  htM 
brethren  (Gen.  xlix.  26).  Her  nobles  were  purer  than  now,  &c.  Still  another  feature  char- 
acterised  them,  they  were  more  mddy  in  body  than  mbles.  "  The  white  and  red  are  to  be 
understood  as  mixed,  and  shading  into  one  another,  as  our  popular  poetry  speaks  of  cheeks 
which  '  like  milk  and  purple  shine ' "  (Delitzsch^  ;  My  beloved  u  white  and  ruddy  (Cant.  ▼.  10) ; 
**My  love  is  like  the  red,  red  rose"  (Scottish  song).  Sapphire  was  their  poUshinfr  Pit. 
figure].  The  comparison,  however,  can  only  be  with  the  brilliancy  of  the  gem,  not  with  its 
shape.  The  appearance  of  the  nobles,  as  here  described,  indicates  that  their  faces  were  not 
bronzed  and  seamed  by  exposure  to  all  kinds  of  weather ;  no  engrained  dust  from  toiling  day 
after  day  darkened  their  complexion.  They  looked  as  those  who  live  ddieately  in  king*i  eourtt. 
But  now — 

(H)  Ver.  8.  Darker  than  blackness  is  their  Tisage;  they  are  not  reoognised  in  the 
streets  as  members  of  the  aristocracy ;  nothing  marks  them  off  from  the  labouring  classes. 
Their  skin  deareth  to  their  bones,  they  are  emaciated  and  shrivelled  through  hunger  and 
anguish,  and  the  skin  is  become  dry  as  wood. 

(D)  Ver.  9.  One  melancholy  contrast  suggests  another,  «.«.,  between  those  who  are  dead  and 
those  who  are  tortured  by  want  Better  are  the  slain  by  the  sword  than  the  slain  by  hunger. 
The  next  clause  is  more  descriptive  of  tbe  condition  of  the  former  than  of  the  latter.  The 
advantage  of  less  prolonged  and  gnawing  pains  is  with  those  who  pine  away  [lit  flow  away, 
as  sinking  from  loss  of  blood  gushing  from  ghastly  wounds],  pieroed  through  at  a  time  when 
there  was  no  lack  of  food  from  the  fmits  of  the  field. 

{>)  Ver.  10.  A  more  dreadful  fact  is  related  in  regard  to  the  little  ones  than  that  in  vers. 
3  and  4.  The  hands  of  tender-hearted  women— not  servants  or  hirelings,  but  themselves— 
haTe  boiled  their  own  children;  they  became  meat  for  them  in  that  clinutx  of  sufferings,  the 
destmetion  of  the  danghter  of  my  people.  Moral  duty  is  sacrificed,  and  unnatural  crimes 
committed  at  the  shrine  of  physical  cravings. 

(3)  Ver.  11  is  a  conclusion  from  the  immediately  preceding  verses,  as  ver.  6  is  from  those  pre- 
ceding it.  Jehovah  has  accomplished,  i.e.,  has  put  forth  a  full  measure  of.  His  fory  ;  has  ponred 
out  the  fierceness  of  His  anger,  and  one  method  of  its  action  is  He  has  kindled  a  fire  in  Son, 
and  has  dcTonred  her  foundations.  The  scenes  of  horror  which  have  been  depicted  show  the 
meeting-place  of  Zion*s  guilt  and  its  Divine  punisher.  God's  fierce  wrath  is  the  blast  which 
consumes  flagrant  iniquities.  The  entire  demolition  of  the  former  principles  dominating  tlie 
Israelites  is  thus  symbolised,  and  so  signifits  that  room  is  made  for  the  new  spirit  which  shall 
possess  the  restored  captivity  when  they  lay  again  the  foundations  of  tbe  House  of  the  Lord. 

A  change  of  features  is  to  be  presented  now  by  sketching,  not  so  much  the  disasters  on 
classeo  'of  the  people,  as  the  cauies  by  which  they  were  produced,  and  the  baffled  hopes  ensuing. 

(^)  Ver.  12.  The  kings  of  the  earth—men  who  might  be  considered  experts— belioTed  not, 
neither  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world— men  who  were  moved  by  appearances  and  common 
hearsay— that  an  adversary  .  .  .  should  enter  into  the  gates  of  Jerusalem.  This  belief 
cannot  be  merely  "a  deep  subjective  conviction."  Whether  or  not  the  city  was  previously 
taken  is  a  matter  of  no  importance.  What  is  stated  is  a  general  opinion.  The  unverified  belief 
would  be  grounded  on  the  knowledge  of  the  strong  situation  and  careful  fortifications  of 
Jerusalem,  which,  with  the  means  of  siege  then  at  command,  might  be  considered  almost  im- 
possible of  capture.  It  was  invested  a  year  and  a  half  before  capture  by  the  greatest  warrior 
of  the  age.  Besides  this,  there  may  well  have  been,  since  tbe  remarkable  repulse  of  Sennacherib, 
a  wide-spread  supposition,  as  when  the  tribes  emeiged  from  the  desert,  that  the  God  of  Israel 
was  very  mighty  in  the  defence  of  His  worshippers,  and  would  not  let  His  sacred  city  be 
subjugated. 

(Dj  Ver.  18.  It  is  needful  to  connect  this  verse  with  the  last  by  words  like,  Thi$  inoredible 
thing  came  to  pan,  because  of  the  sins  of  her  prophets,  the  iniquities  of  her  priests— the 
position  which  these  two  classes  assumed  in  the  polity  of  Jerusalem  is  indicated  in  various 
strong  terms  by  Jeremiah,  the  prophet  of  this  period,  and  especially  in  his  references  to  the 
treatment,  which  he  himself  received  at  their  hands  (chap,  xxvi.)— who  shed  in  her  midst  the 
blood  of  the  rii^teous.  They  are  branded  as  instigators  and  leaders  of  the  evil,  and,  like 
other  occupiers  of  usurped  power,  their  jealousy  and  anger  at  those  who  crossed  them  in  any 
way  urge  them  to  the  extreme  measure  of  dooming  to  death  the  faithful  witnesses  for  God.  In 
thus  declaring  the  causes  of  the  calamity  to  Judah,  there  is  once  more  uplifted  the  moral  stan- 
dard which  Ims  made  the  Bible  to  be  the  impulse  to  all  ethical  revivals,  the  rebuker  of  wroos 
by  whomsoever  committed,  the  unswerving  asserter  of  the  rights  of  God  in  the  face  of  man'i 
injury  to  man. 

(3  D)  Vers.  14  and  16  seem  applicable  to  the  condition  of  prophets  and  priests  after  the  ek^ 

108 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTia  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  OHAP.  IV. 


had  been  ttkmu  They  were  panioftricken.  They  itaggMrAd  [as]  blind  men  in  the  lirettB ;  an 
effeofc  aooounted  for  in  other  parts  of  Scripture  as  a  punishmeiit  of  sin.  They  make  hatte  to  iked 
imnoceiU  blood  .  .  .  tkerrfort  we  grope  for  the  wall  like  the  blind,  yea,  we  grope  «u  they  that  have 
no  eyee  (Isa.  lix.  7  and  10).  Their  ain  found  tham  oat ;  its  marks  were  palpable  ;  they  wert 
defiled  with  blood  when  the  oommand  tu  so  into  exile  arrested  them.  So  they  were  avoided ; 
[men]  oonld  not  tonoh  their  garment!.  In  their  blood-stained  aspect  they  were  met  with  the 
shoat  which  was  enjoined  upon  leprous  persons.  That  it  was  the  leper  who  was  to  cry  unclean 
is  of  little  consequence  where  **  poetical  license  "  is  exercised.  Away  naolaan  ono  [niMll,  cried 
to  them,  away,  away ;  and  so  such  as  had,  in  spiritual  pride,  said,  Come  not  near  me,  I  am 
holier  tftan  thou,  are  abhorred  by  the  people  they  contemned.  The  just  judgment  of  Ood  was 
manifest,  so  that,  as  proscribed  offenders,  When  they  fled  away  and  staggered  blindly  as  before 
in  the  city,  they  found  that,  even  in  other  places  where  they  sought  ease  and  rest  for  the  soles  of 
their  feet,  the  natives  would  not  allow  them  to  stay ;  [men]  Mid  among  the  nationi,  They 
ihall  no  longer  ■ojoom  [among  na].  These  references,  in  all  probabi&ty,  are  made  to  real 
occurrences. 

(D)  Ver.  16.  The  cironmstances  of  those  fugitives  are  ascribable  to  Jehovah.  Wherever  they 
went,  the  faoe  of  Jehorah  had  not  disappeared  ;  in  anger,  not  in  grace,  lifted  up  upon  them,  it 
hai  icattered  them,  and  will  no  more  regard  theuL  This  fact  was  verified  on  their  treat- 
ment by  the  peoples  to  whom  they  hod  gone.  There  no  respect  was  paid,  no  favour  shown,  am 
account  of  office,  occupation,  or  age. 

{V)  Ver.  17  refers  to  the  persons  remaining  in  the  city,  who,  notwithstanding  that  God*s 
righteous  judgments  had  so  afflicted  prophets  and  priests,  yet  thought  longingly  of  human 
defences  ;  Still  onr  eyes  ftdled  [looking]  for  Tain  help.  This  is  explained  in  the  succeeding 
clause,  We  eagerly  watched  for  a  nation  that  oonld  not  save,  trusting  that  Egypt,  that  broken 
reed,  or  perhaps  some  other  equally  unsatisfactory  auxiliary,  would  appear  to  rescue  them. 

(V)  Ver.  18.  Whatever  their  expectations  might  be,  they  were  under  constant  pressure  from 
the  berieging  army.  They  hnnted  oar  steps ;  every  movement  was  closely  watched,  so  that 
we  oonld  niA  go  in  onr  streets,  there,  liable  to  be  laid  hold  on  at  every  turn,  all  seemed  to  be 
over.  The  final  cessation  of  their  independence  was  but  the  question  of  an  hour,  onr  end  is 
eome,  our  national  life  extinguished. 

(p)  Ver.  19.  Flight  from  the  dty  was  of  no  benefit.  Fugitives  were  promptly  and  hoUy 
followed,  whether  thej  betook  themsielves  to  the  cavernous  retreats  of  thf.  everlaUing  hiUt,  or  to 
waste  and  lonely  places.  Swifter  were  onr  pnrsners  than  the  eagles  of  heaTen;  on  the 
mountains  they  chased  ns,  in  the  desert  they  laid  wait  for  ns.  So  the  deportatitm  to  Babylon 
is  prepared  for,  and  proof  given  of  the  complete  break-up  of  the  organised  community  of  Israel. 

("))  Ver.  20.  The  crowning  evidence  of  the  collapse  was  the  seizure  of  the  head  of  the  State, 
who  is  considered  to  have  been,  not  King  Josiah  but  Zedekiali,  by  most  commentators.  The 
breath  of  onr  nostrils,  the  token  of  our  life,  is  the  monarch.  An  idea  like  this  was  prevalent 
among  ancient  peoples,  and  a  noticeable  confirmation  of  it  is  quoted  from  Seneca,  Jh  (AemenUa: 
"  He  (the  sovereign)  is  the  vital  breath  which  so  many  thousands  (of  dtisens)  draw."  In  his 
life  the  nation  views  the  representative  of  its  life.  **  God  made  David  king,  and  his  posterity, 
for  this  end  that  the  life  of  the  people  might,  in  a  manner,  reside  in  him  ;  '  and  so  long  as  he 
was  among  them,  there  seemed  to  be  a  pledge  of  the  favour  of  God,  and  so  of  their  continued 
existence  as  a  separated  nation.  Zedeldah  might  be  irresolute  and  weak,  but  it  is  not  personal 
character,  it  is  office  which  is  regarded— the  anointed  of  Jehorah.  "  We  must  observe  that 
these  high  terms  properly  belong  to  Christ  only,  for  David  was  not  the  life  of  the  people  except 
as  he  was  a  type  of  and  represented  His  person  .  .  .  and  hence  we  learn  that  the  Church  is 
dead  when  separated  from  its  Head  "  (Calvin).  The  representative  of  this  earthly  life  of  the 
nation  had  disappeared,  was  taken,  **like  a  wild  animal  driven  into  a  pitfall,'*  in  their  pits. 
His  capture  by  the  hostile  forces  is  related  in  Jer.  lii  7-11,  and  was  achieved  about  a  month 
prior  to  the  sack  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  the  prelude  to  the  conviction  that  their  last  hopes  were 
being  crushed.  Of  whom  we  said.  Under  his  shadow  we  wiU  li¥e  among  the  nattons.  Asa 
captive  to  Babylon,  there  was  not  the  ghost  of  a  chance  to  rally  round  him,  and  no  sort  of  pro- 
spect of  existing  as  a  semi-independent  people  in  any  foreign  land.     The  end  had  come. 

(t^)  Ver.  21.  The  children  of  Edom  had  exulted  over  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and 
urgently  called  for  its  completeness.  They  said,  Rate  U,  rate  it,  even  to  the  foundatiom 
thereof  (Ps.  cxxxviL  7).  Now  they  are  addressed  in  bitter  irony,  Bejoioe  and  be  glad, 
daughter  of  Edom,  take  a  full  measure  of  yoiur  malicious  joy,  but  with  all  that  your  triumphing 
will  be  short ;  you  cannot  escape  pungent  woes,  however  extended  your  territory  may  be,  that 
dwellest  in  the  land  of  Us,  a  district  of  country  bordering  on  Bdom's  land,  and  which  seems 
to  have  been  overrun  by  Edomites.  To  thee  also  shall  the  cnp  pass,  (/i«  etip  of  the  wine  i^the 
wrath  of  Ood  which  is  mingled  in  Hie  anger. 

The  stronff  feelings  of  indignation,  which  were  almost  hereditary  among  the  Israelites, 
a^^ainst  the  Edomites,  may  be  partly  accounted  for  from  the  idea  that  variance  with  one's  own 
kith  and  kin  is  often  expressed  by  more  bitter  terms  than  variance  with  strangers,  and  partly 
bv  the  consciousness  which  Israel  had  of  its  spiritual  calling  which  the  **  profane  "  nature  of 
Man's  descendants. tended  to  render  inoperative. 

(n)  Ver.  22.  No  hint  marks  the  transition  from  the  grim  scenes  of  calamity  in  which  the 

109 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IV.  BOMILETIC  COMMBNTABT:  LAMENTATIONS. 


Jews  had  been  involved  to  this  glimpse  of  lig^t  and  renewaL  The  abniptneu  muit  b«  doe  to 
the  conviction  that,  as  Israel  is  uie  people  with  whom  Jehovah  has  entered  into  oovenant,  all 
oannot  be  over  with  them,  however  they  are  pressed  down  by  adversity.  If  they  forsake  Him, 
they  will  be  chastised  till  they  acknowledge  and  repent  of  their  apostasy.  Then  He  will  have 
pit^  fur  His  nunieV  sake.  Punishment  will  come  to  a  termination  ;  Ended  is  thine  iniquity, 
danghter  of  Zion.  The  consequenoes  following  an  evil  procedure  would,  as  it  were,  drain  to 
the  dregs  the  cup  of  wrath  and  grace  would  begin  to  appear.  *'  A  Messianic  hope  '*  is  created, 
He  will  no  more  carry  thee  into  captivity,  by  x\\*^  Chaldeans,  at  any  rate.  This  pn>mi8e  is 
dependent  for  its  fulfilment  upon  the  righteous  state  of  Israel.  Avoiding  the  sins  which  had 
brought  the  present  term  of  punishment,  they  would  not  be  subjected  to  such  punishment 
again.  The  exiles  who  returned  from  Babylon  were  greatly  purified  and  elevated  by  the  trials 
which  had  been  passed  through,  and  if  there  had  been  due  progress  in  spiritual  things,  as  the 
prophet  Malachi  declares  there  was  not,  no  further  casting  out  of  the  land  of  promise  would 
have  taken  place.  But  tiiey  crucified  the  Lord  ofgtory.  T^eir  houte  it  left  unto  Hum  deiUaie, 
and  they  are  scattered  over  the  earth  till  they  turn  again  to  Hie  Lord.  The  allotment  to  Edom 
is  a  contrast ;  He  visite  thine  iniqaities,  daughter  of  Edom ;  He  diacovers  thy  aim.  He  sees 
they  are  persisted  in,  and  shame  and  woe  follow  the  exposure.  '*  God  covers  sin  when  He 
forgives  it  (Ps.  xxxii.  1-5).  He  discovers  or  reveals  it  when  He  punishes  it "  (Job  xz.  27). 
The  safety  of  Gk>d*s  people  connotes  the  destruction  of  His  enemies  (Rev.  xxiz.  and  xz.). 


H0MILETIC8. 

Moral  Drqbadatioh. 

(Verses  1,  2.) 

The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  was  an  event  so  unexpected,  so  unparalleled,  so 
astounding,  that  it  seemed  as  if  it  could  not  bo  sufficiently  lamented.  The  grief  of 
the  prophet  is  not  yet  exhausted.  Once  more  lie  looks  upon  the  fated  city  as  it 
gradually  but  inevitably  collapses  in  the  tightening  grasp  of  the  relentless  besiegers, 
and  as  he  sees  the  miseries  of  his  countrymen  in  their  direful  extremity,  he  renews 
his  doleful  elegy.  He  reiterates  the  doctrine  that  the  sufferings  of  Judah  are  the 
just  punishment  of  her  sins,  and  not  until  the  chastisement  has  had  its  proper 
effect  is  there  any  hope  of  her  restoration.  These  verses  describe  the  moral 
degradation  and  wretchedness  of  the  sufferers,  and  suggest  the  following  re- 
flections. 

I.  That  moral  degradation  is  the  more  evident  when  comiMured  with  a 
former  condition  of  superior  excellence.  The  people  of  Qod  are  called  "the 
precious  sons  of  Zion,"  and  their  moral  excellence  is  compared  to  "  the  most  fine 
gold,"  and  to  the  hallowed  "  stones  of  the  sanctuary."  Judah  was  a  chosen  and 
consecrated  nation,  and  enjoyed  unexampled  privileges.  She  was  raised  not  only 
into  temporal  affluence  and  splendour,  but  was  intended  to  represent  the  lofty 
type  of  a  moral  and  spiritual  commonwealth.  She  was  the  custodian  and  teacher 
of  spiritual  blessings  that  were  to  enrich  the  world.  She  was  the  medium  through 
which  Jehovah  sought  to  express  His  gracious  purpose  of  salvation  to  the  whole 
human  race.  No  nation  had  been  so  exalted  and  so  honoured.  While  she 
remained  faithful  to  her  calling,  Judah  was  supremo  and  invulnerable  among  the 
nations.  She  shone  with  the  lustre  of  the  most  fine  gold,  and  her  position  was  as 
secure  as  that  of  an  impregnable  fortress.  But  when  she  sinned  she  fell,  and 
her  fall  was  the  more  notable  when  contrasted  with  her  former  greatness  and 
grandeur. 

II.  That  moral  degradation  is  a  loss  of  character  and  stability.  The  moral 
reputation  of  Judah  was  tarnished — the  gold  was  dimmed,  the  most  fine  gold 
changed.  Three  kinds  of  gold  are  mentioned  in  these  verses — gold,  most  fine 
gold,  and  fine  (or  solid)  gold.  The  precious  metal  not  only  lost  its  brilliancy  but 
also  its  massiveness :  it  became  thin  and  hollow.  The  religious  character  of  Grod's 
people,  which  was  compact  and  strong  as  the  solid  building  of  the  sanctuary,  is 
shattered,  and  lies  in  a  heap  of  ruins,  like  the  stones  of  the  demolished  Temple 

110 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


GRIP.  nr. 


that  now  block  the  streets  of  Jerusalem.  Its  moral  value  is  destroyed.  It  ia 
now  of  no  more  worth  thau  a  piece  of  brittle  earthenware,  which  the  swift  hands 
of  the  potter  can  easily  put  together  and  as  easily  break.  Sin  is  a  great  dis- 
integrator of  character.  The  external  form  may  appear  unchanged  long  after 
decay  has  set  in ;  but  the  mischief  is  slowly  and  surely  working,  and  the  final 
collapse  is  inevitable.  Nothing  is  safe  where  righteousness  is  ignored,  whether 
in  individuals  or  in  nations. 

III.  That  moral  degradation  is  the  occasion  of  painfhllamentation.  ''How 
is  the  gold  become  dim !  How  is  the  most  fine  gold  changed  !  How  are  they 
esteemed  as  earthen  pitchers  "  6vers.  1,  2).  Even  the  most  callous  are  sometimes 
moTed  to  pity  as  they  witness  the  downfall  of  excellence  which  they  often  envied 
and  could  not  reach.  Misfortune  softens  the  hard-hearted.  But  who  can  sound 
the  depths  of  anguish  of  the  soul  that  realises  the  greatness  of  the  disaster  occa- 
sioned by  the  fall  of  morality  and  religion  I  It  is  the  loss  of  personal  righteous- 
ness, happiness,  and  peace;  the  loss  of  national  prestige;  the  loss  of  all  the 
safeguards  of  social  life ;  the  loss  of  untold  blessing  to  the  world ;  and,  greatest 
of  ally  the  loss  of  the  favour  and  smile  of  God  1  In  the  midst  of  moral  wreckage 
and  ruin,  it  is  a  hopeful  sign  when  even  one  is  left  who  sincerely  mourns  and 
laments  the  catastrophe.  The  tears  of  such  an  one  shine  with  the  lustre  of  the 
goodness  whose  loss  he  deplores. 

LBB80N& — 1.  Religion  only  can  make  a  nation  truly  illustrious.  2.  When 
religion  declines^  the  glory  of  the  nation  is  obscured,  3.  The  loss  of  religion  should 
be  not  only  lamented,  but  should  lead  to  diligent  search  after  its  recovery. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vera  1,  2.  Moral  character:  L  Is 
the  basis  of  individual  worth.  IL  Qives 
reputation  and  stability  to  individual 
lifa    ni.  Needs  to  be  carefully  guarded. 

lLLn8TR4TiON&  —  Lack  of  moral 
sense.  It  is  no  exaggeration  to  assert 
that  Napoleon  L,  strangely  called  the 
Great,  had  no  moral  sense.  Carlyle 
tells  the  story  of  a  German  emperor 
who^  when  corrected  for  a  mistake  he 
made  in  Latin,  replied,  "I  am  King 
of  the  Romans,  and  above  grammar." 
Napoleon's  arrogance  was  infinitely 
greater.  He  thought  himself  above 
morality,  and  really  seems  to  have  be- 
lieved that  he  had  a  perfect  right  to 
commit  any  crime,  political  or  personal, 
that  would  advance  his  interests  by  an 
iota ;  and  indeed  he  did  commit  so  many 
it  is  almost  impossible  to  recount  them. 

Moral  degradation  affects  work. 
The  corrupte»l  Papacy  of  the  fifteenth 
century  so  injuriously  affected  the  art 
world,  that  from  that  time  there  was  a 
serious  decline  in  all  the  arts  of  paint- 
ing, sculpture,  and  architecture.  The 
degradation  of  religion  first  touched 
public  morality,  and  then  spread  to  all 


the  arts.  Character  tells  on  skill 
Where  the  heart  declines,  the  hand 
will  soon  disclose  it.  The  *'work  of 
our  hands  "  is  only  established  as  "  the 
beauty  of  the  Lord  is  upon  us." — Ruskin. 

Degeneration.  In  the  Central  Park 
Museum,  at  New  York,  there  is  the 
skeleton  of  a  huge  bird,  now  extinct. 
It  is  14  feet  in  height ;  and  by  its  side 
is  a  stuffed  specimen  of  another  bird 
not  more  than  14  inchea  The  latter 
is  the  nearest  living  representative  of 
the  former,  which  once  abounded  in 
New  Zealand. 

Degeneration  of  character.  Rarely 
does  a  successful  merchant  who  comes 
to  New  Orleans  as  a  young  man  from 
the  cooler  latitudes  leave  a  son  who 
inherits  the  father's  energy.  One  gene- 
ration is  enough  to  change  character. 
A  city  that  lies  below  the  level  of  the 
river  which  washes  its  wharves,  and 
only  a  few  feet  above  the  poisonous 
swamps  surrounding  it,  and  which  has 
six  sweltering  summer  months,  must 
always  continue  to  draw  upon  the 
north  for  new  men  to  carry  on  its 
larger  business  activities. — Smalley. 

Moral  degradation  of  drink.    It  is 
111 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IT. 


HOMILETW  COMMSNTAnT:  LAMENTATIONS. 


in  the  spiritual  realm  that  the  ravages 
of  strong  drink  are  most  terrible.  Many 
a  mother  observes,  with  a  heart  that 
grows  heavier  day  by  day,  the  signs  of 
moral  decay  in  the  character  of  her  son. 
It  is  not  the  flushed  face  and  heavy 
eyes  that  trouble  her  the  most;  it  is 
the  evidence  that  his  mind  is  becoming 
duller  and  fouler,  his  sensibilities  less 
acute,  his  sense  of  honour  less  com- 
manding. She  discovers  that  his  loyalty 
to  truth  is  somewhat  impaired,  tliat  he 
deceives  her  frequently  without  com- 
punction. Coupled  with  this  loss  of 
truthfulness  is  the  weakening  of  the 
will,  which  always  accompanies  chronic 
alcoholism.  Then  comes  Uie  loss  of  self- 
respect)  the  lowering  of  ambition,  and 
the  fading  out  of  hope.  It  is  a  mourn- 
ful spectacle — that  of  the  brave,  the 
ingenuous,  high-spirited  man  sinking 
steadily  down  to  the  degradation  of 
inebriety;  but  how  many  such  spec- 
tacles are  visible  all  over  the  land  1 

A  good  character  a  blessing.   When 
Peter  Cooper,  the  New  York  Philan- 


thropist, held  a  reception  at  the  Women's 
Art  School  shortly  before  his  death,  a 
most  impressive  testimony  was  given  of 
the  high  regard  in  which  his  character 
was  held.  It  was  interesting  to  note 
the  various  manners  of  the  crowd  who 
approached  him.  "Mr.  Cooper,  we 
must  put  our  little  boy's  hand  in 
yours,"  said  a  young  couple,  with  a 
child  five  or  six  years  old  at  their  side. 
Then  a  group  of  boys  would  come  along 
and  stand  curiously  regarding  him  from 
a  short  distance.  "That's  Mr.  Cooper," 
they  whispered  in  an  undertone.  And 
so  the  evening  wore  away,  and  ten 
thousand  people  had  come  and  gone 
through  the  great  bright  halls  and 
schoolrooms,  and  Mr.  Cooper's  presence 
had  put  a  good  thought  or  feeling  into 
everybody's  heart.  I  can  see  him  now, 
with  his  smiling  face  and  interested 
look,  and  his  soft  white  hair  waving 
over  his  shoulders,  anojd  flowers,  lights, 
and  cheerful  music,  whilst  his  presence 
brooded  like  a  benediction  over  the 
swaying  and  surging  crowd. 


HOMILETICS. 

The  Extremitt  of  Sufferikg. 

(Verses  3-10.) 

L  Deadens  natural  affection  (vers.  3,  4).  Maternal  instincts  are  demoralised 
in  the  straitness  of  the  siege.  Little  children  are  left  to  perish,  without  any 
effort  to  relieve  their  wants  or  soothe  their  sufferings.  In  vain  they  ask  for 
bread ;  no  attempt  is  made  to  allay  their  hunger  and  thirst.  Absorbc^l  in  their 
own  intolerable  miseries,  the  wretched  mothers  sink  below  the  instincts  of  the 
wild  beasts,  for  even  the  jackals  suckle  their  joung.  They  are  become  like  the 
cruel  crocodile,  which,  after  laying  its  eggs  in  the  sand,  abandons  them  without 
further  care.  The  infants  pine  to  death,  unheeded  and  unmourned.  Excessive 
suffering  denaturalises  man  and  woman. 

IL  DragB  down  all  dassea  to  one  level  (ver.  6).  The  wealthy  are  now  even 
as  the  poor.  They  who  fared  sumptuously,  and  whose  tastes  were  pampered  with 
the  most  delicate  viands,  are  now  sullenly  starving  to  death  with  the  crowd. 
They  who  were  clothed  in  scarlet,  and  accustomed  to  every  refinement  from  their 
infancy,  are  now  content  to  stretch  themselves  on  the  dirt-heaps  of  the  city,  and 
eager  to  devour  any  offal  they  may  pick  up  amid  the  general  scramble  for  food. 
All  men  iind  a  universal  communism  in  suffering.  Human  extremity  knows  no 
distinction  in  ranks  and  titles.     Hunger  drags  every  one  to  the  same  level 

UL  Prefers  a  swift  to  a  lingering  pnnislunent  (ver.  6).  The  destruction  of 
Sodom,  which  filled  a  large  space  in  the  Jewish  mind  as  an  example  of  the 
terrible  judgment  of  Heaven  on  extreme  iniquity,  was  regarded  as  light  com 
pared  wilh  the  sufferings  of  Jerusalem.  The  punishment  of  Sodom  was  sudden,  and 
oame  direct  from  God;  but  the  punishment  of  Judah  was  by  the  hands  of  the 
112 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAP.  nr. 


Chaldeans,  and  was  slow  and  lingering.  David  preferred  to  be  dealt  with 
directly  from  God,  and  chose  pestilence  rather  than  injuries  inflicted  by  human 
hands  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14).  But  the  iniquity  uf  Judah  was  greater  than  the  sin  of 
Sodom,  and  the  punishment  was  therefore  more  severe.  There  is  a  point  in 
sufifering  when  we  yearn  for  a  speedy  release ;  when  death  is  welcome. 

lY.  Bednces  the  healtliiest  firom  bean^  to  hideonsnen  (vers.  7,  8).  The 
Nazarites,  because  of  their  temperance,  were  remarkable  for  health  and  personal 
beauty,  and  were  held  in  veneration  because  of  their  religious  devotion  (comp. 
Num.  vi.).  Their  complexion  was  ruddy  as  coral,  and  the  beauty  of  their  physical 
form  was  as  exact  and  fiBtultless  as  is  the  cutting  of  a  sapphire.  But  the  most 
distinguished  of  the  population,  whether  Nazarites  or  of  the  aristocracy,  are 
involved  in  the  generd  calamity,  and  suffer  with  the  rest  Their  rosebud  com- 
plexion is  turned  to  blackness,  their  frame  is  shrunk  and  distorted,  and  their  skin 
is  shrivelled  and  dry.  Famine  plays  havoc  with  beauty,  and  brings  the  strongest 
down  to  helplessness. 

v.  BacoiLi  not  firom  the  moat  horrible  meami  of  appeadnf  the  iiresittiblA 
IMiigs  of  hunger  (vers.  9, 10).  Such  were  the  sufferings  of  the  famished,  that  they 
who  were  slain  with  the  sword  were  deemed  happier  tnan  those  who  were  pierced 
with  the  dart  of  nnappeased  hunger.  So  extreme  was  the  famine,  that  cannibalism 
became  common,  and  women  who  were  known  as  tender-hearted  mothers  actually 
boiled  and  ate  their  own  children  (comp.  2  Kings  vi.  28,  29 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  29 ; 
Deut.  xxviii.  56,  57 ;  Josephus's  "Wars,"  cap.  x,  9).  It  is  a  fearful  experience 
when  the  animal  in  human  nature  gains  the  mastery  over  every  other  instinct. 

LBBS0N& — 1.  Extremity  makes  strange  revelations  of  human  naiure,  2.  The 
restraints  of  civilisation  are  very  superficial,  3.  Sin  acquaints  the  soul  with  the 
lowest  depths  of  degradation. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  8-10.  The  rigour  of  war. 
I.  Demoralises  maternal  affection  (ver. 
1).  IL  Involves  innocent  children  in 
suffering  (ver.  2).  IlL  Beduces  all 
classes  to  poverty  and  distress  (vers.  5, 
7,  8).  lY.  Prolongs  the  miseiy  of  its 
victims  (ver.  6).  V.  Is  attended  with 
the  worst  results  of  famine  (vers.  9,  10). 

Ver.  6.  Qraduatad  puniflhinent  1 
Is  proportioned  to  the  character  and 
degree  of  the  sin  committed.  IL  Its 
severity  implies  the  enormity  of  the 
offence.  III.  Cannot  be  charged  with 
injustice. 

Vers.  7-10.  The  horrors  of  famine. 
L  Changes  strength  into  feebleness  and 
beauty  into  deformity  (ver&  7,  8).  11. 
Is  more  cruel  than  the  sword  (ver.  9). 
ILL  Debases  the  most  refined  into  can- 
nibals (v.  10). 

iLLUsTRATiONa — Degradation.   Is  it 

not  wonderful  that  base  desires  should 
BO  extinguish  in  men  the  sense  of  their 
own  excellency,  as  to  make  them  willing 
that  their  souls  should  be  like  to  the 
113 


soub  of  beasts,  mortal  and  corruptible 
with  their  bodies  ? — Hooker. 
There  have  been  those— 

**  Who,  in  the  dark  diasolving  hunuui  heart, 
And  hallowed  secrets  of  this  mioroooem, 
Dabbling,  with  shameless  jest^  a  shameful 

band, 
Enoanialised  their  spirits." 

Importance  of  food.  Temperature 
has  less  influence  in  inciting  the  migra- 
tion of  birds  than  failure  of  food ;  for  a 
few  even  of  the  regular  migrants  will 
linger  throughout  the  winter  at  sheltered 
localities,  where  food  remains  accessible, 
safely  daring  the  severest  cold.  Hunger 
means  loss  of  heat  and  life,  and  it 
is  this  the  birds  primarily  flee.  No 
attraction  to  Christians  like  spiritual 
food.  **Tie  them  up  by  the  teeth,"  as 
Mr.  Spurgeon  says. 

Hecessitj  a  teacher.  '^life  and 
the  necessities  of  life  are  the  best  philo- 
sophers, if  we  will  only  listen  honestly 
to  what  they  say  to  us ;  and  dislike  tlie 
lesson  as  we  may,  it  is  cowardice  which 
refuses  to  hear  it** — Froude, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBA^.  nr.  BOMTLBtia  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 

—  The  wife  of  a  certain  chieftain  who  Many  must  haye  died  had  not  a  large 

had  fallen  upon  idle  habits,  one  day  ship  filled  with  produce  been  wrecked 

lifted  the  dish-cover  at  dinner,  and  re-  off  Coffin    Island.      The  news  spread 

yealed  a  pair  of  spurs ;  a  sign  that  he  like  wildfire.     The  population  turned 

must  ride  and  hunt  for  his  next  meaL  out,  and  from  the  cargo  of  a  shipwrecked 

Help  in  extremity.    In  the  Magdalen  vessel  drew  a  new  lease  of  life. 
Islands,  off  the  Newfoundland  coast,  the         Man's  extremity   is   God's  oppor- 

means  of  livelihood  is  almost  entirely  tnnity.     It  is  a  current  saying,  "  That 

found  in  the  fisheries,  and  if  these  fail,  the  darkest  cloud  precedes  the  dawn," 

life   becomes  a   burden.      In    1883  a  and  that  **  Every  dark  cloud  has  a  silver 

famine  occurred  which  came  near  to  lining."     Early  risers  tell  us  that  the 

decimating  the  population.     The  fish-  lowest    temperature  immediately   pre- 

eries  failed;   the  ship  which  was  ex-  cedes  the  sun-rising.    These  things  serve 

pected  to  bring    the  winter's   supply  to  illustrate  God's  kingdom  of  grace, 

before  the  ice  formed  foundered  in  a  "  Before  honour  is  humility."     "  Thou 

storm.     By  the  time  spring  came,  star-  has  lifted  mo  up  and  cast  me  down." 

vation  stared  the  people  in  the  face.  "  How  long,  0  Lord,  how  long  t ' 


f> 


ffOMILETIOS. 

Thb  Destruction  of  Ziok. 

(Verses  11,  12.) 

L  Was  thorongli  and  complete.  **The  Lord  kindled  a  fire  in  Zion,  and  it 
devoured  the  foundations  thereof"  (ver.  11).  The  holy  city,  the  pride  of  the 
Jews  and  the  envy  of  their  enemies,  was  utterly  overthrown.  Not  only  were  its 
walls,  towers,  palaces,  and  Temple  demolished,  but  its  very  foundations  were  dug 
up  and  scattered :  one  stone  was  not  left  upon  another.  It  was  degraded  and 
spumed  by  the  resolute  destroyers  as  a  heap  of  useless  rubbish.  It  was  im- 
possible for  the  rage  of  man  to  make  a  more  complete  ruin.  In  the  intention  of 
the  irate  Chaldeans  it  was  destroyed  for  ever.  And  yet  the  Divine  Guardian  of 
the  holy  city  allowed  all  this  1 

IL  Was  undeniable  evidence  of  the  reality  of  the  Divine  anger.  ''The 
Lord  hath  accomplished  His  fury  :  He  hath  poured  out  His  fierce  angor  "  (ver.  11). 
There  was  more  of  the  righteous  anger  of  Jehovah  against  the  obstinate  sin  of  His 
people  in  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  than  there  were  skill  and  ferocity  in  the 
Chaldean  army.  The  enemy  would  have  been  powerless  to  pierce  the  city  bul- 
warks if  the  people  had  remained  true  to  Jehovah,  and  sheltered  themselves  in 
humble  trust  beneath  His  all-powerful  defence.  But  the  wrath  of  God  was 
provoked  beyond  the  limit  of  further  endurance,  and  the  Chaldeans  were  used  as 
the  instruments  of  His  vengeance.  Surely  the  eyes  of  the  suffering  people  were 
at  last  opened  to  see  in  the  utter  destruction  of  their  beloved  city  that  Jehovah 
was  indeed  angry  with  them. 

Ill  Was  a  result  deemed  incredible  by  the  nations.  ''The  kings  of  the 
earth,  and  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  world,  would  not  have  believed  that  the 
adversary  should  have  entered  into  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  "  (ver.  12).  Jerusalem 
was  so  strongly  fortified,  not  only  by  massive  walls  and  bulwarks,  but  by  the 
strength  and  heroism  of  its  inhabitants,  that  it  was  deemed  impregnable  to  all 
warlike  forces  of  that  day.  Moreover,  it  was  regarded  as  the  dwelling-place  of 
the  Great  King,  who  had  hitherto  baffled  all  attempts  to  capture  it  The  recent 
defeat  of  Sennacherib,  one  of  the  greatest  warriors  of  the  age,  was  fresh  in  the 
memory  of  the  people.  The  belief  gained  general  currency  that  tl»e  city  could 
not  be  taken.  It  was  invested  for  a  year  and  a  half  by  the  Chaldean  forces, 
furnished  with  the  most  powerful  engines  of  assault^  before  it  was  actually 
114 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOUIIMTIO  CfOMMMNTAMT:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OBAF.  nr. 


captured.  Its  fall  was  the  amazement  of  the  world  What  was  believed 
impossible  had  come  to  pass.  Otliers  saw,  what  the  Jews  were  slow  to  acknow- 
ledge, that  their  God  had  deserted  them  and  given  them  up  to  the  destroyer. 

Lbssons. — 1.  The  holiest  place  may  he  pdlvted  by  gin.  2.  Persistent  sin 
frovokes  Divine  veiigeance.  3.  Divine  wrath  is  not  poured  out  till  every  oppor^ 
tunUy  is  given  for  repentance. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Yer.  11.  The  DiTine  anger.  1.  Will 
accomplish  all  it  threaten&  2.  Is  ter- 
rible  in  its  active  manifestation  3. 
May  well  be  dreaded  by  the  impenitent. 

Yer.  12.  A  world's  wonder.  1. 
That  a  divinely  guarded  city  should 
fall  2.  That  it  should  fall  by  the 
hands  of  the  godless.  3.  That  some 
great  sin  must  have  been  committed  to 
make  such  a  catastrophe  possible. 

Illustbationb. — Terrible  destrue- 
tion.  One  of  the  officers  at  Fredericks- 
burg says: — ** Howard,  who  was  with 
me,  says  I  exclaimed,  '  Oh,  great  God, 
pee  how  our  men,  our  poor  fellows,  are 
falling  I '  I  remember  that  the  whole 
plain  waa  covered  with  men  prostrate 
and  falling.  I  had  never  before  seen 
fighting  like  that — nothing  approaching 
it  in  terrible  uproar  and  destruction. 
As  they  charged,  the  artillery  fire  would 
break  up  their  formation,  and  they 
would  get  mixed;  then  they  would 
close  up,  go  forward,  receive  the  wither- 
ing infantry  fire,  and  those  who  were 
able  would  run  to  their  houses  and  do 
all  they  could ;  then  the  next  brigade 
coming  up  in  succession  would  do  their 
duty,  and  melt  It  was  like  the  snow 
coming  down  and  melting  on  warm 
ground." 

Ckmcentration  of  power  destroys. 


In  the  eighteenth  century  an  immense 
buming-glasswas  constructed  in  France, 
in  which  all  the  heat  falling  on  a  great 
lens  was  then  concentrated  on  a  smaller 
one,  till  at  the  focus  such  was  the  heat 
that  iron,  gold,  and  other  metals  ran 
like  melted  butter.  Another  one,  made 
in  England  by  Parker,  fused  the  most 
refractory  substances,  and  diamonds 
were  by  it  reduced  to  vapour. 

The  Divine  sovereignty.  '^God  is 
free  because  no  causes  external  to  Him- 
self have  power  over  Him ;  and  as 
good  men  are  most  free  when  most  a 
law  to  themselves,  so  it  is  no  infringe- 
ment on  God's  freedom  to  say  that  He 
must  have  acted  as  He  acted ;  but  rather 
He  is  absolutely  free  because  absolutely 
a  law  Himself  to  Himsell" — Froude. 

The  curse  of  sin.  It  is  the  Trojan 
horse ;  it  hath  sword  and  famine  and 
pestilence  in  the  belly  of  it.  Sin  is  a 
coal  that  not  only  blacks,  but  burns. 
Sin  creates  all  our  troubles;  it  puts 
gravel  in  our  bread,  wormwood  in  our 
cup.  Sin  rots  the  name,  consumes  the 
estates,  buries  relation&  Sin  shoots 
the  flying  roll  of  God's  curses  into  a 
family  and  kingdom  (Zech.  v.  4).  It 
is  reported  of  Phocas,  having  built  a 
wall  of  mighty  strength  about  his  city, 
there  was  a  voice  heard,  "  Sin  is  in  the 
city,  and  that  will  throw  down  the  walL" 


HOMIZETIOS. 

Unfaithful  Sbligious  Leadsbs. 

(Verses  13-16.) 

I.  Ii^oire  tke  sacred  duties  of  their  high  office.  ''The  sins  of  her  prophets 
and  the  iniquities  of  her  priests"  (ver.  13).  The  leaders,  whose  first  duty  it  waa 
to  explain  and  enforce  the  Word  of  God,  were  the  prime  movers  in  the  attempt  t<» 
silence  that  Word.  Their  utter  dereliction  of  duty,  and  the  bitter  rancour  with 
which  they  were  actuated,  were  evident  in  their  repeated  efforts  to  put  Jeremiah  to 

115 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CTTAP.  TV. 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIOyS, 


death,  the  only  man  who  had  the  conrage  to  lift  np  his  voice  for  Jehovah  amid 
the  general  defectioa  Had  they  rallied  round  the  faithful  prophet  and  round  their 
king,  who  was  more  weak  than  vicious,  they  might  have  saved  the  city  and  the 
nation  from  ruin.  When  the  servants  of  the  Lord  and  the  religious  guides  of  the 
people  are  false  to  their  sacred  vows,  the  nation  is  grievously  misled,  and  disaster 
will  follow. 

IL  Become  intoxicated  with  alanghter.  '^That  have  shed  the  hlood  of  the 
just  in  the  midst  of  her ;  they  have  wandered  {reded)  as  hlind  men  in  the  streets ; 
they  have  polluted  themselves  with  hlood  ''  (ver.  13,  14).  Tiiey  have  lost  the  art 
of  persuasion,  even  to  do  wrong,  and,  like  all  baffled  tyrants,  adopt  the  bloody 
policy  of  the  sword.  The  people  are  coerced  into  rebellion  against  God  and  their 
best  interests  by  brute  force.  Having  once  tasted  blood,  they  revel  in  it,  and  reel 
through  the  city  blinded  by  their  insatiable  lust  of  slaughter.  They  who  ought 
to  be  holy,  as  God's  ministers  consecrated  to  His  service,  are  defiled  with  blood, 
and  that  the  blood  not  of  enemies,  but  of  their  own  countrymen.  There  is  no 
fury  so  maddening  and  ungovernable  as  the  thirst  for  blood. 

III.  Are  shiumed  and  abhorred  by  God  and  man  (vers.  15,  16).  They  are 
denounced  by  the  people  they  had  oppressed,  and  hounded  out  of  the  city  only  to 
find  themselves  abhorred  by  the  heathen  to  whom  they  fled  for  shelter.  They 
were  hated  at  home  and  abroad.  ''The  anger  of  the  Lord  divided  them/'  scat- 
tered them,  and  wherever  they  wandered,  the  people  despised  and  shunned  them. 
They  were  outcasts  of  Gk)d  and  men.  They  had  sown  to. the  wind,  and  they 
reaped  the  whirlwind.  Such  is  the  fate  of  the  faithless  and  cruel  There  is  no 
punishment  too  severe  for  unfaithful  ministers  of  God's  Word. 

Lbssons. — 1.  Falee  teachers  are  the  curse  of  any  community.  2.  They  are 
utterly  reckless  both  as  to  what  they  say  and  do.  3.  Tliey  involve  the  people  m 
much  wffering. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  13-16.  False  ministers  of 
GkkL  1.  Are  the  authors  of  the  vilest 
sins  (ver.  13).  2.  Are  capable  of  the 
most  revolting  cruelty  in  accomplishing 
their  wicked  ends  (vers.  13,  14).  3. 
Are  the  execration  of  the  people  they 
oppress  (ver.  15).  4.  Are  divinely  pun- 
ished (ver.  16). 

Vers.  15,  16.  The  tactics  of  the 
wicked.  1.  Recoil  upon  themselves. 
2.  Render  them  the  abhorrence  of  all 
dassea  3.  Are  defeated  and  punished 
by  the  vengeance  of  Heaven. 

Illustrations.  —  Unaualified 
ministers.  It  is  the  great  wide-spread 
evil  of  the  Church  that  it  has  unrenewed 
and  inexperienced  pastors ;  that  so 
many  become  preachers  before  they  be- 
come Christians,  and  are  consecrated  as 
priests  at  the  altar  of  God  before  they 
are  made  holy  to  Christ  by  the  offering 
of  the  heart  to  Him ;  and  thus  they 
worship  an  unknown  God  and  proclaim 
an  unknown  Christ,  and  pray  through 
116 


an  unknown  Spirit,  and  preach  a  state 
of  holiness  and  fellowship  with  Christ, 
and  a  glory  and  a  blessedness  which  are 
wholly  unknown  to  them,  and  perhaps 
will  remain  unknown  through  all  eter- 
nity. He  must  indeed  be  a  heartless 
preacher  who  has  not  himself  in  his 
own  heart  the  Christ  and  the  grace  that 
he  declares.  Alas !  that  all  scholars  in 
our  universities  might  well  ponder  this. 
— Baxter. 

Unbelief  and  ministerial  ineA- 
ciency.  There  are  dangerous  signs  at 
the  present  day  of  a  relaxation  of  moral 
tone  in  the  literature  of  free-thinking. 
There  is  a  tendency  to  palliate  the 
oficnces  of  vicious  characters  and  to 
treat  every  sin  as  atoned  for  by  intel- 
lectual brilliancy.  But  it  would  be  in 
the  highest  degree  unjust  to  throw  the 
whole  blame  of  his  error  upon  every 
individual  who  may  happen  to  be  the 
victim  of  unbelief.  We  are  all  bound 
up  together  in  this  matter;  and  the 
sins,   the  unfaithfulness,  the  lack  o( 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMUETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


CHAP.  !▼. 


moral  energy  among  Christians  them- 
selves contribute,  to  a  great  extent,  to 
weaken  the  testimony  to  our  faith. 
The  ministers  of  God's  Word  must  bear 
their  share  in  this  responsibility.  So 
far  as  they  fail  to  exhibit  the  moral 
troth  and  spiritual  force  of  that  Word, 
so  far  as  they  harden  it,  or  obscure  it^ 
or  misrepresent  it,  they  contribute  to 
weaken  its  appeal  to  the  hearts  and  con- 
sciences of  their  fellows,  and  the  result 
is  seen  in  many  an  indirect  and  distant 
injury  to  faith.  It  is  the  mission  of 
the  Church  and  its  ministers  to  carry 
on  the  work  of  the  Apostles  by  bearing 
witness  to  certain  truths  and  revela- 
tions; and  if  that  witness  be  in  any 
instance  unworthily  delivered,  the  force 
with  which  the  troth  appeals  to  the 
soul  of  man  is  proportionately  weakened. 
Wace :  Bampton  Lectures. 

Priestcraft  The  whole  system  is 
one  of  Church  instead  of  Ghrik;  pried 
instead  of  Gospel ;  concealment  of  truth 
instead  of  manifestation  of  troth ;  igno- 
rant superstition  instead  of  enlightened 
faith  ;  bondage  where  we  are  promised 
liberty — all  tending  to  load  us  with 
whatever  is  odious  in  the  worst  meaning 
of  priestcraft^  instead  of  the  free,  affec- 


tionate, enlarging,  elevating,  and  cheer- 
ful liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 
Bishop  M^Ilwaine, 

Penalty  of  murder.  Thales  Milesius, 
one  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece,  being 
asked  what  was  the  most  difficult  thing  in 
life,  answered,  "Fora  tyrant  tolive  to  old 
age."  The  application  may  be  extended 
to  the  cruel,  bloodthirsty,  and  murderers. 

The  triumph  of  the  wicked.  The 
triumph  of  the  wicked  is  always  short. 
When  they  feel  themselves  secure  from 
evil  and  begin  to  boast  of  their  triumph, 
then  judgment  overwhelms  them.  So 
it  was  with  Belshazzar,  Herod,  and  the 
fool  of  the  Grospel.  How  soon  Abel's 
blood  called  for  vengeance  of  Cain  ! 
We  cannot  sin  so  quickly  but  God  seeth 
us  as  quickly.  How  many  have  been 
stricken  while  the  oath  had  been  in 
their  mouths,  as  Jeroboam  was  stricken 
while  he  spoke,  that  they  might  see  they 
were  stricken.  Though  a  man  sin  often, 
and  steal  his  sins  as  it  were  without 
punishment,  yet  at  last  he  is  taken  nap- 
ping, even  while  the  wickedness  is  in  his 
hand,  and  his  day  is  set  when  he  shall 
pay  for  all,  wliether  it  be  twelve  months 
or  twelve  years.  "  When  it  comethi  it 
will  be  soon." 


HOMFLETICS. 

The  Last  Hours  of  a  Doomed  Pboplb. 

(Verses  17-20.) 

L  Erairy  hope  of  rescue  is  disappointed.  "Our  eyes  failed  for  our  vain 
help :  we  have  watched  for  a  nation  that  could  not  save  us ''  (ver.  17).  Israel 
had  been  prone  to  rely  on  the  help  of  Egypt,  and  was  often  bitterly  deceived.  In 
this  instance  the  deluded  inhabitants  looked  eagerly,  till  their  eyes  were  weary,  for 
the  coming  of  a  relief  force  from  Egypt^  but  in  vain.  That  treacherous  kingdom, 
which  had  failed  them  so  often  before,  again  failed  them  in  their  extremity. 
Whatever  aid  they  might  expect  from  the  neighbouring  kingdoms  with  which 
Judah  had  been  in  friendly  alliance,  it  did  not  come.  When  the  sonl  is  alienated 
from  God,  every  reliable  source  of  help  is  cut  off.  When  Crod  will  not  help  us, 
man  cannot 

U.  Eveiry  ayenne  of  escape  is  closely  guarded.  "  They  hunt  our  steps,  that 
we  cannot  go  in  our  streets.  Our  persecutors  are  swifter  than  the  eagles  ;  they 
pursued  us,  they  laid  wait  for  us"  (vers.  18,  19).  The  enemy  was  drawing  his 
lines  more  firmly  round  the  city ;  the  investment  was  complete,  and  slowly  but 
surely  he  was  gaining  the  mastery  over  the  city.  Impatient  with  the  little  pro- 
gress made  and  enraged  with  the  stubborn  resistance  of  the  besieged,  the  Chaldeans 
missed  no  opportunity  to  do  damage.     Every  stray  wanderer  in  the  streets  was  « 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  !▼. 


nOMTLETW  COMMENTARTi  LAMENTATIONS. 


mark  for  their  arrows,  and  those  who  attempted  to  escape  from  the  festering  city 
were  at  once  seized. 

IIL  There  is  a  deepening  conTiction  that  the  end  is  near.  "  Our  end  is 
near;  our  days  are  fultiiled,  for  our  end  is  come''  (ver.  18).  The  sight  of  the 
towers  erected  by  the  besiegers  advancing  in  height  fuled  the  citizens  with  terror. 
Weakened  with  famine  and  disease,  distracted  with  divisions  among  themselves, 
and  alarmed  with  the  steady  encroachments  of  the  enemy,  they  felt  that  further 
resistance  was  useless ;  they  waited  in  sullen  helplessness  for  the  end.  The  end 
toon  came. 

lY.  The  last  yeatige  of  hope  is  destroyed  in  the  capture  of  thalr  king. 
*'  The  anointed  of  the  Lord  was  taken  in  their  pits  **  (ver.  20).  Feeble  as  Zedekiah 
wa«^,  he  was  still  their  king,  **  the  anointed  of  the  Lord."  ''And  now  that  the 
state  was  falling,  he  was  the  very  breath  of  life  to  the  fugitives,  who  would  have 
no  rallying-point  without  him ;  whereas  if  he  escaped,  they  might  with  him 
have  found  a  refuge  among  some  of  the  neighbouring  nations,  and  as  long  as  they 
had  a  king  of  David's  line  all  hope  of  prolonging  their  national  existence  would 
not  seem  lost."  But  the  seizure  of  Zedekiah  in  his  desperate  attempt  to  escape, 
and  the  cruelty  of  his  infuriated  captors  in  puJbting  out  both  his  eyes,  quenched 
the  last  lingering  hope  of  the  doomed  people.  Their  king  was  a  sightless,  helpless 
prisoner,  and  all  was  over.  The  national  life  was  extinguished.  We  cannot  but 
admire  the  dogged  bravery  of  the  people  in  their  resolute  defence  of  king  and 
country ;  but  it  was  the  bravery  of  desperation  and  despair.  The  fiat  of  destrao- 
tion  had  gone  forth,  and  it  was  now  fulfilled  in  every  detail 

LB880N& — 1.  T?ie  ncUion  thai  rebels  against  Ood  is  defencdess.  2.  Th$ 
threaienings  of  Ood  against  disobedience  are  not  meaningless,  3.  Between  the 
threatening  of  doom  and  its  accomjplishment  there  is  amjple  opportunity  for  repenJtr 
anee  and  rqfomk 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yer.  17.  The  weary  watcher.  1. 
Eagerly  longs  for  much-needed  help. 
2.  Impairs  his  eyesight  with  the  in- 
tensity of  his  vigil.  3.  Is  bitterly  dis- 
appointed when  he  looks  for  help  in 
vain. 

Vers.  18, 19.  The  helplessly  baffled. 
I.  Are  everywhere  menaced  with  danger. 
"  They  hunt  our  steps,  that  we  cannot 
go  in  our  streets"  (ver.  18).  IL  Re- 
treat is  cut  off  in  every  direction.  **  Our 
persecutors  are  swifter  than  the  eagles  " 
(ver.  19).  IIL  Sullenly  submit  to  the 
inevitable,  '*  Our  days  are  fulfilled,  for 
our  end  is  come  "  (ver.  18). 

Ver.  20.  Royally.  1.  Is  the  symbol 
of  government  and  protection.  2.  Is 
the  representative  of  national  life  and 
character.  3.  Its  degradation  involves 
national  disaster. 

Illustrations.  —  Disappointment. 
When  Daniel  O'Connell,  on  account  of 
his  ill-health,  was  ordered  to  leave  Eng- 
land, he  started  for  Romej  having  had 
118 


for  many  years  a  desire  to  see  that  city. 
In  the  city  of  Genoa  he  was  seized  with 
paralysis,  was  unable  to  proceed  farther, 
and  died  there,  never  having  looked 
upon  the  longed-for  sight 

A  clever  escape.  When  Mazzini 
fled  from  France,  he  had  to  risk  being 
seized  by  the  French  police  at  Mar- 
seilles. He  refused  to  be  hidden  as  a 
stowaway,  and  when  they  came  to  look 
for  him,  they  passed  without  notice  a 
man  in  his  shirt-sleeves  coolly  washing 
bottles  in  the  cook's  kitchea 

A  sad  end.  Card  inal  Pole,  suspected 
even  by  Queen  Mary,  whom  he  had 
liked  to  serve,  was  on  his  death-bed 
when  she  died.  Among  the  last  sounds 
that  fell  on  his  ears  must  have  been  the 
bells  of  Westminster  ringing  the  knell 
of  the  cause  to  which  he  had  sacrificed 
his  life  ;  and  before  the  evening  he  too 
had  passed  away,  a  blighted,  broken- 
hearted man,  detested  by  those  whom 
he  had  laboured  most  anxiously  to 
serve. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMIhBTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


OHAF.  IV. 


Attaelunent  stronger  tlian  death. 
On  the  18th  of  December  1851,  Turner 
the  painter  died  in  the  front  room  of 
119  Cheyne  Walk,  Chelsea,  fronting 
the  Thameci.  To  an  upper  window,  no 
longer  able  to  paint,  too  feeble  to  walk, 
he  had  been  wheeled  every  morning 
during  those  last  days,  that  he  might 
lose  no  light  of  the  December  sun  on 
his  beloved  Thames. 

The  last  parting. 

**  How  ihall  we  know  it  is  the  last  good-bye  t 
The  skiee  will  not  be  darkened  in  that  hour, 
No  sudden  blight  will  fall  on  leaf  and 

(fewer, 
No  single  bird  will  hush  its  careless  ery, 
And  you  will  hold  my  hands,  and  smile  or 

sigh 
Just  as  before.   Perchance  the  sudden  tears 
In  your  dear  eyes  will  answer  to  my  fears  ; 
But  there  will  come  no  voice  of  prophecy  ; 
No  foioe  to  whisper,  '  Now,  and  not  again, 
Bpaoe  for  last  words,  last  kisses,  and  last 

prayer. 
For  all  the  wUd  unmitigated  pain 
Of  those  who^  parting,  dasp  hands  with 

despair.' 
*  Who  knows  V  we  say  ;  but  doubt  and  fear 

remain. 
Would  any  choote  to  part  thus  unaware  !  ** 

A  good  king  a  blessing.  Speaking 
of  the  reign  of  Leopold  L  of  Tuscany, 


as  compared  with  the  despotism  of  the 
Medicis,  Mr.  Howells  says: — "I  con- 
fess that  it  has  a  great  charm  for  my 
fancy.  It  is  like  a  long  stretch  of  sun- 
light in  that  lurid,  war-clouded  landscape 
of  history,  full  of  repose  and  genial, 
beneficent  growth.  For  twenty-six 
years,  apparently,  the  good  prince  got 
up  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning  and 
dried  the  tears  of  his  people.  In  his 
time,  ten  years  passed  in  which  no  drop 
of  blood  was  shed  on  the  scaffold.  The 
hospitals  that  he  founded,  the  order  and 
propriety  in  which  he  kept  them,  justly 
entitled  him  to  the  name  of  Father  of 
the  Poor.  He  was  happy  because  he 
saw  his  people  were  happy.  He  be- 
lieved in  God." 

Uncertainty  of  royal  fkyonrs. 

'*  Vain  pomp  and  glory  of  this  world,  I  hate  ye ; 
I  feel  my  hewt  new  opened.     Oh,  how 

wretched 
Is  that  poor  man  that  hangs  on  prinoe's 

favours  ! 
There    is  betwixt  that  smile  we  should 

aspire  to^ 
That  sweet  asp^  of  princes,  and  their  ruin, 
More  pangs  and  fears  than  wars  or  women 

have  ; 
And  when  he  falls,  he  falls  like  Lucifer, 
Never  to  hope  again."  ^^Shakcipiott, 


H0MILETIC8. 

The  Fatb  of  thb  Maleyolbmt. 

(Verses  21,  22.) 

I.  Their  malicions  Joy  over  the  unfortunate  is  hriet  ''  Bejoloe  and  be  glad, 
Odaui:jhter  of  Edom*'  (ver.  21).  Edom,  though  related  to  Judah,  was  her  most 
relentless  enemy.  It  was  the  enmity  of  inveterate  envy.  Judah  had  outdistanced 
Edom,  and  rose  to  superior  greatness  and  power.  This  was  the  offence  Edom  could 
never  forgive.  She  watched  the  downfall  of  Judah  with  a  savage  delight^  and  when 
the  catastrophe  came,  which  she  did  her  best  to  accelerate,  she  gloated  over  it  with 
a  fiendish  joy  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7  ;  Jer.  xlix.  7-22).  The  prophet  now  ironically  calls 
upon  Edom  to  take  her  fill  of  her  unnatural  merriment^  for  it  would  soon  be  silenced 
and  chan^'ed  into  a  song  with  a  different  tune.  Having  made  common  cause  with 
the  enemies  of  God's  people  and  become  their  aiders  and  abettors  in  oppression,  Edom 
must  share  in  the  calamities  that  overwhelmed  them.  Edom  is  the  type  of  the  ene- 
mies of  the  Church  in  all  ages,  who,  instigated  with  '*  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  all 
uncharitableness,"  exult  in  the  misfortunes  of  God's  people.  What  a  revelation  is 
this  of  the  possible  wickedness  of  the  human  heart !  Well  might  Yianny  write, 
*'  The  lieart  of  the  wicked  swarms  with  sins  like  an  anthill  with  ants.  It  is  like  a 
piece  of  bad  meat — full  of  worms."     But  the  triumph  of  the  morally  bad  is  short 

II.  They  will  be  certainly  pnnished  for  their  wickedness.  1.  It  toUl  he 
a puraishment involving  suffering  and  disgrace.  "The  cup  also  shall  pass  through 
unto  thee:  thou  shalt  be  drunken,  and  shalt  make  thyself  naked"  (ver.  2l\ 

119 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CTUP.  IT.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 

"  Th(my  ton,  shaft  be  th'unk  with  the  shame  of  ruin :  thou,  too,  shalt  expom  thyself 
to  coniemjff" — O'eikie.  Tiie  wine-cup  of  the  Divine  wrath  will  by-and-bje  bo 
placed  in  the  Iiands  of  His  enemies,  and  they  must  drink  it — drink  it  till  thej  aie 
infatuated  witli  the  intoxicating  draught,  and  commit  follies  and  sins  that  sink 
them  into  utter  contempt  Now  they  know  something  of  the  bitterness  of  the 
suffering  over  which  they  had  gloated  when  others  were  the  victims.  2.  It  mil- 
Ite  a  rujhteous  pnnisliment,  "  He  will  visit  thine  iniquity,  O  daughter  of  Edom ; 
He  will  discover  thy  sins"  (ver.  22).  To  uncover  and  expose  sins  is  equivalent 
to  ^mnishing  them.  Edom  was  punished  not  arbitrarily  and  from  caprice,  but 
because  of  her  iniquity.  The  Divine  chastisements  are  in  harmony  with  the  law 
of  universal  righteousness.  Grod  knows  exactly  the  time  and  the  measure  of  pun- 
ishment The  aip  of  His  wrath  is  not  passed  on  to  either  individual  or  nation 
until  it  is  full.     The  wicked  cannot  escape. 

III.  Their  pnnislimeiit  will  be  intensifled  by  the  delivwrance  of  tho  pooplo 
whoso  miserios  they  ridicnlod.  ''The  punishment  of  thine  iniquity  is  accom- 
plished, O  daughter  of  Zion  :  He  will  no  more  carry  thee  away  into  captivity " 
(ver.  22).  Judah  shall  not  be  exiled  again  for  the  iniquity,  the  guilt  of  which  is 
now  expiated.  It  would  be  unjust  to  punish  twice  for  the  same  offence.  She 
has  borne  the  punishment :  it  is  finished ;  and  slie  is  now  free — free  to  enter  upon 
a  course  of  obedience  which  will  secure  promised  blessing.  The  tables  are  now 
turned.  Judah  is  free :  Edom  is  the  sufferer ;  and  it  adds  sharpness  to  the  thorns 
that  now  distress  her  to  know  that  her  hated  rival  is  delivered  and  is  again  in  the 
ascendant  Envy  gives  the  soul  no  rest^  and  deteriorates  its  capacity  for  nobler 
feelings. 

**  The  cankering  mst  oorrodes  the  brightest  steel ; 

The  moth  frets  oot  your  garment,  and  the  worm 

Eats  its  slow  way  into  the  solid  oak  : 

But  Envy,  of  all  evil  things  the  worst, 

The  same  to-day,  to-morrow,  and  for  ever. 

Saps  and  consumes  the  heart  in  which  ii  works." — CwBulbetiamd, 

We  should  be  careful  not  to  exult  over  the  miseries  of  others,  as  we  know  not 
how  soon  we  may  be  in  the  same  plight,  and  the  memory  of  our  inhuman  conduct 
will  increase  our  own  suffering. 

Lessons. — 1.  OrUy  the  wilfully  malicious  can  refoice  over  the  distresses  of 
others.  2.  Inveterate  wickedness  is  sure  to  receive  its  just  recompense,  3.  Fumsh- 
ment  is  concerned  only  with  the  guilt  already  incurred. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  21,  22.  Two  kinds  of  joy.  the  contents  of  its  mingled  cup.  **Thou 
I.  The  joy  of  the  envious.  "  Rejoice  shalt  be  drunken,  and  shalt  make  thy- 
and  be  glad,  O  daughter  of  Edom"  self  naked"  (ver.  21).  III.  Is  sure  to 
(ver.  21).  1.  Is  full  of  malice.  2.  Is  overt aJ^e  the  transgressor,  "  The  cup 
cruel.  3.  Is  unreal — the  dry  chuckle  also  shall  pass  through  unto  thee "  (vet. 
of  the  scornful.  II.  The  joy  of  the  21).  IV.  Does  not  cease  tUl  its  mis- 
free.  "  Tho  punishment  of  thine  ini-  sion  is  fidjUled.  **  The  punishment  of 
quity  is  accomplished,  0  daughter  of  thine  iniquity  is  accomplished,  0 
Zion  "  (ver.  22).  1.  Indicates  relief  daughter  of  Zion  **  (ver.  22). 
from  suffering.  2.  Despair  has  given  Ver.  22.  A  message  finom  God  to 
place  to  hope.  3.  Has  the  ring  of  theo.  I.  Our  first  message  is  one  of 
grateful  reality.  comfort.  1.  A  joyous  fact.  "The  pun- 
Punishment.  L  Discovers  and  ex-  ishment  of  thine  iniquity  is  acoom- 
poses  sin.  *'  He  will  visit  thine  ini-  plished."  Christ  hath  for  His  peoplo 
quity,  O  daughter  of  Edom ;  He  will  borne  all  the  punishment  which  they 
discover  thy  sins "  (ver.  22).  TL  deserved.  2.  To  whom  this  message  is 
Stupifies  and  degrades  the  victim  with  sent  To  the  sinner  oonscious  of  his 
120 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


OHAP.  n. 


sin.  3.  A  precious  promise.  "  I  will 
no  more  carry  thee  away  into  captivity." 
Thon  art  in  captivity  now,  sorrowing 
on  account  of  sin ;  but  it  is  the  last 
thou  shalt  ever  hava  In  the  world  to 
come  there  is  no  captivity  for  thee. 
XL  A  burden  of  woe.  "  He  will  visit 
thine  iniquity,  0  daughter  of  £dom." 
1.  The  daughter  of  Edom  dwelt  care- 
lessly in  the  land  of  Uz,  as  if  secure  from 
danger.  2.  Made  merriment  over  the 
sorrows  of  oDiers.  3.  Cherished  a 
vain  hope,  a  self-sufficient  confidence. 
4.  Was  very  proud.  ILL  Why  are 
^  there  these  different  messageaf  1.  The 
reason  of  the  message  of  mercy  is  sove- 
reign. 2.  Of  the  message  of  woe, 
Divine  justice.  lY.  What  claim  have 
these  messages  on  our  faith?  To  be 
devoutly  believed,  because  both  mes- 
sages are  plainly  revealed  in  the  Word 
of  Grod. — C  H,  Spurgeon, 

ILLUBTRATI0N& — MaliCO.     - 

**  For  malice  will  with  joy  the  lie  reoeiTe, 
Report,  and  what  it  wishes  true,  believe.** 

— FaWwk 

Bepiroof  of  malice.  St.  Augustine  is 
said  to  have  had  these  two  lines  in- 
scribed on  his  table  to  remind  his 
guests  of  his  wishes — 

"  Whoever  loves  an  absent  friend  to  jeer, 
May  hence  depart,  no  room  is  for  him  here." 

A  malerolent  tongue.  The  tongue 
of  the  slanderer  is  a  devouring  Sie, 
which  tarnishes  everything  it  touches ; 
which  exercises  its  fury  on  the  good  grain 
equally  as  on  the  chaff,  on  the  profane 
as  well  as  on  the  sacred ;  which,  wher- 
ever it  passes,  leaves  only  desolation 
and  ruin;  digs  even  into  the  bowels 
of  the  earth  and  fixes  itself  on  things 
the  most  hidden ;  turns  into  vile  ashes 
what  only  a  moment  before  had  ap- 
peared to  us  so  precious  and  brilliant ; 
acts  with  more  violence  and  danger  than 
ever  in  the  time  when  it  was  apparently 
smothered  up  and  almost  extinct; 
which  blackens  what  it  cannot  con- 
sume, and  sometimes  sparkles  and  de- 
lights before  it  destroys. — 3fassiUon, 

WkikBdneatL  There  have  been  men 
splendidly  wicked  whose  endowments 
threw  a  brightness  on  their  crimes,  and 


whom  scarce  any  villainy  made  per- 
fectly detestable,  because  they  never 
could  be  wholly  divested  of  their  ex- 
cellences; but  such  have  been  in  all 
ages  the  corrupters  of  the  world,  and 
their  resemblance  ought  no  more  to  be 
preserved  than  the  art  of  murdering 
without  pain. 

—  I  have  seen  men  who,  I  thought, 
ought  to  have  a  whole  conversion  for 
each  one  of  their  faculties.  Their  natures 
were  so  unmitigatedly  wicked  that  it 
cost  more  for  them  to  be  decent  than 
for  other  men  to  be  saints. — Beecher, 

Sin  will  And  yon  out.  Men's  sins 
often  find  them  out,  though  no  visible 
sign  or  token  may  betray  this  fact  to 
the  world.  All  may  outwardly  stand 
fair;  there  may  be  no  breach  in  the 
worldly  prosperity;  nay,  this  may  be 
ampler,  more  strongly  established  than 
ever;  while  yet  there  may  be  that 
within  which  forbids  to  rejoice,  which 
takes  all  the  joy  and  gladness  out  of 
life — the  memory  of  that  sin  which  was 
nothing  when  committed,  but  which 
now  darkens  all — the  deadly  arrow 
poisoning  the  springs  of  life,  which  will 
not  drop  from  the  side,  which  no  force, 
no  art  of  man's  'device  can  withdraw. 
To  such  Dr.  Trench's  advice  is,  to  turn 
the  tables  on  our  sins,  to  find  them  out, 
and  to  take  them  all  to  Goil  to  be  con- 
demned, pardoned,  and  subdued  ;  **  con- 
demned by  Thy  righteous  judgments,  O 
Father ;  pardoned  by  the  precious  blood 
of  Thy  dear  Son,  and  subdued  by  the 
mighty  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost" 
This  is  the  good,  old-fashioned  preach- 
ing of  Apostles  and  preachers  of  the 
very  oldest  times. 

The  downward  career  of  eril  In 
the  Rabbinical  books  of  the  Jews  they 
have  a  curious  tradition  about  the 
growth  of  leprosy,  that  it  began  with 
the  walls  of  a  man's  house  ;  then,  if  he 
did  not  repent,  entered  his  garments, 
till  at  last  the  disease  covered  his  whole 
body.  And  thus  it  is  with  the  growth 
of  sin.  It  begins  with  neglect  of  duty ; 
it  may  be  of  prayer,  or  the  warn- 
ing voice  of  conscience  is  unheeded. 
Habits  of  sin  are  formed,  till  at  last  the 
soul  that  lets  Grod  alone  is  let  alone  by 
QfO^—FiUdngton. 

121 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  T.  EOMlLBTia  OOMMBNTAR  7 :  LAMENT  A  TIONSL 

OHAPTBR  V. 
Beoapttulation  of  Zion's  Galamities  and  Prater. 

ThS  Tenet  of  thii  chapter  are  not  arranged  aooording  to  the  order  of  the  alphabet^  yet  their 
number  oorresponda  to  its  number.  More  diitinotly  than  the  preceding  chapten  this  one  shows 
the  "  paralleUism  *'  of  Hebrew  poetry,  in  which  one  clause  of  a  Terse  is  closely  related  by  senti- 
ment and  construction  to  the  other.  The  contents  suggest  that  the  circumstances  of  the  writer 
impelled  him  to  take  a  retrospect  of  what  had  befallen  his  fellow-oountrymen,  and  to  found,  on 
the  variety  and  intensity  of  their  sorrows,  a  hope  that  their  iniquities  would  be  pardoned,  and 
that  they  would  receive  from  the  Lord's  hand  tokens  of  His  restored  favour,  according  to  the 
days  wherein  He  had  afflicted  them. 

Ver.  1.  Remember,  O  Jehoyah,  what  has  happened  to  ns—an  application  not  to  one  who 
had  forgotten,  but  to  One  who  could  conndtr  their  eviction  and  pain  with  a  view  to  forgive  all 
their  ititu  and  redeem  Itrael  outofcUlhis  troubUe;  a  prayer  which  is  not  so  much  an  utterance 
concurrent  with  the  nature  of  Grod,  as  concurrent  with  Uie  partial  knoidedge  and  felt  needs  of 
the  worshipper ;  behold,  and  see  our  reproach,  tht  reproach  of  Thy  aervanti  .  .  .  wherewith 
Thine  enemie$  have  reproached,  0  Jehovah,  tfie  footstept  of  Thine  onoUUed* 

Ver.  2  begins  to  describe  the  substance  of  the  reproaches.  Our  lahailtaiiot,  the  land  which 
was  promised  to  Abraham,  and  of  which  his  descendants  had  held  posaession  for  generations, 
is  tnzned  oyer  unto  atrangers.  Indeed,  all  their  property  had  pasMd  into  other  handa ; 
Ofor  liouses  unto  aliens.  Even  if  an^  small  houses  were  left  standing,  after  the  Chaldeans  hod 
*  destroyed  every  important  building  m  Jerusalem,  besides  breaking  down  the  city  walls,  they 
were  at  the  disposal  of  those  foreigners. 

Ver.  8.  No  reoondite  application  of  the  terms  of  this  verse — as  that,  **  We  are  abandoned  by 
Thee,  our  Father"— need  be  considered.  The  note  of  a  Targram  sufficiently  defines  them, 
"  We  are  like  the  most  desolate  of  beings."  We  have  become  orphans,  without  a  father.  A 
devastating  war,  a  merciless  capture  of  Jerusalem,  a  banishment  to  a  far  country  of  thousands 
of  the  population,  must  have  caused  reports  of  many  among  the  "  bread-winners  "  being  dead 
or  missing ;  hence  it  could  be  said  virtually,  if  not  really,  Our  mothers  [are]  like  widows,  the 
words  being  true  of  other  families  as  well  as  of  those  whose  head  had  perished. 

Ver.  4.  Not  only  are  they  orphaned  and  desolate,  but  they  are  cruelly  mulcted.  Our  water 
for  money  we  have  drunken.  The  bitterness  of  the  act  was  that  water,  perhaps  from  their 
own  wells  and  cisterns,  had  to  be  paid  for,  and  similarly  to  that,  Our  wood  has  ooma  for  a 
price.  Held  in  such  durance  that  they  oould  not  get  the  requisites  for  personal  and  domestio 
oumfort,  to  which  they  had  free  access  formerly,  unlees  by  bribing  their  custodians. 

Ver.  5.  It  is  best  to  suppose  that  the  phrase,  On  our  necks  wa  are  pursued,  means,  our 
pursuers  keep  so  close  as  to  be,  as  it  were,  holding  our  necks ;  yet,  tired  out  by  such  peraeou- 
tion,  no  rest  is  for  us. 

Ver.  6.  Juilaea  was  on  the  verge  of  famine  through  the  foragings  of  the  invaders,  and,  under 
the  ominous  shadow  of  starvation,  To  Egypt  wa  haye  giyen  the  hand,  ie.,  imploring  supplies 
of  food,  as  is  signified  by  the  parallel  clause,  to  Assyria  to  be  satisfied  witii  braad.  The 
people  appealed  to  a  supposed  friendly  and  to  an  openly  hostile  goTemment ;  for  the  Babylonian 
empire,  even  in  the  height  of  its  power,  was  occasionally  spoken  of  as  Assyria  (Jer.  iL  18),  into 
whose  dominion  it  had  entered. 

Ver.  7.  Our  fathers  haYS  sinned ;  they  are  not  in  the  land  of  the  living.  The  hour  of 
punishment  had  not  come  in  their  time.  The  measure  of  iniquity  was  not  yet  full ;  bnt  the 
consequences  of  their  doings,  which  wei'c  not  good,  had  not  been  buried  with  them.  The  dis- 
ruption of  dvil  and  religious  order,  by  which  we  have  so  fearfully  suffered,  results  from  the 
guilt  which  was  incurred  by  preceding  generations.  We  have  bozna  their  iniquities.  This 
truth  is  stated  again  and  again  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  (Ezod.  zx.  5  ;  Num.  ziv.  18  ;  2 
Kings  xxiil  25,  26) ;  it  is,  however,  only  half  a  truth,  and  becomes  an  error  if  understood  to  say 
that  the  descendants  were  not  also  guilty.  This  other  half  was  beginning  to  dawn  upon  IsraeL 
It  is  noted  in  ver.  16,  and  was  boldly  announced  by  the  prophets  of  this  juried,  Jeremiah  (chap, 
xxzi.  29,  30)  and  Ezekiel  (chap.  xviiL).    Tet  God  strikes  the  sins  of  forefathers  with  penal 

1'udgments  on  their  children  only  when  the  children  persist  in  sin,  as  their  predecessors  did. 
}ut  such  vicarious  suffering  placed  them  in  a  position  like  sin-bearers,  and  becomes  ground  of 
appeal  for  the  exercise  of  Divine  compasaion. 

Ver.  8.  Servants  have  ruled  over  us.  Who  they  were  may  be  uncertain.  It  is  a  far- 
fetched supposition  that  they  were  the  conquering  chiefs,  beoause  **  the  Babylonians  in  seneral 
might  be  called  slaves  in  comparison  with  uie  kwgdom  of  priette  and  sons  of  Jehowakr  The 
suggestion  rather  is  that  the  galling  yoke  was  made  doubly  galling  by  the  insolence  and  brutality 
of  menials,  **  dressed  in  the  brief  authority  of  office,*'  slaves  in  Oriental  countries  often  rising  to 
places  of  power.  A  parallel  is  mentioned  by  Nehemiah,  who  says  (chap.  ▼.  6),  Even  their  {%,e^ 
the  govemor't)  tervanti  bare  rule  over  them ;  there  was  no  deliyerer  ftrom  their  hands. 

Ver.  9.  With  our  lives  we  get  our  bread— they  jeopardised  their  lives  when  gumg  to  gather 
a  scanty  harvest,  or  to  take  from  provisions  which  had  been  stowed  away— beoause  of  tha 
122 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  t. 

•word  of  the  dosert,  wielded  by  the  predatory  Bedawin,  who  would  plunder  and  even  kill 
those  who  were  in  posaeBsion  of  food.  So  Qideon  had  to  get  his  wheat  in  secret,  lest  the 
Midianites  should  seize  it  (Judges  vi.  11) ;  and  the  ten  men  who  bought  their  lives  from  the 
robbers  and  murderers  of  G«daliah  (Jer.  zlL  8)  drew  from  concealed  stores  of  victuals. 

Ver.  10.  The  bread,  which  was  obtained  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  was  not  enough  in  quantity 
to  nourish  them.  Our  skin  is  hot  like  an  OTon ;  the  feverishness  is  bocaoBe  of  thi  burning 
heat  of  hunger.  ^  Hunger  dries  up  the  pores  of  the  skin,  so  that  it  becomes  like  as  if  it  had 
been  exposed  to  the  burning  heat  of  the  simoom/' 

We  must  not  fancy  that  the  several  distressing  things  alluded  to  befell  every  one  of  all 
classes.  We  should  rather  believe  that  some  troubles  were  felt  by  one  portion,  while  another 
portion  had  to  bear  different  troubles.  So  the  author  proceeds  to  record  what  sufferings  were 
endured  by  particular  divisions  of  the  population. 

Ver.  12.  The  most  gentle  were  outraged,  and  prinoes  mm  hanged  up  by  their  hand— not 
the  hand  of  the  foe  is  referred  to,  though  by  him  the  cruel  deed  was  perpetrated  ;  still  leas  is 
the  reference  to  compulsory  suicide,  as  Calvin  surmises ;  but  the  hand  ot  the  princes  was  the 
leverage  by  which  their  bodies  were  lifted  up.  Whether  they  were  first  killed  and  then  sus- 
pended, or  were  tortured  by  such  suspension  when  every  nerve  and  muscle  was  vibrating  with 
life's  waves,  is  a  question  to  which  no  sure  reply  oan  be  given ;  but  probably  the  latter  is  hinted 
at  The  bodies  of  Saul  and  his  sons  were  fastened  to  the  wall  of  Beth-shan  (1  Sam.  zxxi« 
10-12);  and  more  recent  commentators  refer  to  "Becords  of  the  Past,"  i.  88,  in  whioh  an  in- 
scription of  Sennaoherib  is  quoted  as  saying  of  the  people  of  Ekron,  **The  chief  priests  and 
noblemen  I  put  to  death ;  on  stakes  all  round  the  city  I  hung  their  bodies ; "  and  the  practice 
seems  to  have  been  not  uncommon  among  Assyrians  and  Babylonians.  Still,  impalement  after 
death  does  not  correspond  distinctly  to  the  atrocity  mentioned  here.  The  faces — persons  -  of 
elders  were  not  honoured.  Not  only  men  high  in  rank,  but  also  those  who  held  responsible 
positions  among  the  people — aged  persons  are  spoken  of  after  this — were  treated  with  indignity 
in  the  insolence  of  conquest. 

Ver.  18.  The  choice  portion  of  the  nation  were  forced  to  be  nothing  but  mere  burden- 
bearers.  Young  men  bare  the  mill.  They  had  to  cany  about,  and  no  doubt  to  turn,  the 
hand-mills  to  grind  com  for  their  military  masters,  thus  doing  the  work  of  women  or  of  slaves ; 
while  the  fuel,  for  cooking  and  other  purposes,  was  laid  on  shoulders  ill  able  to  bear  a  load. 
Boys  stumbled  [under]  a  burden  of  wood. 

Ver.  1 4.  Entire  collapse  of  interest  in  the  common  ways  of  life  was  shown  by  the  abandon- 
ment of  public  meetings  and  social  pastimes.  The  elders  oeased  from  [frequenting]  tlie  gate. 
They  had  gone  thither  as  to  the  usual  gathering-place  ;  they  adjudicated,  advised,  had  genera] 
intercourse,  and  received  the  marks  of  respect  suggested  by  the  law — Thou  shaU  rise  vp  6^/bn 
the  hoary  head  and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man  (Lev.  xiz.  82) ;  but  that  resort  was  no  longer 
theirs.  Moreover,  the  buoyancy  of  youthful  spirits  was  crashed  down.  Toung  men  ceaMd 
from  their  musie,  accompanied  by  inatruments. 

Ver.  15.  The  iron  had  entered  the  soul.  Ceased  is  the  Joy  of  our  lisart»  and  past  pleasures 
had  become  a  pain ;  turned  into  mourning  our  dance. 

Ver.  16.  Fallen  is  the  crown  from  our  head.  That  whioh  was  their  honour  has  gone — the 
crown  with  which  the  Lord  Jehovah  h.id  decked  His  chosen  nation.  I  put  ...  a  beautiful 
crown  upon  thine  head  .  .  .  and  thy  renown  went  forth  among  the  nationtfor  thy  beauty;  for  it 
woe  perfect  through  my  majetty,  which  I  had  put  upon  thee  (Ezek.  zvi  12  and  14).  Now  it  is 
in  the  dust,  set  at  nought  by  all  those  who  had  admired  it.  So,  as  if  in  irrepressible  acknow- 
ledgment that  they  themselves  were  responsible  for  the  dismal  change,  the  exclamation  bursts 
forth,  Woe  unto  us  I  for  we  have  sinned— sinned  not  against  a  ritual  or  a  code  of  law,  but 
against  a  living  Person — Maker,  Monarch,  Father.  This  second  clause  is  in  correlation  with 
ver.  7,  and  expresses  the  share  which  their  own  iniquitieH  had  in  the  guilt  which  had  drawn 
down  such  condign  suffering  as  they  were  subjected  to.  Like  their  fathers,  they  had  disowned 
truth  and  righteousness,  and  addicted  themselves  to  false  and  unholy  practices.  This  view  of 
themselves,  and  confession  of  its  evil  nature,  opens  the  eyes  of  the  heart  to  look  for  the  throne 
of  grace. 

Ver.  17.  How  depressing  is  the  conviction  of  personal  sin.  For  this  our  heart  has  beoome 
faint.  Many  sorrows  had  surged  over  them  and  exhausted  the  faculty  of  external  and  mental 
vision.    For  these  things  our  eyes  are  darkened. 

Ver.  18.  The  depression  of  heart  meets  its  most  striking  symbol  in  that  which,  once  the 
glory  of  the  land,  is  now  its  reproach.  As  to  Mount  Zion — regarded  as  embracing  both  the 
dwelling-place  of  Jehovah  and  the  precincts  of  the  sacred  city,  whioh  is  desolate ;  Jackals 
roam  in  it.  These  animals  live  in  waste  places,  and  avoid  man's  presence,  so  their  wandering 
upon  Zion  proves  that  it  has  become  a  ruinous  area,  without  inhabitant.  The  place  of  the 
tabernacle  of  thy  glory ^  the  hill  and  tite  watch-tower,  are  turned  into  deus  for  vrild  beasts. 

Ver.  19.  NevertheleHs,  whatever  be  the  low  estate  of  His  sanctuary  and  people,  the  living 
God  is  and  reigns.  Thou,  O  Jehovah,  abidest  for  ever.  Not  only  is  His  continual  existence 
denoted,  but  also  that  Jehovah  eittetfi  as  king  for  ever  (Ps.  xxix.  10),  the  same  verb  being  used 
in  this  clause  as  in  the  Psalm  quoted,  and  the  next  clauHe  carries  on  the  thought,  Thy  throne 
from  geaeration  to  generation.    Enemies  may  destroy  the  temple  made  with  h.inda ;  they 

123 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.T.  EOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 

arc  powerless  to  injure  the  kingdom  of  Htm  who  inhabitt  eternity.  GeneratioDS  oome  and  go 
with  their  rises  and  falls,  but  7'hou  art  tJie  same,  and  Thy  years  ihall  not  fail. 

Ver.  20.  The  perpetuity  of  God's  rule,  amid  all  earthly  changes,  frames  an  appealing  prayer. 
Reigning  supreme  over  the  army  of  heaven,  it  is  impossible  that  Ho  can  renounce  authority 
over  the  things  of  earth  and  man  ;  then,  Why  dost  Thon  forget  of  for  ever,  fOTBakeit  Hi  for 
■O  longT  Is  it  not  time  for  Thee  to  pluck  Thy  right  hand  out  of  Thy  bosom  and  brinff  relief  in 
the  lifetime  even  of  this  generation  ?  How  bluntly  petitioners  address  God  when  troubles  press 
upon  them  !  How  ready  to  suppose  His  thoughts  and  ways  must  be  like  their  own  !  How 
prone  to  fancy  that,  because  their  observation  does  not  perceive  His  working,  G^  can  hardly 
care  so  much  for  His  kingdom's  honour  an  they  do  I 

Ver.  21.  Tom  oi,  O  JehoYah,  onto  Thee,  and  we  shall  be  tamed ;  a  prayer  which  proves 
that  a  new  heart  haf  been  given  to  those  in  whose  name  the  writer  speaks.  Affliction  has  been 
a  means  of  showing  the  blunders  and  sins  of  the  past,  and  that  the  only  remedy  for  them  is  in 
Jehovah  Himself.  They  see  that  the  reconciling  power  does  not  originate  with  themselves,  but 
with  Him ;  that  He  must  draw  them  by  a  continual  influence  if  they  are  to  walk  in  the  light  of 
Hi$  countenance.  We  do  not  consider  this  request  as  merely  for  the  restoration  of  their  native 
land  ;  we  need  to  put  a  deeper  meaning  intn  it,  which  will,  at  least,  indicate  that  they  wanted 
to  become  true  worshippers  of  the  Lord  God  of  their  deliverances.  The  succeeding  clause, 
however,  senms  to  imply  that  they  did  not  expect  to  attain  tu  their  desires  unless  they  were 
repossessed  with  their  former  national  organisation.  Benew  OUT  days  aa  of  old;  re-establish 
the  gracious  relations  in  which  thou  stoodest  to  us  ;  let  us  again  have  country,  dty,  and  temple, 
priest,  prophet,  and  king.  Oa/ute  every  man  to  $it  under  his  vine  and  under  hujig-treef  and  none 
make  them  afraid, 

Ver.  22.  The  two  initial  Hebrew  particles  of  this  verse  signify  that  it  is  not  a  fact  which  is 
stated,  but  the  elements  of  a  hope,  and  may  be  introduced  with,  This  will  oome  to  pass,  vnleM 
Thou  hast  utterly  rejected  us  ;  art  wroth  against  us  exceedingly.  The  under-thought  is, 
But  this  cannot  be  the  case.  Thou  wouliist  not  so  disgrace  the  throne  of  Thy  ^ory.  Thou 
wouldst  not  so  falsify  the  promises  made  to  our  fathers.  Thou  wouldst  not  always  give  occasion 
for  the  mocking  heathen  to  say.  Where  is  no\o  your  Oodt 

"This  conclusion  entirely  agrees  with  the  character  of  the  Lamentations,  in  which  com- 
plaint and  supplication  continue  to  the  end,  not  without  an  element  of  hope,  which,  as  Gerlaoh 
says,  '  merely  glimmers  from  afar,  like  the  momiug  star  through  the  clouds,  which  doee  not 
indeed  itself  dispel  the  shadows  of  the  night,  though  it  announces  that  the  rising  of  the  son  is 
near,  and  that  it  shall  obtain  the  victory ' "  (Keil), 

H0MILETIC8. 

A  Piteous  Appeal  to  Jehovah. 

(Verse  1.) 

Once  more,  and  for  the  last  time,  the  prophet  returns  to  his  sorrowful  theme. 
There  is  a  fascination  in  it  he  cannot  resist.  Grief,  unduly  indulged,  is  apt  to 
make  us  selfish,  and  so  to  accustom  us  to  a  grievance  that  we  never  wish  to  he 
without  one  :  we  coax  and  caress  our  troubles  rather  than  seek  to  be  rid  of  them. 
But  the  sorrow  of  the  prophet  arose  from  no  mere  personal  distress.  He  was  the 
mouthpiece  to  express  the  lamentations  of  tlie  best  spirits  of  his  day  over  a  national 
and  world-wide  disaster.  His  poetic  and  prophetic  insight  fitted  him  the  more 
clearly  to  grasp  and  weigh  the  magnitude  of  the  calamity.  The  profound  and 
passionate  grief  with  which  he  recited  the  leading  incidents  in  the  national  catas- 
trophe tended  to  stamp  them  with  indelible  distinctness  upon  his  memory.  He 
could  never  forget  them,  and  it  would  seem  as  if  he  could  not  cease  talking  about 
them.  As  if  with  a  clinging  fondness  for  the  theme  and  loathe  to  dismiss  it,  he 
passes  in  slow  and  final  review  the  chief  features  of  the  siege  and  capture  of  Jeru- 
salem. "Thus  wailed  the  genius  of  Hebrew  poetry  over  the  desolation  of  Judah 
and  Jerusalem  1  Other  cities  and  countries  have  had  their  minstrels  to  lament 
their  public  sorrows,  but  the  national  elegies  of  the  Jew  alone  have  spread  among 
all  races  of  the  earth,  and  remain  fresh  after  twenty-five  centuries.  Nor  are  they 
even  yet  without  deep  and  practical  interest,  recording  as  they  do  the  catastrophe 
that  awaits  any  community,  however  highly  favoured,  which  forgets  that  public 
and  private  righteousness  alone  secures  permanent  prosperity  "  (Geikie).  This 
fifth  and  last  elegy  begins  and  ends  in  prayer  It  is  a  hopeful  sign  when  trouble 
124 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y .  LAMENTATIONS,  chap.  ▼. 

brings  us  to  our  knees.  We  are  then  in  the  way  of  receiving  comfort  and  deliver- 
ing help.     This  verse  is  a  piteous  appeal  to  Jehovah, 

I.  Bisixig  from  the  hearts  of  a  sofEiering  people.  *'  Eemember,  0  Lord,  what 
is  come  upon  us."  The  trouble  is  not  simply  threatened  and  approaching  :  it  is 
ui)on  us ;  we  are  now  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  cannot  be  in  a  worse  plight  than  we 
are  in  already.  Our  nation  ruined,  our  city  gone,  our  Temple  gone,  and  the  spiked 
heel  of  the  oppressor  even  now  presses  us  in  the  dust.  If  Thou  canst  do  anything 
for  us,  O  Lord,  do  it  now.  The  cry  of  real  suffering  has  an  irresistible  pathos 
about  it :  there  is  the  sound  of  tears  in  it.  Such  a  cry  never  fails  to  reach  the 
ears  of  Jehovah,  and  His  pitying  heart  yearns  to  help  the  suppliant. 

IL  Li  expressed  by  a  people  who  regard  their  snffisrings  as  a  reproach. 
'*  Behold  our  reproach."  We  are  sunk  from  dignity  and  greatness  to  abject  humi- 
liation and  shame,  from  affluence  to  poverty.  We  are  the  people  of  Jehovah, 
chosen  by  Him  and  publicly  acknowledged  by  Him  before  the  world.  He  has 
wrought  miracles  of  power  on  our  behalf,  and  we  thought  we  were  lifted  above  the 
possibility  of  change  and  decay  to  which  other  nations  were  liable.  But  now  we 
are  abandoned  by  our  Divine  Protector,  and  have  become  objects  of  scorn  by  our 
oppressors.  Our  calamities  reflect  upon  the  name  and  honour  of  Him  who  has 
done  so  much  for  us :  our  reproach  is  His  reproach.  So  they  thought ;  and  so 
think  the  privileged  in  all  ages  when  trouble  overtakes  them.  They  are  apt  to 
blame  any  one  but  themselves,  and  are  slow  to  see  that  their  distresses  are  the 
fruii<«  of  their  own  sins. 

III.  Is  nttered  with  the  confidence  that  His  help  will  be  graciously  afforded. 
"  Remember,  consider,  behold."  Remember  what  is  past,  the  sufferings  we  have 
had  ;  and  behold  and  consider  the  present,  the  sufferings  under  which  we  at  this 
moment  writhe.  Is  this  nothing  to  Thee,  O  God  of  our  fathers  1  Is  it  a  matter 
of  indifference  to  Thee  tliat  Thine  own  children  are  in  such  abject  woe  f  It  cannot 
be.  Our  fathers  sinned  and  so  have  we  ;  but  we  repent.  We  are  still  the  heirs 
of  the  promisea  Lord  have  mercy,  and  fulfil  Thy  word  unto  Thy  servants.  It  is 
a  great  help  to  prayer  to  believe  that  God  not  only  sees  and  commiserates  our 
miseries,  but  that  He  is  able  and  willing  to  help  us. 

Lessons. — 1.  God  is  not  indifferent  to  the  suffe)'ings  of  His  people,  2.  The 
Kuffenng  heart  finds  relief  in  prayer,  3.  Prayer  is  the  first  stage  in  the  process  of 
religious  reform, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

The  hopeftllness  of  prayer.    1.  When  All  things  that  live  from  (3od  their  sas- 

it  is  the  cry  of  distress.     2.  When  it  ^     tenance  wait,  ,„.      ,  „ 

*^     V       1  1  J  i.-  1  And  sun  and  moon  are  beggars  at  Hi8  sate, 

encourages  a .  humble   and  reverential  **        —Trtnch, 

familiarity  with  God.     3.  When  it  is 

an  earnest  appeal  from  the  weak  to  the  Prayer  in  troubla     Sinking  times 

strong.  4.  Wiien  it  is  based  on  the  are  praying  times  with  the  Lord's  ser- 
assurance  that  God  knows  all  about  our  vants.  Peter  neglected  prayer  at  start- 
case  and  is  willing  to  succour.  ing  upon  his  adventurous  journey,  but 

when  he  began  to  sink,  his  danger  made 

Illustrations. -The  need  of  prayer.  ^^^  «  suppliant,  and  his  cry,  though 

late,  was  not  too  late.     In  our  hours  of 

"  ^^^^'to  w*^*"'  ^""^^^^  ^^^  ^®*"^'  **'®°  ^^"''  ^^»*y  Pa^n  »"<!  "dental  anguish  we  find 

Soul,  now^;  greatest  need  that  thon  shouldst  ourselves  as  naturally  driven  to  prayer 

pray.  as  the  wreck  is  driven  upon  the  shore 

Say  what  is  prayer,  when  it  is  prayer  indeed  ?  by  the  waves.     The  fox  hies  to  his  hole 

The  mighty  ntteranoe  c»f  a  mighty  deed.  f^^  protection,  the  bird  flies  to  the  wood 

m^it     ^"^'"^  ^"^  ^^^  S^^l^'"'  a"d  «^«"   «^  *^«  t"«d  be- 

Out  of  his  darkness  into  God's  own  light         liever   hastens   to   the   mercy-seat   for 

125 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CUAF.  ▼. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


safety.  Heaven's  great  harbour  of 
refuge  is  All-prayer.  Thousands  of 
weather-beaten  vessels  have  found  a 
haven  there,  and  the  moment  a  storm 
comes  on  it  is  wise  for  us  to  make  for 
it  with  all  sail. — SpurgeoTL 

Prayer  should  be  impertimate. 
Prayer  pulls  the  rope  below,  and  the 
great  bell  rini^'s  above  in  the  ears  of 
God.  Some  scarcely  stir  the  bell,  for  they 
pray  so  languidly ;  others  give  but  an 
occasional  pluck  at  the  rope ;  but  he  who 
wins  with  Heaven  is  the  man  who  grasps 
the  rope  boldly,  and  pulls  continuously 
with  all  his  might. — Biblical  Treasury, 

God  answers  prayer.  I  once  saw  a 
grand  procession  in  which  an  Oriental 
monarch,  surrounded  *  by  a  thousand 
life-guards,  moved  to  the  sound  of  all 
kinds  of  music.  Some  unknown  sub- 
ject had  a  request  to  urge.  He  knew 
the  utter  impossibility  of  ever  break- 
ing through  the  guards  that  day  and 
night  surrounded  his  majesty.  That 
humble  person  perhaps  had  some  dear 
friend  in  prison,  who,  according  to 
Oriental  custom,  could  never  be  tried  or 
freed  while  the  prosecutor's  malice  or 
purse  held  out.  They  have  no  Habeas 
Corpus  law  among  nations  without  the 
Bible.  This  poor  creature  took  the  only 
possible  way  known  to  one  unable  to 
bribe  the  officers,  and  flung  his  petition 
over  the  heads  of  the  guards,  and  it  fell 


at  the  feet  of  the  sovereign.  In  a 
moment  one  of  the  life-guards  pierced 
it  with  his  bayonet  and  flung  it  back 
into  the  crowd.  Alas  I  the  proud, 
pleasure  -  loving  monarch,  amid  the 
luxuriant  splendours  of  his  court, 
palace,  army,  and  plans  of  reaping  re- 
nown, never  so  much  as  dreamed  of 
noticing  the  prayer  of  that  broken 
heart  and  crushed  spirit.  Not  thus 
does  the  King  of  kings  treat  the  hum- 
blest suppliant  who  seeks  His  help. — 
VanDarefL 

—  I  never  was  deeply  interested  in 
any  object,  I  never  prayed  sincerely 
and  earnestly  for  anything,  but  it  came ; 
at  some  time,  no  matter  how  distant  a 
day,  in  some  shape,  probably  the  last 
I  should  have  devised,  it  came. — Adoni- 
ram  Jwlson. 

Prayer  brings  deliverance.  Prayer 
procures  deliverance  from  trouble  just 
as  Naaman's  dipping  himself  seven 
times  in  Jordan  procured  him  a  deliver- 
ance from  his  leprosy;  not  by  any 
virtue  in  itself  adequate  to  so  great  an 
effect,  you  may  be  sure,  but  from  this, 
that  it  was  appointed  by  God  as  the 
condition  of  his  recovery,  and  so  obliged 
the  power  of  Him  who  appointed  it  to 
give  force  and  virtue  to  His  own  insti- 
tutions beyond  what  the  nature  of  the 
thing  itself  could  otherwise  have  raised 
it  to,— SotUlL 


E0MILETIC8, 
Ths  Miseries  of  thb  Disinhkrited. 
(Verses  2-^.) 

I.  To  see  their  possessions  enjoyed  by  foreigners.  ''Our  inheritance  is 
turned  to  strangers,  our  houses  to  aliens  "  (ver.  2).  The  land  of  Canaan  was  God's 
gift  to  the  Jews.  It  was  promised  to  them  long  before  they  entered  into  posses- 
sion. There  was  a  time  when  it  seemed  they  would  not  be  permitted  even  to  look 
upon  their  Beulah-land.  But  God  kept  His  word,  and,  after  long  wandering  and 
many  disappointments,  the  tribes  received  their  allotted  inheritance.  In  beauty 
an<i  fruitfulness  they  found  the  land  all  that  it  had  been  represented.  For  many 
happy  years  they  sat  under  their  own  vine  and  fig-tree,  none  daring  to  make  them 
afraid.  It  was  a  bitter  disappointment  to  find  themselves  violently  ejected,  and 
their  loved  inheritance  occupied  by  their  enemies.  The  possessions  of  earth  are 
liable  to  strange  and  sudden  changes  ;  but  the  heavenly  inheritance  is  indefeasible, 
and  can  never  be  wrested  from  the  faithful. 

II.  To  be  reduced  to  the  condition  of  widows  and  orphans.  '^  We  are 
orphans  and  fatherless ;  our  mothers  are  as  widows"  (ver.  3).     Their  misery  was 

126 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  OTAF.  ▼. 

* 
comparable  to  the  sad  and  lonely  desolation  of  fatherless  orphans  and  wires  just 
bereaved  of  their  husbands.  The  guardian,  guide,  and  support  of  family  life  is 
taken  away,  and  they  are  left  to  battle  with  the  cold,  unpitying  world,  surrounded 
with  heartless  and  cruel  enemies.  It  is  a  painful  experience  for  any  family  to  be 
reduced  by  a  single  stroke  from  affluence  to  penury  and  friendlessness.  If  Gkxl 
did  not  help  the  widows  and  the  fatherless,  their  condition  would  be  unbearable. 
The  competition  of  life  is  keen  enough  to  the  most  favoured ;  but  it  is  a  terrible 
struggle  to  the  lonely  and  friendless.  The  luxury  of  former  years  unfits  many  for 
the  fierceness  of  life's  conflict,  and  thousands  go  down  into  untimely  oblivion. 

III.  To  be  compelled  to  pay  for  the  food  and  ftiel  produced  on  their  own 
property.  "  We  have  drunken  our  water  for  money ;  our  wood  is  sold  unto  us  " 
(ver.  4).  The  bitterness  of  the  complaint  is  intensified  in  not  merely  that  they 
must  pay  for  the  necessaries  of  life,  but  that  it  is  their  own  property  which  they 
have  to  purchase.  The  water  in  their  own  house  cisterns  is  taxed  ;  the  wood  in 
their  own  forests  must  be  paid  for — and  they  paid  dearly  for  every  fagot.  **  The 
captives  were  doubtless  closely  watched,  and  not  allowed  to  stray  from  the  place 
where  they  were  detained  in  preparation  for  their  removal  to  Babylon,  and  thus 
could  obtain  wood  and  water  only  by  paying  for  them  "  {Speakev's  Commentary), 
How  would  they  long  now  for  the  sticks  their  little  children  used  to  gather  for  the 
fires  in  which  they  idolatrously  baked  cakes  for  the  queen  of  heaven !  (Jer.  vii 
18).  It  is  in  the  hardships  of  life  that  we  lament  the  wanton  waste  of  more  pros- 
perous times. 

rV.  To  be  harassed  by  incessant  toil  <*  Our  necks  are  under  persecution : 
we  labour  and  have  no  rest "  (ver.  5).  We  were  pursued  so  actively  that  our  ene- 
mies seemed  ever  so  close  upon  us  as  to  be  leaning  over  our  necks  ready  at  once 
to  seize  us.  We  were  tired  out  with  being  thus  chased  incessantly,  and  no  oppor- 
tunity was  allowed  us  of  refre.-^hing  our  weary  frames  {Speakefr'a  Ckmmientary), 
Lal>our  is  necessary  for  health,  for  sustenance,  for  happiness.  There  is  nothing 
servile  in  honest  and  necessary  work,  whether  by  hand  or  brain.  Abraham  fed  his 
own  flocka  Moses  kept  sheep  in  the  desert.  Paul  stitched  canvas  tents  while 
labouring  as  a  pioneer  among  the  Gentiles.  The  others  of  the  Roman  Republic 
ploughed  their  own  fields,  sowed  the  seed,  and  reaped  their  harvests  with  their  own 
hands.  But  there  is  neither  nobility  nor  pleasure  in  forced  labour,  especially  in 
labour  unrelieved  by  necessary  rest  Life  becomes  one  long,  weary,  monotonous, 
and  depressing  grind.     And  this  is  oft^n  the  fate  of  the  disinherited. 

Lessons. — 1.  It  is  a  great  hardship  to  see  our  rightful  inheritance  violently 
transferred  to  strangers.  2.  The  loss  of  worldly  property  is  not  always  tJie  greatest 
calamity.  3.  The  truly  good  have  an  inheritance  that  ia  incorruptible^  undefUed^ 
and  thatfadeth  not  away, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  2-5.  The  sudden  reverses  of  Yer.  3.  Bereavement.  1.  One  of 
fortune.  1.  From  wealth  to  poverty  the  great  curses  of  war.  2.  The  inevit- 
(ver.  2).  2.  From  social  happiness  to  able  lot  of  humanity.  3.  Brings  pun- 
loneliness  (ver.  3).  3.  From  freedom  gent  sorrow  to  somebody, 
to  galling  exactions  (ver.  4).  4.  From  Vers.  4,  5.  The  loss  of  liberty.  I. 
ease  to  excessive  toil  (ver.  6).  Is  painfully  realised  by  the  imposition 

Ver.  2.  Property.    1.  Knows  nothing  of  ur^fust  exactions.    "We  have  drunken 

of  absolute  ownership.    2.  Is  constantly  our  water  for  money ;  our  wood  is  sold 

changing  haiid&    3.  Its  loss  by  robbery  unto  us"  (ver.  4).     IL  Is  followed  by 

and  pillage  a  great  hardship.      4.  Its  oppression.    "  Our  necks  are  under  per- 

fickle  tenure  contrasts   with   the   im-  secution "  (ver.  6).    III.  Subjects  to  the 

perishable  character  of  spiritual  posses-  slavery  of  incessant  labour.    *'  We  labour 

sions.  and  have  no  rest "  (ver.  5). 

127 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  LAMENTATIONS. 


Illustrations.  —  The  sadness  of 
national  decline.  '*  Since  first  the 
dominion  of  men  was  asserted  over  the 
ocean,  three  thrones,  of  mark  beyond 
all  others,  have  been  set  upon  its  sands 
— the  thrones  of  Tyre,  Venice,  and 
England.  Of  the  first  of  these  great 
powers  only  the  memory  remains;  of 
the  second,  the  ruin ;  the  third,  which 
inherits  their  greatness,  if  it  forget  their 
example,  may  be  led,  through  prouder 
eminence,  to  less  pitied  destruction. 
The  exultation,  the  sin,  and  the  punish- 
ment of  Tyre  have  been  recorded  for 
us  in  perhaps  the  most  touching  words 
ever  uttered  by  the  prophets  of  Israel 
against  the  cities  of  the  stranger.  Her 
successor,  like  her  in  perfection  of 
beauty,  though  less  in  endurance  of 
dominion,  is  still  left  for  our  beholding 
in  the  final  period  of  her  decline,  a 
ghost  upon  the  sands  of  the  sea,  so 
weak,  so  quiet,  so  bereft  of  all  but  her 
loveliness,  that  we  might  well  doubt, 
as  we  watched  her  faint  reflection  in 
the  mirage  of  the  lagoon,  which  was 
the  city  and  which  the  shadow." — 
Ruskin. 

Bereavement  has  its  consolations. 
A  little  boy  once  went  out  in  the  early 
mom,  and  was  greatly  delighted  with 
the  little  globes  formed  by  the  dew  on 
the  brambles.  He  hastened  back,  and 
led  his  father  out  to  see  these  miniature 
worlds ;  but  when  the  father  and  son 
arrived,  the  sun  was  up,  and  had  drawn 
up  in  vapour  the  globes  that  had  hung 
on  the  brambles,  and  so  displeased  the 
child.  The  child  cried,  and  said,  "The 
angry  sun  has  taken  them  all  up."  The 
father  looked  up  and  saw  the  beautiful 
rainbow  on  the  bosom  of  the  cloud,  and 
said,  "There,  my  child,  the  sun  has 
taken  up  the  bramble  globes,  and  they 
help  to  form  that  beautiful  bow  on  the 
cloud."  Ah  !  my  friends,  God  has  taken 
up  some  of  our  friends,  and  have  we 
not  murmured  t    But  where  are  they  ? 


Ah!   do  they  not  form  the   beautiful 
bow  round  the  throne  of  Grod  f 

Industry  secures  independence.  He 
that  hath  a  trade  hath  an  estate,  and  he 
that  hath  a  calling  hath  an  office  of 
profit  and  honour ;  but  then  the  trade 
must  be  worked  at  and  the  calling 
followed.  If  we  are  industrious,  we 
shall  never  starve,  for  at  the  working 
man's  house  hunger  looks  in  but  dares 
not  enter.  Nor  will  the  bailiff  or  the 
constable  enter,  for  industry  pays 
debts  while  despair  increaseth  them. — 
Franklin, 

Compassion  for  the  needy.  King 
Oswald  of  Northumbria  accompanied 
the  monk  Aidan  in  his  long  missionary' 
journeys  as  interpreter.  One  day,  as 
he  feasted  with  the  monk  by  his  side, 
the  thegn,  a  noble  of  his  war-band, 
whom  he  had  set  to  give  alms  to  the 
poor  at  his  gate,  told  him  of  a  multi- 
tude that  still  waited  fasting  without 
The  king  at  once  bade  the  untasted 
meat  before  him  be  carried  to  the  poor, 
and  his  silver  dish  he  divided  piece- 
meal among  them.  Aidan  seized  the 
royal  hand  and  blessed  it.  "  May  this 
hand,"  he  cried,  "  never  grow  old." 

Persecution  defeats  itsell  The 
cruelty  of  Mary's  reign  and  the  lurid 
fires  of  Smithfield  had  only  worked  in 
Londoners  a  fiercer  conviction  of  the 
error  and  falsity  of  the  Roman  Catholic 
religion,  and  when  Elizabeth  came  to 
the  throne,  the  people  thronged  the 
streets  and  greeted  her  with  acclama- 
tion, as  though  her  coming  were  as  the 
rising  of  the  sun. 

—  Speaking  of  the  persecutions  and 
martyrdoms  in  the  time  of  Queen  Mary, 
Mr.  Froude  says,  "  Every  martyr's  trial 
was  a  battle ;  every  constant  death  was 
a  defeat  of  the  common  enemy;  and 
the  instinctive  consciousness  that  truth 
was  asserting  itself  in  suffering  con- 
verted the  natural  emotion  of  horroi 
into  admiring  pride." 


EOMILETICS. 

HumuATiNG  SuBjEcnoir. 

(Verses  6-9.) 

L  Personal  liberty  is  surrendered  for  a  livelihooa.    "  We  have  given  the 

hand  to  the  Egyptian  and  to  the  Assyrians,  to  be  satisfied  with  bread"  (ver.  6). 

128 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS.  chap.  v. 

Absolutely  it  was  Babylon  tbat  bad  just  destroyed  tbeir  national  existence,  but 
Jeremiab  means  tbat  all  feelings  of  patriotism  were  crushed,  and  the  f«ole  caie 
tbat  remained  was  the  selHsb  desire  for  personal  preservation.  To  secure  this  the 
people  would  readily  have  submitted  to  the  yoke  either  of  Egypt  or  Assyria,  the 
great  powers  from  which  in  their  past  history  tbey  had  so  often  suffered  {Speaker'a 
Commentary).  Life  is  sweet,  and  it  is  appalling  to  think  how  many  there  are 
ready  to  sell  their  conscience,  their  souls,  ttieir  friends,  their  country  for  bread  ! 
The  sting  of  want  demoralises  the  soul.  It  is  matter  for  unspeakable  thankfulness 
when  men  are  lifted  above  the  degrading  temptations  of  poverty. 

IL  The  penalty  of  continnance  in  sin.  *'  Our  fathers  have  sinned,  and  are 
not ;  and  we  have  borne  their  iniquities"  (ver.  7).  It  is  a  frequent  practice  of  the 
unfortunate  to  blame  the  past.  Here  the  sufferers  complain  that  their  predeces- 
sors, who  commenced  the  national  apostasy,  had  died  before  the  punishment  began, 
and  that  they  are  left  to  bear  alone  the  fatal  consequences  which  previous  trans- 
gressors had  escaped.  It  was  some  time  before  the  truth  dawned  upon  their  minds 
that  they  had  adopted  and  continued  with  aggravated  obstinacy  the  sins  of  their 
forefathers,  and  that  there  was  quite  sufficient  guilt  in  their  own  iniquity  to  merit 
the  chastisement  they  suffered.  The  course  of  sin  is  downward,  ever  downward, 
and  plunges  its  victims  into  the  most  humiliating  subjection. 

III.  A  painful  experience  to  a  high-spirited  people  when  domineered  over 
by  inferiors.  *'  Servants  have  ruled  over  us :  there  is  none  that  doth  deliver  us 
out  of  their  hands "  (ver.  8).  Among  the  things  for  which  **  the  earth  is  dis- 
quieted and  which  it  cannot  bear,"  the  proverb  saith,  "  For  a  servant  when  he 
reigneth**  (Prov.  xxx.  21,  22).  In  Oriental  countries  slaves  often  rose  to  high 
office,  and  there  were  no  doubt  such  in  the  Chaldean  army.  The  rule  of  such  is 
often  maintained  with  unnecessary  rigour.  They  seem  to  think  that  they  can  gain 
respect  and  reverence  only  by  severity.  The  Jews  fretted  and  chafed  under  the 
petty  tyranny  of  men  whom  they  regarded  as  in  every  respect  their  inferiors  except 
in  their  cruel  bondage.     Vir^  has  said — 

'*  Since  slaves  so  insolent  are  ffrowBy 
What  may  not  masters  do? 

The  Jews  had  rebelled  against  the  wise  and  gentle  rule  of  Jehovah  and  His  servants 
the  prophets.  Now  they  are  ruled  by  the  tyranny  of  their  enemies  and  of  their 
slaves.    The  sinner  cannot  escape  the  operation  of  law.    He  only  exchanges  rulers. 

IV.  The  victims  are  compelled  to  snatch  their  food  at  the  peril  of  their 
lives.  "  We  gat  our  bread  at  the  peril  of  our  lives,  because  of  the  sword  of  the 
wilderness"  (ver.  9).  Though  they  were  willing  to  surrender  their  liberty  for 
food,  its  supply  was  very  uncertain  and  precarioua  **  This  verse  apparently  refers 
to  those  who  were  left  as  delvers  and  vine-dressers  in  the  land,  and  who,  in  gather- 
ing in  such  fruits  as  remained,  were  exposed  to  incursions  of  the  Bedaween,  here 
called  tJie  sword  of  the  desert,^  Every  morsel  of  food  they  ate  was  snatched  as 
from  the  mouths  of  wild  beasts.  The  next  forage  for  food  may  cost  them,  not 
only  their  independence,  but  their  lives.  They  had  indeed  to  eat  their  bread  with 
qus^ing  and  carefulness,  as  it  had  been  predicted  (£zek.  xii.  18,  19).  There  is 
no  advantage  in  selling  our  souls  for  bread ;  it  is  a  bad  bargain.  Honour  is  more 
precious  i;han  food,  or  than  life  itself. 

LE880N& — 1.  War  imposes  great  degradations  on  the  conquered,  2.  Sin  is  at 
ike  root  of  all  humiliation  and  suffering.  3.  Subjection  is  intolerable  to  those  whs 
have  tasted  the  stjoeets  of  freedom. 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  6,  8,  9.  The  intense  love  of     freedom  for  food  (ver.  6).    2.  Subjects 
life:   1.  Tempts  men  to  barter  their     to  the  oppressive  tyranny  of  inferiors 
129  I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ▼. 


HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS, 


(ver.  8).     3.  Will  nin   great  risks   in 
the  stnisfgle  for  maintenance  (ver.  9). 

Ver  7.  Sin  and  punishment :  1.  Are 
closely  linked  together.  2.  The  sins, 
like  the  virtues,  of  one  generation  pass 
on  in  their  consequence  to  the  next 
3.  Suffering  on  account  of  others  is 
taken  into  account  in  God's  dealing 
with  individuals  and  with  nationa  4. 
Every  offender  is  punished  only  accord- 
ing to  his  own  sin. 

Illubtrationb. — Migtakmi  views  of 
life.  Two  old  men,  amateur  naturalists, 
who  had  devoted  their  whole  lives,  one 
to  ferns  and  the  other  to  orchids,  tra- 
velled together  for  many  hours.  At 
the  end  of  their  journey  he  who  had 
cultivated  ferns  said  to  his  companion 
with  a  sigh,  '*  I  have  wasted  my  life : 
if  I  had  it  to  live  over  again,  I  should 
devote  it  to  orchids." 

Life  divinely  ordered.  Our  life  is 
a  web  woven  by  the  hand  of  GU)d,  the 
thread  reaching  from  our  birth  to  our 
death.  The  woof  is  trouble,  but  still 
runs  with  it  a  weft  of  interwoven  com- 
forts.— Adams. 

Sin  in  man.  In  man  there  will  be 
a  layer  of  fierce  hyena  or  of  timid  deer 
running  through  the  nature  in  the  most 
uncertain  and  tortuous  manner.     Nero 


is  sensitive  to  poetry  and  music,  but  not 
to  human  suffering.  Marcus  Aurelius 
is  tolerant  and  good  to  all  men  but 
Christians.  The  Tlascalaus  of  Mexico 
loved,  and  even  worshipped  flowers,  but 
they  were  cruel  to  excess,  and  sacrificed 
human  victims  with  savage  delight 
The  good  and  the  evil  lie  close  together, 
the  virtues  and  the  vices  alternate,  so 
is  human  power  accumulated ;  alter- 
nately the  metal  and  the  rags,  a  terrible 
voltaic  pile.  In  the  well-bred  animal 
the  claw  is  nicely  cushioned ;  the  old 
Adam  is  presentable. — A,  F.  RwtseU, 

Humiliation.  It  is  with  us  as  with 
the  reeds  which  grow  by  the  river-side ; 
when  the  waters  overflow,  the  reed  bows 
its  head  and  bends  down,  and  the  flood 
passes  over  without  breaking  it ;  after 
which  it  uplifts  its  head  and  stands 
erect  in  all  its  vigour,  rejoicing  in  re- 
newed life.  So  is  it  with  us ;  we  also 
must  sometimes  be  bowed  down  to  the 
earth  and  humbled,  and  then  arise  with 
renewed  joy  and  trust. 

Submission.  Let  us  not  charge  Gk)d 
over- hastily  with  the  untoward  inci- 
dents of  life.  In  the  main  we  are  the 
manufacturers  of  our  own  life-materiaL 
If  you  give  the  weaver  none  but  dark 
threads,  he  can  only  fashion  a  sombre 
pattern. — Hahey. 


E0MILETIC8. 

The  Oalung  Tyranny  op  CJonqubst. 

(Verses  10-13.) 

L  There  is  the  physical  suffering  occasioned  hy  starvation.  ''  Our  skin  is 
black  like  an  oven  because  of  the  terrible  famine  "  (ver.  10).  The  human  body 
can  bear  a  great  deal,  but  it  cannot  resist,  nor  can  it  survive,  the  ravages  of  famine. 
The  bloom  of  health  fades  from  the  cheek,  the  eyes  shine  with  an  unnatural  lustre, 
and  then  lose  all  expression ;  the  flesh  is  dried  and  parched,  the  skin  becomes 
**  fiery  red  like  an  oven,  because  of  the  fever-blast "  of  famine,  and  the  whole 
frame  becomes  skeletonised.  During  one  of  the  famines  in  Ireland  there  was  a 
form  of  face  which  came  upon  the  suflerers  when  their  state  of  misery  was  far 
advanced,  and  which  was  a  sure  signal  that  their  last  stage  of  misery  was  nearly 
run.  The  mouth  would  fall  and  seem  to  hang,  the  lips  at  the  two  ends  of  the 
mouth  would  be  dragged  down,  and  the  lower  parts  of  the  cheeks  would  fall,  as 
though  they  had  been  dragged  and  pulled.  There  were  no  signs  of  acute  agony, 
none  of  the  horrid  symptoms  of  gnawing  hunger.  The  look  was  one  of  apathy, 
desolation,  and  death.     The  agony  of  want  was  past.     Nothing  could  save. 

n.  Social  purity  is  outraged.  **  They  humbled  the  women  in  Zion,  and  the 
maids  in  the  city  of  Judah  ''  (ver.  11).  History  records  revolting  examples  of  the 
130 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HO  MI  LET IC  COM  MEN  TAR  Y :  LA  MENTA  TTONS.  chap.  ▼. 


committed  by  a  brutal  soldiery  in  the  mail  delirium  of  conquest  War 
brings  in  its  train  worse  consequences  tban  wounds  and  death.  There  is  a  fouler 
lust  than  the  lust  of  military  glory.  The  pure  and  unoffending  are  dishonoured. 
The  sanctity  of  social  life  is  invaded,  and  its  sacred  laws  violated. 

IIL  Baiik  and  age  are  treated  with  indignity.  "  Princes  are  hanged  up  by 
their  hand :  the  faces  of  elders  were  not  honoured "  (ver.  1 2).  See  exegetical 
notes  on  this  verse.  It  was  a  barbarity  of  ancient  warfare  that  the  conqueror  paid 
so  little  regard  to  the  feelings  of  the  conquered  To  the  humiliation  of  defeat  was 
added  whatever  could  pain  and  degrade  the  vanquished.  The  princes  of  the  royal 
blood  and  magistrates  who  had  grown  old  in  their  lengthened  term  of  office  were 
treated  with  scant  courtesy.  The  conqueror  seemed  to  glory  in  parading  the  most 
illustrious  of  his  captives  under  the  most  ignominious  conditions.  There  were 
noble  exceptions  to  this  rule,  but  they  were  so  rare  that  history  has  not  failed  to 
chronicle  them. 

lY.  Yonng  men  and  children  are  forced  into  the  performance  of  the  most 
menial  and  ezhansting  tasks.  *'They  took  the  young  men  to  grind,  and  the 
children  fell  under  the  wood"  (ver.  13).  To  grind  the  com  in  the  hand-mill  was 
the  work  of  female  slaves.  It  was  a  great  blow  to  the  self-respect  and  ambition 
of  the  young  men  who  were  of  legal  age  for  military  service  to  be  condemned  to 
this  menial  work.  The  little  Jewish  children,  whose  tender  years  should  have 
been  a  sufficient  protection  against  such  cruelty,  staggered  under  the  loads  of  fire« 
wood  they  were  compelled  to  carry  for  the  Chaldean  soldiers,  who  indulged  in 
inhuman  sport  at  the  brave  little  fellows  as  they  fell  exhausted  under  their  crush- 
ing burdens.  Many  of  the  children  would  be  crippled  for  life.  It  is  one  of  the 
praiseworthy  features  of  nineteenth-century  civilisation  that  so  much  care  is  shown 
in  the  protection  and  healthy  development  of  child-life. 

Lbbsons. — 1.  Woe  to  the  people  who  faH  into  the  hande  of  a  hearilem  con- 
queror/ 2.  There  are  worm  sufferings  than  the  sense  of  being  vanquished,  3.  The 
tyrani  eongueror  has  no  respect  for  sex^  or  rank,  or  age^ 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yer.  10.  The  snfferingB  of  fiunineu  thrive  in  their  shadow,  kept  the  ground 

1.  Apparent  in  their  ghastly  physical  open,  and  held  the  water  in  countless 

results.     2.  Reduce  all  ranks  to  a  com-  natural  wells  for  the  use  of  the  soil  in 

mon  level     3.  Are  intensified  by  con«  droughts.      But  all  the  undergrowth 

scions  defeat  and  humiliation.  dying  when  its  protecting  forests  were 

Yers.  11-13.   The  atrocities  of  war.  felled,  the  scanty  showers  percolated 

1.  The  pure  and  defenceless  are  defiled  into  the  streams  at  once,  causing  rare 

(ver.  11).     2.  Princes  and  aged  coun-  floods    and    frequent    droughts.     The 

sellers  are  treated  with  contempt  and  droughts  yielded  no  harvests,  and  no 

cruelty  (ver.  12).     3.  The  spirit  of  the  harvests  were  followed  by  famine,  pes- 

young  is  crushed  with  overpowering  tilence,  and  death, 

burdens  (ver.  13).  The  fascination  of  lust     You  will 

go  on  in  your  lust  and  your  sins,  de- 

Illtjbtrations. — ThecanseofflEunine.  spite   warnings,   despite  advice,   until 

For  unknown  years  the  Persians  have  you  perish  in  your  guilt     How  worse 

been  cutting  off  their  trees,  and  dimi-  than  children  are  grown-up  men  i    The 

nishing  their  rainfall  thereby.      Nay,  child  who  goes  for  a  merry  slide  upon 

not  only  has  the  removal  of  the  forests  a  pond,  if  he  be  told  that  the  ice  will 

decreased  the  supply,  but  it  has  wasted  not  bear  him,  starts  back  affrighted,  or, 

whatever  rain  felL      For  the  roots  of  if  he  daringly  creeps  upon  it,  how  soon 

the  trees  and  of  all  the  innumerable  he  leaves  it  if  he  hears  but  a  crack  upon 

shrubs,  bushes,   vines  and  ferns  that  the  slender  covering  of  the  water !   But 

131 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


THAP.  V. 


HOMILETIC  COMMt:NTARY:  LAMESTATI0N8. 


you  men  have  conscience,  which  tells 
yoa  that  your  sins  are  vile,  and  that 
they  will  be  your  ruin.  You  hear  the 
crack  of  sin  as  its  thin  sheet  of  pleasure 
gives  way  beneath  your  feet ;  ay  1  and 
some  of  you  have  seen  your  comrades 
sink  in  the  flood  and  lost,  and  yet  you 
go  sliding  on.  Worse  than  childish, 
worse  than  mad,  are  you,  thus  pre- 
sumptuously to  play  with  your  ever- 
lasting state. — Spurgeon, 

Age  dishonoured. 

"  I  h»ve  lived  long  enough.     My  Wfty  of  life 
Ib  fallen  into  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf  : 
And  that  which  should  aooompany  old  age, 
As  honour,  love,  obedience,  troops  of  friends, 
I  must  not  look  to  have." — Shakapeare, 

Helplessness  appeals  to  onr  pity. 

Thus  was  the  heart  of  the  rough  sailor 
touched  when,  tossing  with  other  cast- 
aways in  an  open  boat  on  the  open  sea^ 
he  parted  with  a  morsel  of  food,  which, 
hidden  with  more  care  than  misers  hide 
their  gold,  he  had  reserved  for  his  own 
last  extremity.  Around  him  lay  men 
and  women,  some  dead,  with  glassy 


eyes,  some  dying,  and  these  reduced  to 
ghastly  skeletons  ;  but  none  of  these 
moved  him  to  peril  his  own  life  for 
theirs.  The  object  of  his  noble  and  not 
unrewarded  generosity — foras  if  Heaven 
had  sent  it  on  purpose  to  reward  the 
act,  a  sail  speedily  hove  in  sight — was 
a  gentle  boy,  that,  with  his  face  turned 
on  hers,  lay  dying  in  a  mother's  arms, 
and  between  whose  teeth  the  famished 
man  put  his  own  last  precious  morsel 
— Outhie, 

The  atrocities  of  war.  I  look  on 
war  with  a  horror  which  no  words  can 
express.  I  have  long  wanted  patience 
to  read  of  battles.  The  thought  of 
man,  €k)d's  immortal  child,  butchered 
by  his  brother,  the  thought  of  sea  and 
land  stained  with  human  blood  by 
human  hands,  of  women  and  children 
buried  under  the  ruins  of  besieged  cities, 
of  the  resources  of  empires  and  the 
mighty  powers  of  nature  all  turned  by 
man's  malignity  into  engines  of  torture 
and  destruction — this  thought  gives  to 
earth  the  semblance  of  hell.  I  shudder 
as  among  demons. — Ohanning. 


E0MILETIC8. 

Business  and  Recreation. 

(Verses  14,  15.) 

L  Are  necessary  in  all  organised  commnnitlea.  Commercial  activity  and 
prosperity  lead  to  a  more  highly  organised  condition  of  social  life.  To  prevent 
the  clashing  and  confusion  of  the  multiplicity  of  interests  generated  by  an  increas- 
ing commerce,  certain  rules  are  laid  down  for  general  observance.  It  is  only  thus 
that  law  and  order  can  be  maintained.  It  is  soon  recognised  that  business  and 
pleasure  must  be  judiciously  combined  in  order  to  develop  a  healthy  and  vigorous 
peopla  Incessant  labour  wotdd  grind  down  and  destroy  the  force  of  the  national 
character,  and  an  uninterrupted  round  of  pleasure  would  weaken  and  dissipate  its 
enterprise  and  energy.  The  happy  medium  in  promoting  what  is  best  in  both 
individual  and  national  life  is  found  in  the  wise  alternation  of  work  and  recreation. 

"  Run  if  ^u  will,  but  try  to  keep  your  breath  ; 
Work  like  a  man,  but  don't  be  woriied  to  death." 

II.  Are  evidences  of  a  happy  and  contented  people.  The  gate  of  an  Eastern 
city  is  the  common  rendezvous  of  the  citizens  for  both  business  and  recreation. 
There  the  venerable  counsellors  sit  in  repose  and  dignity  to  discuss  and  settle  dis- 
putes. There  the  traders  Tend  their  warea  There  the  young  life  of  the  city  ex- 
presses its  exuberant  joy  in  song  and  dance.  Here  we  have  a  picture  of  prosperity, 
peace,  and  happiness.  No  people  will  be  long  content  where  there  is  not  a  thriv- 
ing commerce,  a  reverence  for  law  and  age,  ample  employment  and  food,  and  the 
opportunity  for  innocent  recreation. 
132 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMTIETIC  COMMENT  A  R  V:  LA  MENTA  TIONS, 


III.  Their  absence  a  pathetic  sign  of  general  desolation.  **  The  elders  have 
ceased  from  the  gate,  the  young  men  from  their  music.  The  joy  of  our  heart  is 
ceased  ;  our  dance  is  turned  into  mourning"  (vers.  14,  15).  The  aged  magistrates 
no  longer  frequent  the  gate,  the  bazaars  of  the  merchants  are  deserted,  the  busy 
murmur  of  buying  and  selling  is  Imshed,  the  instruments  of  music  are  laid  aside 
nnstrung,  the  voice  of  singing  is  no  longer  heard,  and  the  spirits  of  the  youthful 
dancers  are  crushed.  Business  and  pleasure  alike  are  abandoned.  Tlie  joy  of 
happier  times  is  turned  into  mourning.  The  prophet  could  give  no  more  graphic 
a  picture  of  the  desolation  and  ruin  that  had  settled  down  up  m  the  land. 

Lessons. — 1.  Tlie  diaracfer  and  condition  of  a  nation  may  he  read  in  its 
commerce  and  recreations,  2.  Work  and  play  are  alike  necessary  in  the  develop- 
ment of  national  life^  3.  When  the  spring  of  enterprise  is  broken,  a  nation  sinks 
into  decay. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vera  14,  15.  The  extinction  of 
Bational  life :  1.  When  the  wise  and 
aged  are  no  longer  interested  in  public 
affairs.  2.  When  the  voice  of  mirth  is 
hushed.  3.  When  youth  has  lost  its 
elasticity  and  hope. 

lLLnsTiiATioN&  —  The  dignity  of 
labour.  It  is  time  that  the  opprobrium 
of  toil  were  done  away.  Ashamed  of 
toil,  art  thou  ?  Ashamed  of  thy  dingy 
workshop  or  dusty  labour-field,  of  thy 
hard  hand,  scarred  with  service  more 
honourable  than  that  of  war,  of  thy 
soiled  and  weather-stained  garments,  on 
which  Mother  Nature  has  embroidered, 
amidst  sun  and  rain,  amidst  smoke  and 
steam,  her  own  heraldic  honours? 
Ashamed  of  these  tokens  and  titles,  and 
envious  of  the  flaunting  robes  of  im- 
becile idleness  and  vanity  ?  It  is  treason 
to  Nature,  it  is  impiety  to  Heaven.  Toil 
— toil  eitlier  of  the  brain,  of  the  hearty 
or  of  the  hand — is  true  nobility. 

Business  not  to  absorb  all  our  time. 
Who  gave  thee  leave,  Christian,  to  over- 
lade  thyself  with  the  encumbrances  of 
life  ?  Is  not  God  the  Lord  of  thy  time, 
as  of  everything  else  1  He  does  indeed 
allow  thee  a  fair  portion  for  the  lower 
employments  of  the  body,  but  did  He 
ever  intend  to  turn  Himself  out  of  all  1 
This  is  as  if  the  sailors,  who  are  allowed 
by  the  merchant  some  small  adventure 
for  themselves,  should  fill  the  ship,  and 
leave  no  stowage  for  his  goods ;  or  as  if 
a  servant  should  excuse  himself  to  his 
master,  when  reproved  for  neglecting 
his  duty,  by  saying  he  could  not  do  it 
because  he  was  drunk. — GumalL 


Business  and  religion.  Piety  does 
not  retreat  from  business,  but  it  seizes 
business,  sanctifies  it,  and  makes  it 
sacred.  If  I  understand  religion,  it  is 
to  open  a  shop,  it  is  to  freight  ships,  it 
is  to  keep  accounts,  it  is  to  write  up 
your  ledgers,  it  is  to  wear  an  apron  till 
it  be  as  holy  as  a  bishop*s  sleeve,  and 
to  wield  a  spade  as  responsibly  and 
devoutly  as  a  monarch  sways  a  sceptre. 
The  true  characteristic  of  religion  is  to 
go  down  into  everything,  rise  up  to  the 
highest^  till,  like  the  atmosphere,  it  em- 
braces all  in  its  beneficent  and  beautiful 
f  olda  — Gumming. 

Recreation.  Lute-strings  sound  all 
the  sweeter  for  being  sometimes  let 
down ;  and  fields  sowed  every  year  be- 
come barren.  So  it  is  with  body  and 
mind. 

—  A  primitive  Christian  playing  with 
birds  vindicated  his  conduct  by  com- 
parison with  the  bow,  which,  if  con- 
stantly bent,  becomes  useless.  Kecrea- 
tion  is  a  second  creation. 

Pleasure  itself  unsatisfying.  George 
Moore,  when  a  wealthy  man,  wrote  in 
his  diary — "  After  this  we  kept  a  great 
deal  of  company.  The  house  was  looked 
upon  as  a  work  of  art  All  our  friends 
expected  to  be  invited  to  see  it  and 
partake  of  our  hospitality.  We  accord- 
ingly gave  a  large  dinner  weekly,  until 
we  had  exhausted  our  numerous  friends 
and  acquaintances.  But  happiness  does 
not  flow  in  such  a  channel.  Promiscuous 
company  takes  one's  mind  away  from 
God  and  His  dealings  with  men ;  and 
there  is  no  lasting  pleasure  in  the  ex- 
citement." 

133 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP  ▼.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 

HOMTLETICS. 

The  Loss  of  Honoub. 

(Verse  16.) 

L  Honour  is  the  crown  of  indiyidoal  charaeter.  Honour  is  mosal  reetiiade^ 
the  down  and  dignity  of  the  true  man. 

"  Say  wh»t  is  honour  ?    'Tis  the  finest  sense 
Of  justice  which  the  human  mind  can  frames 
Intent  each  lurking  frailty  to  disclaim, 
And  guard  the  way  of  life  from  aU  offenoe 
Suffered  or  done." — WordtwortlL 

Moral  rectitude  is  not  a  natural  possession ;  it  is  the  gift  of  Divine  grace.  It 
must  be  humbly  and  penitently  sought,  gratefully  received,  and  strengthened  and 
increased  by  incessant  exercisa  It  is  all  of  grace,  and  this  grace  sheds  a  glory 
and  lustre  upon  the  souL  As  the  diamond  in  the  ring,  so  is  grace  to  the  souL  A 
heart  beautified  with  grace  has  the  picture  of  the  King  of  heaven  hung  in  it  It 
is  dignified  with  the  reflected  splendour  of  the  Divine  majesty. 

IL  When  honour  is  lost,  man  is  discrowned.  "  The  crown  is  fallen  from  our 
head."  Israel  not  only  lost  their  national  king,  and  with  him  their  national 
independence,  but  they  lost  their  moral  kingship,  their  personal  righteousness ; 
and  this  they  lost  before  they  were  deprived  of  their  earthly  king.  All  that  had 
given  them  rank  and  honour  was  tumbled  in  the  dust 

**  Better  to  die  ten  thousand  deaths 
Than  wound  my  honour." 

"  Mine  honour  is  my  life ;  both  grow  fai  one ; 
Take  honour  from  me,  and  my  life  is  done." 

m  Honour  is  lost  when  righteousness  is  abandoned.  *' Woe  onto  us  that  we 
have  sinned."  Afifticted  Judah  is  getting  clearer  light  In  the  seventh  verse  tiiey 
still  cling  to  the  idea  that  their  national  calamities  were  to  be  ascribed  to  the  sins 
of  their  ancestors.  Now  they  see  the  enormity  of  their  own  sins,  and  acknow- 
ledge that  they  deserved  chastisement  Man  is  invulnerable  to  the  assaults  of  the 
enemy  and  to  the  heaviest  blows  of  misfortune  and  suffering  while  he  retains  his 
integrity.  He  is  fenced  round  with  the  unconquerable  protection  of  the  Qod  in 
whom  he  trusts.  It  is  when  he  is  untrue  to  himself,  to  his  highest  sense  of 
honour,  that  he  is  untrue  to  Qod,  and,  falling  away  from  righteousness,  he  becomes 
discrowned,  and  sinks  into  disgrace  and  misery. 

Lessons.— 1.  Righteousneas  confers  dignity,  2.  That  man  9uffer$  unttpeakabU 
loes  who  does  not  act  up  to  his  holiest  imptdsei.  8.  When  a  num  loses  a  sense 
of  honottTf  he  may  sink  to  any  de^h  of  infamy. 


OEBM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEEaESL 

Yer.  16.   The  degradation  of  sin:  abhorrence.    8.  The  third  woe  is  God's 

1.  Begins  in  personal  unfaithfulness,  leaving  us.     4.  The  fourth  woe  is  all 

2.  It  is  undignified  to  sin.     3.  The  kinds  of  punishment — an  Iliad  of  evils, 
course  of  sin  ends  in  misery  and  in  — Bishop  Ussher, 

woe. 

A  aeries  of  woes.     '*  Woe  unto  us  iLLUSTRAHoNa— Tme  dignitj. 

that  we  have  sinned.''     1.   The  first  .,  -,_   j-    r^  i              i  _■  u-  i  _ 

.    ^,          „   ..         .  .  1           1  v      •  *•  True  dignity  is  never  gained  by  place, 

woe  IS  the  polluting  of  the  soul  by  sin.  ^^  n^ver  lost  wheS  honouls  are  with- 

2.  The  second  woe  is  Qod's  hatred  and  drawn."— Ifomii^rer. 
134 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENT  ART:  LAMENTATIONS.  OHAli  T. 

••  Ye  proud,  ye  selfish,  ye  severe,  stands  80  little  the  nature  of  God  that 

How  v«n  your  mask  of  sUte ;  he  understands  not  himself ;  and  yet 

^T^J'Z^ZriZ^B^^  troubled   by  the  contemplation  of 'his 

own  condition,  he  boldly  pronounces 

Fallen  greatness.  ^^^^  ^t  is  beyond  the  power  of  Gkxl 

to  qualify  him  for  this   connection. — 

*•  I  h»ve  ventnred,  Pascal 

Like  little  wanton  boys  that  swim  on  bladders,  mi,J ^^^•^^  ^  iiiai.«»t ^n*      Tk-.  ->^«* 

This  many  summers  in  a  sea  of  glory,  ™  ^^^  ^  dlSllononr.     The  most 

But  far  beyond  my  depth:  my  high- blown  pride  terrible  blow  that  General  Orant  ever 

At  length  broke  under  me  ;  and  now  has  left  knew  was  when  the  bank  in  whicb  he 

«T   ™®'   ■.  1  i.    ..L    __,     .  ..  ^"^^^8  a  partner  had  suspended  payment. 

Weary  and  old  with  senrioe,  to  the  meroy  xr«i.  ^«i«  «,««  u^  ^.iJ^a   v:-.  ^  1*     ^a 

Of  a  ^de  stream,  that  muTt  for  ever  hide  me.  ^^^  only  was  he  rumed,  his  sons  and 

Tain  pomp  and  glory  of  this  world,  I  hate  ye ! "  daughters  penniless  by  reason  of  all  their 

—Wiitey,  savings  invested  in  it  being  lost ;  but 
after  a  few  days  there  came  out  a 

Degradation.    That  which  renders  horrible  story  of  craft  and  goile,  and  it 

men  so  unwilling  to  believe  themselves  was  seen  that  his  honoured  name  had 

capable  of  union  with  God  is  but  the  been  used  to  entice  and  decoy  hosts  of 

sense  of    their  own  degradation.      I  friends,  to  their  own  injury  and  Grant's 

would    gladly    be    informed    whence  discredit     Imputations  were  even  cast 

this  creature,  who  acknowledges  him-  on  the  fame  that  belonged  to  the  coun- 

self    so  weak,   obtains    the   right   to  try,  and  this  blow  was  worst  of  all :  the 

measure  and  limit  the  Divine  mercy  as  shock  of  battle  was  less  tremendousj 

his  own  fancy  suggests.    Man  under-  his  physical  agonies  less  acute. 


EOMILETICa. 

BiEUoions  Dbolbnsiov. 

(Verses  17,  18.) 

L  Srident  In  the  desolation  of  the  sanctuary.  ''The  mountain  of  Zion, 
which  is  desolate,  the  foxes  walk  upon  it "  (ver.  18).  The  foxes  or  jackals  were 
very  likely  attracted  to  the  niinous  site  of  Zion  by  the  bodies  of  the  slain,  which 
they  devoured  for  food  and,  finding  how  completely  the  place  was  deserted,  they 
remained  in  undisturbed  possession.  How  different  from  the  time  when  the 
Temple  services  were  in  full  swing  and  the  city  crowded  with  happy  worshippers  ! 
Religion  is  at  a  low  ebb  when  the  house  of  God  is  neglected  and  its  services  dis- 
regarded ;  it  is  lower  still  when  the  sanctuary  is  closed  and  its  mouldering  stones 
are  covered  with  mosses  and  lichens ;  but  it  has  got  to  the  lowest  depth  when  the 
building  is  demolished  and  scattered  in  ruins.  To  this  pass  had  all  the  pretentious 
religionism  of  Judah  now  come. 

IL  Is  a  reason  for  depression  and  sorrow.  *'  For  this  our  heart  is  faint ;  for 
these  things  our  eyes  are  dim  "  (ver.  17).  The  Jews  of  all  ranks  and  classes  would 
lament  the  national  disasters — the  loss  of  national  honour  in  the  fall  of  their  king, 
the  loss  of  wealth  and  influence,  the  loss  of  independence  and  liberty ;  but  the 
pious  Jews  would  lament  most  of  all  the  loss  of  religion.  They  sorrowed  till  their 
hearts  became  faint  and  their  eyes  grew  dim  with  tears.  We  may  well  grieve 
over  the  loss  of  property  and  Mends,  of  worldly  comforts  and  necessities,  but 
the  devout  heart  sorrows  most  of  all  over  the  decline  of  religion  and  the  cessa- 
tion of  the  worship  of  Gkxl. 

in  Should  lead  to  much  heart-searching  as  to  its  cause.  *'  For  this^for 
these  things — because  of  Zion  which  is  desolate"  (vers.  17,  18).  To  the  Jewish 
mind  the  Temple  was  the  residence  and  throne  of  Jehovah,  the  symbol  of  worship, 
the  embodiment  of  the  national  religious  life.     The  destniction  of  the  Temple 

135 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ▼. 


H0M1LETIC  COMMI-NTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


carried  with  it  the  doom  of  religion  :  no  Temple,  no  religion.  It  is  true  that 
genuine  religion  is  independent  of  temples  and  buildings,  but  as  a  matter  of  fact 
it  does  not  exist  long  without  them.  Individual  piety  may  flourish  without  a 
material  tenij)le,  but  collective  and  organised  religion  can  be  maintained  only  by 
continued  association  and  intercourse,  and  the  sanctuary  becomes  a  necessity  of 
associated  religious  life.  Those  who  talk  so  grandiosely  about  worshipping  God 
in  the  temple  of  Nature  rarely  worsliip  Him  at  all  anywhere.  Where  there  is  no 
recognised  sanctuary  there  is  no  rally-point  for  worshippers,  and  religion  is  dis- 
organised and  depressed.  The  same  result  ensues  when  the  house  of  God  is 
habitually  neglected. 

Lessons. — 1.  Religton4  declension  ia  at  the  root  of  national  decay,  2.  The 
people  of  God  should  be  (dways  deeply  concerned  in  religious  extension,  3.  Beligioua 
declension  is  sincerely  lamented  by  the  good. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  17,  18.  The  disasters  of  the 
Ohnrch :  1.  Create  profound  concern 
in  the  hearts  of  the  good.  2.  Should 
be  deplored  by  every  member  of  the 
commonwealth.  3.  Mean  that  there 
has  been  gross  unfaithfulness  some- 
where. 

Yer.  18.  A  deserted  sanctuary: 
1.  A  pathetic  and  suggestive  sight.  2. 
An  evidence  of  indifference  and  sin. 
3.  A  reproach  that  should  be  promptly 
wiped  away. 

Illustrations.  —  Eeligious  declen- 
sion. The  consequences  which  Moses 
foretold  (Deut.  xxix.  24,  25)  as  the 
result  of  the  religious  defection  of  the 
people  were  such  as  no  human  wisdom 
could  foresee  or  experience  suggest. 
The  practice  of  idolatry  did  not  prevent 
the  aggrandisement  of  ancient  Rome, 
nor  any  mere  statesman  ensure  the  ac- 
complishment of  a  prophecy  that  mili- 
tary success  should  always  attend  the 
worship  of  the  one  true  God,  and  that 
military  discomfiture  should  always 
follow  idolatry.  It  is  evident  that 
Moses  derived  his  accurate  knowledge 
of  futurity  from  immediate  inspiration 
of  God. 

Religions  sham.  A  religion  that 
does  not  take  hold  of  the  life  that  now 
is,  is  like  a  cloud  that  does  not  rain. 
A  cloud  may  roll  in  grandeur  and  be  an 
object  of  admiration,  but  if  it  does  not 
rain,  it  is  of  little  account  so  far  as 
utility  is  concerned.  And  a  religion 
that  consists  in  the  observance  of  mag- 
nificent oonMiionies,  but  docs  not  toucli 
136 


the  duties  of  daily  life,  is  a  religion  of 
show  and  of  sham. 

Church-going  not  the  end  of  religion. 
I  fear  there  are  some  who  imagine  that 
church-going  is  in  itself  the  aim  and 
end  of  all  religion.  No  mistake  can  be 
more  deplorable  or  pernicious.  It  is  a 
blunder  as  egregious  as  it  would  be  for 
a  visitor  to  a  manufactory  to  suppose 
that  the  machinery  was  all  set  in  motion 
merely  to  be  gazed  at,  and  to  keep  em- 
ployed the  people  who  are  engaged  in 
tending  it  The  manufacturer  who  lays 
out  his  capital  in  such  costly  apparatus 
would  find  but  an  unsatisfactory  return 
at  the  end  of  the  year  if  there  had  not 
been  a  given  quantity  of  finished  goods 
for  profitable  sale  in  the  market  So  it 
is  with  church-going.  It  is  wretched 
work  if  the  worship  of  the  house  of 
God  begins  and  ends  with  the  prayers 
uttered  there. — Hooper. 

Mercenary  religion.  One  of  the 
causes  that  led  to  the  overthrow  of 
religion  in  Ephesus  was  the  growing 
wealth  attached  to  the  Temple  of  Diana. 
The  priesthood  established  deposit 
banks.  Kings  and  private  individuals 
intrusted  their  money  to  the  care  of 
the  goddess,  and  the  priests  reinvested 
this  for  a  profit  But  gradually  the 
idea  uf  religious  sanctity  gave  place  to 
that  of  commercial  enterprise,  and  the 
temple  became  fair  game  for  attack  and 
robbery. 

Decay  of  religion.  The  most  curious 
phenomenon  in  all  Venetian  history 
is  the  vitality  of  religion  in  private 
life,  and  its  deadness  in  public  policy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS,  chap.  ▼ 

Amidst  the  enthusiasm,   chivalry,   or  commerce.     She  calculated  the  glory  of 

fanaticism  of  the  other  States  of  Europe,  her  conquests  by  their  value,  and  esti- 

Venice  stands  from  first  to  last  like  a  mated  their  justice  by  their  facility, 

masked   statue;   her  coldness  impene-  While  all  Europe  around  her  was  wasted 

tnible,    her  exertion   only  aroused  by  by  the  fire  of  its  devotion,  she  first  cal- 

the  touches  of  a  secret  spring.     That  culated  the  highest  price  she  could  exact 

spring  was  her  commercial  interests —  from  its  piety  for  the  armament  she  fur- 

tliis  the  one  motive  of  all  her  important  nished,  and  then,  for  the  advancement 

political  acts  or  enduring  national  ani-  of  her  own  private  interests,  at  once 

luosities.     She  could  forgive  insults  to  broke  her  faith  and  betrayed  her  re- 

her  honour,  but  never  rivalship  in  her  ligion. — Ruahin. 

HOMILETICS. 

An  Earnbst  Prayeb  for  Ristoration. 

(Verses  19-22.) 

L  Acknowledges  the  eternal  sovereignty  of  Jehovah.  ''Thou,  0  Lord, 
lemainest  for  ever;  Thy  throne  from  generation  to  generation  "  (ver.  19).  The 
throne  of  Judah  is  fallen,  but  not  so  the  throne  of  Gted.  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylon, 
Israel,  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  may  rise  and  fall,  but  God  is  unchanged. 
The  fact  of  the  perpetuity  of  the  Divine  government  of  the  world  forms  the  basis 
of  a  hope  that,  however  desperate  may  be  the  condition  of  His  people,  God  can 
restore  them.  If  the  throne  of  God  was  like  the  fickle  governments  of  earth, 
there  would  be  no  prospect  of  recovery.  All  true  prayer  has  the  assurance  of 
being  heard  and  answered  in  the  fact  of  the  righteousness  of  an  unchangeable  God. 

II.  Deprecates  the  continned  absence  of  the  Divine  favour.  '<  Wherefore 
dost  Thou  forget  us  for  ever,  and  forsake  us  so  long  time!"  (ver.  20).  If  Thy 
government  is  continuous,  why  are  we  forgotten  and  abandoned?  If  Thy 
throne  in  heaven  is  immovable,  why  is  Thy  throne  in  our  earthly  Zion  over- 
thrown? Thou  didst  once  care  for  us  and  love  us,  and  the  memory  of  that 
happy  time  still  keeps  our  hope  alive.  Thy  favour  was  the  joy  and  the  sunshine 
of  our  lives ;  its  absence  is  at  the  root  of  all  our  misery.  Low  as  we  have  sunk, 
it  cannot  be  that  Thou  hast  utterly  and  for  ever  given  us  up.  Cast  us  not  away 
from  Thy  presence,  and  take  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit  from  us.  Restore  unto  us  the 
joy  of  Thy  salvation.  The  soul  that  yeanis  in  prayer  for  the  Divine  favour  is  on 
the  brink  of  a  glorious  vision. 

UL  Supplicates  the  grace  of  genuine  repentance.  "Turn  Thou  us  unto 
Thee,  O  Lord,  and  we  shall  be  turned;  renew  our  days  as  of  old  "  (ver.  21).  Repent- 
ance is  a  turning  about.  For  some  time  the  course  of  Judah  had  been  in  one 
direction — wandering  from  God,  and  sinking  into  ever  lower  depths  of  sin  and 
misery.  Now  there  is  a  thoughtful  pause,  an  arrest  of  the  downward  career. 
What  has  brought  this  aliout  ?  Prayer ;  and  that  prayer  becomes  more  eager  and 
earnest  as  it  becomes  more  evident  that  rescue  is  at  hand.  True  prayer  recognises 
that  God  alone  can  give  repentance  and  renew  the  glory  of  tha  golden  days  of 
old.  When  the  heart  is  changed,  our  outward  circumstances  soon  alter  for  the 
better.  When  Judah  regained  the  favour  of  God,  she  also  regained  lost  temporal 
blessings. 

IV.  Is  urged  with  the  assurance  that  Ood  cannot  utterly  reject  the  truly 
penitenl  "  But  Thou  hast  utterly  rejected  us ;  Thou  art  very  wroth  against  us." 
UnUas  Thou  hast  utterly  rejected  tis,  unless  Thou  art  very  wroth  against  us.  This 
is  stated  as  a  virtual  impossibility.  Geikie  translates  the  verse,  '*  Thou  wilt  not 
surely  wholly  forget  us  ?  Thou  wilt  not  be  angry  with  us  beyond  measure  ? " 
The  miserable  results  of  their  repudiation  by  Jehovah  become  the  ground  of  a 

137 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ▼. 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMBNTATIONS. 


confident  appeal  to  Him.  He  heard  the  prayer,  and  at  the  end  of  seventy  years 
the  Jews  were  restored  to  their  own  land.  The  Book  of  Lamentations  ends,  as  it 
begins,  with  a  wail;  but  the  conchiding  wail,  unlike  the  first,  has  in  it  a  joyous 
strain  of  hope.  In  many  ancient  MSS.  the  twenty- first  verse  is  repeated  after 
the  twenty-second,  to  make  a  more  agreeable  finish  when  the  book  was  read  in 
the  Synagogue;  but  Jeremiah  did  not  think  this  arrangement  necessary.  He 
concludes  with  the  refrain  of  what  had  been  the  burden  of  his  sorrowful  mono- 
logue, because  he  is  so  confident  of  help  and  restoration.  '*  The  message  of  God 
to  the  soul,  even  in  threatenings,  is  ever  in  truth  one  of  comfort"  The  darkest 
night  of  suffering  and  sorrow  is  followed  by  the  tranquillising  hope  of  the  golden 
daybreak. 

Lsssoiro. — 1.  When  the  Church  begins  to  pray  there  is  Jiope  of  revival.  2. 
True  prayer  is  ever  accompanied  with  r^pentanee.  8.  Qod  not  only  hears,  but 
anewere  the  prayer  of  the  contrite. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  19,  20.  The  unchangeable 
(Jod.  L  His  government  is  in  perpetual 
activity.  "Thou  remainest  for  ever, 
Thy  throne  from  generation  to  genera- 
tion" (ver.  19).  II.  He  cannot  forget 
His  people,  "Wherefore  dost  Thou 
forget  us  for  evert"  (ver.  20).  IH  He 
will  not  for  ever  stand  aloof  from  His 
people.  "  Wherefore  dost  Thou  forsake 
us  for  so  long  time  f  "  (ver.  20). 

Vers.  21,  22.  A  prayer  for  repent- 
anca  L  Recognises  that  repentance  is 
a  Divine  act.  "Turn  Thou  us  unto 
Thee,  O  Lord;  renew  our  days  as  of 
old"  (ver.  21).  IL  When  God  gives 
repentance  it  is  effectiud.  "And  we 
shall  be  turned"  (ver.  21).  IIL  When 
Qod  gives  repentance  it  is  evident  His 
wrath  is  withdrawn^  and  He  again  ac- 
cepts us,  "Unless  Thou  hast  utterly 
rejected  us ;  unless  Thou  art  very  wroth 
against  us  "  (ver.  22).  But  this  cannot 
be,  for  He  gives  repentance.  He  "  re- 
news our  days  as  of  old." 

Illustrations.  —  The  eternity  of 
God.  Would  you  gain  some  idea  of 
the  eternity  past  of  God's  existence) 
Go  to  the  astronomer  and  bid  him  lead 
you  with  him  in  one  of  his  walks 
through  space ;  and  as  he  sweeps  out- 
ward from  object  to  object^  from  uni- 
verse to  universe,  remember  that  the 
light  from  those  filmy  stains  on  the 
deep  pare  blue  of  heaven  now  foiling 
on  your  eye  has  been  travelling  space 
for  a  million  of  years, — MitchelU 
138 


Prayer  the  melody  of  misery. 

**  Oh,  hearts  that  break  and  give  no  slgiit 
Save  whitening  lip  and  fading  trewea, 
Till  death  poors  ont  his  oordial  wine, 
Slow  •  dropped   from    misery's    crashing 
presses: 
If  singing  breath  or  echoing  chord 

To  every  hidden  pain  were  given, 
What  endless  melodies  were  ponred, 
As  sad  as  earth,  as  sweet  as  heaven  1 " 
—0.  W.  Helmn. 

Suffering  iiromptB  prayer.  AfiSic- 
tions  make  us  most  frequent  and  fer- 
vent in  pouring  forth  our  supplications 
unto  Qod.  In  our  prosperity  we  either 
utterly  neglect  this  duty,  or  perform  it 
carelessly  and  slothfully ;  but  when  we 
are  brought  into  calamities,  we  flee  to 
Him  by  earnest  prayer,  craving  His  aid 
and  help.  And  as  the  child,  fearing 
nothing,  is  so  fond  of  his  play  that  he 
strays  and  wanders  from  his  mother, 
not  so  much  as  thinking  of  her,  but  if 
he  be  scared  or  frighted  with  the  sight 
or  apprehension  of  some  apparent  or 
approaching  danger,  presently  runs  to 
her,  casts  himself  into  her  arms,  and 
cries  out  to  be  saved  and  shielded  by 
her,  so  we,  securely  enjoying  the 
childish  sports  of  worldly  prosperity, 
do  so  fondly  dote  on  them  that  we 
scarce  think  of  our  Heavenly  Father; 
but  when  perils  approach  and  are  ready 
to  seize  upon  us,  then  we  flee  to  Him  and 
cast  ourselves  into  the  arms  of  His  pro- 
tection, crying  to  Him  by  earnest  prayer 
for  help  in  our  extremity. — Doimame. 

The  value  of  prayer.    If  the  whole 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LAMENTATIONS. 


CHAP.  ▼. 


world  in  whicli  we  live  is  but  a  con- 
tinnal  temptation,  if  all  around  appears 
to  agree  with  our  inward  corruptions  to 
weaken  and  seduce  us,  if  riches  bribe 
and  indigence  sours,  if  prosperity  ele- 
vates and  afflictions  abase  us,  if  busi- 
ness dissipates  and  rest  enervates,  if 
the  sciences  exalt  and  ignorance  be- 
wilders us,  if  commerce  exposes  us  too 
much  and  solitude  leaves  us  too  much 
to  ourselves,  if  pleasure  seduce  us  and 
holy  works  make  us  proud,  if  health 
awakens  the  passions  and  sickness  pro- 
duces murmurings — in  a  word,  if  since 
the  fall  of  man  all  that  surrounds  us 
and  all  that  is  in  us  is  perilous,  in  so 
deplorable  a  situation,  O  my  Gk)d,  what 
hope  of  salvation  remains  for  usi  If 
our  sighs  do  not  incessantly  ascend 
from  the  depth  of  our  misery  towards 
the  throne  of  Thy  meroy,  until  Thou 


deignest  to  assist  us  and  to  rescue  us 
from  our  fallen  state. — Massillon, 

God  answers  prayer.  When  poor 
men  make  requests  to  us,  we  usually 
answer  them  as  the  echo  does  the 
voice — the  answer  cuts  off  half  the 
petition.  We  shall  seldom  find  among 
men  Jael's  courtesy,  giving  milk  to 
those  that  ask  water,  except  it  be  as 
this  was,  an  entangling  benefit,  the 
better  to  introduce  a  mischief.  There 
are  not  many  Naaroans  among  us  that, 
when  you  beg  of  them  one  talent,  will 
force  you  to  take  two.  But  Gkxi's 
answer  to  our  prayers  is  like  a  multi- 
plying glass,  which  renders  the  request 
much  greater  in  the  answer  than  it  was 
in  the  prayer. — Bishop  Reynolds, 

^  More  thing!  are  wrought  by  prayer 
Than  the  world  dreamB  of." 

— Tmmg9fm» 


189 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  TO  HOMILETICS. 


Adtahtaobb  of  a  sUte  of  ezpectatioD,  88 
Affliotod,  God  the  ooniolatiou  of  the,  98 
AfBiction,  the  man  of,  70 
AMotions,  Tiewi  of  a  taint  in  bis,  84 

not  aoddental,  98 

Anger,  the  Divine,  115 

the  fieroenoM  of  the  Diyine,  48 

the  pitileuneu  of  the  Divine,  100 

Appeal  to  Jehovah^  a  piteous,  124 
to  Divine  jnstice,  104 

Baffled,  the  helplessly,  118 
Bereavement,  127 
Bewilderment  of  grief,  74 
Burden  for  vonug  shoulders,  80 
Busineis  ana  recreation,  132 

Call  to  prayer,  00 
Oharaote^  moraL  111 

the  Divine,  06 

Choice  portions,  86 

Ohnroh,  the  disasters  of  the,  186 

indifference  of  the  enemies  of  the,  22 

Oity  in  sorrow,  20 

a  populons,  14 

gnef  for  a  mined,  18 

Comfort  for  the  sorrowful,  92 
Compliant  nnder  affliction,  96 
Conquest,  the  gaUing  tyranny  of,  130 

Danobbs  of  a  sinful  life,  77 
Dawn  of  hope,  80 
Dayspring  mercies,  84 
Declension,  religions,  185 
Defeat,  inglorioa:^  81 
Defences  of  a  nation,  44 
DeKn<l&tion,  moral,  110 
Despair,  the  helplessness  of,  32 
Destroyer,  the  implacable,  48 
Destruction  of  Zioii,  114 
Devotion,  the  sublimity  of,  98 
Disinherited,  the  miseries  of  the,  126 
Distress,  complex  phases  of,  78 
Divine  anger,  the,  115 

the  fierceness  of  the,  43 

the  pitilessness  of  the,  100 

—'  character,  the,  95 

compassion,  a  prayer  for  the,  63 

faithfulness,  8ft 

Koodness.  88 

justice,  86 

a  confident  appeal  to,  104 

pity,  64 

— —  punishment,  31, 105 

rule  absolute  and  universal,  95 

slowness  to  punish.  104 

threatenings  of  judgment,  50 

-^  wrath,  the  storm  of  the,  43 


Dnty  of  self-reflection,  96 
to  the  Jewish  peoj^e^  91 

Book  Homo,  72 
Enemies  of  the  church,  2S 
Enemy,  Jehovah  as  an,  44 
Enmity,  a  spirit  of,  86 
Expectation,  advantages  of,  88 
Extremity  of  suffering,  112 

Faithful  prophet  in  trouble,  a,  102 
Faithfulness,  the  Divine,  83 
False  roinidters  of  Qod,  116 
Famine,  the  extremities  of,  27 

the  horrors  of,  113 

the  sufferings  of,  131 

Fate  of  the  malevolent,  119 

Fear,  the  tyranny  of,  6i 

Fickleness,  human,  86 

Foe,  Jehovah  as  a,  76 

Fortune,  the  strange  reverses  o^  14, 127 

Friendship,  the  fickleness  of  human,  14 

God  and  human  suffering,  73 

wrong,  94 

pleading  for  saints,  108 

the  tenderness  of,  92 

the  unchangeable^  188 

Qodly  life  the  music  of  societj,  a»  104 
Goodness,  the  Divine,  88 

three  grades  of,  87 

Grief  for  a  ruined  oity,  18 
—  the  bewilderment  of,  74 
the  utter  exhaustion  of,  63 

Happiness,  the  loss  of,  79 
Heathenism  a  moral  obliquity,  37 
Hope,  the  dawn  of,  80 

and  patience,  88 

Honour,  the  loss  of,  134 
Humiliating  subjection,  128 

Ikdiffbbenos  of  the  enemies  of  the  Ohubh,  22 
Is  it  nothing  to  you  ?  31 

JiHOVAH,  a  piteous  appeal  to,  134 

as  a  foe,  44,  76 

Jewish  people,  our  duty  towards  the,  81 
Joy,  two  kmds  of,  120 
Judgment  of  oppression,  16 
—  the  Divine  threateningi  of,  59 
Justice,  Divine,  36 
a  confident  appeal  to,  104 

Lamxntation  over  a  forsaken  sanctuary,  19 
Leaders,  unfaithful  religions,  115 
LibertT,  the  loss  of,  137 
Life,  the  intense  love  of,  139 
the  ohan^  of^  17 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  TO  HOMILETliML 


Life,  the  dangen  of  •  sinfol,  77 

young,  86 

LoM  of  happiiieM,  79 

of  bonoiir,  134 

Lotft  hope  rwtond,  81 

UtAUVounr,  the  f^ile  of  ihe^  119 
Han  of  afflicticKD.  the,  70 
Meeten,  new,  88 
Memories,  iad.  28 
Memory,  the  oflloe  oiL  81 

the  handmaid  of  hope^  81 

Merdei,  daysprins,  84 
Menage  from  Ood  to  thee,  120 
Miniatey,  a  disphrited,  20 
Miaeriet  of  the  dUinherited,  126 
Miaery  of  the  penitent.  81 
Moral  degradation,  110 

Natioit,  a  diatreaaod,  29 

the  defenoea  of  %  44 

National  diaaater,  28 

life,  the  extinction  ol,  188 

—  rain,  oomplete,  48 
Night  of  prayer,  81 

OPPBBnoir,  the  jndnnent  of,  16 
Ordinaneea,  the  wreok  of  religiona,  46 

Pathhob,  hope  and,  88 
Penitence,  aincere,  86 
Penitent,  the  misery  of  the,  81 
People,  last  hoars  of  a  doomed,  117 
Persecution,  the  spirit  of^  17 
Pity,  the  Divine,  64 
Prayer,  a  call  to,  60 

a  night  of,  61 

— »  for  fiirine  oompaaslon,  68 
— » the  hopefulness  oL  126 
— »  for  repentance,  188 

the  efficacy  ol,  IflS 

Property,  127 
Propheta,  f^^se,  66 
Punishment,  Divine^  n«  106 

—  of  Judah  a  type,  86 
— —  the  certainty  of,  77 

graduated,  118, 120 

sin  and,  180 

RiTOiiLioir,  the  bitter  fruits  of,  36 
BecreatSon,  business  and,  182 
Bedeemer,  the  aufferinffs  of  the  world's,  80 
BeligiouB  declension,  185 

ordinancea,  the  wreok  of,  46 

Repentance,  a  prayer  for,  97*  188 

Beaignation,  90 

Bestoration,  an  earneat  prayer  for.  187 

BoTeraea  of  fortune,  the  atrange,  14 

Ridicule,  79 

Boyalty,  118 

Bum,  inezpresdble,  64 

Bule,  the  DiTine,  96 

Sasctuabt,  laraentatioa  over  a  foisaken,  19 
ade^piaad,48 


Sanctuary,  a  deserted,  186 

Saints  pleading  for  God,  108 

Soomer,  the  heartless  triumph  of  tha^  68 

Self -reflection,  the  duty  of,  98 

Service,  watch-night,  nl 

Silent  sniTering,  VI 

Silence,  retirement  uidJH 

Sin  an  implacable  foe,  26 

—  the  cauae  of  suffering,  101 
»-^  conscious,  26 

— —  the  course  oL  26 
— » the  degradation  d^  184 
— » the  gallinff  tyrannr  of,  81 
— —  and  puniahment,  130 

the  terrible  havoc  of,  25 

Sodety,  a  godly  life  the  music  o(  104 
Sonow,  a  aty  in,  20 

—  the  Toioe  of,  86 

—  the  ravages  of,  76 
Spirit  of  persecution,  17 

of  enmity,  86 

Subjection,  hamiliating,  128 
Sufferer,  a  baffled,  75 
Suffering;  God  and  human,  72 
the  mystery  of,  78 

—  the  extremity  ot  112 

— ^  the  tenaion  of  prolonged,  99 
Sufferinga  of  the  world'a  Bedeemer,  80 
Sympathetic  nature,  a,  101 

TlABfl,  the  pathoa  of.  14 
Tenderness  of  God,  the,  92 
Tension  of  prolonged  suffering,  the,  99 
Temple,  the  earthly,  47 
Trouble,  a  faithful  proj^Mtin,  102 

atimeoM7 

^^nny  of  sin,  81 
— ^  of  conquest,  130 

UvFAiTHnTL  religious  leaders,  116 

YiKWS  of  a  saint  in  hia  afflictions,  84 
Voice  of  sorrow,  86 
Voiceless  woe,  60 

Wab,  the  atrocities  of,  181 
Watcher,  the  weary,  118 
Watch-night  service,  61 

the  rigour  of,  113 

Wicked,  the  tactlca  of  the,  116 

Widowhood,  14 

Woe,  voiceleaa,  60 

Woes,  a  series  of,  184 

Wonder  explained  by  greater  wonders,  108 

World's  wonderi^  a.  115 

—  treatment  of  its  suffering  Bedeemer,  09 
Worship,  perrerted,  48 

Wrath,  the  storm  of  the  Dirine,  48 
Wreck  of  religious  ordinances,  4& 
Wrong,  Gk>d  and  human,  94 

TOUN o  Uf  e,  86 

Touth  the  seaaon  of  discipline,  89 


ZioVythe 


of.  U4 


141 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEX  TO  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Awwucnom  rmrMls  our  sio,  82 

ripens  oharaotor,  78 

Qod'i  mesMDger,  94 

iJUotioiii  oTerroled,  94 
Age  dishonoured,  182 
Anger,  the  Divine,  78 

injnstioe  and.  96 

restrained,  more  terrible,  100 

AttMhment  stronger  than  death,  119 

Bad,  aToid  the  example  of  the,  24 
Bereavement  has  its  consolations,  128 
Best  always  to  do  jastlj,  106 
Bitterness  of  sin,  78 
Business  not  to  absorb  all  onr  time,  188 

—  and  religion,  138 

OHABTisiiaHT  a  proof  of  God's  tenderness,  94 
Christianity  addresses  the  despairing,  34 

relieves  the  miseries  of  great  cities,  16 

Ohnroh-going  not  the  end  of  religion,  186 

Ohnrohes,  dead  and  dyings  20 

Oitv  in  sorrow,  a,  21 

Oildes,  sin  and  danger  of  great,  27 

Compassion,  Divine^  66 

of  Jesns,  66 

for  the  needy,  128 

Conoentration  of  ix>wer  destroys,  116 
Oondnot,  loose  talk  leads  to  loose,  28 
Crying  to  Qod.  84 
Ciurse  of  sin,  the,  116 

DiiroKBB  of  sin,  78 
DarkneM  and  danger,  78 

preoedes  light,  78 

Death-bed  repentance,  99 
Decay  of  religion,  136 
Defeat,  inglorious,  84 
Defenoe,  goodness  a  nation's,  46 
Degeneration,  111 

of  oharaoter,  111 

Degradation,  113»  186 

of  sin,  78 

Dejection  and  despair,  61 
Depression,  62 

uoiastifiable,  100 

Despairing,  Christianity  addresses  the,  84 
Dignity,  true.  184 
Disappointment,  118 
Dbhonour,  the  agony  of,  186 
Distress  exhausting,  68 

the  best  work  oomes  out  oL  80 

Divine  aid  works  a  marvellous  ohaoge,  103 

—  anger,  the.  78 
^—  oompassion,  66 
faithfulness.  86 

—  Judgment  a  Painful  reality,  78 
providence,  66 

142 


Dirine  punlshflMni  offttiB,  60 

^^^  and  pewimism,  88 

— —  mpplj  in  emergraeieit  87 

Doctrine,  nlse,  67 

Drink,  moral  degradation  oi.  111 

Bmd,  a  sad,  118 

Bnmity,  how  manufaotnred,  88 

Bioape,  a  dever.  118 

Example  of  the  bad,  avoid  the,  24 

Bvil,  the  downward  career  ol^  121 

overruled,  97 

Faith  in  falsehood  disastrooa,  68 
Faithful  to  death,  108 
Faithfulness,  Divine,  86 

in  serrice,  108 

Falsehood,  68 

Famine,  the  horrors  of^  28 

the  cause  of,  131 

Fear,  the  inflaenoe  of,  66 

sUvish  and  filial,  66 

the  greatest,  66 

Fellow-siUfering  silences  oomplaini»  89 
Fickleness  a  dlMppointment,  87 

and  its  contrast,  88 

Food,  importance  o^  118 

Friends  of  youth,  wnere  ara  they?  16 

Friendship,  sarcasm  destn^ys,  60 


God  the  helper  of  the  pers6ented»  18 

—  yearning  for,  64 

the  eternity  of,  138 

— —  answers  prayer,  189 
does  hear  prayer,  100 

— »  frustrates  the  schemes  of  the  wicked,  106 
God's  anger  man's  heariest  affliction,  78 
Good  character  a  blessing.  112 

—  king  a  blessing,  119 
Goodness  a  nation's  defence,  46 
— —  of  Gk>d  experienced,  89 
Greatness,  fallen,  186 

Grief,  causes  of,  76 

excessively  indulged,  68 

— —  irksome  but  neediol,  76 

its  uses,  76 

leaves  its  mark,  102 

secret,  76 

useless  that  does  not  lead  to  help,  16 

prostrating,  68 

HAPPnnsS  depends  on  God,  80 
Heathen  worship  a  performnnce,  28 

darkness,  light  for,  28 

Help  in  extremity,  114 
Helplessness  appeals  to  our  pity.  182 
Heroie  enduranoe^  91 
Hope  presuppoees  faith,  88 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INDEl  TO  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Hope  clings  to  ns  to  the  Usi,  83 

none  but  iu  God,  56 

Horrors  of  faniioe,  28 

HomilUtion.  130 

Humility  %  help  to  knowledge,  91 

iHDiviDUALXTT,  tin  and,  27 
Industry  secnres  independenoe,  128 
Injnstioe,  suffering  preferred  to,  95 

and  ftnger.  95 

not  to  be  hastOr  resented,  108 

Intercession  irresistible,  82 

Jkhoyah  a  foe  to  all  sin,  77 
Judgment  a  smrprise,  44 

a  painf  al  reality,  78 

Just  and  the  nnjnst.  ^e,  105 
Justice  and  mercy^  37 

expedited,  96 

between  man  and  man,  105 


Labdub,  the  diimity  of,  133 
Life  dirlnely  ordered,  130 

—  the  ehsnges  of,  18 

mistaken  views  of,  ISO 

ordinances  help  religioui,  48 

wellUved,97 

Lonely,  the  AU^eeing  God  and  the,  15 

Lora  and  soirow,  21 

Lnst^  the  fascination  of,  181 

]Cauob,121 

—  reproof  of.  111 

Man  superior  to  his  surroondlngs,  20 

Man's  extremity  God's  opportunity,  114 

Meknoholy,  beware  o^  26 

Memory  and  musio,  25 

Memories,  sad,  24 

Meroeoary  religion,  188 

Merar»  Justiee  and,  37 

—  in  every  storm,  45 

Ministers  not  only  ftnger-poets  hut  guides,  21 

unqualified,  118 

Misery,  work  a  remedy  for,  21 

prolonged.  45. 

makes  indelible  impressions,  63 

of  hopelessness,  83 

Moral  sense,  lack  of.  Ill 

degradation  affects  work.  111 

Mosoow,  the  retreat  from,  84 
Mother's  prayer,  a.  63 
Murder,  penalty  of,  117 

NUKW.  a  distressed,  32 

National  decline,  tha  sadaiM  of,  128 

—  ruin,  50 
Keoessityateaeher,118 
Negleet  incurs  wrath,  44 

OpnoBSOB  a  selfish  maSt  18 

——punished,  17 

Ordinances  help  religioaa  life,  48 

FATnanm  conquers.  89 
Parting,  the  last,  U9  ,     _ 

Penitence  Invohrea  oonfeMlon  of  sin,  38 
Penitent,  miseiyci;  how  eared,  83 
Persecution,  18 

inexorable^  ^«  >^*  ^9  ^ 

defeats  itaelf.l» 

PtoMCtttad,  Godtiie  helper  of  th^  18 
Pleasure  itself  unsatisfyug^  133 
Practical  sympathy,  102 
Prayer,  64 

—  a  preparation  for  aonflict,  83 


Prayer,  a  mother's,  63 

a  mute  summons  to^  82 

an  ever-open  refuge,  108 

brings  deliTerance,  126 

God  answers,  128 

in  trouble,  125 

necessary  for  servioe,  69 

should  be  importunate,  128 

—  sorrow  drives  men  to,  63 
the  need  of,  125 

the  melody  of  misery,  138 

Priestcraft,  117 
Prophet,  a  false,  57 
Providenoe,  Divine,  86 
Punishment  and  pessimism,  33 
certain,  60 

BnBLUOir,36 

fomenting,  37 

Beoreation,  138 

Redeemer's  sufferings  unique,  the^  89 
Religion  and  Instice,  105 
Religious  declension,  136 

sham,  186 

Remorse.  34 

Repentance  and  confession,  98 

and  f or^veneesj^ 

must  be  sincere,  99 

Resignation  to  the  will  of  God,  91 
Retnbution,  38 

implacable,  49 

Ridicule,  triumph  over,  79 
Ruin  appeals  to  our  sympathy,  58 

—  and  responsibility,  55 
drifting  to,  55 

—  the  punishment  for  sin,  65 

—  unutterable,  65 

Rvla,  i^iritual  insight  into  the  Diving  98 

Bavotuabt,  a  despised,  49 
Sareasm  destroys  f rlendsh^,  59 
Batan  an  enemy,  46 
Scoffer,  nonplussed,  a,  69 
Scorn  not  to  be  dreaded,  59 
Self-sacrifice,  83 
Selfish  man,  the  oppressor  a,  18 
Sin  a  disease,  27 

a  double  effect,  28 

and  individuality,  27 

afoe,28 

— —  a  poiiwn,  24 

—  a  slavery,  33 
defies  law,  24 


— —  discovery  of,  33 
——In  man,  130 


—  stupifies,  27 

—  the  danger  of  great  dtlai,  27 

—  the  bitterness  of,  78 

—  the  course  of,  28 

—  the  dangers  of,  78 

—  the  degradation  of,  78 

—  wiU  find  you  out,  121 
Skill  acquired  in  youth,  99 
Solitude  oppressive,  62 
Sorrow,  a  great.  75 

a«ltyin,21 

-i—  does  not  regenerala,  37 

—  drlvea  man  to  prayer,  68 

—  leva  In,  21 

— ^  the  cure  of  ezcesHive,  53 
Sorrows,  whose  like  unto  mine?  38 
Soul-growth  aided  by  silence,  91 
Sovereignty,  the  Divine,  115 
Spirit  of  perseoutton  innorable,  the,  19 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TWMZ  TO  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


Storms,  tonpomj,  46 
Bnbminioii,  190 

to  Qod't  wm,  M 

Sufferer  baffled  Vj  tamptalta,  76 
Suffering  »  mjw^itjt  7S 

—  Mia  its  oompeneatloiii,  80 

perrerted  newi  of,  tOO 

promptt  to  prayer,  188 

the  nngee  fijL  01 

the  uaee  of,  21 

Snpplj  in  emergeneie^  91 
Sympathy  in  sorrow,  1ft 
— » the  power  of,  101 

—  with  yonthy  OS 

Tbamb,  the  power  of,  10 

the  relief  of,  102 

Temple  and  penrerted  worship,  49 

Terrible  destmction,  116 

Tongue,  a  maleTolent,  181 

Treachery  has  no  pity^  80 

Triomph  premfttore,  60 

— —  of«r  ridienlsu  70 

Tronbltbatimeot  18 

TVn^  false  teaching  danfanNU  whn 

TymiB J  not  permMi«n\  24 


Umuv  and  ministerial  intOeleMy,  Hi 
Unoertninty  of  royal  faTonrs,  110 
Underenrrenta  cause  wreeks^  48 

TAXtini  of  praytr,  188 

Tlotoiy,  memory  d^  *'^r''*ft  88 

Wakt  anticipated,  87 
War,  the  atrocities  of,  U2 

—  the  haToc  of.  82 
Wloked,  the  triumph  cf;  117 
WibkedncM,  181 

Wosu  the  lonelinem  o^  61 
Work  a  remedy  for  misery,  21 
Worid's  treatment,  lessons  tnm,  the,  28 
Worship,  the  ear^ly  temple  and  psrrsrtad*  # 
Wrath,  neglect  incmrs,  44 
Wrecks,  nndercnrrents  canse,  48 
Wrong,  the  beginning  of,  96 
Wrongdoing  brings  r«tifholioa»  106 

TkABHiHO  for  Qod,  64 
Toath,87 

—  a  brave,  00 

—— needs  instmetloB,  21 

skin  acquired  in,  00 

-»-  sympathy  with,  68 
t^MndioTU 


144 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX 


INDEX  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LAMENTATIONS. 

raos 
94 

Diit7- 

Of  Self  .refieotion.  The     

FAsa 

V 

98 

Oooiputtnv  mflOT   •••        •••        ••• 

Cur,  towards  the  Jewish  People ... 

31 

TheMaQof           ^        ...        ^ 

70 

EcceHomo       

7a 

Afflictions^ 

Enemies  of  the  Ohuroh,  their  Tantalis- 

Not  AooidentAl      — 

43 

ing  Indiflerenoe 

22 

Saint,  HiB  views  ia          — 
Anger— 

I>iyin€b  FieroeneM  of  the ...        .^ 

Bnmitv,  A  Spirit  of 

Bxpeotation,  AdTsntages  of  a  SUte 
of 

36 

88 

„    ,  Pitif  olneM  of  the 

100 

Faithfulness,  The  DiTine  ...        ^ 

s 

^    ,The           ...        — 

\\i 

False  Prophets ^        ^ 

Baffled,  The  Helplenly         ^        ^ 

Famine -^ 

Bereavement ^       ^ 

137 

Horrors  of  ...        m*        —        — 

113 

Business  and  Beoreetion      ^. 

'S 

131 

Call  to  Prejer,  ▲        ...        •- 

119 

Gharaoter— 

Fear,  The  Tyranny  of 

e»4 

Difine^  The          ^        .^        ^ 
Moral         ...        .M        

95 
III 

Fickleness,  Human  ^       ^       ^ 
Foe,  Jehovah  as  a       •• 

V 

Ohoioe  Portiooa         ^       

86 

Fortune- 

Ohiistianity— 

Strange  Befersos  of         ...        ••• 

14 

Addreoeet  the  Deapeiring ... 
BeUevet  the  Miaeriea  of  Great  Oitiei 

34 

Sudden  BeTerses  of,  The 

127 

15 

Friendship,  Sarcasm  Destnnni 
Friendships,  Fickleness  of  Human 

59 

Ohuroh,  DiMsters  of  the       

136 

14 

City- 

Ood— 

In  Sorrow,  A  (Antwerp)  .- 

ai 

And  Human  Suffering     

72 

Bnined,  Grief  for  a          

«3 

M         M       Wrong         

94 

Comfort  for  the  Sorrowfol    ...        ^ 

92 

Pleading   for  Saints,  and  Saints 

Compassion,  Diyine 

63,65 

Pleadfaigforaod          

«03 

Complaint  under  Afflietioo  ... 

96 

Tendemeis,  His     

92 

Conquest,  Galling  Tyranny  of 
Dangers  of  a  Sinful  life,  The         ^ 

130 
77 

Darkness,  light  for  Heathen 

28 

Ck>odness,  Three  Grades  of 

Dawn  of  Hope,  The 

80 

Grief- 

Declension,  Religiona          

135 

Bewilderment  of    - 

74 

Defeat,  Inglorious      

31 

Useless  that  Does   not  Lsad  to 

Degradation,  Moral 

Dejection  and  Despair 

no 
SI 

Active  Help       

Utter  Exhaustion  of         

IS 
53 

Despair,  Helplessness  of       

Despairing,  Christianity  Addresses  the 

32 

Happiness,  The  Loss  of      •» 

79 

Honour,  The  Loss  of  .^        

134 

Des&<^er,  The  Implacable 

48 

Hope— 

Discipline^  Touth  the  Proper  Season  of 
Disinherited,  Miseries  of  the 

89 

And  Patience        ...        ^ 

88 

ia6 

Dawn  of.  The 

80 

Distress,  Complex  Phases  of 

78 

Iiost,  Restored       ...         ..•        ... 

81 

Divine— 

Memory  the  Handmaid  of 

81 

Anger,  Fieroenefls  of  the 

43 

Indifference,    Tantalioing,    of    the 

„    .Pitilessnessofthe 

100 

Enemies  of  the  Ohuroh 

22 

^    ,The            ...        ^ 

"5 

Jehovah— 

Character,  The      

95 

As  a  Foe    ... 

76 

Compassion,  A  Prayer  for 
Taithfulness,  The 

an  Enemy        • 

Piteous  Appeal  to^  A        

44 
124 

Goodness,  The       

Joy,  Two  Kinds  of      

120 

JQstie^  A  Confident  Appeal  to  .. . 

104 

Jndah,  Punishment  of,  a  Type  of  the 

Pity,  The 

64 

Punishment  of  all  Unfaithful  Nations 

36 

Punishment          

Certain         

31,105 
60 

Judgment  of  Oppression,  The 
Justice,  Dirine^  A  Confident  Appeal 

16 

Role,  Absolute  and  UniTersal    ... 

95 

to 

104 

Slowness  to  Punish,  The 

104 

Lamentation  orer  a  Forsaken  Sanc- 

Wrath, The  Storm  of  the 1    43 

tuary       1    19 

Digitized  by  VjOOQ 

e 

146 


APPENDIX. 


LaxnentationB,  T^t  Book  of^ 

Introdaction  

Author  ...        •••        ••• 

Oontdnti         •••        •••        ••• 

Dftte — 

Vonn     ...  •••  mm*  ••• 

Xdtargioftl  XJm8  •9*  ••• 
Name  ...  •••  .^  >- 
Purport  ..•         .••         ••• 

Leaders,  Unfaithful  ReHgiooi 

Liberty,  The  Lom  of 

Life- 

Ohanget  of 

Gkxlly,  the  Mtudo  of  Sodety,  ▲  ... 

Intense  Love  of     

National,  Sztinotion  of     

Sinful,  Dangers  of  a         

Light  for  Heathen  DarkneM ... 

Love  in  Sorrow  

Malevolent,  Fate  of  the      .^ 

Man  of  Affliction,  The  

Memory- 
Handmaid  of  Hope,  The  •••        •«» 

Offioeof,  The         ...        •« 

Mercies,  Dayspring •m 

Ministers,  False,  of  Qod  •- 
Moral  Degradation  ...  .^ 
Nation— 

A  Distressed         

„         „        :  Havoc  of  War 
National  Sorrow,  An  Ideal  Repre- 
sentation  

Natnre,  A  Sympathetic        

Oppression,  Judgment  o^  The 
Oppressor  Punished,  The 
Oidinanoes— 

Help  Religious  Life  

Religious,  The  Wreck  of 

Patience  and  Hope    ...        ••.        •«• 

Penitence,  Sincere «« 

Penitent,  Misery  of  the        

People— 

Doomed,  Last  Hours  of  a 

Jewish,  Our  Duty  towards  the   ... 

Persecution 

Pity,  Divine     

Portions,  Ghoioe        

Prayer- 
Call  to^  A  ^ 

Earnest,  for  Rettoration 

Efficacy  of - 

For  Divine  Oompasdon 

„    Repentance,  A  

Hopefulness  of       

Property        

Prophet^Faithfol,inTrouhls^A,Jeremiah 

Prophets,  False         

Punishment •• 

Certainty  o^  The 

Divine        ••        •< 

Graduated 

Sin  and       • 

Bebellion       ». 

Bitter  Fruits,  Its 

Recreation,  Business  and    ... 
Bedeemer,TheSufferingsof  the  World's 
Beligioos— 

D  -clension 

Oniinances,  The  Wreck  of 

Remorse         • 

Bepentance 


PAGE 
I 

4 

2 

6 
I 

8 

I 

7 

"5 

lay 

i8 
104 
129 
133 

28 

21 

119 

70 

81 
81 

no 

39 
3a 

66 

lOI 

16 
17 


36 
31 

117 
18,19 


60 

137 
loa 

.§ 

"5 

lay 
102 

56 
120 

77 
105 
"3 

35 
132 

30 

13s 

47 
34 
oy 


Bepentance,  Prayer  for      

Resignation 

to  the  WiU  of  Ood     ..« 
Restoration,  Earnest  Prayer  for,  An 

Retribution 

Ridicule  

Royalty         ...       ^       

Inexpressible         

National,  Complete  

Rule,  Divine,  Absolute  and  UniTersal 

Saint  in  his  Afflictions,  The  Views  of  a 

Saints   Pleading  for  God,  and  God 
Pleading  for  Saints       

Sanctuary- 
Deserted,  A  

Despised,  A  

Forsaken,  Lamentation  over  a     ... 

Sarcasm  Destroys  Friendship 

Scomer,  Heartless  Triumph  of  the,The 

Self-reflection,  Duty  of 

Self. sacrifice 

Service,  Watch-night ...        •» 

Silence  and  Retirement        

Sin— 

And  Punishment  ...        ••• 
Degradation  of       ...         ...        *- 

Galling  Tyranny  of 
National,  Its  Punishment^ 

Terrible  Havoc  of 

The  Cause  of  Suffering     

Slowness,  Divine,  to  Punish,  The  ... 

Society,  Godly  Life  the  Music  of,  A 

Sorrow- 
Cure  for  Excessive  

yational.  An  Ideal  Representation  of 
Ravages  of,  The     

Subjection,  Humiliating       •« 

Sufferer,  A  Baffled     

Suffering— • 

Extremity  of.  The  •*•        ••• 

Human,  Gk>d  and 

Mystery  of  ...         ...        •••        ... 

Silent  

Tension  of  Prolonged,  The 

Sufferingsof  theWorld'sRedeemer,The 

Tears,  ifie  Power  of 

Temple,  The  Earthly 

Tenderness  of  God,  The      

War— 

Atrooitiee  of  •••        mm        — 

Rigour  of.  The       ...         «.        ••• 

Watch-niffht  Servioe  — 

Watcher,  Weary,  Hie  •••        .^ 

Wicked,  Tactics  of  the  

Widowhood •» 

Woe,  A  YoicelesB        

Woes,  A  Series  of        

Wonder  Explained  by  Greater  Won- 
ders, A  (iii.  57) 

World's  Wonder,  A 

Worship,  Perverted 

Wrong,  Human,  God  and      

Youth- 
Needs  Instruction, 

The  Proper  Season  of  Discipline  ... 

Zion— 

Calamitins  and  Prayer,  Recapitula- 
tion of  its  ... 

Destruction  of        

Its  Pitiful  E6«^^<ite 


rAes 
138 

9* 

38»50 


84 
103 

4^49 
19 

59 

55 
98 

if 

91 

130 

134 

31 

39 
25 

lOI 

104 
105 


75 

iia 
72 
73 
91 
99 

fe 

47 
9a 

131 

61 

118 

116 

14 

50 

134 

103 

'il 

94 

ai 

«9 


122 

"4 
107 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC     COMMENTARY 


ON  THE  BOOK  OP  THE  PROPHBT 


E  Z  E  K  I  E  L. 


CHAPTERS   I.— XI. 
By  the  REV.  D.  G.   WATT,  M.A. 

OHAPTEES   XII.— XXIX. 
By  the  MEV.  T.  H.  LEALR 

CHAPTERS   XXX.— XLVIIL 
By  the  REV.  GEO.  BARLOW. 


FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY 

LoraX>N  &  TOEOHTO 

189a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PREFACE. 


Tms  Gommentaiy  is  the  work  of  three  different  Mithon.  The  portion  ohtpteri 
L-ZL  is  written  by  the  Bev.  D.  O.  Watt,  M.A.;  xil-xziz.  by  the  Bev.  T.  H. 
LiALK;  zzx-xlTiii  by  the  Bev.  G.  Bablow. 

The  ExegeUcdl  Notes  contain,  in  a  oondensed  form,  the  results  of  reoent 
Biblical  eritidsm,  and  will  be  found  a  valuable  help  in  the  interpretation  of  the 
text  and  in  furnishing  facts  of  contemporaneous  history  to  elucidate  the  pro- 
phecies. The  Vision  of  the  Temple  (chapters  xL-xlTiiL)  is  treated  in  its  ideal 
aspect^  and,  yiewed  in  this  lights  it  becomes  full  of  suggestiyeness  to  the 
practised  homilete. 

Every  available  work  on  this  confessedly  difficult  book  has  been  diligently 
consulted,  and  the  choicest  and  most  helpful  passages  of  the  best  authors  are 
condensed  in  the  body  of  this  Oommentary.  Of  the  S90  Hamiletic  OuUima  all 
an  original,  except  those  which  bear  the  names  of  their  respective  authors. 

Among  other  works,  the  following  writers  on  the  Prophecies  of  Esekiel 
have  been  carefully  scanned : — ^W.  Oreenhill,  &  Henderson,  Patrick  Fairbaim, 
Hengstenbeig^  Keil,  IfFarlan,  Archbishop  Newcombe^  Bishop  Horsley,  Dean 
Stanley,  Eitto,  Dr.  Fraser^s  ''Synoptical  Lectures,**  Qeikie*s  <* Hours  with  the 
KUe,**  Pool's  *<  Annotations,**  Lightfoot  on  *<The  Temple^**  F.  D.  Maurice's 
*' Prophets  and  Kings,**  Guthrie*s  ''Gh)spel  in  Esekiel,**  and  the  following  Oom- 
mentaries— The  Speaker's,  Lange's,  A*  Clarke's,  Benson's,  Sutcliffe's,  Matthew 
Henry's,  Trapp's,  and  Fausset's. 

Amid  the  wealth  of  imagery  in  the  use  of  which  Eiekiel  is  so  lavish,  and 
the  dry  facts  of  history,  the  aim  throughout  has  been  to  detect  and  develop  the 
great  moral  truths  of  which  the  thoughtful  sermonisar  is  in  constant  search  is 
his  anxious  study  of  the  Word  of  God. 

a& 

SuMfff IMLP^  Amgiid  189a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO   COMMENTARY 


OV  THB 


BOOK  OF  EZEKIEL 


INTRODUCTION. 

No  prophetical  book  Bets  the  writer,  the  dates,  the  places  of  its  contents  so 
distinctly  forth  as  that  of  Ezekiel  does.  It  is  not  only  a  record  of  what  the 
Lord  spoke  by  His  prophet,  it  is  also  a  record  of  personal  experiences  during 
the  period  in  which  he  was  an  organ  for  special  divine  impulses.  The  one  is 
as  instructiye  as  the  other. 

The  book  shows  that  Esekiel  was  the  child  of  a  priestly  family,  and  had 
been  taken  into  captivity  when  the  king  of  Babylon  carried  away  the  wealth, 
the  strength,  the  skilled  industry  of  Jerusalem.  No  direct  information  is  com- 
municated as  to  his  life  before  the  captivity,  or  as  to  the  first  five  years  of  his 
enforced  exile.  We  cannot  say  that  he  had  ever  ofBciated  as  a  priest  in  the 
Temple  of  Jerusalem,  though  his  movements  show  apparent  familiarity  with 
its  compartments  (chap.  viii).  He  was  one  of  a  colony  of  his  fellow-exiles  who 
had  been  settled — why,  he  does  not  say — by  the  Ghebar,  somewhere  among 
**  the  rivers  of  Babylon,**  and  had  established  a  characteristic  organisation  for 
themselves.  "  The  elders  '*  once  and  again  took  counsel  with  Ezekiel  in  his 
own  house;  for  he  was  a  householder  and  married  to  a  woman  whom  he 
warmly  loved.  He  starts  his  narration  from  the  fifth  day  of  the  fourth  month 
of  the  fifth  year,  when  the  distinguished  episode  in  his  life,  by  which  he  became 
known,  was  commenced  with  his  first  vision  of  God. 

That  revelation  affected  his  constitution  in  a  remarkable  manner.  Mental 
conditions,  of  course,  would  be  altered  thereby;  but  bodily  affections  were 
still  more  palpably  influenced.  The  sensation  of  eating  the  roll  of  writing,  of 
being  lifted  up  and  carried  away,  of  the  strong  hand  of  the  Lord  laid  upon  him ; 
the  sitting  **  astonished  '* — stunned — seven  days,  the  lengthened  duress,  the  loss 
of  power  of  speech,  except  when  authorised  by  the  Lord  to  utter  His  messages, 
and  other  physical  phenomena,  betoken  at  once  the  action  of  Gk>d  and  of  a 
disorder  in  Ezekiel's  health.  Perhaps  his  nervous  system  was  one  of  that  highly 
sensitive  kind  whose  conditions  under  excitement  cannot  be  foreseen ;  and 
that  it  should  have  been  upset  could  not  be  regarded  as  an  unlikely  thing; 
God's  instruments  are  not  always  such  as  man  would  employ.  He  chose,  for 
an  apostle,  Paul,  whose  '*  bodily  presence  was  weak ;"  is  it  impossible  that  He 
would  choose,  for  a  prophet,  a  man  of  a  peculiarly  nervous  temperament  t    If 

A  1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


the  ''  abandance  of  revelations ''  given  to  the  former  a£fected  his  bodily  frame, 
why  should  similar  revelations  not  have  affected  Ezeldel's  physical  eonttitation  t 

The  symptoms  did  not  disappear  at  once.  Though  he  had  recovered  the 
power  of  walking  (zii  3-7),  yet  the  statement  that  the  elders  were  accustomed 
to  go  to  his  house  to  hear  his  words  (viiL  1,  ziv.  1,  zx.  1),  indicates  that  weak- 
ness and  physical  disability  clung  to  him  for  a  considerable  time— perhaps  to 
the  tenth  month  of  the  ninth  year  (zxiv.  1).  At  that  date  he  was  confronted 
with  something  more  than  physical  ailment  He  endured  the  chastisement 
whereof  all  sous  are  partakers,  and  learned  how  ''  deep  calleth  unto  deep  **  as 
they  cross  the  sea  of  life.  The  wife  whom  his  eyes  liked  to  rest  upon  was 
cast  down  at  his  side  by  a  sudden  stroke.  No  open  ciy  of  anguish  broke 
from  his  lips.  Every  sign  of  sorrow  and  mourning  was  sternly  repressed;  yet 
the  pathetic  reference  to  what  she  had  been  to  him  suffices  to  prove  how 
hard  it  must  have  been  to  say  *^  Thy  will  be  done." 

(Jnder  the  dark  shadow  of  this  sad  event  his  last  prophecy  concerning  the 
state  of  undestroyed  Jerusalem  was  uttered.  Then  for  about  three  years  he 
remained  dumb,  as  if  his  bereavement  had  aggravated  his  previous  disordered 
bodily  symptoms.  Only  when  the  first  part  of  his  commission  was  fulfilled, 
when  his  position,  as  the  sign  of  troubles  impending  over  the  Holy  City,  was 
no  longer  tenable,  the  turning-point  of  his  affliction  was  reached.  The  news  of 
the  capture  of  Jerusalem  became  the  signal  for  recovery  of  the  free  use  of  his 
organs  of  speech  (zxziii.  22),  and  no  mention  is  made  of  any  bodily  infirmities 
Avhen  executing  the  second  part  of  his  commission.  Thus  he  passes  from  view. 
Like  Moses,  like  prophets  and  apostles,  *^  he  was  buried,  and  no  man  knoweth 
of  his  sepulchre  unto  this  day."  Is  this  significant  of  a  principle  of  the  divine 
government,  intimating  that  true  conduct  not  outward  appearances,  that  life 
not  death,  are  to  be  perpetuated  in  the  thoughts  of  men  t 

Ezekiel  was  profoundly  conscious  of  the  dates  when  he  spoke  by  the  Spirit, 
and  might  be  said  to  keep  a  journal  of  them.  For  him  ''  inspiration  "  was  not 
merely  an  ecstasy  of  his  own. mind.  From  the  fifth  to  the  twenty-seventh  year 
of  his  residence  in  Chaldea  he  knew  that  he  was  an  organ  which  the  Lord  used 
to  sound  forth  the  notes  of  judgment  and  mercy* 

The  sphere  of  his  prophetic  activity  was  not  only  the  captives,  but  also  the 
Jews  still  remaining  in  Judea.  Between  the  two  portions  there  was  no  cor- 
diality, and  we  might  fancy  that  the  property  of  the  exiles  had  been  some- 
what dishonestly  or  forcibly  appropriated  by  the  others  (xL  15).  The  task  of 
Ezekiel  was  hard.  He  saw  that  both  divisions  were  oppressed  and  depressed, 
and  open  to  the  glitter  of  flattering  prospects  presented  by  unworthy  men. 
He  had  to  dispel  vivid  illusions,  to  expose  clamant  evils,  to  render  patient 
under  the  hard  facts  of  punishment,  to  urge  unpalatable  truths  which  were  no 
more  agreeable  to  them  than  to  other  people.  More  than  other  prophets  he 
was  ordered  to  watch  for  souls ;  more  than  to  others  the  modelling  of  the  future 
Israel  was  intrusted  to  him.  The  last  fortress  of  Judaism  as  it  had  been  is  to 
be  trodden  under  the  feet  of  the  heathen,  but  out  of  its  ruins  anew  one  is  to  be 
raised,  and  he  has  to  make  a  sketch  of  it.  More  magnificent  and  moving  symbols 
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  than  had  been  given  in  the  Temple  of  Jerusalem  came 
to  the  exile  by  the  Chebar,  and  testified  that  He  could  preserve  there  a  people 
for  Himsell     His  gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance,  yet  he  means  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETia  COMMENT AXT:  EZEKIEL. 


bring  the  people  to  perceive  their  unfaithfulness,  that  ^thej  had  to  do  with  the 
living  Qod,  that  the  eternal  holiness  is  unchangeable,  and  that  each  soul  is 
responsible  for  its  own  sins.  Buried  seed  does  not  rot  though  ungenial  weather 
may  prevent  it  sprouting  for  many  a  day,  and  out  of  this  period  of  banishment 
were  to  spring  forces  for  the  creation  of  a  new  Judaism  to  which  idols  and  idol- 
worship  would  be  altogether  abhorrent  A  new  theocracy  would  be  constituted, 
and  Ezekiel  is  the  pioneer  of  this  new  phase  of  divine  education.  He  ''  was  to 
point  to  an  inauguration  of  divine,  worship  £bu'  more  solemn  than  was  to  be 
secured  by  the  reconstruction  of  the  city  or  Temple  on  its  original  site  in  its 
original  form ;  to  point,  in  fact,  to  that  dispensation  which  Temple,  city,  and 
nation  were  intended  to  foreshadow  and  introduce  "  {Speaker's  dm,).  Thus  was 
he  given  one  of  the  highest  places  among  the  men  of  the  Old  Testament.  It  is 
not  absurd  to  make  a  comparison  between  Moses  and  this  prophets  Moses  had 
visions  of  God  and  instructed  the  tribes  of  Israel  to  build  a  sanctuary  according 
to  the  pattern  shown  to  him ;  he  gave  details  of  the  services  to  be  rendered 
therein ;  he  set  before  the  congregation  life  and  death ;  <*  he  heard  the  voice  of 
One  speaking  unto  him  from  off  the  mercy-seat,  .  .  .  from  between  the  two 
cherubims."  Did  not  Ezekiel  hear  a  voice  from  above  the  cherubim  %  Did  he 
not  stand  between  the  people  and  the  Lord  ?  Did  he  not  prepare  them  to 
sanctify  God,  and  so  to  be  fitted  for  the  future  position  they  were  to  occupy  in 
their  own  land  and  before  all  nations!  Did  he  not  appear  like  a  lawgiver, 
who,  in  chaps.  xL-zlviii.,  was  authorised  to  prescribe  Temple  and  worship  for 
future  times,  and  so  place  the  crown  upon  his  prophetic  service) 

The  manner  in  which  he  carried  out  his  service  is  instmctive  and  stimulating 
All  his  faculties  are  put  at  the  call  of  the  Lord'^his  eyes,  ears,  feet,  tongue.  He 
sets  forth  plainly  and  amply  that  which  he  has  been  inspired  to  do  and  teach* 
He  goes  on  to  the  appointed  duty,  unheeding  what  its  consequences  to  himself 
may  be.  He  will  bear  any  burden,  expose  himself  to  any  risks,  confront  any  fear 
or  the  dislike  and  hatred  of  his  own  people,  if  thus  he  may  promote  their  welfare 
or  be  exculpated  from  their  woe.  If  his  forehead  is  ''  as  an  adamant,  harder 
than  flint,"  it  is  not  from  indifference  to  the  moral  conduct  and  disastrous  fate 
of  his  countrymen,  it  is  from  a  burning  wish  that  the  divine  word  should  find  a 
faithful  and  adequate  representation  (iii  9,  10).  He  is  *'  a  spiritual  Samson,** 
^  of  undaunted  and  audacious  courage,''  one  of 

**  The  dead,  bat  sceptered  80T«reigii%  who  still  role 
Onr  spiriU  from  their  nms." 

There  is  another  side  of  his  service.  He  is  the  most  practical  of  prophets ; 
he  can  cook,  draw,  dig,  calculate,  and'  measure.  He  is  not  a  recluse ;  he  sits 
among  his  captive  countrymen  for  days  and  freely  receives  them  into  his 
house.  He  is  informed  as  to  the  history  and  state  of  his  own  nation,  and 
as  to  the  religions,  the  politics,  the  trade  of  other  nations  toa  Had  he 
watched  the  sea  and  its  sailors ;  looked  upon  the  many  articles  of  commerce 
that  were  found  in  the  busy  marts  of  ancient  Tyre  t  Each  of  his  features 
assures  us  that  he  was  fitted  to  point  the  way  into  a  new  position  in  which 
men  should  be  required  to  reconsider  and  rearrange  the  practice  of  their 
forefathers. 

The  s^le  of  Ezekiel  is  dev  enough  on  the  whole.    At  times  "  a  sublimity, 

3 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIBL. 


tenderness,  beauty,  melody  wholly  his  own"  distinguish  it.  ^'Stranga  com- 
binations and  grotesque  forms  are  resorted  to,  when  by  means  of  them  he  can 
add  to  the  graphic  power  and  moral  force  of  his  delineations,  and  invest  his 
imagery  with  such  specific  and  minute  details  as  are  naturally  connected  with 
a  felt  and  present  reality''  {Fcwrhaim).  The  stir  and  pomp  of  Babylonian  life 
are  within  his  scope,  and  some  of  its  colossal  symbolic  figures,  which  have  been 
unearthed  to  the  wonder  of  our  generation,  show  how  his  thoughts  had  been 
coloured  His  parables,  proverbs,  pictures  are  all  used  to  present  and  impress 
the  truths  he  had  to  deliver,  and  in  this  view  he  freely  repeats  himself,  so  as  to 
produce  sometimes  the  feeling  that  he  is  too  prolix.  (Gomp.  chap.  i.  with 
viii-xL ;  iii  16-21  with  zzziii.  1-9 ;  vL  with  xzxvl ;  xvi.  with  xxii.  and  xxiii. ; 
xviii.  with  zzxiil  10-20.)  He  has  favourite  and  peculiar  expressions :  "  The 
word  of  the  Lord  came,"  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me,"  "  Thou  son 
of  man,"  ^'  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Ood ; "  and  a  tendency  to  sum  up  with,  <<  So  shall 
ye,  or  they,  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  Lidividuality  and  unity  mark  his 
whole  work,  and  help  us  to  perceive  what  he  was  whom  the  Lord  moulded  into 
a  vessel  fit  for  that  juncture  of  affairs  in  which  he  lived  and  acted  as  a 
spiritual  force. 

A  considerable  likeness  of  phraseology  is  to  be  noticed  between  Ezekiel  and 
Jeremiah,  and  is  an  Indication,  not  that  one  borrowed  from  the  other,  but  that 
a  similar  mission  had  made  for  itself  a  similar  verbal  garment.  A  much  more 
remarkable  parallelism,  however,  is  found  between  Lev.  xvii-zxvi  and  the 
early  portion  of  EzekiePs  prophecies.  To  account  for  this  by  saying  that 
Ezekiel  wrote  both,  or  that  some  scamp  interpolated  Ezekiel's  words  into  the 
book  of  the  law  in  order  to  give  the  former  or  the  latter  a  factitious  authority, 
is  an  explanation  quite  worthy  of  those  who  can  tell  to  a  line  what  Isaiah 
wrote  or  did  not  write ;  or  who  can  clear  out  of  the  Four  Gospels  the  many 
words  which  Jesus  of  Nasareth  did  not  speak,  and  actions  which  He  did  not 
do !  I  have  no  skill  for  such  legerdemain*  I  can  do  no  more  than  suppose 
that  Ezekiel  had  so  closely  studied  the  condition  of  affairs  described  in  Leviticus 
that  he,  perhaps  unconsciously,  adopted  its  expressions  in  reference  to  a  rebel- 
lious  and  gainsaying  people. 

Scanty  justice  has  been  meted  out  to  Ezekiel  and  his  work.  Not  only  was 
he  treated  harshly  at  the  outset  of  his  prophesying,  but  the  Jews  of  later  times, 
we  are  told,  at  the  last  revision  of  the  Hebrew  canon,  disputed  as  to  whether 
the  Book  of  Ezekiel  should  be  included  therein,  and  in  after-days  forbad  that 
it  should  be  read  until  thirty  years  of  age  had  been  passed.  If  it  has  not  fared 
quite  so  badly  among  Christians,  yet  Jerome,  1500  years  ago,  applied  epithets 
to  it  which  are  re-echoed  by  unnumbered  comiQentators,  and  do  not  encourage 
its  study — Scripiwarum  oceantu  ei  mysteriorvm  Dei  labyrirUhus,  A  certain  class 
of  moderns  are  still  less  respectful,  and  therefore  less  likely  than  Jerome  to 
find  the  spiritual  power  of  the  prophet.  Preachers  of  our  day  say  that  they 
have  never  taken  a  text  out  of  it,  or  but  three  or  four  times  during  the  course 
of  a  lengthened  ministry.  Reuss  suggests,  as  a  ground  for  this  neglect,  that 
**  Christian  commentators  have  found  less  in  him  than  in  others  of  what  they 
sought  for,  viz.,  Hebrew  texts,  direct  relations,  true  or  pretended,  with  the 
facts  and  ideas  of  the  gospel"  Still  there  are  testimonies  of  another  kind. 
Hengstenberg  writes,  "  Whoever  penetrates  into  Ezekiel  will  be  deeply  stirred 
4 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL. 


hj  his  earnestness,  and  ...  if  it  please  Gk)(l  to  bring  great  sifting  judgmentf 
upon  us,  to  pull  down  what  He  has  built  up,  and  to  root  out  what  He  has 
planted,  we  may  gain  from  him  an  immovable  confidence  in  the  final  victory 
of  the  kingdom  of  Gk>d,  who  kills  and  makes  alive,  who  wounds  and  heals,  and 
who,  after  He  has  sent  the  darkest  cloud,  at  length  remembers  His  covenant 
and  displays  His  shining  bow.''  ''  What  things  were  written  aforetime  were 
written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through  comfort  and  patience  of  the  Scriptures 
might  have  hopet" 

The  book  is  divided  into  two  halves,  which  have  striking  parallelisms  ¥dtb 
one  another.  In  the  first  the  carnal  confidence  of  Israel  in  Jerusalem  is  buried, 
in  the  second  a  new  Temple  is  built  up.  The  first  part  embraces  chaps,  i-zziv., 
and  treats  of  the  obstinate  wickedness  of  the  people  and  the  approaching 
overthrow  of  Jerusalem.  The  second  part  embraces  chaps,  zzxiii.-xlviii,  and 
treats  of  the  new  life  to  the  people  and  the  future  modified  Temple  and  its 
worship.  Between  these  two  parts  stand  chaps,  zxv.-zzxii,  which  treat  of 
seven  neighbouring  heathen  peoples.  They  are  warned  of  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  God  against  them,  and  their  number,  seven,  probably  conveys  the 
intimation  that  the  principles  applied  to  them  are  applicable  to  all  the  ungodly 
nations. 


THE  PROPHECIES   OF  EZEKIEL. 


FIRST  MAIN  DIVISION. 

Chapters  I.-XXIV. 

I— THE  DIVINE  CALL  OF  EZEKIEL.    Chaps  L-IIL  16. 


1.  The  Debicq^ation  of  the  Prophet  to  his  Work  (Chap.  i.  1-8). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1.  the  father  of  Nebuchadnezzar  as  the 
^'Now/'  the  usual  Hebrew  connective  commencement  of  the  Chaldean  domi- 
partide,  united  to  a  tense  which  signi-  nion,  or  from  the  birth  of  the  prophet — 
fies  an  action  associated  with  something  such  are  the  suggestions  made  by  various 
which  has  ah-eady  transpired.  It  seems  expositors.  The  first  and  the  kst  are 
to  have  place  here,  neither  because  the  the  most  improbable ;  still,  it  would  be 
Book  of  Ezekiel  is  a  continuation  of  that  misapplied  labour  to  discuss  whether  the 
of  Jeremiah,  nor  because  a  preceding  third  or  the  fourth  is  the  more  likely, 
portion  of  EzekieFs  prophecies  has  been  There  is  no  part  of  the  prophecies  de- 
lost,  but  rather  because  of  thoughts  pending  for  illustration  upon  a  settle- 
which  were  in  the  mind  of  the  writer,  ment  of  the  point  from  which  Ezekiel 
and  in  succession  to  which  his  call  came,  reckons.  No  doubt  it  had  some  bearing 
''In  the  thirtieth  year.''  No  note  is  upon  him  and  his  contemporaries;  it 
given  to  define  the  point  from  which  seems  to  have  none  upon  us.  ''In 
this  date  takes  its  origin.  It  was  the  the  fonrth" — month  is  omitted  in  the 
thirtieth  from  the  last  jubilee  year,  or  Hebrew,  as  frequently  with  Eaekiel. 
from  the  finding  of  the  Book  of  the  The  fourth  month  of  the  ecclesiastical 
Law  in  { lie  reign  of  King  Josiah  (2  year  corresponds  to  our  June-July,  when 
Kings  xxii  8)^  or  from  the  era  fixed  by  nature  is  prolific  with  storms,     "  In  the 

6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CEAP.  I. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL, 


fifth  day  of  tho  month" — was  this  a 
Sabbath  f  So  it  has  been  affirmed  be- 
cause seven  days  after  he  received  a  far- 
tlier  commission  (iii.  16).  This  is  too 
precarions  a  footing  from  which  to  trace 
a  parallel  to  the  case  of  the  banished 
John  (Rev.  i.  10).  "  Aa  I  was  among 
the  captives  " — ^literally,  "  and  I  in  the 
midst  of  the  captivity,*^  He  has  not  yet 
mentioned  who  he  is,  so  by  this  silence 
he  calls  special  attention  to  his  en- 
vironment. He  sets  forth  that  he  was 
amongst,  and  was  one  of  those  Jews 
who  had  been  earried  away  from  their 
ancestral  land,  and  subjected  to  the 
shame  and  pain  of  captivity.  He  was  a 
troubled  man  along  with  other  troubled 
m3n.  Not  that  he  was  under  enforced 
servile  labour,  as  the  Israelites  were  in 
Egypt,  ''  the  house  of  bondage  ; "  he 
had  a  considerable  amount  af  personal 
liberty;  but  he  was  far  from  the  land 
of  promise,  and  oppres-sed  with  a  sense 
of  his  exile.  ''  By  the  river  of  Ohebar. " 
It  is  not  at  all  certain  to-day  where  thi« 
river  was.  It  is  not  necessary  to  sup 
pose  that  Esekiel  was  beside  it,  because 
the  murmur  of  the  water  might  dispose 
to  quietude,  and  prepare  his  mind  for 
openness  to  Qod.  Something  less  senti- 
mental than  that  took  him  thither.  He 
had  been  located  in  the  district,  through 
which  the  water  flowed,  by  the  para- 
mount power  as  a  district  wbich  could 
be  easily  superintended,  and  in  which 
there  was  need  of  population.  Such 
wars  as  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  on,  like 
the  wars  which  modem  Turks  have 
waged,  could  not  but  have  been  the 
occasion  for  large  parts  of  his  dominions 
to  fall  out  of  cultivation.  It  would  be 
politic  to  settle  an  industrial  people  like 
the  Jews  in  such  places,  and  grant  them 
full  permission  ''to  build  houses  and 
dwell  in  them,  and  plant  gardens,  and 
eat  the  fruit  of  them."  Abundance  of 
water  was  needed  for  such  operations. 
So  the  captive  Jews  were  by  a  river. 
All  was  not  pleasant  there.  Just  as  the 
later  Jews  were  confined  to  the  slums 
of  Rome  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Tiber, 
and  satirised  as  Transtiberini^  so  was 
scorn  heaped  upon  the  earlier  captives 
by  "  the  rivers  of  Babylon."  There  they 
were  teiised  and    tormented.      ''They 


that  carried  us  away  captive  required  of 
us  a  song,  saying.  Sing  us  one  of  the 
songs  of  Zioa"  A  somewhat  truculent 
temper  was  engendered ;  but  .God  did 
not  forsake  them,  and  even  there  did 
exceeding  abundantly  above  what  they 
thought.  "  The  heavens  were  opened.'' 
The  exile  perceived  the  sky  cleft  open. 
Perhaps  it  was  not  materially  so,  but 
only  to  the  eye  of  faith.  Tet  as  he 
speaks  of  it  as  an  actual  fact,  it  is  pre- 
ferable to  consider  the  appearance  to 
have  been  shown  to  "  eyes  open,''  as  was 
that  to  John  the  Baptist,  to  Stephen,  to 
Peter.  "  I  saw  visions  of  God  "—phe- 
nomena produce  1  by  Qod  and  relating 
to  His  Godhead;  He  was  at  once  the 
author  and  the  object  of  them.  They 
were  somewhat  differently  presented 
from  those  which  Ezekiel  received  after- 
wards, which  were  "  in  visions  "  (chapa 
viii.  3,  xi.  24,  xl.  2). 

Ver.  2.  "The  fifth  year  of  King 
Jehoiachin's  captivity.''  Jehoiachin 
had  been  placed  on  the  throne  of  Judea 
b  Nebuchadnezzar ;  but,  following  ad- 
vice from  the  partisans  of  an  Egyptian 
alliance,  and  in  defiance  of  the  protesta- 
tions and  threaten  ings  of  Jeremiah,  he 
had  pursued  a  procedure  at  variance 
with  the  interests  of  the  Babylonian 
empire.  Nebuchadnezzar  soon  trampled 
down  the  feeble  revolt,  and,  in  little 
more  than  three  months  of  kingship, 
Jehoiachin  was  made  captive  and  carried 
away  to  Babylon  with  the  prophetic  de 
nunciation  ringing  in  his  ears  that  he 
would  "  die  childless  " — the  last  of  the 
line  of  David  which  was  traced  through 
Solomon.  His  captivity  was  rigorous 
for  years.  He  was  kept  in  confinement 
and  clothed  in  prison  garments,  and  that, 
with  their  own  troubles,  must  have  made 
the  thousands  of  Jews  who  had  been 
transported  with  him  to  regard  the  date 
of  their  exile  as  deeply  significant  So 
Ezekiel  says  to  them — ^his  contemporaries 
and  hearers — that  four  years  of  their 
captivity  had  gone  by,  and  then  he  was 
made  cognisant  of  manifestations  of  Qod. 
This  mode  of  dating  he  adheres  to  in  his 
succeeding  prophecies,  never  again  refer- 
ring to  the  thirtieth  year  of  verse  1. 

Ver.  3.  "  Tho  word  of  the  Lord." 
Appearances  were  fortified,  as  so  often 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OHAP.L 


in  Ood's  revelations,  by  words  heard. 
*'  Oaxne  expressly.''  Ezekiel  uses  here 
a  form  of  Hebrew  emphasis,  t.^.,  repeat- 
ing the  same  verb.  Such  a  repetition, 
in  this  connection,  can  scarcely  mean 
that  the  word  came  directly  to  him,  but 
rather  that  it  was  certainly,  verily, 
really  a  divine  word  which  in  "  coming 
came  to  him."  It  needed  a  special 
attestation,  and  that  was  given  to  it. 
The  same  authenticating  feature  is  ex- 
hibited in  the  frequent  reiterations  and 
assertions  by  Ezekiel  that  he  was  acting 
under  divine  impulse  and  autliority. 
'<  Ezekiel  the  priest,  the  son  of  BuzL" 
The  order  in  the  Hebrew,  is,  **  Ezekiel, 
the  son  of  Buzi  the  priest."  Of  course 
Ezekiel  was  a  priest  by  descent;  but 
this  order  of  the  Hebrew  may  be  in- 
tended to  signify  that,  being  in  captivity, 
he  had  never  fulfilled  any  specific  prie>ily 
functions.  His  name,  as  usual  among 
the  Jews,  has  a  meaning,  and  is  to  be 
translated  either  "Qod  is  strong,"  or 
**  God  will  strengthen."  Heng.stenberg 
decides  for  the  former,  and  says  it  is  to 
be  explained  that  **  Ezekiel  was  he  in 
relation  to  whom  God  is  strong."  Baum- 
garten  chooses  the  latter,  and  says  it 
signifies  '*  he  whose  character  is  a  special 
confirmation  of  the  strength  of  God." 
The  idea  insisted  on  by  Hengstenberg, 
following  an  older  commentator,  that  it 


''  is  not  a  name  he  had  borne  from  his 
youth,  but  an  official  name  which  he  had 
assumed  at  the  beginning  of  his  calling," 
appears  to  be  groundless.  It  is  true  of 
all  the  prophets,  both  that  God  is  strong 
to  fulfil  His  purpose,  and  that  He  will 
give  strength  to  His  servants  for  that 
part  of  His  work  which  He  has  assigned 
them.  "  In  the  land  of  the  Ohaldeans." 
This  topographical  addition  seems  to  be 
intended  for  a  further  attestation  that  it 
was  the  word  of  the  Lord  which  really 
came  to  EzekieL  The  Chaldee  version 
interpolates  thus,  "  In  the  land  [of  Israel, 
and  again  a  second  time  He  spake  to 
him  in  the  land]  of  the  Chaldeans."  It 
is  believed  that  '*  the  Jews  had  a  notion 
that  the  Shechinah  could  not  overshadow 
a  prophet  out  ojthe  Holy  Land."  Per- 
haps a  strain  of  this  notion  is  to  be 
heard  in  the  wail  of  the  captives  "by 
the  rivers  of  Babylon  "  when  they  ask, 
"  How  can  we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a 
strange  land  ? "  The  notion  was  to  be 
eradicated.  God  could  endue  a  man 
with  prophetic  power  even  in  Chaldea, 
and  that  is  further  witnessed  to  by  the 
words  *'was  t/tere  upon  him,**  "The 
hand  of  the  Lord  "  is  a  frequent  Scrip- 
tural expression,  and  indicates  that  the 
thing  which  was  to  be  done  was  done 
in  submission  to  the  restraining  or  the 
impelling  energy  of  the  Lord. 


HOMILETICS. 


(L)  General  Conditions  of  the  Designation. 

I.  The  time  to  receive  ftiller  knowledge  of  the  Lord  is  uncertain.    Who 

can  tell  why  the  call  to  Ezekiel  came  in  the  fifth  year,  and  not  in  the  first,  second, 
he,  f  The  pain  and  pressure  of  exile  galled,  no  doubt,  as  deeply  in  the  earlier  years 
as  in  the  later,  yet  Ezekiel  had  not  seen  "  the  heavens  opened."  What  is  uncertain 
to  men  is  fixed  with  God,  He  is  "  the  only  wise  God."  He  sees  the  end  from 
the  beginning  of  all  lives.  He  alone  knows  where  it  is  best  to  lead  "  the  brook " 
across  the  way  of  His  people,  by  drinking  of  which  they  "will  lift  up  their  heada" 
Though  uncertain,  men  are  not  to  be  unconcerned.  Having  no  criterion  as  to  the 
appropriate  time  for  special  unfolding  of  the  will  of  God,  that  does  not  sanction  an 
utter  indifference  as  to  what  they  would  have  Him  da  They  must  "  wait  on  the 
Lord  and  keep  His  way,"  ever  hoping  that  He  will  "exalt"  them  to  see  what  they 
do  not  yet  see  of  the  glorious  majesty  of  His  kingdom.  7'hough  uncertain,  men 
should  always  he  on  die  alert.  Waiting  for  blessing  is  not  real  and  valid  waiting, 
except  they  who  wait  are  sensitive  to  the  approach  of  the  Lord.  His  word  comes 
to  comfort,  strengthen,  open  up  a  duty,  and  those  are  the  good  and  faithful  ser- 
vanta  who  honour  Him  by  receiving  it,  no  matter  at  what  time,  convenient  or 
mcouvenient  to  them.  He  may  vouchsafe  it.     Though  uncertain  men  must  never 

7 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOM I LETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL, 


lose  faith.  However  long  it  be  ere  a  word  comes — one  year  or  five  jean— tliej 
mast  believe  in  Qod.  He  lias  not  forgotten  His  people.  Let  them  trust  that  in 
bome  month  He  will  bestow  favour  on  them  and  His  depressed  interests. 

IL  The  place  la  nndistiiigiiiahed.  It  has  no  memorable  assucuUiont,  The  land 
of  the  Chaldeans  was  devoid  of  that  instructive  relation  to  the  Jews  which  both 
Egypt  and  the  mountains  of  Sinai  had.  Tlie  river  of  Chebar  could  not  stir  their 
thoughts  as  the  Jordan  could.  But  Qod  can  produce  in  an  obscure  or  obnoxious 
place  that  which  will  be  a  hallowed  memory.  He  can  make  communications  in  a 
garden  as  to  Adam,  in  an  outlying  district  of  Luz  as  to  Jacob,  in  a  cave  of  the 
desert  as  to  Elijah,  in  exile  as  to  Ezekiel.  He  may  manifest  Himself  anywhere — 
in  ship  or  customhouse,  by  road  or  rail,  in  a  family  or  alone.  It  has  no  recog- 
nised  religiotu  privileges.  The  captives  could  not  make  yearly  pilgrimages  to  the 
City  of  the  Qreat  King ;  they  could  not  approach  to  the  place  where  His  honour 
dwelt.  For  them  there  was  no  treading  of  His  courts,  no  appearing  before  Him, 
no  burnt- offerings  and  sacrifices  to  offer  for  His  acceptance.  Their  hearts  might 
thirst  and  faint  for  His  altars^  but  they  could  not  be  relieved.  As  Nathanael  in 
after  times,  they  might  have  put  a  question  expressive  of  contempt  and  unbelief, 
Can  any  good  thing  be  obtained  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon  f  They  had  not  yet 
learned  by  experience  that  the  Lord  would  make  '^  a  little  sanctuary  "  for  them  in 
the  place  to  which  He  had  driven  them,  and  there  reveal  His  justice  and  His 
grace.  So  when  Ezekiel  was  constituted  an  organ  of  new  revelations,  they  were 
blessed  where  they  did  not  look  for  blessing.  Happy  is  it  that  the  help  of  Qod  is 
for  the  feeble  who  cannot,  for  the  charged  with  duty  who  must  not,  for  the  wan- 
derers who  may  not  enter  into  the  assemblies  of  worshippers,  as  well  as  for  those 
who  have  all  means  of  grace  at  their  command.  "  In  all  places  where  I  record  my 
name  I  will  come  unto  thee,  and  I  will  bless  thee."  ''Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  world." 

m  The  person  la  inooDBpicnona.  So  far  as  is  known,  there  was  nothing  to 
give  prominence  to  Ezekiel  over  other  members  of  priestly  families,  or  the  general 
body  of  his  fellow-captives.  ''There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  Ood."  He 
does  not  limit  His  manifestations  by  any  classifications  which  men  may  make. 
*'  Base  things  of  the  world,  and  tbings  which  are  despised,  hath  Qod  chosen."  The 
boy  with  a  good  education  or  the  boy  without  it,  children  who  are  taught  by 
their  parents  the  truth  in  Jesus  from  their  earliest  days,  or  children  who  have 
learned  no  more  than  they  learned  in  a  Sundaynschool,  may  equally  obtain  from 
God  an  entrance  into  "the  secret  of  His  covenant" 

This  designation  of  Ezekiel  furthermore  suggests — Ood  can  provide  JU  agents  in 
unexpected  circumstances.  He  only  knows  when  and  where  it  is  required  that  He 
hhould  make  special  additions  to  men's  knowledge  of  Him  and  His  ways,  and  He 
has  the  wisdom  and  the  power  to  select  the  persons  to  whom  that  kntiwledge  can 
be  given.  So  He  finds  Enoch  amid  gigantic  iniquities,  Moses  in  the  palace  of 
Pharaoh,  Ezekiel  among  the  captives  of  Babylon,  Paul  (ShuI)  among  the  fiercest 
of  persecutors,  Luther  in  a  monastery.  Lowly  places  or  prominent  places  cannot 
be  obstacles  in  His  path  of  goodness  and  mercy.  He  proves  that  '*  His  strength 
is  made  perfect  in  weakness." 

God  can  bestow  great  boons  on  the  person  He  may  calL  An  exile  amongst  exiles, 
with  none  of  the  appointed  external  means  of  worship,  in  the  face  of  political  dis- 
abilities, pressed  upon  by  social  troubles,  allied  to  men  who  had  no  heart  to  help 
him,  yet  Ezekiel  not  only  found  Qod  near,  but,  moreover,  saw  heavenly  things,  and 
was  touched  by  a  hand  which  made  him  one  of  the  forces  of  the  world.  It  tells  us 
that  not  any  circumstances  of  life,  not  any  conditions  of  body  need  to  prevent  na 
from  being  dignified  by  a  faith  in  the  unseen,  and  sitting  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ  Jesus. 

Ood  can  increase  Uis  servants  power  by  connecting  him  with  an  organisation. 
Bobinson  Crusoe,  alone  on  Juan  Feruandefi  might  have  received  large  favours  from 
8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WOMILBTia  OOMMBNTART:  BZBKIBL.  <nu^  l 


God,  but  he  could  not  use  those  favoars  for  the  welfare  of  neighbours.  Power  with 
men  depends  more  or  lean  upon  the  links  which  bind  us  to  them.  There  is  influ- 
ence from  a  family.  When  the  solitary  are  set  in  families  it  is  that  they  may  give 
and  find  help  which  could  not  have  been  otherwise  secured.  Each  member  has  a 
power  to  affect  the  rest  who  are  within  the  same  circle.  There  is  influence  from  a 
caste.  Commercial,  social,  intellectual,  religious  interests  bind  men  to  one  another, 
and  that  bond  enables  them  to  carry  out  schemes  which  could  not  have  been  ao- 
complished  individually,  e,g,,  guilds,  trades'  unions,  companies,  an  aristocracy,  an 
army,  a  priesthood,  a  denomination  of  Christians.  There  is  influence  from  a  nation. 
The  members  of  a  small  nation  are  not  so  powerfully  backed  as  those  of  a  large. 
CivU  Botnanus  sum  was  a  phrase  which  gave,  to  the  person  who  could  employ  it, 
greater  consideration  and  security  than  were  given  to  the  citijsens  of  any  other  state 
contemporary  with  the  Roman.  The  phrase,  "  I  am  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,'' — 
however  the  speaker  of  it  might  have  been  counted  as  ''the  offiscouring  of  all 
things," — was  pregnant  with  mightier  influences  than  have  been  wielded  by  the 
nationalities  of  those  who  derided  him.  The  use  of  a  nation's  influence  cannot  be 
indifferent  to  Qod  who  loveth  righteousness ;  and  in  Ezekiel  He  designated  a  man 
who  had  received  a  certain  education  and  status  on  account  of  his  ]>riestly  origin, 
and  who,  because  he  was  a  Jew  and  could  contribute  to  Hebrew  literature,  has 
obtained  a  position  which  commands  the  suffrages  of  the  world.  '*  This  also  is  of 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in  counsel  and  excellent  in  working.''  Organi- 
sations may  be  hurtful  by  checking  the  fair  development  of  personal  life,  but  they 
can  also  add  to  personal  power. 

(2.)  Pbeliminary  Steps  to  the  Designation. 

I  ''  Ezekiel,  the  son  of  Bozi  the  priest "  (ver.  3). 

It  is  sometimes  argued  that  Ezekiel  was  trammelled  by  his  connection  with  the 
priestly  organisation,  that  his  lineage  induced  him  to  weave  a  sacerdotal  element 
into  his  prophecies,  that  he  presents  ''  a  Levitical  turn  of  mind,  in  virtue  of  which 
he  sets  a  high  value  upon  sacred  customs."  Attempts  to  prove  this  do  not  appear 
eminently  snocessfuL  When  commentators  say  that  his  sacerdotalism  is  shown  in 
the  demands  he  makes  for  obedience  to  the  requisitions  of  the  Law,  we  seem  to  hear 
in  that  statement,  not  a  simple  reading  of  the  prophecies,  but  a  r^ing  with  inter- 
polations from  fancy  or  prepossession.  Isaiah,  Jeremiah  make  the  same  demands, 
and,  taking  account  of  the  different  circumstances  of  Esekiel,  he  exhibits  no  more 
of  a  sacerdotal  tendency  than  they  do.  It  would  have  been  an  odd  place  in  which 
to  manifest  ^  a  genuine  priestly  turn  of  mind " — whatever  that  may  mean — the 
place  where  he  could  not  by  any  means  fulfil  the  special  functions  of  the  priest- 
hood ;  but  a  very  suitable  place  in  which  to  efndeavour  to  impress  the  captives 
with  the  conviction  that  they  were  still  "  under  the  law  to  Qod,"  even  though  far 
from  the  Temple  of  Jehovah.  It  would  be  as  hard  to  signify  where  Esekiel  exhibits 
"  a  strong  priestly  feeling,"  marking  him  off  from  other  prophets,  as  it  would  be  to 
exhibit  a  strong  pastoral  and  fruit-gathering  feeling  in  Amos  (chap.  vii.  14).  Tet 
Fairbaim  writes,  "  In  Ezekiel  alone  of  the  later  prophets  does  the  priestly  element 
become  so  peculiarly  prominent  and  prevaiUng  as  to  give  a  tone  and  impress  to 
the  general  character  of  his  ministrations,  and  to  render  even  his  prophetical 
labours  a  kind  of  priestly  service  "  (p.  8).  We  see — what  we  expect  to  see  I  God 
chooses  prophets  not  to  unfold  their  own  ancestral  or  technical  habits,  but  EUs 
true  and  broad  righteousness  and  love.  That  Ezekiel,  when  acting  in  accordance 
with  this,  should  employ  imagery  borrowed  from  the  Law  and  worship  of  Israel 
was  natural  He  did  it,  however,  not  as  one  who  would  exalt  whatever  the  priests 
had  to  carry  out,  but  as  one  who  had  been  taught  that  against  the  degrading  ten- 
dencies of  Israel  there  was  no  barrier,  against  heathenism  there  was  no  power,  in 
Temple,  offerings,  or  priests.  He  was  taught  that  there  was  no  preservative  in  the 
evil  days  of  din  captivity  save  in  the  latent  energy  and  intrinsic  truth  of  <<  the 

9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  L  ffOMlLETIC  QOMMENTART:  BZBKIBL. 


lively  oracles''  given  by  Moses.  So  he  sets  himself,  not  to  do  a  serrice  for  priest- 
liness,  but  for  the  Law.  As  a  priest  he  was  doubtless  one  of  that  kind  whose  lips 
kept  knowledge,  and  as  an  enforcer  of  the  Law  was  "  the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts"  (Mai.  il  7). 

U  ''Now  I  was  among  the  eaptiyes"  (ver.  1). 

Eiekiel  had  been,  apparently,  by  himself.  His  mind  had  been  exercised  upon 
the  sad  days  that  were  passing  over  him  and  his  people.  He  Iiad  been  laying 
himself  open  to  thoughts  of  the  Xord,  and  then  he  was  called  into  a  nearer 
communion  than  he  had  ever  experienced.  Unconsciously  he  was  stepping  for- 
ward to  receive  competency  to  do  actions  for  God.  He  does  not  tell  how  he  had 
been  moving— only  that,  while  so  employed,  "  it  came  to  pass "  that  Qod  spoke 
to  him.  They  who  would  learn  of  Christ  must  \  \.  Oo  alone  with  Him,  Things 
pass  in  secret  from  Him  which  no  stranger  need  intermeddle  with,  and  no  personal 
insufficiency  need  intercept  2.  Go  with  all  cares.  Outer  circumstances  may  be 
harassing,  associates  may  be  lukewarm  or  nug<»dly,  prospects  may  seem  utterly 
blank,  but  neither  ignore  them  nor  make  light  of  them  before  Him,  for  *'  He 
careth  for  you."  3.  Go  in  ho]>e  that  He  wUl  manifest  Himself,  Unlooked  for 
light  may  be  lifted  up  on  you,  strength  may  be  infused,  faith  be  increased,  and  new 
scenes  in  your  history  be  entered  on  ;  fur  ''  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly 
beyond  what  you  think." 

m  **  The  heavens  were  opened  "  (ver.  1). 

1.  Men  have  faculties  for  realising  what  is  beyond  the  earth.  We  dwell  on  the 
borders  of  the  unknown,  and  can  take  interest  in  noticing  the  traces  of  what  may 
be  therein.  Qod's  hands  have  made  us  and  fashioned  us  so  that  this  is  possible. 
To  use  only  animal  functions,  to  develop  only  earthly  aims,  and  to  present  a  muti- 
lated nature  to  all  the  influences  which  play  upon  us,  is  a  spectacle  darkened  with 
criminality  in  reference  to  ourselves  and  our  Maker.  But  to  use  our  faculties  for 
looking  at  *'  the  things  unseen  and  eternal,"  that  is  the  part  of  full  and  true  man- 
hood— a  token  that  our  life  is  a  life  worth  living. 

2.  God  adopts  methods  far  acting  on  t}u>se  faculties.  As  light  is  made  to  suit  the 
organ  of  sight,  and  sound  the  organ  of  hearing,  so  His  Spirit  is  able  to  operate 
upon  us  in  order  that  we  may  discern  spiritual  things.  The  person  who  sees  light 
or  hears  a  sound  cannot  prove  to  another  person  that  he  sees  or  hears.  He  can  only 
affirm,  witness.  So  a  person,  who  has  *^  the  eyes  of  his  heart  enlightened  to  know  " 
what  is  his  inheritance  in  the  heavens,  cannot  give  any  demonstration  of  the 
change  which  he  is  conscious  of,  he  can  only  affirm,  witness,  that  he  does  know 
what  he  did  not  know.  ''  Whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see,"  is  as  applicable  to 
heavenly  as  to  earthly  things.  All. men  do  not  receive  the  benefit  of  Qod's  methods. 
Some  deny  their  operation,  and  some  their  validity.  Some  acknowledge  them  only 
t<i  neglect  them,  and  some  hope  that  they  will  see  the  heavens  opened  though  they 
do  not  go  to  the  only  door  thereinto.  But  whatever  the  reason  be  for  their 
deficiency,  the  light  has  been  opened  up  to  the  world,  and  men  are  judged  for  not 
believing  in  it.  The  Son  of  Qod  has  come  from  heaven  and  has  again  ascended  to 
His  Father :  through  Him  heaven  is  always  open,  and  open  to  every  one  who  wilL 
''  Set  your  affections  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth." 

IV.  "  I  saw  visions  of  Ood  "  (ver.  1). 

More  is  meant  than  that  Ezekiel  saw  grand  and  vast  visions.  His  expression 
is  not  to  be  limited  to  visions  given  by  the  action  of  CM,  or  to  visions  notifying 
the  will  of  Qod,  but  embraces  also  the  marvellousuess  of  revelations  of  Qod.  He 
was  made  a  seer  of  Qod  in  order  to  be  a  prophet  for  Qod.     Observe — 

1.  TJiOughts  of  Jieaven  must  receive  tJieir  cliaracler  from  views  of  God,  If 
we  could  see  into  heaven  and  did  not  see  signs  of  Qod  there,  ^a  e  should  remain  in 
spiritual  darkness.  We  must  pass  into  the  house  to  perceive  the  householder. 
We  are  vagrants  still,  as  to  all  moral  progress  and  undertakings,  if  we  do  not  find 
Oni  who  can  enlighten  and  guide  and  strengthen  us.  All  beliefs  of  our  interest  in 
10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BO  MI  LET IC  COMMENTAlit:  EZERISL.  cuLf.  L 


the  heavens  will  be  blighted  unless  they  are  steps  on  our  way  to  know  we  have  a 
living,  almighty,  perfect  Fiiend. 

2.  All  true  views  of  God  are  given  by  God.  ''  He  dwelleth  iu  light,  whicb  no 
man  can  approach  unto ;  whom  no  man  hath  seen,  nor  can  sea"  Human  power 
cannot  make  Him  manifest  Himself.  The  highest  knowledge  which  men  of  them- 
selves can  reach  does  not  embrace  one  of  the  secrets  of  His  being.  He  alone  opens 
the  inward  eyes  and  presents  the  aspects  He  wants  to  reveal.  He  may  open  them 
through  some  outward  impulse,  or  by  action  on  the  heart,  but  in  either  case  the 
ripple  of  sensational  life  is  hushed  by  the  flow  of  a  grander  life,  and  the  reasoning 
faculty  stands  still,  waiting  to  know  what  it  shall  receive.  Then,  as  the  light  air 
comes  to  a  hanging  leaf  and  stirs  it,  as  a  father's  love  and  wisdom  come  to  an 
erring  child  and  prompt  to  confession,  so  the  subject  of  visions  of  Qod  knows  that 
Qod  has  affected  him — that  Gk)d  alone  could  accomplish  that  which  has  happened 
to  hinu  The  visions  are  real.  The  prophet  did  see  some  appearances  of  Qod ;  and, 
whether  it  were  by  an  external  operation  or  by  his  own  inward  rapt  attention,  he 
was  prepared  to  avouch  it  as  confidently  as  he  would  a  vision  obvious  merely  to 
his  physical  sight  How  many  He  gives  !  Is  there  a  week,  a  day  passing  in  which 
He  does  not  set  forth  something  of  His  glory  % 

3.  Visions  of  God  require  a  conscious  appreheimon  hy  men.  Men  can  look 
upwards  or  downwards,  outward  or  inward ;  but  they  may  shut  their  eyes.  So 
they  decide  whether  they  will  see  the  things  of  Qod  or  not — whether  they  will 
accept  the  fuller  manifestations  of  Qod  or  not.  And  the  bowed  in  heart,  the 
seeker  for  the  truth  learns  that,  back  of  the  material  world  and  its  forces,  is  He 
whom  they  all  obey,  and  whom  hearts  should  believe  in.  They  yield  themselves 
up,  not  by  the  push  of  a  blind  necessity,  but  according  to  the  laws  of  their  own 
freedom,  and  yet  they  are  elevated,  guarded,  and  assured  of  the  reality  of  theur 
visions  by  the  supreme  Spirit  operating. 

4.  Various  aspects  of  Qod  are  presented.  No  man  can  see  Qod,  and  all  that  is 
perceived  by  the  most  favoured  seer  is  but  the  back  parts  of  His  goodness  and  glory. 
Parts  of  His  ways  are  recognised ;  "  but  how  little  a  portion  is  beard  of  Him  ?  but 
the  thunder  of  His  power  who  can  understand  1 "  He  b  working  in  the  earth 
which  He  has  filled  with  good ;  in  the  heavens  which  declare  His  glory ;  in  the 
movements  of  men's  spirits  which  accuse  themselves,  repent,  trust,  love ;  in  the 
prosperous  or  depressed  trade  of  nations,  in  their  freedom  jfrom  or  subjection  to 
calamities ;  in  the  birth,  life,  death,  resurrection,  and  exaltation  of  the  Son  of  His 
love  who  hath  declared  Him.  Wonderful  in  number  and  variety  are  the  views 
which  Qod  has  provided  for  willing  hearts.  '*  They  are  new  every  morning.''  It 
is  a  sign  of  no  reverence  or  true  knowledge  when  some  assume  to  tell  just  what 
Qod  must  show  of  Himself,  just  what  Qod  must  do.  They  forget  that  He  gives 
no  account  of  His  matters — that  "He  dwells  in  the  thick  darkness."  It  is  for  men 
to  be  humble  before  Him,  even  though  He  may  let  them  see  many  a  token  of  His 
will.  They  are  to  look  and  wait.  ''  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,  and  set  me  upon 
the  tower,  and  will  watch  to  see  what  He  will  say  unto  me.  For  the  vision  is  yet 
for  an  appointed  time,  but  at  the  end  it  shall  speak  and  not  lie  "  (Hab.  il  1-3). 

V.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  expressly  "  (ver.  3). 

This  is  an  evidence  of  the  fact  that  the  vision  and  the  word  were  closely  allied 
in  prophetical  phenomena.  Isaiah  ^^saw  tJie  word  which  he  received  concerning 
Judah  and  Jerusalem."  Amos  begins  his  book  thus,  "  The  words  of  Amos  which 
he  saw  concerning  IsraeL"  Daniel  was  overwhelmed  by  a  great  vision,  "  yet  heard 
the  voice  of  his  word&"  Paul  had  *'  visions  and  revelations  of  the  Lord."  John  in 
Patmos  saw  one  like  unto  the  Son  of  man,  and  then  listened  to  what  He  said. 
So  was  it  with  Ezekiel  now. 

Notice :  1.  ''  God  is  His  own  interpreter^^  Symbols  and  scenes  are  less  capable 
of  definite  explanation  than  words.  It  is  hazardous  to  take  impressions,  feelings, 
ftc.|  as  intimating  the  will  of  Qod,  in  the  absence  of  His  Word  or  of  principles 

11 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  BZBKISIk 


which  His  Word  embraces.  So  He  **  spake  in  time  past  in  the  prophets,**  and  "in 
these  last  days  in  His  Son.'*  He  can  make  His  visions,  m;inifestatioii8,  plain,  and 
no  one  who  wants  to  know  His  will  in  sincerity  can  live  without  having  some  signs 
of  what  that  will  really  is. 

2.  There  are  tesUfor  learning  **  wAo^  God  the  Lord  doth  speak"  It  Las  often 
perplexed  men's  minds  how  to  discern  between  a  suggestion  from  Qod  and  a  sug- 
gestion from  some  other  source.  There  is  no  short  and  easy  method  applicable 
to  all  cases.  Not  the  strength  of  the  impression,  not  mere  unhesitating  con- 
fidence in  its  divineness,  not  its  apparent  conformity  to  what  has  been  done,  not 
the  memory  of  words  of  Scripture  which  seem  to  sanction  it,  can  decide  the  doubt 
Conscience,  though  willing  to  do  only  the  will  of  Qod,  may  give  different  prompt- 
ings from  those  of  the  Spirit  of  Qod.  We  are  left  without  any  infallible  guide  ;  but 
surely  no  one  who  wants  to  order  his  conduct  aright  will  fail  to  discern,  sooner  or 
later,  what  is  of  God  or  of  man.  It  may  be  there  was  for  His  prophets  a  special 
light  in  which  they  saw  that  they  were  addressed  by  Qod,  and  so  were  both  made 
sure  and  warranted  to  say,  **  Thus  saith  the  Lord  Qod ;  **  but  it  is  not  likely  that 
they  could  have  given  any  explicit  information  on  the  point  Tbey  knew  His 
voice,  as  the  sheep  of  the  Q<)od  Shepherd  know  His,  yet  are  unable  to  explain  how 
they  do  so.  Let  it  be  believed  that  God  is  our  Father,  and  we  shall  find  little 
difficulty  in  granting  that  He  can  make  His  children  know  He  is  speaking  to  them 
and  that  they  are  not  deceived. 

3.  OocTs  servants  must  teach  according  to  the  Word  of  God.  They  cannot  make 
truth  ;  they  must  receive  it  '*  from  above."  Their  souls  should  be  as  a  mirror  on 
which  He  casts  His  rays,  and  which  send  forth  a  faithful  reflection.  They  are  to 
be  as  a  channel  through  which  the  water  of  life  may  flow  unimpeded.  Eiach  one 
may  exhibit  his  own  characteristic  qualities  of  mind,  as  water  takes  the  tint  of  the 
rocky  bed  over  which  it  runs.  No  prophet  is  a  reproduction  of  any  other  prophet 
No  apostle  is  a  copy  of  ano^er  apostle.  No  believing  man  or  woman  is  exactly 
like  to  any  one  else  among  ''  the  saints  of  the  Most  High."  The  Lord  of  all  makes 
each  seed  to  have  its  own  body,  and  envelops  therein  some  property  which  is  of 
use  to  other  existences,  so  has  He  constituted  each  soul  distinct,  and  each  is  capable 
of  acting  in  behalf  of  the  King  of  Truth.  Therefore  should  every  one  strive  to  grow 
by  feeding  on  His  Word.  Only  thus  can  they  teach  to  profit — only  thus  can  they 
expect  ''the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit" — when  not  the  words  of  man's  wisdom 
but  the  words  of  the  only  wise  Gk)d  are  declared. 

4.  We  can  luwe  access  to  the  Word  of  God.  It  is  not  now  a  gift  bestowed  upon 
a  few  selected  individuals ;  it  is  the  endowment  of  mankind.  *'  The  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God,  .  .  .  and  the  Word  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt 
among  us,  .  .  •  full  of  grace  and  truth."  We  can  come  to  the  Light  and  Life, 
and  hear  Him  at  aU  times.  All  the  history,  all  the  psalms,  all  the  prophecies  of 
the  Old  Testament  have  some  more  or  less  portion  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus. 
"  Search  the  Scriptures,  for  they  testify  of  "  Him.  Come  to  Him,  for  **  whosoever 
will  may  come."  We  are  in  a  more  lofty  position  than  Ezekiel  was,  and  can  see 
and  hear  more  fully  from  God  and  of  God  than  he  did.  What  manner  of  persons 
ought  we  to  be  I  "  Obeying  the  truth  through  the  Spirit,"  abiding  in  Christ,  and 
the  word  of  Christ  abiding  in  us.     "  Take  heed  how  ye  hear." 

VL  "  The  hand  of  the  Iiord  was  there  upon  him  "  (ver.  3). 

"  Hand  is  equivalent  to  sovereignty  in  its  fullest  meaning,  and  sovereignty  in 
that  meaning  does  not  admit  of  degrees  "  {The  Aryan  Household),  It  is  a  symbol 
in  Scripture  of  impulse,  power,  &c.,  and  capable  not  only  of  laying  the  foundation 
of  the  earth  and  of  spanning  the  heavens,  but  also  of  being  laid  gently  on  the  heads 
of  little  children  as  well  as  on  sorrowing,  awestruck  men.  Its  touch  prepared  for 
another  stage  in  Exekiel's  development  It  infused  strength  for  seeing  and  acting 
in  his  new  vocation.  It  sanctified  him,  set  him  apart,  so  that  he  was  constituted 
a  true  and  capable  prophet  to  Israel.  Observe— 
18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKISL.  OVAP.L 


1.  The  real  power  in  serving  the  Lord.  It  is  contact  with  Him.  Daniel  could 
not  hear  the  divine  meAsages  till  a  hand  touched  Hiiu  (Dan.  x.  10).  John  could 
receive  the  revelation  after  the  right  hand  of  the  Glorified  had  been  laid  on 
him  (Bev.  i  17).  Every  disciple  must  be  strengthened  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner 
man  (Eph.  iii  16)»  in  order  ''to  will  and  to  do  of  His  good  pleasure.'^  Obstacles 
lie  in  man's  heart  which  have  to  be  overcome,  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  presses 
them  down  or  sweeps  them  away.  When  it  is  laid  on  us,  then  we  can  do  all 
things;  then,  whatever  may  be  accomplished,  with  money,  with  words,  with  deeds 
for  the  kingdom  of  Qod  in  the  world,  owes  its  success  to  His  giving  His  hand  to 
it.  ''Severed  from  me,  ye  can  do  nothing."  We  must  have  the  word  of  Christ, 
and  also  Christ  Himself  to  dwell  in  us,  else  we  shall  fail  in  fulfilling  the  word  of 
the  truth  of  the  gospel  Prayer,  reading  and  hearing  the  Word,  teaching  and 
preaching  it^  are  "as  tinkling  cymbals"  if  the  power  of  Christ  do  not  rest 
on  ua» 

2.  Be  at  the  disposal  of  the  Lord.  (1.)  Implicitly.  Let  there  be  no  obstruc- 
tions, no  reserves.  The  creature  has  no  claim  except  in  correspondence  to  that  of 
his  Creator,  the  bondsman  no  choice  but  that  of  his  lord,  the  ransomed  no  half- 
heartedness  towards  his  deliverer.  Whosoever  is  touched  so  that  he  is  impelled  to 
say  "  It  is  the  Lord,"  then  no  hesitancy,  no  trouble  should  be  regarded  by  him  in 
any  light  but  that  of  a  temptation  out  of  which  a  way  of  escape  is  to  be  found. 
(2.)  On  the  spot  In  our  own  houses  or  lodgings,  in  business  or  worship,  in  health 
or  ailments,  in  agreeable  conditions  or  disagreeable,  begin  to  obey  the  pressure  of 
Qod's  hand  iliere,  '*  The  one  secret  of  life  and  development  is  not  to  devise  and 
plan,  but  to  fall  in  with  the  forces  at  work,  to  do  every  moment's  duty  aright, 
that  being  the  part  of  the  process  allotted  to  us ;  and  let  come,  not  what  will,  for 
there  is  no  such  thing,  but  what  the  Eternal  thought  wills  for  each  of  us,  has 
intended  for  each  of  us  from  the  first "  (G.  MacdonaU).  (3.)  Confidingly.  Dark- 
ness may  fall,  weakness  may  be  experienced,  opponents  may  bar  the  way,  fear  not. 
He  upholds  by  the  right  hand  of  Hb  righteousness.  Maintain  the  thought  of  a 
present  Lord,  in  contact  with  your  spirit,  putting  you  forth  but  also  going  before 
yon,  and  you  will  find  a  force  which  will  more  than  conquer  all  against  you.  It 
b  no  dream,  no  cunningly  devised  fable,  that  Christ  Jesus  is  with  us. 

3.  2\titt  to  receive  impulses  from  the  Loi'd.  The  life  of  Qod  in  the  soul  is  not 
\  constantly  equal  force.  It  is  sometimes  hardly  distinguishable  from  the  life  of 
sense,  and  at  other  times  it  is  as  if  it  was  more  than  conqueror  over  the  world  and 
the  flesL  Prayer  is  now  easy,  but  then  it  is  a  drag.  Here  we  walk  in  darkness, 
and  have  no  light  on  the  ways  of  the  Lord ;  and  there  we  seem  enabled  to  "  mount 
up  on  wings  as  eagles,  run  and  not  be  weary,  walk  and  not  faint"  The  Qod  of 
all  grace  will  stablish,  strengthen,  perfect,  settle.  From  ordinary  earthly  sur- 
roundings He  can  lead  so  that  we  shall,  first,  be  made  to  feel  that  another  world 
afiects  us ;  then,  that  Qod  manifests  Himself  to  us ;  and  afterwards,  that  He  imparts 
to  us  of  His  own  strength.     Thus  may  we  be  filled  with  the  Spirit. 

4.  Our  ordinary  peaces  of  sojourn  may  he  made  memorable.  Not  only  nations 
remember  places  where  events  historically  important  to  them  have  occurred ;  not 
only  cities  and  towns  keep  up  memories  of  persons  and  actions  interesting  to  their 
inhabitants ;  but  also  individual  believers  in  Qod  can  record  of  one  spot  or  another 
that  the  Lord  met  them  there.  How  precious  a  thought  it  is  that  there  is  no 
place  whatever  but  may  become  a  Bethel — a  house  of  Qod — to  any  traveller 
towards  eternity  I  A  private  room,  a  church,  a  prison,  a  street,  a  hillside,  a  river- 
bank  will  be  sacred,  as  no  other  place  can  be  sacred,  if  they  have  witnessed  a 
stimulating  manifestation  of  what  Qod  can  do.  Be  we  where  we  may,  we  may  be 
there  with  the  unseen  Christ,  and  He  will  be  its  glory. 

Thus  Ezekiel  was  designated.  He  was  not  consecrated  by  any  enactment  of 
the  law  of  Moses.  No  oil  of  anointment  was  poured  upon  his  head  to  authorise 
him  to  prophesy.    No  hands  of  predecessors  were  laid  upon  him.     He  is  chosen 

18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ciup.  I.  HOMlLETW  COMMESTARf :  BZMKIBL 

and  set  apart  by  the  Lonl  aloue,  and  he,  with  all  true  prophets,  is  a  type  of  the 
coming  time  when  the  children  should  be  all  taught  of  the  Lord,  for  the  Spirit 
would  be  p(»ured  out  upon  us  from  ou  high.  We  are  under  this  dispensation. 
We  must  guard  against  supposing  that  human  appointments  to  nkinistry  for  the 
Lord  are  valid  if  He  has  not  called  to  itw  There  is  no  true  ordination  but  that  of 
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  there  is  no  true  service  but  that  which  opens  out  to 
more  service.  Vague  longings  for  €k)d  may  be  turned  into  real  manifestations ; 
visions  of  Qod  may  prepare  for  feeling  the  hand  of  Qod.  Such  are  the  ways  of 
'Hhe  Ghid  of  Israel,  who  giveth  strength  and  power  to  His  people:  blessed  be 
Gk>d  1 "     '*  Of  His  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace.'' 

<<I  saw  visionB  of  Qod." 
Thb  Sources  of  Religious  Sensibility. 

L  Man  mu$t  consider  himself,  Let  him  examine  his  own  natare,  look  at  the 
wonderful  mechanism  which  is  going  on  in  his  own  breast,  and  he  will  surely  awake 
to  a  sense  of  the  high  and  exalted  relations  which  his  existence  sustains.  But  he 
lives  in  the  world  Material  objects  engross  and  enthral  his  mind.  He  converses 
not  with  his  own  spirit.  He  considers  not  what  manner  of  being  he  is.  Let  this 
thoughtlessness  be  laid  aside,  nnd  it  will  not  be  strange  if  he  come  to  a  living  con- 
ception of  that  mighty  Being  from  whom  we  all  spring,  and  by  whom  we  all 
subsist 

2.  He  must  consider  the  wonderf\U  works  external  to  himself.  The  green  earth 
and  its  diversities  of  scenery,  the  canopy  above  it,  bright  with  stars  and  burning 
duns,  show  visions  of  power,  wisdom,  goodness  transcending  his  utmost  ability  to 
measure  and  fathom.  Let  him  think  of  these,  and  will  he  not  feel  how  awful  nnd 
stupendous  the  Author  of  such  prodigies  most  be  f 

3.  He  must  consider  liow  different  man  is  from  what  he  might  have  been  expected 
to  he.  With  eyes  to  see  visions  of  Qod,  he  bends  them  to  the  earth.  He  does  not 
realise  the  purposes  for  which  he  is  made,  the  character  he  is  to  acquire,  the  destiny 
placed  within  bis  reach.  How  much  is  there  in  the  course  of  human  affairs  to 
trouble  and  perplex?  Ignorance  and  superstition  brood  over  a  large  portion  of 
the  habitable  globe.  In  Christian  countries  how  little  is  seen  of  that  purity,  faith, 
and  piety  which  Christ  enjoins.  But  all  that  need  not  destroy  the  conviction  that 
we  are  under  a  wise  and  merciful  Qod — that  it  is  impossible  for  Him  who  has  dis- 
played in  the  frame  of  man,  in  the  constitution  of  the  outer  world,  in  the  gospel 
of  Christ,  such  tokens  of  wisdom  and  love,  to  exercise  other  than  a  goveniraent  of 
perfect  benevolence.  It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  we,  who  are  but  of  yesterday, 
should  be  able  to  interpret  the  many  mysterious  and  inscrutable  events  in  human 
affairs,  though  all  will  be  clear  when  the  day  shall  dispel  the  midnight  vapours. 

4.  He  must  consider  how  God  has  been  trusted  in.  We  know  of  men  who  have 
been  subjected  to  heavy  assaults  because  they  believed  in  the  Word  of  God — of 
Jesus  Christ,  in  despisal  and  rejection,  upheld  by  communings  with  His  Father; 
and  we  learn  that  in  duties,  harassments,  weariness,  death,  our  safety,  strength, 
consolation  will  be  obtained  in  those  retirements  of  the  soul  where  our  eyes  are 
opened  to  see  visions  of  Qod. — Madob  (condensed), 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Dates. — The  Jews,  if  there  is  any  tratli  in  their  history  at  all,  were  a  joumaliBing  people. 
.  .  .  The  prophets  keep  a  diary  of  their  yiaioiiB.  Everywhere  do  they  record  the  dates,  the 
year,  the  day  of  the  month,  the  attending  chronological  circumstances  of  the  hardens  and 
messages  with  which,  as  they  allege,  they  have  been  commissioned  by  the  Lord.  If  these  dates 
are  pat  in  hy  compilers,  long  after  ihe  times  of  the  proplietic  visions,  then  there  is  no  reason 
for  it,  no  meaning  in  it.  .  .  It  is  an  easier  theory  that  every  word  of  the  prophetic  writings 
had  been  forged.  There  is  bat  one  other  supposition  :  the  dates  and  the  visions  are  from  tlie 
same  persons,  and  these  are  the  prophets  themselves  writing  and  speaking  at  the  times  they 
14 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  BZEKlKL  ohak  1. 


profen  to  write  and  speak,  and  in  relation  to  actual  ezisiiu'^  events  that  form  tlie  subjects  of 
their  warning.  The  seers,  the  times,  the  nation,  the  national  life,  it  is  all  one  true  picture — 
iniUpa^U  most  truthful  and  natural ;  in  iti  wlwiU  suggestive  of  an  extraordinary  and  difficult 
problem.  Let  any  man  attempt  to  explain  iU  natural  without  bringing  in  its  supernatural, 
or  some  other  supernatural — if  he  can. — Taylor  Lewi$. 

Names. — What  is  the  real  historical  significance  of  the  deeply  religious  character  of  Jewish 
names,  their  stronir  theistic  or  rather  monotheistic  aspect,  their  continual  expression  of  fuiih 
and  hope,  their  so  frequent  allusions  to  the  ideas  of  covenant  and  redemption  ?  And  why  too, 
may  we  ask,  do  so  many  of  these  appellations  end  in  El  and  Jah,  ever  calling  up  the  two  great 
divine  names  with  their  most  holy  ideas  ?  Let  the  reader  ponder  well  the  fact,  and  see  if  he 
can  find  any  other  reason  for  this  national  teal,  this  naming  after  the  Lord,  as  we  may  call  it, 
than  the  great  all-explaining  fact  thai  (hey  were  indeed  *'a  chosen  people,*'  '*an  elect 
people,"  whom  for  high  and  world-wide  reasons  God  had  taken  oa  Hit  own  "when  he 
separated  the  sons  of  Adam'and  gave  the  nations  their  inheritance."  It  is  a  standing  memorial, 
handed  down  from  generation  to  generation,  that  "this  was  the  people  whose  God,"  whose  £1 
or  Mighty  One,  was  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  Covenant,  who  had  been  their  fathers'  God,  and 
who  had  given  them  those  glorious  promises,  ineffaceable  by  the  bondage  of  generations,  thai 
in  them  and  in  their  seed  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  were  to  be  blessed." — Tai^  Lewit, 

Visions.— Thankfulness  for  being  made  capable  of  seeing  this  "  burning  west"  [glorious  vision 
of  Arran],  and  of  being  so  affected  by  its  beauty,  gave  place  to  thankfulness  for  the  spiritual 
eye  opened  in  me,  l>y  which  I  saw  the  Eternal  Light  and  the  Eternal  Beauty ;  thankful ne€S 
tliat  was  much  mingled  with  self-condemnation,  as  I  reflected  thai  .  . .  that  which  my  spiritual 
eye  saw  is  an  ever-present  glor)',  to  be  seen  wherever  the  eye  opens  on  it ;  and  yet  my  memories 
of  it  were  of  what  had  been  seen  only  ai  long  intervals  ...  in  a  solemn  sense  of  choice.  1 
say^in  a  sente  of  choice,  because  I  do  not  feel  in  reality  that  the  opening  of  the  eye  that  sees 
the  spiritual,  so  that  the  spirit  is  flooded  with  its  proper  light,  is  so  simple  a  matter,  or  so 
absolutely  to  be  determined  by  a  mere  volition,  as  the  opening  of  the  bodily  eye.  Thai  "glory 
of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ"  we  do  not  see  in  its  brightness  simply  by  turning  to  it. 
For  such  vision  beyond  habitual  faith  we  wait  on  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  have  it  not  in  our  own 
hand.    But  still  we  know  that  he  that  soweth  bountifully  reaps  bountifully. — Madeod  Campbell, 

Power. — The  distinction  is  always  assuming  more  and  more  importance  to  my  mind,  viz., 
that  between  the  special  acting  of  the  Divine  Spirit  in  the  revelation  of  truth  not  previously 
revealed  to  men,  and  His  acting  in  enabling  us  to  apprehend  that  truth,  and  to  advance  in  its 
light  and  the  life  which  it  feeds. ...  No  explanation  seems  adequate  which  admits  not — rather, 
assumes  not — that  God  can,  and  when  it  seemeth  good  to  Him  does  give  the  human  spirit  to 
know  His  own  presence,  and  His  own  touch,  otherwise  than  in  thai  highett  way  which  is  com- 
munion with  Himself  in  the  light  of  life.  Thit  .  .  .  the  whole  record  of  Revelation  seems  to 
me  to  ti  ach  as  to  those  great  events  in  the  history  of  intercourse  between  God  and  men  which 
we  have  been  accustomed  to  receive  as  "Divine  Revelation,"  viz.,  a  knowledge  of  being  spoken 
to  by  the  living  God  which  was  not  an  inference  from  the  nature  of  that  which  God  spake — 
a  knowledge  common  to  Balaam  and  Jonah  with  Moses  and  Samuel,  and  distinct  from  all 
communion  in  the  word  that  came  to  them.  What  this  was  I  know  not,  and  may  never 
know.  .  .  .  What  we  seek  to  know  is,  surely,  the  actual  fact  as  to  what  God  does  in  the  earth, 
of  which  we  may  not  make  our  own  experience  the  measure ;  while  we  cannot  be  too  thankful 
for  thai  clear  consciousness  of  seeing  light  in  God's  light  which  may  be  onr  temptation  to  do 
so. — Madeod  Oampbdl. 

Ban>erieiice  of  God. — Now  and  then  a  great  experience  comes  unexpected  and  unsonght. 
It  ionohes  the  greater  chords  of  the  soul,  and  lifts  it  above  the  common  level  of  emotion,  out- 
runs all  former  knowledge.  . . .  But  what  other  experience  is  like  that  of  the  personal  disclosure 
of  God  in  the  soul.  .  .  .  There  comes  an  hour  to  some,  to  many,  of  transfiguration.  It  m:iy 
be  in  grief;  it  may  be  in  joy ;  it  may  be  the  opening  of  the  door  of  sickness;  it  may  be  in 
active  duty ;  it  may  be  under  the  roof  or  under  the  sky,  where  God  draws  near  with  such 
reality,  glory,  and  power  that  the  soul  is  filled,  amazed,  transported.  All  before  was  nothing ; 
all  afterwards  will  be  but  a  souvenir.  Thai  single  vision,  that  one  hour,  is  worth  the  whole 
of  life,  and  throws  hsLck  a  light  on  all  that  went  before.  It  .  .  .  gives  to  the  soul  some  such 
certainty  of  invisible,  spiritual  truths  as  one  has  of  his  own  personal  identity.  When  one  has 
had  this  hoar  of  divine  disclosure,  of  full  and  entrancing  vision,  it  never  can  be  retracted,  or 
effaced,  or  reasoned  against,  or  torgoiten,— Ward  Beecher, 

2.  The  View  given  to  Ezekibl  of  "the  Likeness  op  the  Glory 
OF  the  Lord  "  (Chap.  i.  4-28). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  4.  (ii.  11),  "came  out  of  tho  nortV  the 

The  storm-cloud.     "A  whirlwind,"  a  region  from  which  the  Chaldean  forces 

tempest  such  as  Job  perceived  (xxxviii.  proceeded,  and,  in  general,  to  the  Jews, 

1),  or  like  that  which  Jonah  encountered  "the   region   pregnant   with    destiny" 


Digitized  by 


ifi 

Google 


O&AP.  t 


BOMtLETIC  OOMMSNTARY:  BZEKISL. 


(HengsU),  **  A  great  cloud,  and  a  firo 
infolding  itself"  Fire  in  volumes  wan 
mixed  up  with  the  cloud,  Jiiid  (Exod. 
ix.  24)  flashed  hither  and  thither, 
circling  round.  ''A  brightness  was 
about  it/'  the  cloud,  "  and  ont  of  the 
midst  thereof,"  of  the  Are,  ''as  the 
colonr  of  amber,"  ur  as  the  eye  of 
ehasmaL  The  appearance  was  such  as 
gave  tints,  shone,  burned  like  chasmaL 
The  mild  colour  of  amber  does  not  seem 
to  express  the  meaning  of  this  uncertain 
word.  There  was  a  look  like  that  of  ore 
glowmg  from  ''the  midst  of  the  fire/' 
Vers.  5-14.  The  living  creatnrea 
Ver.  5.  Out  of  this  saine  fire  came  "  the 
likeness  of  fonr  living  creatures,''  re- 
presenting all  beings  with  life  (Rev.  iv. 
6) ;  and,  as  the  best  representative  of 
vital  energies,  each  of  the  four  had  "  the 
likeness  of  a  man."  But  not  entirely 
so.  Ver.  7.  "Their  feet,"  including 
knee  and  thigh,  were  of  the  nature  of 
"a  straight  foot;"  they  were  upright, 
not  bent,  and  that  part  which  was  next 
the  ground  was  "like  the  sole  of  a 
calf  s  foot,  and  they  sparkled  like  the 
colour,"  the  eye,  the  gleam  "of  bur- 
nished," or  shining,  "brass"  (Rev.  L 
16).  Their  wings  proceeded  from  their 
shoulders,  for  (ver.  8)  "they  had  the 
hands  of  a  man  under  their  wings,** 
one  hand  under  each  of  "their  four 
sidea"  Ver.  9.  Two  "wings"  of  each 
"were  joined"  to  a  wing  of  each  of  its 
nearest  neighbours,  and  as  each  had  four 
faces,  one  of  which  looked  towards  a 
distinct  quarter  of  the  sky,  "they 
turned  not  when  they  went."  So 
"they  went  every  one  straight  for- 
ward" in  the  direction  in  which  any 
one  of  their  faces  looked,  and  as  a  con- 
junct whole.      Ver.    10.    Of  the   four 


faces,  one  was  like  that  of  **a  man,* 
another  like  that  of  "a  lion,"  another 
of  "an  ox,"  and  the  fourth  of  "an 
eagle."  Ver.  11.  "Thus  were  their 
faces,  and  their  wings  were  stretched 
upward ; "  rather,  and  their  faces  and 
their  wings  were  separated  from  above, 
%.€,,  it  could  be  seen  that  their  heads 
were  distinct  and  their  wings  were  dis- 
tinct, though  two  wings  of  one  were 
in  contact  with  two  wings  of  otliers. 
Ver.  12.  They  were  moved  by  an  irre- 
sistible impulse,  and,  separated  as  they 
were  from  one  another,  yet  they  were 
ani I  u  ated  by  one  1  if e-breath.  ' '  l^Hiither 
the  spirit  was  to  go,  they  went" 
Ver.  13.  "  Their  appearance  was  like 
burning  coals  of  fire,  like  the  appear- 
ance of  lamps,"  torches;  "it,"  the  fire, 
was  separate  from,  and  '^went  up  and 
down  among  the  living  creatures." 
Ver.  14.  The  creatures  had  a  motion 
which  made  the  impression  as  of  a 
" flash "  of  a  meteor,  or  "the  zigzag 
course"  of  "lightning."* 

Vers.  16-21.  The  wheels.  Ver.  15. 
"Behold  one  wheel  upon  the  earth 
by  the  living  creatures,  with  his  four 
facea"  Ezekiel  saw  wheels  upon  the 
ground,  one  in  close  proximity  to  each 
of  the  four  creatures,  and  lower  than 
they.  Ver.  16.  "They  four"  wheels 
"  had  one  likeness ; "  each  consisted  of 
two  wheels  really,  *'  as  it  were  a  wheel 
in  the  middle  of  a  wheel,"  set  in  the 
other  at  right  augks.  Ver.  17.  "They 
went  upon  their  four  sides;"  they 
could  go  in  any  direction  without  turn- 
ing round.  Ver.  18.  "As  for  their 
rings,"  circumference  or  felloes,  **they 
were  so  high  that  they  were  dreadful," 
they  had  both  height  and  terribleness,and 
"full  of  eyes  round  about."    Ver.  20, 


*  The  eherabims  in  Tabernacle  and  Temple  had  each  one  face  ;  those  of  Ezekiel  hare  foar 
faces.  We  work  ap  in  dreams  a  mixture  of  things  which  we  have  come  across  in  different 
places.  Did  Ezekiel,  in  his  ecstasy,  mnke  up  his  representations  of  the  living  creatures  witn 
objects  familiar  to  those  who  sojourned  in  Assyria,  the  land  of  his  exile?  ** Tiie  approaches  to 
the  hall  at  Kimrond  were  guarded  by  pairs  of  colossal  figures.  At  the  chief  entrance  were 
human-headed  winged  lions,  the  human  shape  being  continued  down  to  the  waist,  and  furnished 
with  arms. .  .  .  Expanded  wings  spring  from  the  shoulders  and  spread  over  the  back.  .  .  .  The 
entrance  on  the  south  was  guarded  by  human-headed  winged  bulls,  whilst  the  two  doorways  on 
the  north  were  both  guarded  by  winired  lions  with  the  heads  of  men  and  with  human  arms. .  . . 
It  will  be  observed  that  the  fonr  forms  (and  those  only)  chosen  by  Ezekiel  to  illustrate  his 
description — the  man,  the  lion,  the  bull,  and  the  eagle — are  precisely  those  which  are  con- 
stantly found  on  Assyrian  monuments.  .  .  .  They  could  find  no  better  type  of  intellect  and 
knowledge  than  the  head  of  the  man  ;  of  strength  than  the  body  of  the  lion ;  of  rapidity  of 
BOtion  than  the  wings  of  a  bird." — Layard, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILSTia  OOMMBNTABYs  BZBKIBL. 


CKAHl. 


^The  spirit  of  the  living  creature  was 
in  the  wheels. "  Tb  e  sam  e  energy  wh  ich 
actuated  tbe  former  actuated  the  latter 
also,  and  they  were  one  in  standing, 
going,  or  rising  upwards. 

Vers.  22-28.  The  throned  one,  Ver. 
22.  Above  ''the  heads  of  the  liv- 
ing creatures  ^  Ezekiel  saw  an  expanse 
extended,  having  a  colour  like  that  "  of 
the  terrible  crystal,''  exciting  fear  by 
its  purity  and  splendour.  Ver.  23. 
"Under  the  flrmament^"  or  expanse, 
which  therefore  came  between  the  throne 
and  the  living  creatures,  ''were  their 
wings  straight,  the  one  toward  the 
other,"  joined  to  one  another,  as  ver. 
11,  "and  every  one  had  two  which 
covered  f  there  was  a  wing  for  each  side 
of  "  their  bodiea"  Ver.  24.  When  the 
living  creatures  were  in  movement  "  the 
noiseof  their  wings  was  like  .  .  .  the 
voice  of  speech,"  rather,  "  the  noise  of 
tnmnlt,  as  the  noise  of  an  host"  The 
sounds  were  heard  only  when  they  were 
in  motion,  for  "  when  they  stood  they 
let  down  their  wings."  Ver.  25.  Their 
movement  or  rest  was  not  self-directed, 
but  was  instigated  or  checked  by  "a 
voice  from  the  firmament  that  was 
over  their  heads,"  from  Him  who  was 
on  the  throne,  since,  ver.  26,  "above 
the  firmament  was  the  likeness  of  a 
throne,  as  the  appearance  of"  the  pale- 
blue  "sapphire  stone,  and  upon  the 
likeness  of  the  thrgne,"  not  the  distin- 
guishable form  of  a  man,  but  "the like- 
ness as  the  appearance  of  a  man.*' 
"No  man  hath  seen  God  at  anytime." 
This  manifestation  had  three  aspects-— 
ver.  27.  (1.)  Over  the  dim  form  was  shed 
shining  light  like  to  glowing  ore,  and 
the  same  as  in  ver.  4,  which  radiated 
''from,  the  appearance  of  his  loins 
even  upward  "  (chap.  viii.  2).  (2.)  Upon 
the  lower  part,  "  from  the  appearance 
of  kiS  loins  even  downward  was  as  it 
were  the  appearance  of  fire."  (3.)  All 
round  was  a  shining  light  (ver.  28),  "  as 
the  appearance  of  thd  bow  that  is  in 
the  doud  in  the  day  of  rain."  Those 
three  aspects  were  united  to  frame  "  the 


appearance  of  the  likeness  of  the  glory 
of  the  Lord."  The  visions  of  God  over- 
powered Ezekiel,  "  I  fell  upon  my  face  " 
(Rev.  L  17). 

The  details  of  this  wondrous  vision 
may  be  summarised.  A  furious  storm 
from  the  north  is  seen  driving  a  vast 
cloud,  pervaded  and  glowing  with  rest- 
less  fires,  and  surrounded  with  radiance. 
From  this  fiery  cloud  four  living  beings 
appear,  whose  general  aspect  was  that  of 
man.  Each  had  four  different  faces  and 
four  wings,  and  two  of  the  wings  were 
stretched  out  in  juxtaposition  to  the 
wings  of  others.  One  spiritual  energy 
stirred  in  the  living  creatures,  and  under 
its  impulse  they  moved  Jike  meteors 
shooting  across  the  field  of  vision  and 
shining  with  the  brightness  of  fire.  By 
the  side  of  each  creature  was  a  gigantic 
double  wheel,  not  needing  to  turn  w  hen 
it  changed  from  one  direction  to  another. 
Eyes  were  set  round  the  outer  rims, 
and,  possessed  by  the  same  energy  as  the 
living  creatures,  the  wheels  made  aJl  move- 
ments perfectly  simultaneous  with  theirs. 
Above  all  was  an  expanse  of  awful  pure- 
ness,  and  on  which  was  the  likeness  of 
an  azure  throne.  Some  one  in  the  figure 
of  a  man  was  seated  on  this  throne — 
the  upper  half  of  his  body  shining  like 
glowing  metal,  the  lower  half  like  fire, 
while,  girdling  round  the  throne,  the  hues 
of  a  bright  rainbow  were  displayed.  A 
voice  proceeded  from  this  throne-crowned 
expanse,  at  the  sound  of  which  the  living 
creatures  let  down  their  wings  in  lowly 
reverence  and  silence.  Ezekiel  also  heard 
himself  addressed  by  an  unseen  speaker. 

The  appearances  which  accompanied 
the  designation  of  Ezekiel,  and  also  the 
repetition  of  their  prominent  aspects  at 
other  turns  of  his  service,  indicate  the  fact 
of  a  special  meaning  adhering  to  them  in 
view  of  what  was  appointed  him.* 

1.  Tlu  ttarm,  the  cloud,  thefire,  signify 
the  wrath  of  Qod  and  the  sufferings 
which  may  proceed  therefrom.  "The 
Lord  hath  His  way  in  the  whirlwind 
and  in  the  storm,  and  the  clouds  are  the 
dust  of  His  feet "  (Nah.  I  3).    Of  Israel 


*  ''If  any  one  asks  whether  the  vision  is  lucid,  I  confeBS  its  obecnrity,  and  ihat  I  can  scareely 
ondersuinrl  it ;  but  yet  into  what  Qod  has  set  before  us,  it  is  not  only  lawful  and  useful,  but 
necessary  to  inqarre.  We  shall  perhaps  but  skim  the  surface  of  what  God  wUh^  yet  this  ii  of 
no  Buiall  moment." — C<Uvin, 

»  17 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OiUF.L 


HOMILETIC  C0MMBNTAR7:  BZBKISL 


It  is  said,  "  The  Lord  thy  Qod  is  a  con- 
suming fire,  even  a  jealous  Gkxi  "  (Dent 
iv.  24).  Ezekiel  is  to  prepare  himself 
to  carry  a  message  of  judgment  and  woe 
to  his  people ;  be  is  to  be  invested  with 
authority  and  then  to  inspire  them  with 
terror.  But  not  unmitigated.  *'  The 
brightness  round  about,"  which  vers. 
27  and  28  signify  to  be  that  of  the 
rainbow,  warrants  the  belief  that  pity 
and  grace  will  surround  all  inflictions. 
The  false  prophets  spoke  of  deliverance 
without  punishment  and  without  re- 
pentance ;  Ezekiel  has  to  bear  down  all 
such  fancies,  and  proclaim  that  there  will 
be  scathing  trials,  but  afterwards  a  new 
heart  and  the  outpoured  Spirit. 

2.  The  cherubim.  In  chap.  x.  20, 
Ezekiel  intimates  that  the  living  creature 
which  he  saw  by  the  Chebar  he  was  led 
to  recognise  as  the  cherubims.  An  im- 
portant part  is  assigned  to  them  in  the 
Bible.  They  were  placed  at  the  east  of 
the  garden  of  Eden  ;  they  stood  over 
the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  in  Tabernacle 
and  Temple.  In  each  case  they  signified 
the  divipe  presence.  Hence  the  familiar 
expressions,  '*  He  dwelleth  between  the 
cherubims,"  "He  sitteth  between  the 
cherubims."  Their  outstretched  wings 
form  "the  chariot  of  the  cherubims." 
While  it  is  also  said,  ''He  rode  upon 
a  cherub,"  as  a  token  that  He  rules  all 
movements  among  the  forces  of  nature. 
It  was  an  obvious  reflection  of  cherubic 
forms  which  John  saw,  in  his  Revela- 
tion, "  in  the  midst  of  the  throne." 
What  did  they  signify?  In  all  cases 
they  signify  that  God  is  present,  and 
belong  to  His  manifestation  in  living, 
organised  creatures,  in  all  quarters  of 
the  world.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  the 
focea  of  a  man,  a  lion,  an  ox,'  and  an 
eagle  on  each  are  emblematical  of  the 
fulness  and  power  of  life.  The  fact 
that  they  were,  in  Ezekiel,  double  in 
number  and  more  complex  in  form  than 
those  found  in  Tabernacle  or  Temple,  is 
a  fact  which  goes  to  prove  that  they 
were  not  real  beings,  not  even  angelic, 
but  symbolical,  and  they  "at  one  and 
the  same  time  proclaim  and  veil  His 
presence.  When  He  is  honoured  as  He 
who  is  enthroned  above  the  clierubim. 
He  is  acknowledged  as  the  God  who 
18 


rules  the  world  on  all  sides,  in  power, 
wisdom,  and  omniscience."  They  re- 
present not  God  Himself,  except  as  He 
is  absolute  Life,  working  in  living 
creatures  and  moving  them  to  the  endis 
which  He  prescribes.  In  accordance 
with  those  ends,  the  clierubims  had  the 
appearance  which  bright  buniing  coals 
of  fire  have,  yet  the  Hre  was  separate 
from  them.  Thus  was  indicated  that 
all  living  creatures  could  be  made  to 
carry  out  the  righteous  judgment  of 
God  with  ominous  rapidity.  So  Ezekiel 
was  prepared  to  testify  that  all  hopes  of 
earthly  help  which  Israel  might  cherish 
would  be  speedily  falsified. 

3.  The  wheels.  In  the  Buddhist,  and 
partially  in  the  Hindu  religion,  a  wheel 
"  is  the  symbol  of  supreme  power  in  the 
hands  of  certain  monarchs,  who  are  held 
to  have  exercised  universal  dominion, 
and  who  are,  for  this  reason,  termed 
iui-ners  of  the  wheel''  A  similar  idea 
is  conveyed  here.  The  wheels  represent 
the  forces  of  nature  as  distinct  from,  but 
in  working  harmony  with,  living  beings. 
This  distinction  appears  from  chap.  x.  13, 
where  the.  right  interpretation  seems  to 
be  that  the  wheels  were  called  Galgal^ 
"whirlwind ;"  and  from  chap.  x.  6,  where 
fire  was  taken  from  between  them.  Those 
natural  energies  revolve,  along  with  the 
cherubim,  under  obedience  to  one  and 
the  same  inworking  impulse.  They  are 
used  when  the  Spirit  will,  and  go  to  any 
quarter  of  the  heaven  that  He  wills. 
One  wheel  is  within  another ;  changes 
are  complicated,  and  not  in  one  direc- 
tion only.  They  are  full  of  eyes  :  "  the 
symbol  of  intelligent  life;  the  living 
Spirit's  most  peculiar  organ  and  index.*' 
"Space  is  everywhere  equally  present 
to  them."  They  do  not  move  Jblindly ; 
they  can  perceive  that  which  is  opposed 
to  the  interests  of  God  in  any  quarter ; 
they  can  follow  up  all  traces  of  His 
enemies,  and  carry  His  terrors  wherever 
they  should  strike.  Ezekiel  must  ex- 
pect to  speak  of  various  trials  hanging 
over  all  classes  in  Israel,  and  certainty 
in  their  infliction. 

4.  The  appearance  of  a  throned  man. 

"  Whose  faith  has  centre  everywhere, 
Nor  cares  to  fix  itself  to  form." 

This  portion  oi  the  vision  is  seen  upon 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL.  chap.  I. 

a  firmament  which  preseDts  'Visible  the  same  as  in  the  Temple,  yet  with 
poetry,  gloriously  embossed,  and  whose  differences.  He  was  about  to  work  in 
psahns  are  writ  in  the  rhythm  of  mo-  new  methods,  and  would  make  known 
tion."  It  intimates  that  *'  the  heavens  to  exiled  Israel,  through  Ezekiel,  that 
do  rule,"  that  all  forms  of  animate  and  if  their  covenant  was  to  "  vanish  away," 
inanimate  existence  are  under  the  will  He  would  not  go.  He  would  rule  the 
of  tbe  Qod  of  glory.*  Besides,  He  is  heathen  as  well  as  His  chosen  seed,  and 
in  a  human  form,  which  cannot  be  ade-  one  day  evoke  from  all  quarters  the 
quately  seen,  while  the  appearance  of  glorious  cry,  "  Hallelujah  !  for  the  Lord 
brigbtness  and  fire,  and  a  rainbow,  in-  Ood  omnipotent  reigneth ! " 
dicates  the  holiness  and  righteousness  •«  One  God,  one  law.  one  element, 
and  grace  which  make  a  glorious  unity  And  one  far-off  Divine  event, 
in  Him,  and  are  possess^  in  absolute  To  whicli  the  whole  creation  moves.* 
perfection — a  type  of  the  glory  and  —Tmnyum, 
grace  of  Him  who  was  made  flesh  and  **  There  was  nothing  accidental  or  capri- 
dwelt  among  us.  "  God  is  the  unrepre-  cious  about  this  vision ;  all  was  wisely 
sentable  One.  He  has  no  similitude ;  adjusted  and  arranged,  so  as  to  convey 
and  yet,  without  any  misgiving  or  sense  beforehand  suitable  impressions  of  that 
of  inconsistency,  there  are  ascribed  to  work  of  God  to  which  Ezekiel  was  now 
Him  acts  and  appearances  which,  with-  called  to  devote  himself.  It  was  sub- 
out  the  conceptive  or  imaging  faculty,  stantially  an  exhibition  by  means  of 
can  have  for  us  neither  force  nor  mean-  emblematical  appearances  and  actions, 
ing"  {Lewis).  The  mighty  voice  and  of  the  same  views  of  the  Divine  char- 
the  movements  with  the  cherubims  acter  and  government,  which  were  to  be 
|x)iut  to  the  truth  that  He  punishes  His  unfolded  in  the  successive  communicar 
enemies  and  comforts  His  friends.  Thus,  tions  made  by  Ezekiel  to  the  covenant- 
sitting  above  the  cherubims,  He  does  people "  (Fairbaim). 

EOMILETICS. 
(1.)  The  Vision  is  Suggbstivk  Regarding  the  Government  of  God. 

I.  As  to  its  resourcea 

1.  They  are  manifold.  Wind  and  fire,  thunder  and  lightning,  the  wisdom  of 
man,  brute  force,  patient  labour,  swift  movements  are  significant  portions  of  the 
materials  which  He  can  gather  to  execute  His  purposes.  Men  live  in  perpetual 
contact  with  forces  which  may  affect  their  organs  of  sight,  hearing,  taste,  touch, 
and  which  can  be  marshalled  in  any  number,  in  any  strength,  and  at  any  moment. 
We  see  wrongly  if  we  do  not  see  that  the  uniform  of  God's  servants  is  woni  by  all 
animate  and  inanimate  creatures. 

2.  They  are  mutable.  They  are  restrained  and  again  in  motion,  now  in  the 
darkness  and  then  in  the  light,  here  as  a  glow  and  there  as  a  meteoric  flash,  acting 
inertly  at  one  time  and  intensely  after  that.  Changes  continually  come  up.  How 
remarkable  are  the  vicissitudes  in  nations,  churches,  families.  We  are  settled  in 
nothing — in  nothing  but  in  God. 

3.  They  are  inscrutable,  "  We  are  but  of  yesterday  and  know  nothing."  We 
see  little  else  than  an  item  on  the  outside  of  a  few  of  His  resources.  "  His  judg- 
ments are  a  great  deep."  "HLs  providence  walks  and  works,  darkly,  deeply, 
changeably,  wheels  about  so  that  mortals  cannot  tell  what  conclusions  to  make  "  as 
to  all  the  causes  which  bring  about  changes,  or  as  to  all  the  consequences  which 

,.  .*  "^^*  chembim  with  the  living  wheels  form,  so  to  speak,  the  chariot,  the  base  for  the 
living  God.  All  this  is  the  mere  forecourt  of  the  divine  sphere ;  the  innermost  circle  is  re- 
served for  God  fts  living  Spirit.  If  we  approach  from  the  side  of  the  world,  this  heavenly 
fulness  of  life  may  already  appear  to  be  the  Godhead  or  God.  But  when  we  are  in  possession 
of  the  Divine  Personality,  that  fulness  will  be  a  predicate  of  God,  a  mere  iubstr'tnm.  so  to 
say,  of  His  PerBonality."^2>onicr. 

19 


Digitized  by 


Google 


.  L  SOMILETIO  OOMMMNTARlt:  K7KWftfft, 


shall  follow.     <<  Hjs  ways  are  high  above,  out  of  our  sight,"  with  uations,  oounoik^ 
churches,  individuals — in  panics,  wars,  demoralisations. 

4.  They  are  subordinated  to  one  pervading  impulse.  Living  or  non-living,  one 
and  the  same  migbty  Spirit  works  in  all.  The  Spirit  which  brooded  over  a 
chaotic  creation  *' renews  the  face  of  the  earth"  year  by  year.  The  Spirit  of 
understanding  and  of  love  is  the  "Spirit  of  judgment  and  of  burning."  He 
divides  to  each  thing  severally  as  He  will ;  but  there  is  no  division  in  their  camp. 
They  do  not  fall  out  by  the  way.  They  work  together  to  fulfil  His  word.  There 
is  no  crookedness  in  their  goings  when  He  commands  to  go  '*  straight  forward." 
They  run  very  swiftly  in  accordance  with  the  might  by  which  He  energises  them. 
No  bullet  goes  so  fairly  or  rapidly  to  the  target  as  do  the  manifold  resources  of 
God  when  stirred  by  the  Spirit  of  life.  Why  should  men  resist  Him  f  Why  do 
they  yield  to  a  spirit  of  error,  of  lying,  and  of  whoredoms,  except  on  the  ground 
that  they  rebel  and  vex  the  Holy  Spirit?  When  will  Uiat  kingdom  which  is 
righteousness,  peace,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  permanent  on  earth )  But  what- 
ever discord  may  be  introduced  by  men,  the  Spirit  will  not  be  baulked  in  His 
aims.  "  He  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,"  and  He  will  avenge  the 
dishonour  done  to  His  righteousness  and  grace  by  means  of  the  pliant  resources  at 
His  command.  They  do  not  look  back,  that  would  have  denoted  unwillingness ; 
nor  turn  aside,  that  would  have  intimated  self-will ;  nor  suspend  their  movements 
before  their  course  is  completed,  that  would  have  spoken  of  weariness.  So  should 
men  follow  obediently,  unswervingly,  persistently  Him  who  guides  wanderers  into 
the  way  of  life,  and  sustains  them  therein. 

5.  They  inflict  chastisemeiU.  Gales,  fire,  lightning,  are  disastrooa  in  various 
ways  to  men.  The  doors  of  Lebanon  open  that  the  fire  may  devour  its  cedars. 
Snares,  fire  and  brimstone,  and  an  horrible  tempest  rain  upon  the  wicked,  and 
Ezekiel  saw  such  agencies  in  action  as  ominous  of  calamities  which  he  was  to 
declare  would  befall  his  people.  Thus,  above  Nebuchadnezair  and  his  desolating 
army  ;  above  losses,  pains,  bereavements ;  above  wars,  depression  of  trade,  lower- 
ing of  health,  we  must  observe  the  signs  of  the  Lord  condemning  untruthfulness, 
unrighteousness,  formality,  pride,  selfishness.  '*  Who  can  stand  before  Him  when 
once  He  is  angry  f "  Is  there  not  a  warning  to  '*  cease  to  do  evil,  to  learn  to 
do  well"! 

6.  TJi^  may  he  brought  from  any  quarter.  Out  of  the  north,  as  the  Assyrians ; 
out  of  the  east,  as  the  plague  of  locusts  in  Egypt ;  out  of  the  north-east,  as  the 
Euroclydon  in  Paul's  sea  passage  to  Rome,  God's  resources  can  be  drawn.  Men 
may  boast  of  their  soldiery  or  navy,  of  their  preparedness  for  any  war,  of  their 
civilization  or  religiousness,  of  their  worship  or  their  benevolence;  bnt  they  lay 
themselves  open  to  the  menacing  word,  **  I  the  Lord  do  blow  upim  it."  Li  front, 
in  flank,  or  in  rear  assailants  may  fall  upon  them.  "Political  changes  and  revoln- 
tions  are,  after  all,  only  the  moving  of  the  shadow  on  the  earthly  dial-plate,  that 
marks  the  mightier  motions  going  forward  in  the  heavens." — Moore, 

7.  Thfy  radiate  toiih  mercy.  His  resources  are  not  only  for  punishment  They 
are  wieant  to  show  to  men  their  evil  and  their  need  of  repentance  ;  to  show  that 
God  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that  all  should  come  to  repent- 
ance." Judgment  is  His  ''  strange  act."  He  wants  to  purify  the  world,  though 
the  process  be  slow,  just  as  He  is  separating  the  dross  from  the  heart  of  every 
believer  in  His  Son.  Even  if  a  deluge  of  wrath  is  sent  forth  in  order  to  sweep  off 
evil  habits  from  a  people,  after  the  floods  have  lifted  up  their  voice  the  rainbow 
will  appear.  The  covenant  of  the  Lord  is  sure  in  faithfuhiess  and  mercy.  "Once 
in  the  end  of  the  world  hath  He  ap[)eared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  Him- 
self."    "God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself." 

U  As  to  the  representation  of  the  divine. 

L  It  is  supreme.     All  things  are  under  His  feet     He  is  a  Prince  upon  His 
throne.     Nothing  stirs  or  rests^  nothing  develops  or  degenerates,  nothing  pain^  oi 
20 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMlLBTia  COMMENTARY:  MZBEIEIh  ohap.  l 

■ootlies  apart  from  His  coutroL  It  is  not  a  mechanical  force  which  operates  the 
changes  of  all  creatures.  It  is  One  who  possesses  power,  wisdom,  righteousness, 
love — *'  who  does  His  will  among  the  armies  of  heaven  and  the  inhabitants  of  this 
earth."  What  chu  btand  if  He  will  overthrow  ?  Who  hinder  if  He  will  open  the 
gates  to  anxiety,  sorrow,  shame,  death  ) 

2.  It  is  closely  allied  to  man.  Ezekiel  saw  **  the  likeness  of  the  appearance  of 
»  man."  We  must  not  say  that  Qod  is  corporeal  and  has  the  figure  of  a  man,  but 
we  can  say  that  He  has  some  striking  affinities  with  human  nature — '*  For  we  are 
also  His  offspring" — and  these  foreshadow  the  mystery  to  be  presented  in  the  end 
of  the  world,  and  in  which  Paul  grandly  exults.  God  ''  was  manifest  in  the  flesh." 
Therefore  was  it  possible  for  the  Sou  of  Qod  to  pray  ''  That  they  all  may  be  one ; 
as  Thou,  Father,  art  in  me  and  I  in  Thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us." 

3.  It  is  beyond  our  hiowledge,  *'  He  dwells  in  the  light  which  no  man  hath 
seen  or  can  see."  He  does  condescend  to  our  faculties,  and  by  means  of  the  hiero- 
glyphics of  undefined  forms,  of  clouds,  fire,  living  beings,  revolutions,  He  shows  us 
what  His  power  and  resources  are.  Our  thoughts  of  Him  suggest  more  riddles 
than  they  can  solve.  No  research  can  define  Him.  There  is  a  glory  excelling 
that  which  men  have  beheld.  He  has  never  appeared  as  He  really  exists ;  but 
*'  He  has  so  appeared  as  to  leave  no  doubt  on  the  minds  of  His  servants  as  to  their 
knowing  that  they  have  seen  God."  If  in  certain  aspects  He  is  ''  unknowable," 
yet  all  doubts  as  to  His  character  pass  away  when  Jesus  reyeals  Him.  '^  He  that 
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father." 

nL  As  to  the  preparation  of  a  human  servant 

1.  Reverence.  A  deep  feeling  pervades  Eaekiel  of  the  holy  supremacy  of  God. 
He  who  is  glorious  produces  another  state  of  mind  than  that  which  springs  from  a 
gratified  curiosity  or  an  increased  knowledge,  and  the  man  who  is  not  "  moved 
with  fear"  before  the  manifested  will  of  the  Almighty  is  a  man  who  will  neyer  serve 
Him  aright.  The  sight  of  Christ  Jesua,  the  only-begotten  of  the  Father,  will  lay  us 
at  His  feet,  utterly  self-emptied  by 'a  sense  of  His  spotless  glory  and  our  un  worthi- 
ness, and  will  be  a  prelude  to  His  touch  and  restoration. 

2.  Weakness.  Ezekiel  cannot  act  of  himself  in  co-operation  with  this  all-ruling 
God.  He  has  no  strength  to  carry  out  such  arduous  duties  as  are  justly  required. 
But  this  weakness  is  his  stepping-stone  to  light  and  power.  When  he  is  weak  then 
is  lie  strong,  for  God  will  bestow  sufficient  grace.  Trust  in  self  is  gone  that  God 
may  work.     Wisdom,  energy,  faithfulness  not  his  own  are  open  to  him. 

3.  Called,  Ezekiel  is  thrilled  by  the  yoice  which  addresses  him.  He  could  not 
serve  at  all  till  that  call  of  God  was  heard.  Men  cannot  act  for  His  kingdom  by 
their  own  impulses  and  preparations.  It  is  not  colleges  or  ordination  by  man  which 
make  fit,  but,  hearing  the  voice  of  the  Lord  within,  they  can  take  up  any  service 
pointed  out,  in  face  of  their  other  occupations,  of  fears,  of  reluctance.  Before 
Him  all  events,  however  solemn,  all  duties,  howeyer  untried,  become  dwarfed  and 
feasible.  '*  In  Christ  strengthening  me  I  can  do  all  things."  Between  His  voice 
and  yours  let  no  other  voice  come.  You  will  know  the  mark  to  aim  at,  and  reach 
*Vthe  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."  If  we  teach  or  preach 
about  His  kingdom  without  knowing  we  are  warranted  by  Him,  it  is  rather  sin 
than  service.     His  roust  be  the  impulse  and  sustainment 

4.  Susceptible,  Ezekiel  hears ;  for  it  is  little  matter  to  have  the  call  of  God  if 
we  have  not  ears  to  hear.  We  must  let  that  mind  be  in  us  which  will  desire  to 
recognise  and  apprehend  whatever  He  will  say  to  us.  "  If  men  did  consult  with 
Christ,  and  do  all  upon  His  warrants,  they  should  never  miscarry  in  their  ways,  but 
proceed  farther  in  the  paths  of  godliness  in  a  few  weeks  than  they  did  before  in 
many  years." — Oreenhill.  "Though  you  have  no  visions  of  God,  unwavering 
fealty  to  His  law  will  secure  that  He  will  guide  you  by  His  counsel,  and  afterwards 
receive  you  to  glory." — GouUy.  When  the  suggestions  and  motions  of  God's  Spirit 
come  on  a  receptive  heart,  they  subdue  carnal  reasonings,  stubbornness  of  will,  all 

31 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBARL  EOMJLETIC  COM  MEN  TART :  EZEKIEL. 

shifts  and  pntenoes,  and  frame  *'  a  resael  onto  honour,  sanctified  and  meet  for  the 
Mastoids  use,"  such  as  Ezekiel  became. 

**  It  is  of  much  concernment  for  ministers  to  see  that  they  have  a  guodand  dear 
call  to  their  ministry.  If  they  can  dear  it  up  that  Qod  hath  sent  them,  they  may 
expect  His  assistance,  His  blessing,  His  protection,  and  success  in  their  labours. 
However  tilings  prove,  this  will  be  their  comfort  in  the  midst  of  opposition, 
reproach,  persecution,  hazard  of  liberty  and  lives ;  I  was  called  of  God,  I  am  in 
His  work,  in  His  way.  He  brought  me  into  His  vineyard.  He  will  stand  by  me, 
I  will  go  on,  let  Him  do  with  me  what  He  pleaseth." — OreetUiUL 

ILLUSTRATIONa 

God  the  life  of  all  things. — Nothing  exists,  subsists^  is  toted  apoB  or  moved 
by  itself,  but  by  some  other  being  or  agent ;  whence  it  follows  that  everything  exists, 
subsists,  is  acted  opon,  and  is  moved  by  the  First  Being,  who  has  no  origin  from  another,  but 
is  in  Himself  the  force  which  is  Mlt.-^Swedenborg,  Ood  has  a  world  of  real  foroes  in  Himself. 
He  bears  within  Him  an  inexhaustible  spring,  by  virtue  of  which  He  is  the  Life  eternally 
streaming  forth,  but  also  eternally  streaming  back  into  Himself.  He  neither  empties  nor 
loses  Himself  in  His  vital  activity.  He  is  a  sea  of  self-revolving  Life ;  an  infinite  fulness  of 
forces  moves,  so  to  speak,  and  undulates  therein. — Dcmer,  In  this  communication  of  life^  Gkd 
gives  Himself  so  unreservedly  that  creation  feels  Him  as  her  own,  His  joy  as  her  Joy,  His  peaoe 
as  her  pence,  His  strength  as  her  strength.  His  personality  and  independence  as  her  personality 
and  independence. — IF.  White. 

Poreknowledgo. — The  divine  foreknowledge  has  put  a  stamp  of  that  which  was  ooming 
upon  that  which  went  before.  This  stamp  is  the  basis  of  figurative  language,  of  analogy, 
of  typology,  of  prophe^,  yea,  of  all  knowledge.  Every  lower  thing  is  a  figure,  a  type,  or 
prophecy  of  a  higher  thing ;  every  present  thing  contains  a  representation  of  a  coming  thing, 
and  every  visible  thing  is  more  or  leas  the  image  of  things  invisible.  Ood's  foreknowl^ge  thus 
becomes  the  great  highway  of  knowledge  to  man,  by  which  he  can  traverse  not  only  the  earth, 
but  the  universe  so  far  as  it  is  accessible  to  his  inspection. — W.  White. 

Clouds. — Those  war-clouds  that  gather  on  the  horison,  dragon-crested,  tongued  with 
fire  ; — how  is  their  barbed  strength  bridled  ?  What  bits  are  these  they  are  ehamping  with 
their  vaporous  lips ;  flinging  ofiT  flakes  of  blaek  foam  ?  Leagned  leviathans  of  the  sea  of 
heaven,  out  of  their  nostrils  goeth  smoke,  and  their  eyes  are  like  the  eyelids  of  the  morning. 
•  .  .  Where  ride  the  captains  of  their  armies?  Where  are  set  the  measures  of  their  march? 
Fierce  murmurers,  answering  each  other  from  morning  until  evening — what  rebuke  is  tbis 
which  has  awed  them  into  peace  ?  What  hand  has  reined  them  back  by  the  way  by  which  they 
eame  ?  "  The  wondrous  works  of  Him  which  is  perfect  in  knowledge  ?  "  We  have  too  great 
veneration  for  cloudlessness.— iZutHn. 

Human  ignoranoa — There  has  never  been  a  weak  deity  worshipped,  and  it  is  safe  to 
say  there  never  will  be  one.  Man  is  too  strong  himself  not  to  admire  strength,  and  looks  with 
pity  or  contempt  upon  weakness.  And  no  deity  can  be  pitied  or  despised  and  hold  his 
sovereignty  over  men's  minds.  The  heavens  must  be  braced  beyond  the  possibility  of  fall,  or 
they  who  live  beneath  the  dome  could  never  gase  with  awe  into  the  overhanging  spaces.  ...  I 
do  not  expect  that  any  of  mortal  kind  have  a  correct  idea  of  Qod.  .  .  .  How  little  do  we  know 
even  yet  of  the  qualities  and  uses  of  material  and  finite  Nature  I  For  Nature  is  yet  a  mystery. 
She  sits  like  the  veiled  prophet  in  the  inner  temple  of  her  abode,  whose  outer  walls  we  in  our 
groping  have  at  last  stumbled  against  and  upon  the  panels  of  whose  mighty  gates  a  few  of  our 
most  ambitious  scientists  are  beginning  to  rap.  If,  then,  so  little  is  known  of  Nature,  how 
little  indeed  must  we  know  of  the  Invisible  Spirit,  who  is  so  removed  from  our  senses  that  no 
man  could  look  upon  His  face  and  live.  How  flippantly  men  talk  of  Qod  I  As  if  they  could 
understand  the  measureless  reality  whose  reflection  they  only  behold  I  The  men  who  say  Ood 
must  be  Uiis  or  that,  must  do  this  or  that,  are  for  the  most  part  men  who  hare  great  intellectual 
vanity  and  great  spiritual  ignorance.  The  bowed  head,  the  closed  eye,  the  hand  on  the  mouth 
and  the  mouth  in  the  dust, — ^these  are  the  evidenoes  of  piety,  and,  I  may  say,  of  spiritual 
knowledge  also. — W,  H.  Murray. 

An  uiflnito  unknown. — We  are  separated  from  it,  not  by  any  anger  of  storm,  not  by 
any  vain  and  fading  vapour,  but  only  by  the  deep  infinity  of  the  thing  itself. — Rutikin, 
Capable  are  we  of  Gk>d,  both  by  understanding  and  will ;  by  understanding,  as  He  is  that 
sovereign  truth  which  com*>rehends  the  rich  treasures  of  all  wisdom ;  by  will,  as  He  is  that 
sea  of  goodness  whereof  whoso  tasteth  shall  thirst  no  more. — Hoticer, 

A  Seer. — ^The  more  I  think  of  it,  the  more  I  find  this  conclusion  impressed  upon  me^> 
that  the  greatest  thing  a  haraan  soul  ever  does  in  this  world  is  to  ie»  something,  and  tell  what 
it  taw  in  a  plain  way.  Hvndreds  of  people  ean  talk  for  one  who  can  think,  but  thousands 
can  think  for  one  who  ean  see.  To  see  clearly  is  poetry,  prophecy,  and  religion — all  la 
one. — RtukirK, 

Law  in  tha  spirituaL — Laws  are  operant  m  the  things  of  the  Spirit  as  truly  as  in  the 
22 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMlLBTia  00MMBNTAR7:  BZBKIEL.  ohap.  1. 

tlilngi  of  matter.  The  foro«8  there  are  not  disorderly,  nor  do  the  moTemente  which  thej 
generate  start  haphazard.  Thej  are  not  impulsive,  freakful,  and  fickle.  They  who  suppose 
that  the  coming  of  the  Spirit  to  human  consciousness  is  the  result  of  arbitrary  sending  and  of 
periodical  ordering,  and  not  the  result  of  a  ceaseless  and  ceaselessly  expressed  benevolence, 
doubtless  mistake.  .  •  .  The  anarchy  must  be  reduced  to  order ;  the  chuos  taught  the  nse  and 
made  to  feel  the  force  of  law ;  the  imperfect  organisations  of  society  be  supplanted  by  the 
perfect.  .  .  .  The  Spirit,  through  change  of  custom,  law,  and  habit,  and  by  a  gradual  transition 
of  the  world  from  old  to  new,  can,  at  last,  after  ages  of  reyolution  and  growth,  aeoomplish 
another  structure. — W.  H,  Murray, 

Ood  manifested. — Ue  thu  Creator,  the  OoTernor,  became  a  presence  clear  and  plain 
before  men's  hearts.  He,  by  the  marrellous  method  of  the  Incarnation,  showed  Himself  to 
man.  He  stood  beside  man's  work.  He  towered  aboye,  and  folded  Himself  about^  man's  life. 
And  what  then  ?  Ood  in  the  world  must  be  the  standard  of  the  world.  Orealness  meant 
something  different  when  men  had  seen  how  great  He  was.  Just  suppose  that  suddenly  Omni- 
science towered  op  abore  our  knowledge,  and  Omnipotence  abore  our  strength,  and  the  Infinite 
Wisdom  stood  piercing  out  of  the  sight  of  our  ignorant  and  baffled  skill.  Must  it  not  crush 
the  man  with  an  utter  insignificance  f  ...  He  would  be  brought  face  to  face  with  facts.  He 
would  measure  himself  against  the  eternal  pillars  of  the  universe.  He  would  learn  the  blessed 
lesson  of  his  own  littleness  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  always  learnt  most  blessedly — by  learning 
the  largeness  of  larger  things.  ...  If  you  could  only  see  God  for  ever  present  in  your  life, 
and  Jesus  dying  for  your  soul,  and  your  soul  worth  Jesus  dying  for,  and  the  souls  of  your 
brethren  precious  in  His  sight,  and  the  whole  uniTcrse  teeming  with  work  for  Him,  then  must 
come  the  humility  of  the  Christian* — Brooht, 

In  the  divinity  of  His  person  there  is  laid  an  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable  ground 
for  the  most  unbounded  confidence.  If  He  were  a  being  possessed  of  nothing  higher  than  the 
highest  possible  endowments  of  humanity,  we  might  well  scruple  to  place  in  such  an  one  a  con- 
fidence stretching  through  eternity.  But  being  God,  in  trusting  in  Him  we  rely  upon  a  power 
that  cannot  be  withstood,  upon  a  wisdom  which  hath  no  limits,  upon  a  truth  tha(  is  infallible, 
upon  a  love  that  is  unchangeable,  upon  a  fidelity  that  cannot  fail. — IF.  White, 

The  enduring  Word  of  God. — We  are  not  more  unworldly  than  the  patriarchs,  more 
spiritual  than  the  prophets,  more  heavenly-minded  than  the  apostles;  we  are  not  nearer  the 
great  celestial  verities  than  men  of  the  olden  time— at  least  by  any  philosophy,  or  science,  or 
culture  of  our  own  that  is  independent  of  the  study  and  the  grace  of  the  Scriptures ;  we  are  not 
beyond  the  Bible  either  in  its  letter  or  its  thought.  There  are  ideas  there  the  world  has  not 
yet  fathomed  ;  there  are  words  and  figures  there  whose  rich  significance  interpretation  has  not 
Tet  exhausted.  The  scriptural  style  and  the  scriptural  language  are  not  meant  for  one  age, 
but  for  all  ages.  Its  Orientalisms  will  grow  in  the  West ;  its  archaisms  will  be  found  still  young 
in  the  nineteenth  century.  Science  is  ever  changing,  as  it  is  oyer  unfinished  ;  its  language  is 
ever  becoming  obsolete,  as  it  is  ever  superseded;  philosophy  is  continually  presenting  some 
new  phase  of  its  ever-revolying  cycles;  the  political  world  is  ever  a  dissolving  yiew  ;  literature 
becomes  effete,  and  art  decays ;  *'  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall  stand  for  ever."  Not  so  sure 
are  the  types  of  nature  as  even  the  form  and  feature  of  this  written  word,  if  it  be  indeed  tk§ 
word  cf  Qcd,  uttered  in  humanity,  breathed  into  human  souls,  informing  human  emotions, 
conceiyed  in  human  thoughts,  made  outward  in  human  images,  and  indissolubly  bi)und,  as  the 
wondrous  narrative  of  the  supernatural,  in  the  long  chain  of  human  history. — T.  Leioit, 

Ghanges. — We  are  apt  to  fret  and  murmnr  at  the  motions  of  the  wheels  when  they  cross 
our  hopes  and  interests;  but  if  the  Spirit  of  God  be  in  the  wheels  and  acts  them  according  to 
His  own  pleasure,  then  all  our  impatience  is  groundless  and  sinful.  We  should  stay  and  quiet 
our  minds  under  all  turns  and  changes  in  a  world  for  discipline,  rebuke,  threatening,  lamenta- 
tion, calling. — M.  Meade, 

XTnity. — The  prophet,  cast  into  the  wide  world  and  feeling  himself  lost  in  it,  was  led  by 
the  Divine  Teacher  into  a  region  of  thought  to  wh'oh  the  Israelite  had  been  hitherto  compara- 
tively a  stranger — was  led  to  see  how  each  part  of  the  universe,  which  must  have  often  seemed 
to  him  a  storehouse  of  divided  material  idols,  was  pointing  when  seen  by  the  divine  light  to  a 
ipiritual  unity,  as  its  explanation  and  its  centre.  ...  It  is  Spirit  only  which  distinguishes  and 
unites,  which  brings  eacn  thing  forth  in  its  clearness  and  fulness,  and  brings  all  into  harmony^ 
.  .  .  a  Spirit  whidh  had  oome  from  some  higher  region.  There  is  One,  human  and  divine, 
from  whom  this  Spirit  has  proceeded,  in  whom  it  dwells  perfectly. — Maurice, 

8.  The  Commission  to  Ezbkiel  (Chaps,  iu-iiu  1-16). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Yer.  1.  captiyity,  the  title  rnxjai  have  been  con- 
**  Son  of  man."  This  is  the  customary  ditioned  by  that  fact,  and  would  signify 
furm  of  address  to  Ezekiel,  and  is  used  to  the  exiled  prophets,  away  from  the 
only  of  him  and  Daniel  among  all  the  eity  which  Qod  had  chosen  to  place  His 
prophets.     As  both  were  prophesyini(  in     name  there,  that  above  them  He  was 

23 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.L  HOMILBTIC  OOMMBNTART:  BZEKIBL. 


who  was  the  Gk>d  of  the  spirits  of  all  ancouscioos  and  his  spirit  came  to  him 

fleshy  who  would  commanicate  with  the  again ;  nor  scarcely  the  Holy  Spirit,  as 

souls  He  owned,  and  supply  all  that  -operative  in  pruphetic  revelation ;  but 

would  make  up  for  absence  from  the  the  Spirit  which  was  in  the  living  crea- 

land   of   promise   and   covenant.     The  tures,  and    wbicb,   no  doubt,  was  the 

title  hardly  could  intimate,  as  is  said  by  Spirit  of  Qod. 

commentators,  that  Ezekiel  was  in  need  Yer.  3.  "The  children  of  Israel"  The 
of  a  continual  reminder  of  his  human  most  common  expression  used  by  Ezekiel 
origin  and  frailty  and  unworthiness,  or  for  his  people,  perhaps  significant  of  an 
tliat  he  was  to  watch  against  being  amalgamation  already  begun  of  the  Jews 
puffed  up  by  his  visions,  or  tbat  he  was  with  the  remnants  of  the  ten  tribes  for- 
Bpoken  to  familiarh'  as  a  special  friend  merly  gone  into  captivity.  '^  To  a  ro- 
of God.  We  may  listen  to  the  phrase  bellioiu  nation,"  ot  to  the  nationa,  tJie 
as  expressing  both  a  contrast  and  a  con-  rebeU,  They  who  were  children  of  him 
uection  between  the  speaker  and  the  who  wrestled  with  the  angel  are  dete- 
hearer.  riorated,  not  to  the  level  of  a  heathen 
Yer.  2.  '^  The  Spirit."  Not  the  spirit  nation,  as  in  Isaiah  i  4,  but  to 'that  of 
of  Esekiel,  as  if  he  had  been  altogether  heathen  nations. 

ffOMILETIGS. 
(1.)  Requisites  for  Executing  the  Commission  (ii.  1-8), 

L  Lively  attention.  Ezekiel  must  no  longer  lie  upon  his  face ;  he  must  stand 
npon  his  feet  if  he  is  rightly  to  hear  the  voice  of  him  that  speaks.  The  call  of 
Qod  demands  of  our  human  faculties  a  readiness  for  action.  They  may  be  dead 
'  in  sins  or  stunned  by  some  masterful  emotion,  and  the  first  thing  needed  is  that 
they  should  be  raised  from  such  a  state;  then  they  will  be  fitted  to  hear  and  to 
obey.  To  be  in  a  condition  to  do  the  work  of  the  Lord,  so  far  as  that  condition 
is  dependent  on  a  man  himself,  is  to  be  in  an  attentive  attitude  regarding  Him. 
Are  we  watching  so  that  the  moment  in  which  the  Master  of  the  house  comes  we 
will  open  to  Him  1 

n.  Impulses  to  secure  apprehension.  The  Lord  acts  in  nature.  He  pledged 
Himself  of  old  that  the  seasons  should  not  cease  while  the  earth  remaineth,  and  He 
sends  forth  His  Spirit  in  spring  and  reneweth  the  face  of  the  earth.  He  woHcs 
thus  on  man.  Spiritual  power,  understanding,  and  love  are  wrought  in  their 
hearts  by  Him.  Supplies  suited  to  all  the  duties  He  may  impose  are  forthcoming. 
He  will  bring  persons  who  may  be  unconscious  into  consciousness,  in  darkness 
into  light,  and  the  hardest  position  in  His  kingdom  can  be  occupied  when  the 
Spirit  of  the  living  God  has  entered  into  the  occu[)ant  and  the  words  of  the 
Almighty  Speaker  are  heard.  Until  he  is  fitted  by  the  Spirit  to  hear  the  voice, 
words  would  be  spoken  in  vain,  however  adapted  to  the  sins,  or  weakness,  or 
ignorance  of  his  soul.  But  he  is  quickened.  The  Spirit  enters  into  him,  and  the 
words  which  follow  profit  him.  So  two  factors  develop  our  apprehension  of  Qod's 
will — His  Spirit  in  us  and  His  words  to  us.  The  efficacy  of  the  words  proceeds 
from  the  Spirit ;  the  words  are  the  means  by  which  the  Spirit  energises  us.  Read 
the  Word  of  the  Lord,  preach  it,  spread  it,  but  never  be  forgetful  that  the  grasping 
it  by  the  understanding  and  obeying  it  with  the  will  come  from  the  Spirit  whom 
Christ  sends  from  the  Father. 

nL  A  dear  defining  of  the  evil  to  be  engaged  with.  Qod  practises  no  con- 
cealment to  His  servant.  He  urges  him  to  count  the  cost,  and  look,  by  His  light, 
on  the  materials  he  has  to  deal  with.  He  is  to  regard  them  as  God  directs.  He 
is  to  submerge  any  tendency  to  make  excuses  for  his  peoploi  and  also  his  wishes 
for  peace,  comfort^  honour,  remuneration,  and  hold  up  to  view  the  solemn  and  deep- 
searching  decisions  of  the  Lord. 

1.  The  evil  is  earUrarietv  to  God,  Israel  had  forsaken  Him  to  serve  idols.  To 
2i 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTW  COMMBNTAnT:  BZEKIBL.  oha^.  n. 


leave  Him,  to  pervert  His  ordinances,  or  the  mixing  up  devices  of  their  own  with 
these  is  a  renunciation  of  His  authority — is  rebellion.  Departing  from  the  Lord 
was  the  root  which  sent  its  sap  into  each  branch,  twig,  leaf  of  their  conduct  before 
His  sight,  and  gave  character  to  every  false,  unjust,  selfish,  impure  thought,  word, 
or  action,  with  which  they  were  chargeable.  In  dealing  with  men  on  God's  behalf, 
His  servants  must  never  blink  the  fact  that  it  is  not  mere  mistakes,  mere  misfor- 
tune, they  have  to  contend  with ;  but  it  is  with  ''  the  minding  of  the  flesh,  which  is 
enmity  against  Gbd."  Tet  they  will  not  refrain  from  urging  His  chiinis  to  implicit 
submission,  and  will  desire  to  execute  their  service  in  the  knowledge  that  they  are 
**  earthen  vessels,"  and  "  the  excellency  of  the  power  "  is  with  God  alone. 

2.  The  evil  is  hereditary.  It  does  not  die  out  when  a  generation  is  dead.  It 
was  operative  in  the  Israel  who  dwelt  in  Canaan,  and  it  is  operative  in  the  Israel 
captive  in  Babylon.  As  the  fathers  resisted  the  Holy  Ghost  so  did  the  descendants. 
Parents  should  learn  not  to  continue  in  sin  against  God  for  their  children's  sake, 
and  children  learn  that  a  father's  example  is  not  a  binding  rule  as  to  what  .to 
worship.  Not  from  parentage,  not  from  ancestors,  not  from  mere  antiquity  must 
we  learn  ourxluty,  but  always  try  our  procedure  by  the  revealed  will  of  God. 

3.  The  evil  affecU  both  the  inner  and  the  outer  life.  The  heart  is  at  one  with 
the  conduct.  No  chasm,  no  rotted  bridge  lies  between  them  and  prevents  them 
from  uniting  their  forces  against  God.  No  regrets  within  hamper  the  words  and 
deeds  which  offend  Him,  and  the  sinning  men  go  with  unblushing  faces  in  their 
own  ways.  Such  is  the  evil  to  be  dealt  with,  and  *^  who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things  1"  It  is  not  merely  perplexing  to  human  strength  and  wisdom;  it  is  im- 
possible for  men  to  encounter  it  effectively,  except  the  Spirit  is  given  them  from 
above  to  know  what  God  is,  and  what  Qod  purposes  for  salvation. 

ly.  Snpport  from  the  authority  of  Qod.  Any  attempts  to  destroy  such 
rooted  impiety  could  bring  nothing  but  reproaches,  repulses,  and  defeats,  if  not 
under  the  authorisation  of  the  Lord  the  Spirit     That  is  provided — 

h  By  positive  appointmmt :  *^  I  send  thee."  Ezekiel  has  good  ground  for  the 
stand  he  is  required  to  take.  He  is  an  ambassador  of  the  great  king — sufficient 
warrant  for  any  message  of  woe  or  of  comfort,  and  a  pledge  that  all  needs  will  be 
supplied.  The  secret  place  for  receiving  true  power,  knowledge,  wisdom,  and 
adaptation  to  a  service  is  here.  I  do  not  go  to  it  of  myself.  I  do  not  seek  my 
own  things  but  the  things  which  are  Jesus  Christ'flb  I  have  behind  me  all  forces, 
for  He  is  with  me  who  has  "  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth." 

2.  By  a  full  title  to  tise  Mis  name.  He  deputes  Ezekiel  to  stand  in  His  stead. 
All  that  he  is  to  say,  so  standing,  will  express  the  true  state  of  the  relations  between 
God  and  the  people,  and  will  all  hold  good.  His  servants  are  prompted  to  learn 
thoroughly  and  to  utter  plainly  that  which  God  has  revealed.  If  they  are  not 
able  to  appeal  to  any  special  vision  or  ordination  of  the  Lord,  they  can  lie  open  to 
His  Spirit,  be  led  into  all  the  truth,  and  declare  it  with  no  hesitancy  of  accent. 
They  *'  preach  not  themselves  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  **  Their  word  is  i^th 
power." 

V.  Perserered  in  through  all  circum8taiice& 

1.  Because  fitted  for  men.  A  divine  message  is  not  dependent  for  its  truth  on 
any  earthly  position  in  which  it  may  be  uttered,  or  on  any  treatment  which  it  may 
receive.  Accepted  or  rejected,  it  retains  its  authority  and  adaptation.  Farmers 
must  prosecute  operations  in  their  fields  whatever  the  appearance  of  the  clouds 
may  be,  sure  that  vivifying  rays  of  the  sun  will  act  So  they  who  are  sent  with 
the  truth  of  Gk>d  must  affirm  its  declarations,  even  if  to  do  so  be  both  arduous  and 
unproductiva  Their  encouragement  and  their  constancy  are  to  be  taken  from  God, 
not  from  the  results  which  might  gratify  the  mind  of  the  flesh. 

2.  Because  it  will  not  be  altoyetfier  vain.  Should  no  success,  such  as  teachers 
are  eager  to  see,  ever  come,  and  people  maintain  their  attitude  of  disobedience  to 
Qod|  some  end,  which  He  has  proposed,  shall  be  sure  of  accomplishment     He  will 

26 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBA».  m.  BOMILETIC  COMMBNTA  BT:  SZBKIBL. 

Tindicate  Hii  righteoiuness  and  love  somehow,  and  present  the  way  of  truth  so 
that  men  will  not  be  able  to  plead  ignorance  of  His  appeal  to  them.  They  shall 
know,  even  thoogh  they  persist  in  stabborimess  and  rebellion,  that  a  prophet — a 
man  with  words  of  rebuke  and  impulse— has  been  among  them.  ^  The  light  is 
come  into  the  world,  and  men  loved  darkness  rather  than  the  light. ** 

3.  Because  obsUtcUs  are  not  bound  to  paralyse  effof^U.  Men  who  have  Qod  on 
their  side  are  stronger  than  all  that  can  be  against  them.  His  kingdom  never  has 
attempted  an  advance  except  in  face  of  chiding,  and  adverse  reports,  and  sullen 
looks.  His  servants  are  not  to  count  such  trials  as  strange  things,  but  set  their 
faces  as  a  flint  and  urge  His  warnings  and  entreaties  unwaveringly.  When  the 
Lord  is  on  their  side  they  need  not  fear  men's  procedure.  like  their  perfect 
Ezampler,  they  should  be  warranted  to  say,  ''  When  I  would  have  gathered  you, 
ye  would  not" 

VL  Demands  implicit  Bubmission.  To  stand  before  the  Lord  of  hosts,  like 
Elijah,  and  be  empowered  to  bear  His  messages,  what  stronger  force  can  there  be 
than  that  to  constrain  men,  who  are  loyal  to  Qod,  to  do  whatsoever  He  wishes) 
What  if  their  preaching  and  teaching  seem  to  be  addressed  as  to  a  blank  wall  t  That 
will  not  prompt  them  to  falter,  to  blunt  the  edge  of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  or  to 
compromise  the  claims  of  any  truth.  *^  It  is  required  of  stewards  that  a  man  be 
found  faithful"  They  are  not  so  to  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  they  who 
are  unwilling  to  meet  evil  reports  or  good  reports;  to  stand  in  the  midst  of 
calumnies,  threats,  oppressions ;  to  find  in  the  very  obstinacy  of  their  hearers  that 
which  develops  a  deepening  regard  for  Qod  and  a  deepening  sympathy  for  men. 
For  all  true-hearted  men  will  be  anxious  not  to  be  rebellions  as  others  whom  they 
see  to  be  rebellious,  being  sure  of  this,  nobody  but  himself  can  make  him  a  rebel. 
Above  all,  should  preachers  and  teachers  hear  the  voice  of  Jesus,  so  that  they  shall 
speak  what  He  bids  them,  and  never  be  disheartened  by  the  indifference,  the  levity, 
the  contempt,  the  resistance  shown  by  those  who  do  not  take  heed  how  they  hear. 

(2.)  Conscious  Acoeptancb  of  the  Commission  (Chaps,  ii.  8 — iii.  3). 

EXEQETICAL    NOTES.— Yer.   9.  eat  and  fUl  thy  bowels  with  this  roU." 

"  Sent  unto  me ;  '*  ratheTf  put  forth  unto  So  the  eating  could  not  be  corporeal ;  it, 

me  (as  in  chap.  viii.  3).    Yer.  10.  **Writ-  too,  was  happening  in  the  visions,  and 

ten  within  and  without,*'  as  indicat-  enjoined  Ezekiel  to  take  whatever  would 

ing  the  number  of  overwhelming  afflic-  be  spoken  to  him  into  his  inner  man, 

tions  which  were  to  fall  upon  the  rebel-  there  to  be  assimilated  with  his  own 

lions.  feelings,  thoughts,  will,  and  then  to  be 

Chap,  iii  yer.  3.  "  Oauae  thy  belly  to  declared  to  the  people. 

HOMILETICS. 

Duty  Acceptbd  for  Reasons. 

1  As  the  conunlBsion  issnes  from  a  divine  source.  This  is  signified — 
1.  By  its  direction,  A  hand  carried  the  symbolic  medium  of  the  commission, 
and  Ezekiel  recognised  that  hand  to  be  His  whose  mighty  voice  he  heard.  God  often 
appoints  to  duties  by  figures  which  are  not  unfamiliar  to  men.  Moses  saw  a  bush 
burning,  Isaiah  had  a  live  coal  laid  upon  his  lips,  Jeremiah's  mouth  was  touched 
by  a  hand,  and  Ezekiel  is  shown  a  book.  And  now,  when  men  hear  of  the  cross, 
the  tomb,  the  throne,  they  are  told  of  that  which  is  not  revealed  by  flesh  and  blood, 
but  by  our  Father  in  heaven.  Thus  the  Christ,  who  is  always  with  us,  directs  to 
hearts  the  truth  He  would  have  them  believe  and  obey,  and  what  we  ought  to  desire 
is  not  vision  but  faith.     ''  We  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight." 

S.  By  Us  plainness  to  the  understanding,    Ezekiel  could  not  have  made  anything 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILSTIO  OOMMBNTART :  SZSKIEL.  ohap.  Sl 


out  of  tha  book  unless  its  Holder  had  unrolled  it  and  showed  its  contents.  Then 
he  gets  a  glimpse  of  the  persons  to  whom  he  has  to  go,  and  of  the  prominence  he 
is  to  give  to  threats  of  coming  woes.  The  Lord  would  let  His  servant  clearly  see 
what  he  has  to  do.  He  wishes  no  vagueness  or  obscurity  to  be  in  any  mind  as  to 
the  certain  retribution  for  sin.  He  wants  to  convince  our  intelligence.  Mysteries 
there  cannot  but  be  in  His  procedure,  but  He  sanctions  no  blind  faith.  He  gives 
us  as  much  light  as  we  can  bear  for  the  time,  and  more  will  be  added.  '*  He  opens 
the  understanding  to  understand  the  Scriptures."  '*  He  gives  seed  to  the  sower 
and  bread  to  the  eater."  The  boldest  of  all  followers  of  ChriHt  the  Way  will  be 
those  who  most  clearly  see  that  He  is  the  Light,  and  that  "  whoso  believes  in  Him 
shall  not  abide  in  darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life.''  They  have  the  witness 
in  themselves.     Lighten  our  darkness,  O  Lord  1 

3.  By  its  announcing  tribulations  to  come.  Qod  only  can  tell  the  sorrows,  pains, 
and  harassment  which  will  be  imposed  on  any  sinners ;  and  Esekiel  may  see  written 
on  the  roll  those  future  sulTerings  which  men  could  not  foresee.  The  Israelites 
did  suffer  in  their  native  land,  and  if  sin  had  been  its  own  punishment^  the  punish- 
ment would  assuredly  have  ended  there.  But  it  did  not,  and  they  were  deported 
into  foreign  countries  in  order  to  be  visited  there  also  for  their  rebelliousness.  Sin 
is  not  its  own  avenger.  The  evils  which  follow  it  are  signs  of  Qod's  rule.  He 
manifests  His  righteous  character,  and  His  determination  to  govern  the  world  in 
righteousness.  In  due  places  and  at  fit  times  He  will  make  His  utter  abhorrence 
of  wrong  to  appear.  He  is  never  at  a  loss  where  to  strike,  or  whom.  '*  We  are 
sure  that  the  judgment  of  Qod  is  according  to  truth,"  and  that  all  suffering  among 
the  peoples  of  the  world  to-day  are  in  accordance  with  His  purposes  of  old.  He 
is  fulfilling  them  before  our  eyes,  though  we  cannot  compare  them  with  predic- 
tions of  them,  as  Eiekiel  and  Israel  oould.  "  The  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  people 
tremble." 

IL  As  the  commiasion  ia  aceompanied  with  power  to  ftilfll  it.  The  book- 
roll  was  not  handed  to  Ezekiel  with  the  guarantee  of  priests  or  church,  nor  from 
the  archives  of  the  Temple.  It  was  from  the  Lord  Himselt  Ezekiel  may  gather 
from  this  fact — 

1.  Tiuat  there  would  he  new  revealings  of  the  rule  of  the  Lord.  He  had  not 
exhausted  all  methods  for  characterising  the  proceedings  and  the  destinies  of  men. 
Fresh  conditions,  such  as  those  in  which  His  chosen  people  were  found,  opened  up 
the  occasion  by  which  He  could  unfold  distincter  views  of  His  just  and  good  will 
It  might  be  said  that  all  He  can  show  must  be  already  indicated ;  but  Israel  would 
not,  or  could  not,  read  the  logical  conclusions  implied  in  the  law  and  the  prophets. 
They  needed  further  teaching,  and  God  is  no  mber  with  His  knowledge  and 
wisdom.  He  freely  would  impart  to  all ;  He  never  binds  Himself  to  use  only 
established  institutions,  and  thus  does  He  the  more  thoroughly  bring  His  word  to 
the  platform  from  which  all  classes  hear.  We  expect  more  light,  even  with  a 
knowledge  of  His  will  far  beyond  that  which  £zekiel  could  receive ;  and  in  pre- 
sence of  novel  conditions  of  science,  politics,  ecclesiastical  developments,  we  should 
be  on  the  outlook  for  further  manifestations  of  Christ,  *'  who  is  the  power  of  Qod 
and  the  wisdom  of  God."  If  it  be  said  that  the  Book  of  Revelation  is  closed  now, 
it  should  not  be  said  that  wider  and  distincter  views  of  Revelation  are  also  shut 
out.     We  must  welcome  the  better  things  which  the  Lord  will  spread  before  us. 

2.  That  there  would  be  sensitiveness  to  receive  fuller  knowledge.  Nature  had  pre- 
sented to  Ezekiel  its  storms  and  lights  and  animal  forms  actuated  by  one  controlling 
force,  and  he  had  been  deeply  moved ;  but  no  special  message  was  there  of  which  lie 
eould  say,  *^  This  is  for  me  alone."  Now  there  is,  not  Ezekiel's  case  only,  but  myriads 
of  other  cases  attest  that  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  does  speak  to  human  consciences 
with  the  old  appeal,  "  Thou  art  the  man  1 "  He  wiU  uot  let  His  Word  miss  its 
opportunities.  He  singles  out  one  and  another  on  the  ground  of  their  competence 
to  obey  Him ;  and  if  there  h^  *■  single  person  who  has  no  sense  of  God  being  near 

27 


Digitized  by 


Google 


cfiAP.  tit  BOMILBTW  00MMENTAM7:  SiBKISL. 


and  bringing  something  to  him  perBonallji  it  !•  because  he  or  she  is  shutting  the 
ear  "  lest  they  should  hear  with  their  ears  and  understand  with  their  lieaii^."  For 
"the  word  is  nigh  thee,  even  in  thy  mouth  and  in  thy  lieart'^  God  opens  the 
door  of  faith,  and  men  may  enter  in  and  receive  that  which  flesh  and  blood  could 
not  give,  but  which  He  can. 

3.  That  this  knowledge  would  be  assimilated  to  his  Vmughts  and  ways,  Ezekiel 
has  to  eat  the  book.  It  is  not  that  he  is  merely  to  learn  its  meaning,  but  it  is 
that  he  is  to  make  all  its  words  his  own.  He  is  to  ** inwardly  digest"  them,  that 
they  may  obtain  a  form  suitable  to  his  character  and  environment.  The  Lord 
imparts  them  so  that  they  shall  be  turned  into  bone  and  muscle  for  prophetic 
tasks.  Thus  they  will  be  psychologically  the  prophet's  own  representation,  and 
yet  prepared  by  divine  energy  to  convey  an  adequate  idea  of  what  the  people  must 
hear  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  This  power  to  take  and  eat  the  book  symbolises 
the  truth  that,  without  baring  thus  assimilated  the  words  of  Qod,  no  one  ought  to 
teach  and  preach.  "Out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth  speaketh." 
Certainly  no  one  will  live  for  ever  who  does  not  eat  of  the  bread  of  life  which 
Christ  givea  The  word  of  hearing  does  not  profit  if  not  mixed  with  faith,  but 
when  with  the  heart  man  believeth,  then  will  fruit  be  borne.  God  knows  our  need ; 
He  gives  power  to  the  faint,  and  "  in  Christ  strengthening  we  can  do  all  things." 
This  is  ^true  inspiration.  The  divine  does  not  remain  as  a  strange  element  in  the 
man ;  it  becomes  his  own  feeling  thoroughly,  penetrates  him  entirely,  just  as  food 
becomes  a  part  of  his  bodily  frame"  (Umbreit), 

HL  As  the  commission  produces  satisfoction  with  itseU  Ezekiel  had  the 
sweet  experience  that  he  was  called  by  God  to  serve  Him,  and  found  it  eminently 
pleasant  to  '*know  no  will  but  His."  This  experience  follows  on  complete  sub- 
mission to  all  that  He  gives  us  to  know  of  Himself.  Once  taught  of  God,  we 
should  have  no  doubts  and  no  reserves.  Men's  commissions  often  disappoint, 
because  power  to  carry  them  out  is  not  welded  into  them.  God  never  lets  His 
workers  go  on  their  own  charges ;  He  is  prepared  to  supply  all  their  need.  Let 
them  but  be  consecrated  to  Him,  present  their  bodies  as  a  living  sacrifice,  take 
all  the  strength  and  love  which  Jesus  has  for  them,  and  they  will  be  enabled  to 
exclaim,  '*  I  take  pleasure  in  infirmities,  in  reproaches,  in  necessities,  for  Christ's 
sake."  To  be  used  for  the  Lord  will  be  a  sweeter  experience  than  we  shall  find 
elsewhere.  Even  if  we  have  to  tell  of  painful  and  woful  things,  we  shall  do  so, 
knowing  that  we  are  not  acting  on  the  promptings  of  our  own  temper,  not  serving 
our  own  desires,  but  obeying  "  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God  merciful  and  gracious,  who 
will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."  Come  what  may  in  our  life-service,  a  little  or 
a  great  duty,  one  to  which  we  run  or  one  from  which  we  shrink,  we  shall  surely  be 
able  to  say,  as  Jeremiah  did,  ^*  Thy  words  were  found,  and  I  did  eat  them ;  and  thy 
word  was  unto  me  the  joy  and  rejoicing  of  mine  heart ;  for  I  am  called  by  Thy 
name,  O  Lord  Gk)d  of  hosts." 

(3.)  Ratifications  of  the  Commission  (Chap.  iii.  4-15). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  5, 6.  contracted.     He  will  be  able  to  give  his 

"  Of  a  strange  speech  and  of  an  hard  whole  attention  to  the  meaning  rather 

language."     The  marginal  reading,  deep  than  to  the  vocal  sounds  of  the  words 

of  lip  and  heavy  of  Umgne,  indicates  in  which  he  declares  the  messages  of  the 

that  nothing  is  referred  to  here  about  Lord,  and  must  aim  that  his  people  tho- 

the  characteristics  of  national  languages,  roughly  understand  the  words  he  uses. 

It  is  the  obscurity  and  embarrassment  '' They  would  have  hearkened  to  thee." 

of  a  foreign  speech,  to  a  man  who  cannot  The  obstacle  meethig  the  prophet,  if  he 

employ  them,  which  are  brought  to  view,  spoke  in  the  words  of  the  Lord  to  the 

Ezekiel  is  to  speak  no  tongue  but  that  heathen,  would  be  their  language.  When 

of  Israel.      EUs  sphere  is  definite  and  he  speaks  to  the  Israelites,  it  is  their 

as 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


BOMiLETW  OOMMMNTAMT:  SiMKlML. 


OBaP.  Itt 


harduesB  of  heart  Familiarity  with  reli- 
gious words  often  counteracts  their  (ower. 

Yer.  9.  "As  an  ftdamant"  A  very 
bard  stone  of  some  kind.  We  may 
doubt  if  it  be  a  diamond ,  as  in  Jer. 
xviL  I ;  but  it  signified  to  Ezekiel  that 
he  would  be  made  more  than  a  match 
for  the  contumacy  of  Israel.  He  would 
be  neither  shamed,  nor  terrified,  nor 
put  down  before  his  rebellious  people. 

Ver.  1 2.  "  The  Spirit/'  the  same  which 
moyed  in  the  living  creatures,  "took 
me  np,"  or,  as  in  yer.  14,  "  lifted  me 
op."  He  had  been  standing  on  his  feet, 
bnt  now  there  came  a  feeling  as  if  he 
were  raised  from  the  ground  and  about 
to  be  removed  from  the  spot  at  which 
he  had  seen  **  visions  of  6od"  Just 
as  he  was  turned,  "  I  heard  behind  me 
a  Toice  of  a  great  mahing  " — a  sound 
of  loud  and  commingled  noises,  but 
not  that,  as  in  our  Bible,  they  only 
conveyed  the  cry,  "  Blessed  be  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  firom  his  place."  TJie  ap- 
pearance of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was 
to  be  withdrawn  for  a  season  from  the 
sight  of  Ezekiel,  but  wherever  it  might 
be,  resting  or  moving,  he  whs  to  know 
that  matter  for  praise  and  honour  must 
belong  to  it  It  is  not  said  who  gave 
forth  this  doxology ;  but  as  the  only 
articulate  voice  mentioned  is  (chap.  L 
28)  that  of  Him  who  is  on  the  sapphire 
throne,  the  voice  would  appear  to  have 
proceeded  from  thence,  and  so  clearly 
that  it  oould  be  distinguished  from  the 
other  accompanying  sounds,  which  Eze- 
kiel goes  on  to  specify.  Yer.  13.  The 
sound  of  great  rushing  was  caused  also 
by  ''the  noise  of  the  wings  of  the 
liying  creatures" — when  flying,  the 
wings  touched  one  the  other,  as  was 
intimated  chap.  L  24 — '^and  the  noise 
of  the  wheels." 

Yer.  14.  '*I  went  in  hittemess,  in 
the  heat  of  my  spirit."  He  was  de- 
pressed and  also  excited.  He  felt  his 
own  insufficiency,  and  in  a  glow  of  indig- 
nation regarding  the  work  he  had  to  do. 
He  went  straight  to  it,  for  he  was  mas- 
tered by  the  mighty  hand.  His  state 
was  akin  to  that  of  Paul  (1  Cor.  il  3, 
4)i  ^  I  was  with  you  in  weakness,  and 


in  fear,  and  in  much  trembling;  and 
my  speech  and  my  preaching  was  not 
with  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom, 
but  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and 
of  power."  Under  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  Ezt'kiel  went  into  society. 

Yer.  15.  Tel-abib,  the  place  near 
which,  probably,  Ezekiel's  home  was; 
but  instead  of  living  in  comparative 
seclusion,  he  was  required  to  lay  himself 
open  to  his  fellow-exiles.  '*  And  I  sat 
where  they  sat."  There  is  a  difficulty 
in  the  Hebrew  of  this  clause.  The  way 
of  solving  it  \thich  is  taken  by  the  Eng 
lish  Bible  is  that  suggested  by  ancient 
Jewish  critics.  The  Septuagint  has  an 
other  way,  by  leaving  out  "  and,"  and 
rendering  the  other  words,  *'t/iose  who 
were  there."  Some  later  commentators 
prefer  a  slightly  different  Hebrew  punc- 
tuation, and  translate,  **and  I  saw  thevi 
dwelling  there;"  while  others  give  this 
version,  "  and  where  they  were  dwelling 
there'* — a  version  perhaps  the  least  open 
to  objections — ^*I  remainedastonished  " 
— stunned.  Ezra  iz.  3,  4,  indicates  that 
Ezekiel's  posture  was  that  of  a  man 
who  does  not  move  by  reason  of  his 
emotion  and  infirmity.  There  follows 
continuous  silence  for  *' seven  days," 
not  as  a  fixed  time  for  mounitng,  but  as  a 
period  of  purification  and  probation  for 
appointed  services  (Lev.  viii.  33). 

lliis  paragra})h  conveys  to  Ezekiel 
the  purport  of  the  order  he  had  carried 
out  in  eating  the  roll.  There  are  repe- 
titions of  matters  which  had  already 
been  communicated  to  him,  but  they  are 
applied  to  a  somewhat  altered  condition. 
The  sight  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  the 
summons  to  serve  this  Ck)d  of  Glory, 
the  consent  to  do  as  be  was  instructed, 
are  followed  up  by  the  command  to  go 
and  do  the  service  in  the  allotted  sphere. 
Thus  in  later  days  Andrew,  Peter,  Philip 
followed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  before  they 
were  called  by  Him  to  become  fisliers  of 
men.  And. in  our  days  it  is  not  enough 
to  look  to  Christ  anH  feel  inclination  to 
take  up  a  portion  of  work  for  Him  ;  men 
and  women  need  to  get  the  opportunity 
which  is  furnished  by  the  Lord  opening 
a  door.    By  this  He  ratifies  His  own  call. 


29 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  in.  HOMILETIC  COMMKSTAR  Y :  EZBKIEL. 


HOMILETIGS. 

I  The  adaptedness  of  GKkI's  messages  (vers.  4-6). 

1.  They  are  transmissible  by  meiins  of  words,  Man's  language  and  thought  are 
bound  to  each  other  by  coherent  linka.  Qiven  words  will  suggest  ideas  correspon- 
dent to  them,  and  so  men  can  understand  what  the  purport  of  a  message  is.  The 
fact  that  God  is  on  another  plane  than  His  creatures  is  not  an  obstacle  t<»  His  com- 
municating with  them,  if  He  choose  to  do  so.  But  it  is  impossible  for  them  to 
perceive  His  method  of  doing  so.  Tet  it  carries  a  self-evidencing  power,  and  true 
men  can  unhesitatingly  say,  *^  Thus  saith  the  Lord.''  Mysteriousuess  does  not  in- 
Talidate  consciousness.  We  may  eat  the  fruit  though  we  cannot  tell  how  the 
tree  produced  it  from  soil  and  atmosphere. 

2.  They  are  transkUable  into  every  tongue  of  men.  It  may  be  rude  or  culti- 
vated, that  of  Israel  or  of  a  heathen  nation,  no  matter  which,  all  men  are  His  off- 
spring and  capable  of  receiving  what  God  wishes  to  let  them  know.  His  children, 
scattered  abroad  over  the  earth — Cretans  and  Arabs,  Indians  and  Negroes — hear  in 
their  own  tongues  wherein  they  were  bom  the  wonderful  works  of  God.  "  He 
will  have  all  men  to  be  saved  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth." 

3.  They  suppose  competent  messengers,  A  fit  messenger  will  speak  in  the 
language  of  the  people  to  whom  he  conveys  the  words  of  God.  To  repeat  them  in 
a  dead  language^  or  in  a  foreign  language,  or  in  the  hard,  unusual  terms  of  a  ver- 
nacular, is  to  go  agunst  the  desire  of  God  that  all  people  should  understand  His 
will  Preachers  and  teachers  should  aim  to  employ  language  which  will  produce 
the  clearest  and  most  widespread  impression  of  what  God  has  given  for  their 
hearers.  It  was  a  characteristic  of  our  perfect  Exampler  that  ''the  common  people 
heard  Him  gladly.''  He  should  be  copied  in  this,  if  possible,  by  all  who  would 
speak  for  the  Father. 

4.  They  do  not  compel  aoceptanee*  It  may  be  no  discredit  to  one  who  is  endear 
Touring  to  do  spiritual  good  to  men  that  he  is  not  attended  ta  He  may  speak 
precious  truths  in  yain,  and  that  not  because  of  the  unsuitableness  of  his  messagey 
but  because  of  the  state  of  those  who  hear.  Like  his  Lord,  he  may  feel  grieved 
because  of  the  hardness  of  their  hearts^  He  makes  his  appeal  to  those  whose 
eyes  the  god  of  this  world  has  blinded — **  who  love  the  darkness  rather  than  the 
light " — who  are  as  free  to  reject  as  to  accept  the  words  of  the  Lord.  But  while  be- 
lieving this,  let  all  who  speak  His  words  be  sure  that  they  state  them  as  they  ought^ 
and  then,  if  they  are  not  hearkened  to,  they  will  be  free  from  blame  for  their  unsuo- 
cess — they  will  sorrow  over  the  sad  fact  that  it  is  God  who  is  not  hearkened  ta 

5.  They  are  partial  in  tlieir  diffusion.  There  are  tribes  and  nations  which 
have  not  received  any  special  messages  regarding  the  glory  and  grace  of  the  God 
and  Father  of  their  spirits.  "  His  ways  are  past  finding  out."  It  is  sometimes 
said  that  if  the  servants  of  Gh>d  had  been  more  devout  and  enterprising,  such  a 
eondition  of  ignorance  as  to  the  true  God  would  not  have  remained.  There  is  » 
eertain  amount  of  truth  in  this  representation ;  but  it  would  be  an  error  if  we  let 
that  aspect  alone  be  regarded.  We  have  this  also  to  notice,  that  behind  it  there  is 
the  mightier  and  more  mysterious  fact  that  God  has  not  commissioned  messengers 
to  go  to  certain  peoples,  who  yet,  if  He  had  done  so,  would  have  embraced  His 
messages!  ''Even  so.  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight"  We  are 
dumb  with  silence.     We  can  only  wait,  believing  that  "  He  doeth  all  things  well." 

U  Sufficient  grace  proffered  (vers.  7-11). 

1.  To  meet  foreshadowed  difficulties.  The  Lord  is  wishful  that  His  servants 
should  not  be  surprised  at  hindrances.  Their  first  impression  generally  is,  that^ 
having  become  obedient  to  the  Almighty  One,  He  will  make  a  clear  way  for  them 
to  walk  in.  That  impression  is  not  caused  by  anything  He  has  said  or  omitted  to 
say.  He  knows  how  the  consciences  of  men  will  deal  with  His  righteous  claims  and 
turn  themselves  away  from  hearing  the  law ;  so  He  urges  His  people  to  count  the 
30 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOUILBTia  OOMMBNTART:  BZBKIEL.  obap.  m. 


•ost  of  serving  Him,  to  expect  rebuffs  and  disappointments.  Then,  if  they  fail  to 
win  men,  God  will  have  prepared  them  for  just  such  an  event  They  need  not  be 
cast  down,  however  painful  their  trials ;  they  must  act  on  His  authority,  though 
they  have  to  make  a  hard,  determined  advance. 

2.  To  enable  to  etand  firm.  For  all  such  failures  Qod  will  bestow  surpassing 
strength.  If  the  rejecters  are  obstinate,  He  will  make  His  servants  more  tenacious 
than  they.  He  will  ''give  a  mouth  and  wisdom,  that  all  their  adversaries  will  not 
be  able  to  gainsay  or  resist."  They  go  forth  with  precious  promises  from  "a 
faithful  Creator."  He  does  not  pledge  Himself  to  give  them  comforts  or  converts 
—He  does  pledge  Himself  to  give  "  mercy  to  the  faithful"  Jeremiah  heard  Him 
say,  ^  They  shall  fight  against  thee,  but  they  shall  not  prevail  against  thee,  for  I 
am  with  thee  to  deliver  thee."  Suspicious  and  angry  looks  may  confront  us,  but 
they  will  not  dismay  us,  for  the  Lord  is  at  our  right  hand.  ''  God  so  wishes  some- 
times His  servants  to  acquiesce  in  His  government  that  they  should  labour  even 
without  any  hope  of  fruit  Therefore  let  us  learn  to  leave  the  event  in  the  hand 
of  Gk>d  when  He  enjoins  anything  upon  us.  It  ought  to  suffice  us  that  our  obedi- 
ence is  pleasing  to  Him." — Calvin. 

3.  To  maintain  unbroken  communion.  His  words  remain  with  His  people.  His 
Spirit  is  ever  bringing  to  their  remembrance  the  things  He  hath  spoken.  Ready 
to  receive  Him,  they  find  a  spring  opened  on  every  parched  pathway — something 
fitted  to  sustain  them  in  all  duties  and  discouragements.  It  will  be  from  their 
own  negligence,  or  fear,  or  unbelief,  that  they  will  lose  the  light  of  His  conntenance. 
^  The  same  anointing  teacheth  you  of  all  things,  and  is  truth  and  is  no  lie ;  and 
even  as  it  hath  taught  you,  ye  shall  abide  in  Him." 

4.  To  promote  eomiuct  correspondent  to  His  assurances,  ''  He  giveth  grace  upon 
grace.**  <<  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given  ; "  and  intimation  is  made  to  Ezekiel 
that  He  expects:  (1.)  Acknowledgment  of  His  auUiority.  From  Him  alone  is  it 
derived.  No  man,  no  ordinance,  no  institution  can  convey  the  power  to  receive 
€h>d's  words  to  any  person.  Every  claim  to  possessing  such  power  is  baseless,  since 
He  claims  that  it  belongs  to  His  own  in  working,  and  is  communicated  to  whomso- 
ever He  chooses.  Men  can  truly  speak  with  a  ''  Thus  saith  the  Lord,"  but  it  is 
because  they  have  been  "  called  of  God,  and  have  bowed  to  that  calL  Such  men 
may  preach  boldly,  for  they  will  be  warranted  to  believe  that  they  do  so  through 
the  power  of  Christ  speaking  in  them.  (2.)  Unwavering  adJierenee  to  His  word  of 
trutlk  There  must  be  no  compromises  with  selfish  and  worldly  thoughts.  Whether 
the  truth  is  listened  to  approvingly  or  carelessly,  whether  it  is  acquiesced  in  or 
utterly  rejected,  no  part  of  it  is  to  be  concealed — "  all  my  words " — no  part  is  to 
be  mutilated,  for  He  who  speaks  is  'Uhe  Lord  God."  The  rain  cometh  down  from 
heaven  and  falls  on  soil  which  absorbs  it,  or  on  flinty  rocks  which  throw  it  off,  so 
is  the  word  which  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord.  *'  We  preach  not 
ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord." 

ni'  Appointment  to  labour  for  €k>d  (vers.  12-15). 

1.  By  the  energy  of  the  Spirit  He  knoweth  the  deep  things  of  Gtod,  and  is 
able  to  show  where,  when,  and  how  His  servants  must  go  to  speak  from  His 
mouth.  It  cannot  be  an  impossible  duty  to  be  '*  filled  with  the  Spirit :  **  it  cannot 
be  a  special  duty  for  a  few  amongst  those  who  obey  the  Lord  :  one  in  the  lowliest 
sphere  may  receive  this  "unspeakable  gift"  as  assuredly  as  one  in  the  most 
conspicuous  sphere ;  and,  supplied  with  the  Spirit,  all  believers  in  Jesus  will  hear 
His  voice  calling  them  into  His  footprints,  and  act  for  His  glory  in  all  ways. 
They  will  learn  to  prosecute  His  interests,  and  not  their  own,  wherever  He  leads 
them.  Not  by  desire  for  a  position  amongst  men,  not  for  **  filthy  lucre,"  not  ft»r 
success  will  they  be  led  amongst  acquaintances  or  strangers.  They  will  go  to  be 
''a  sweet  savour  of  Christ  in  them  that  are  saved  and  in  them  that  perish." 
Sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  they  will  speak  in  His  mighty  power. 

2.  In  the  face,  of  soul-reluctances.     The  circumstances  into  which  the  Spirit  lifts 

31 


Digitized  by 


Google 


(Jit  A  p.  III.  BOMILSTW  COMMENTARY :  BZBKIBL. 


the  children  of  God  are  not  always  agreeable  to  them.  Nothing  promising  maj 
appear,  their  opportunities  may  be  few  and  contracted,  or  the  people  may  be 
apathetic  and  scornful.  Not  despondency  only,  but  chagrin  may  infest  the  hearts  of 
those  whom  He  has  "chosen  for  Himself,  that  they  might  show  forth  His  praise." 
They  are  disposed  to  murmur  that  they  are  not  kindly  treated  by  being  appointed 
to  such  a  work,  or  are  not  qualified  to  face  the  difficulties,  and,  with  more  pity  for 
themselves  than  trust  in  the  Lord,  to  exclaim,  '^  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?" 
Alas  1  in  such  ^  bitterness  of  spirit"  there  may  be  the  result  of  misapprehension  of 
the  ways  of  Gk>d  and  irritation  against  them.  Our  only  security  against  mistakes 
and  disobedience  is  in  obtaining  the  gift  of  power — in  the  hand  of  the  Lord  being 
strong  upon  us.  Under  it  we  may  hare  a  masterful  experience  like  that  of  Paul, 
"  I  have  great  heaviness  and  continnal  sorrow  in  my  heart  For  I  could  wish  that 
myself  were  accursed  from  Christ,  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to  the 
flesh."  We  shall  bear  the  strain,  however  we  may  feel  as  if  we  could  cry,  "  Send 
by  whom  Thou  wilt  send,  but  not  by  me." 

3.  Willi  Buffi  ient  upholding.  "  All  the  need  "  of  those  who  have  given  them- 
selves up  to  the  rule  of  God  has  a  guaranteed  supply.  Their  weaknesi,  fear,  and 
much  trembling  do  not  exhaust  iU  They  will  not  long  falter,  and  will  not  retreat, 
because  they  ''  go  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  Qod."  They  will  bear  the  heat  and 
burden  of  their  day  of  labour,  because  "  greater  is  He  that  is  for  them  than  all  that 
can  be  against  them." 

4.  AfeeUd  by  th-ange  hindrances.  A  wide  door  and  effectual  was  opened  before 
Ezekiel,  but  disablement  and  silence  formed  his  first  experiences  upon  entrance 
thereunto.  Peter  is  to  be  converted  before  he  can  strengthen  his  brethren.  Paul 
has  to  go  into  Arabia  before  he  is  fit  to  be  a  chosen  vessel  unto  the  Lord.  Many  a 
later  Christian  has  found  unexpected  obstacles  interfering  with  the  service  to  which 
he  believed  himself  called  by  his  Master.  Weak  health,  uncertainty  what  first  to 
do,  severe  temptations  and  doubts  have  appeared  obstructing  his  devotedness. 
Sometimes  he  is  inclined  to  give  up  or  let  despondency  unman  him.  But  no  :  he 
has  to  hope  in  Qod,  for.  he  will  yet  praise  Him  for  the  help  of  His  countenance. 
He  must  sow  the  good  seed  of  the  kingdom,  if  he  can  ;  if  he  cannot,  he  must  wut 
till  Gk>d  tells  him  to  go  and  work  in  the  field.  All  delay,  all  pain,  all  inability  to 
do  what  we  hoped  to  do  have  purposes  which  will  not  really  hinder  "  the  end  of 
the  Lord."  ^'  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  Gk>d "  and  to 
the  interests  of  His  righteousness  and  salvation  amongst  men. 

ILLUSTRATIONa 

Ckmunnzdoation  firom.  God. — He  ean  have  His  infinite  and,  at  the  same  time,  His  finite 
aide  of  being.  He  has  His  own  eternal  thought,  and  can  also  think,  and  does  constantly  think, 
the  thoughts  of  time.  He  is  all-knowing,  and,  therefore,  more  intimately  present  in  our  souls, 
yea,  spiritually  nearer  to  us,  we  may  say,  than  we  are  to  ourgelves.  He  knows  us  not  by 
imedia,  by  signals  oat  ward  or  interior,  not  by  induction  from  effects  or  by  foreknowledge 
from  caoseSy  but  by  direct  and  immediate  presence,  even  by  spirit-pervuding,  interpenetrating 
spirit.  He  ean  think  oar  thoughts  as  we  think  them,  feel  our  feelings  as  we  feel  them,  know 
our  knowledge  as  we  know  it;  if  He  cannot  do  this,  then  are  there  deep  places  in  His  universe 
of  soul  unknown  to  Him  as  they  truly  are.  If  He  can  do  this,  then  he  can  make  a  revelation 
in  language,  in  any  language,  in  any  actions,  signals,  symbols,  in  any  outward  representations, 
in  any  inward  affections  of  the  soul,  in  any  finite  way.  If  Qod  thus  comes  down  to  us,  we  see 
reason  why  He  should  adopt  that  style  of  speech  which  is  the  most  outward,  the  most  pheno- 
menal, and,  therefore,  the  most  universal.  It  is  the  language  of  the  Infinite  speaking  through 
media  to  the  human  mind,  even  as  one  unseen  human  soul  speaks  to  another  homan  soul 
through  the  outward  undulations  of  the  air.  The  words  and  images  are  specially  seleeled  and 
specially  arranged  with  reference  to  the  wants  of  our  human  race  in  their  peculiar  moral  history. 
The  words  are  not  outwardly  spoken  to  the  prophet's  ears  or  telegrapliically  signalled  to  his 
imagining  sensorium.  They  are,  psychologically,  the  propiiet's  words,  the  prophet's  images, 
yet  still  none  the  less  specially  designed  throntrh  the  linked  media  of  revelation,  as  the  veiy 
best  poasiUe  words,  the  beat  possible  imagery  through  which  sucli  an  approximate  oommuniea- 
tion  of  the  ineffable  could  be  made  to  human  minds.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  every  type,  for 
fvefv  metaphor,  for  every  impassioned  appeal,  for  every  instance  of  the  divine  eondesoensioa 
92 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMSNTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  m. 


in  coming  down  to  us,  taking  the  scale  of  our  though ts,  and  speaking  to  ni  in  onr  own  hnmaa 
emotions,  onr  own  human  concepiiona,  as  well  as  in  our  own  human  words. — LewU,  No 
man  by  searching  could  ever  comprehend  the  glories  of  a  sunrise.  Only  as  the  sun,  coming 
np  from  behind  the  hills  of  the  morning,  reveals  himself,  could  we  know  what  morning 
is.  And  80  only  as  God,  moTing  up  by  a  law  of  motion  inherent  and  nndiscovcruble,  lifts 
Himself  into  tlie  horiEon  of  man's  oltserration,  can  man  know  what  God  is.  All  we  know  of 
Qod,  therefore,  we  know  because  of  revelation  made  of  Himself  by  Himself. — Murray. 
Nearer  than  **  the  next  street,*'  even  nigh  to  our  spirits  within,  and  yet  above  us  high  as 
heaven  is  above  the  earth,  is  God  felt  to  be  when  the  words  of  [prophets  and]  apostles  address 
themselves  "  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God."  While  not  rejecting  the  thought 
Off  exceptional  dealings  amounting  to  the  miraculous,  my  faith  acknowledges  as  normal  and 
underlying  all  hope  in  preaching  as  all  responsibility  in  hearing,  a  true  inward  divine  teaching 
in  the  Spirit,  enabling  him  who  is  yielded  to  i  ,  and  in  the  measure  in  which  he  is  yielded  to  it^ 
to  understand  and  welcome  revelation. — Macleod  CampbelL 

The  evil  religious  condition. — In  the  national  spirit  and  character  prevalent  in  any 
age,  every  member  ui  the  nation  without  exception  has  a  share.  Every  one  contributes  to  this 
spirit,  not  only  when  :i8  a  child  of  the  age  he  is  infected,  if  not  by  all,  yet  by  one  or  other  of 
the  sins  universally  diHu<ted  ;  but  also  when,  through  neglect  of  energetic  protest,  admonition, 
correction,  and  puniHhmcnt,  he  does  not  meet  it  with  opposition  sufficiently  decided.  But 
sinful  acts,  manifold  and  widely  ramified,  point  back  to  sinful  tendencies,  of  which  they  are 
manifestations.  There  is  nothing  external  without  an  internal  counterpart.  At  the  root  of 
illegal  acts  lies  the  illegal  condition.  .  .  .  God's  eye  pieroes  to  the  heart,  and  His  lips  of 
truth  describe  the  sinful  tendency  as  already  a  sinful  act,  a  transgression  of  that  law  of  His 
which  requires  obedience  of  heart  and  inclination. — Philippi 

Submiasion.  —  What  we  can  help  and  what  we  cannot  help  are  on  two  sides  of  a  line 
which  separates  the  sphere  of  human  responsibility  from  that  of  the  Being  who  has  arranged 
and  controlled  the  order  of  things.  The  divine  foreknowledge  is  no  more  in  the  way  of  dele* 
gated  choice  than  the  divine  omnipotence  is  in  the  way  of  delegated  power.  The  Infinite  can 
surely  slip  the  eable  of  the  finite  if  it  choose  to  do  so. — Mdmei.  It  is  absolutely  necessaiy  that^ 
in  activity  as  in  rest,  you  should  not  only  support  the  idea  of  €k>d,  but  that  it  should  be 
welcome  to  you ;  that  yon  should  feel  the  need  to  blend  it  with  everything ;  that  it  should  not 
disturb  but  complete  your  life.  If  it  were  not  so,  God  would  not  be  to  you  what  He  ought 
to  be,  nor  would  you  be  to  Him  what  you  ought ;  in  both  cases  your  life  would  be  mutilated, 
false,  absurd. — VineL  Every  time  Jesus  had  to  act  or  speak  He  first  efilaced  Himself,  then 
left  it  to  the  Father  to  will,  to  think,  to  act,  to  be  everything  in  Him.  Similarly,  when  we 
aet  or  speak,  we  must  first  efiiice  ourselves  in  presence  of  Jesus;  and  after  having  suppressed 
in  ourselves,  by  an  act  of  will,  every  wish,  every  thought,  every  act  of  our  own  self,  we  are 
to  leave  it  to  Jesus  to  manifest  in  us  His  will,  His  wisdom.  His  power.  With  Jesus  the  believer 
holds  direct  communication,  and  through  Him  alone  we  find  and  can  possess  the  IMng 
FMer.—GodeL 

BeceptiveneM  to  truth. — I  must  have  my  spirit  brought  into  contact  with  the  quality 
and  character  and  realitv  of  truth,  so  as  to  be  affected  by  it  in  accordance  with  iti  proper  nature. 
All  spiritual  truth  is  addressed  to  the  conscience  in  man,  and  is  understood  only  by  the  con- 
science ;  and  if  the  eonscience  is  not  in  action,  the  truth  is  to  him  like  light  grasped  by  the 
hand  instead  of  received  by  the  eye.  A  grammarian  or  logician  is  apt  to  forget  that  there  may 
be  meaning  in  the  words  or  reasonings  which  require  the  co-operation  of  another  faculty.  All 
spiritual  truth  is  of  inspiration,  and  speaks  to  what  is  of  .the  nature  of  inspiration  within  man. 
All  that  Ood  speaks  to  us  through  others,  or  from  without,  is  intended  to  make  us  better 
apprehend  what  He  is  speaking  to  each  in  the  secret  of  His  hemg.^Snkine, 

Prescience  of  God.— It  cannot  but  seem  to  us  a  higher  perfection  to  know  all  things  at 
once  than  gradually  to  arrive  to  the  knowledge  of  one  thing  after  another,  and  so  proceed  from 
the  ignorance  of  some  things  to  the  knowledge  of  them ;  and  that  nothing  is  more  certtiin 
than  that  all  possible  perfection  must  agree  to  God  :  so  we  find  His  own  word  asserting  to  Him 
that  most  perfect  knowledge  which  seems  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  increase.  It  is  not 
impossible  to  assign  particular  instances  of  some  or  other  most  confessedly  wickod  actions, 
against  which  GK>d  had  directed  those  ordinary  means  of  counselling  and  dehorting  men,  and 
which  yet  it  is  most  certain  He  did  foreknow  they  would  do ;  as  Ezekiel  was  directed  to  speak 
to  the  revolted  Israelites  with  God's  own  words  to  warn  and  dehort  them  from  their  wicked 
ways. — ffowe* 

Differing  results  from  truth. — It  is  from  no  fault  inherent  in  the  earth  that  it 
enables  the  upas-tree  poison  to  be  eliminated  from  the  same  soil  that  gives  us  the  bread  of 
life.  The  tree  elaborates  deadly  essences  through  an  organism  and  chemistry  of  its  own — a 
devil  in  the  tree— to  the  heart  of  man  misuses  the  good  things  of  God. — IF.  M,  W, 

Independence. — Warm  your  body  by  healthful  exercise,  not  by  cowering  over  a  stove. 
Warm  your  spirit  by  performing  independently  noble  deeds,  not  by  ignobly  seeking  the  qrm« 
pathj  of  your  fellows. — Tkoreau. 

To  feel,  to  i  iiink,  to  do  only  the  holy  right> 

To  yield  no  step  in  the  awful  race,  no  blow  in  the  fearful  fight. — Anon. 

«  33 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  HL  HOMILBTIC  COMMENT  ART:  EZEKIEL, 


There  is  tonie  in  the  things  thai  men  do  not  loTe  to  hear,  and  there  is  damnation  in  the 
things  that  wicked  men  love  to  hear.  Free  speech  is  to  a  great  people  what  winds  are  to  oceans 
and  malarial  regions,  which  waft  away  the  elements  of  disease  and  bring  new  elements  of 
health ;  and  whe/^e  free  speech  is  stopped,  miasma  is  bred  and  death  comes  fast. — Beeek&r. 
Find,  in  everj  stress  of  spiritual  fortune,  in  eyery  hour  of  supreme  exposure  to  evil,  in  every 
time  of  assault  from  wickedness,  find  your  resources  within  yourselves  ;  not  0/ yourselves,  but 
within  yourselves.  Too  many  people  have  an  outeide  God.  What  they  need,  what  the  world 
needs,  is,  as  Paul  said,  "  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory." — Murray, 

Ini^iration. — As  the  water  with  which  we  water  the  seed  sown  in  the  ground  does  not 
create  the  plant  which  g^ows  out  of  it,  but  stimulates  the  development  of  the  organs  which  had 
previously  l>een  formed  in  the  germ  and  sets  their  power  in  action,  so  the  Holy  Spirit  does  not 
substitute  Himself  for  the  individuality  of  the  sacred  author.  He  awakens  his  faculties,  He 
groups  his  experiences.  He  places  him  in  immediate  contact  with  salvation,  and  by  that  means 
confers  upon  him  a  special  gift — the  distinct  intuition  of  that  aspect  of  gospel  truth  which 
answers  most  specially  to  his  own  character  and  needs.  The  pole  which  attracted  the  sentiment 
or  intelligence  of  each  writer  was  not  situated  for  all  at  tne  same  point  on  the  sphere  of 
revelation.  —Oodet. 

Moral  government. — Who  shall  not  aim  at  the  same  end  at  which  God  aims  in  revealing 
the  gospel — ^that  end  to  which  creation,  providence,  laws,  precepts,  ordinances,  grace,  reason, 
conscience,  revelation,  everything  else  is  subservient — right  moral  action  in  principle  and 
practice  ?  Who  shall  not  use  the  same  means  for  this  end  which  God  uses — that  truth  or 
system  of  tmth  which  is  imbedded  in  His  perfect  moral  government — which  ever  places  man  in 
the  attitude  of  an  agent,  teaching  his  dependence  on  Gk»d  only  as  a  reason  for  acting  and  doing  f 
Who  shall  not  aim  to  make  the  same  impreesion  on  the  human  mind  which  God  aims  to  mske 
by  His  commands  to  act,  His  exhortations  to  act,  His  invitations.  His  entreaties  to  act,  thus 
throwing  every  iota  of  responsibility  for  the  issues  of  eternity  on  man  as  an  agent— ^  what  he 
does,  for  the  deeds  done  in  the  body  ?  God's  revealed  moral  government,  the  glorious  gospel 
of  the  blessed  €k>d,  is  by  Him  designed  and  fitted,  not  to  hold  a  world  of  moral  beings  like  this 
in  the  slumbers  of  spiritual  death,  but  to  ronse  and  move  and  stir  them  to  the  instant,  the 
ceaseless,  the  joyous  activities  of  that  spiritual  life  which  is  the  only  and  absolute  perfection  of 
a  spiritual  being. — Taylor, 

Spirit  and  matter. — ^All  life,  individual  as  well  as  universal,  has,  as  its  ground  of  origina- 
tion and  subsistence,  as  its  root  and  its  link,  God's  Xo70f  and  God's  rvw/ua.  Everything  lives 
and  moves  and  sui)si8t8,  closely  united  and  reciprocally  attracted  in  one  element — in  Him. 
'*  As  an  army  is  organised  by  its  general,  and  is  arranged  according  to  his  plan  of  battle,  even 
so  are  banded  together  the  starry  hosts  and  the  groups  of  atoms  according  to  the  will  of  one 
Eternal  Spirit.  This  creating  and  ordaining  Spirit  pervades  every  cell,  generates  and  regulates 
the  flight  of  eveiT^  working  bee,  according  to  the  eternal  purpose  of  the  whole.  .  .  .  That  which 
generates  the  galvanic  current  in  the  most  opposed  elements  of  the  voltaic  pile  ;  that  which 
gives  the  living  weapon  of  defence  to  the  electric  eel,  by  the  contact  of  moist  heterogeneous 
parts ;  that  which  inclines  the  magnetic  needle  to  the  north — precisely  the  same  creative  prin- 
ciple orders  and  controls  the  whole  fabric  of  the  world,  creates  and  vitalises  the  organic  cell, 
arranges  the  intercourse  between  spirit  and  matter."  Above  the  material  stands  the  power  as 
the  material  of  materials ;  above  the  power  stands  life  as  the  power  of  powers ;  above  life 
stands  the  spirit  as  the  life  of  life ;  above  all  spirits  stands  God  as  the  Spirit  of  spirits,  and 
there  is  no  solution  for  the  enigma  of  the  reciprocal  action  of  all  things  but  this  all-effecting 
and  pervading  chief  monad,  which  unites  all  contraries  in  itself  and  through  itself. — DdiizBch, 
Self-sacnflce. — The  completest  self-sacrifice  gives  the  completest  self-possession ;  only  the 
captive  soul  which  has  flung  her  rights  away  has  all  her  powers  free;  simply  to  serve,  under 
instant  orders  of  the  living  God,  is  the  higiiest  qualification  for  command.  This  is  the  mean- 
ing of  that  great  saying  of  CromwelPs,  '*One  never  mounts  so  high  as  when  one  knows  not 
whither  one  is  going" — a  saying  which  the  wise  and  prudent  scorned  as  a  confession  of  blind- 
ness, but  which  reveals  to  simpler  minds  the  deepest  truth. — Martineau. 

Waiting*. — God  has  so  arranged  the  clironometry  of  our  spirits  that  there  shall  be  thousands 
of  silent  momenta  between  the  striking  hours. — Martineau.  She  accepted  it  all  a1«olutely, 
unconditionally.  The  past  never  confused  the  present :  her  life  went  on  from  moment  to 
moment,  from  step  to  step,  as  naturally  as  plants  grow  and  flower.  She  said,  *'I  think 
there  are  lighthonaes  all  along  onr  lives,  and  God  knows  when  it  is  time  to  light  the  lampt,"^ 
Anon. 

Let  tongue  rest  and  quiet  thy  quill  be  I 

Earth  is  earth  and  not  heaven,  and  never  will  h% 

Han's  work  is  to  labour  and  leaven — 

As  best  he  may — earth  here  with  heaven. 

*Tis  work  for  work's  sake  that  he  is  needing | 

Let  him  work  on  and  on  as  if  speeding 

Work's  end,  but  not  dream  of  succeeding  | 

Because  if  success  wt-re  intended. 

Why,  heaven  would  begin  ere  «arth  ended,— Broitii^ 

S4 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


HOMILETW  OOMMENTART:  EZEKISL. 


OHAP.  m. 


n.— THE  ENTRANCE  BY  EZEKIEL  ON  THE  EXECUTION  OP  HIS 
COMMISSION.    Chaps.  III.  16— VIL     ' 


Esekiel  bad  been  fully  accredited,  but  did  not  begin  his  work  as  a  messenger 
of  the  Lord  when  he  was  sent  among  the  people.  He  remained  in  their  midst, 
silent  and  astonied — stunned — for  a  season.  Then  came  instructions,  conveying 
distinct  intimation  of  the  respon-sibilities  of  his  position,  of  the  thraldom  in  which 
be  would  be  held,  and  thereto  the  first  communications  for  the  people  followed. 

1.  Rbsponsibilitibs  Illustrated  (Chap,  iii.  16-21). 


EXEQETICAL  NOTES.  Ver.  16. 
''At  the  end  of  seven  days  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came.''  The  power  to 
prophesy  is  not  inherent  in  man.  It  is 
not  produced  by  his  agency.  It  comes 
and  goes  according  to  occult  influences 
whid^  do  not  obliterate  the  mental  con- 
dition of  the  recipient  Rather  they 
enter  into  such  correlation  with  him  as 
to  enhance  his  susceptibility  for  what  is 
divine,  and  are  always  in  a  certain  cor- 
respondence with  constitutional  ability, 
circumstances,  acquirements  of  the  per- 
son on  whom  they  openite. 

Ver.  17.  "I  have  made'' — given — 
''thee  a  watchman."  This  showd  to 
Ezekiel  how  he  is  to  think  of  himself  in 
the  work  appointed.  He  is,  as  it  were, 
to  cover  with  his  eyes  the  objectn  placed 
under  his  view,  and  to  take  action  in 
correspondence  with  their  appearances. 
He  is  to  look,  search,  announce  or  de- 
nounce. The  watchman  is  thus  closely 
allied  to  the  seer— only  this  is  the  pas- 
sive state  of  which  the  former  is  the 
active.  "Unto  the  honse  of  Israel." 
Not  as  an  organic  unity,  but  as  made  up 
of  individuals,  part  of  whom  are  wicked 
and  part  righteous,  and  the  prophet  is 
to  inspect  carefully  the  marks  which  are 
traceable  on  each  so  as  to  impart  appro- 
priate warnings.  "  Hear  the  wopi  at 
my  month."  He  is  not  to  produce  his 
own  opinions,  or  to  state  that  which  may 
agree  with  the  opinions  of  the  people ; 
he  is  to  stand  in  the  light  of  pure  truth 
and  goodness  and  tell  its  manifestations. 
^Qive  them  warning."  Be  not  a  lec- 
turer on  history  or  business ;  do  not  sit 
as  a  professor  to  set  forth  the  doctrines 
that  are  to  be  accepted  as  credible; 
«pend  not  your  time  in  making  np  com- 


plaints for  the  people  about  their  dis- 
tresses as  captives  in  a  foreign  land. 
Show  that  the  real  evil  is  in  themselves, 
not  in  their  environment;  rouse  up  a 
conviction  of  danger  to  them  so  long  as 
they  cherish  any  delusion  as  to  external 
relationship  to  the  Lord  God,  if  they 
are  disregarding  His  laws.  The  future 
is  ominous  with  storms,  and  they  will 
be  struck  down  if  they  follow  the  ways 
of  their  own  heart  "From  me."  It 
is  I  who  warn.  I  speak  to  thee  and  use 
thy  capabilities.  Take  a  fearless  mes- 
sage, for  I  am  with  thee.  Do  not  tra- 
vesty the  sketch  I  intmst  thee  with  by 
inserting  colours  which  I  warn  thee  not 
to  put  there. 

Ver.  18.  "When  I  aay  nnto  the 
wicked."  God  comes  into  personal  com- 
munication with  transgressors  when  His 
servant  delivers  His  message  faithfully. 
"Thon  Shalt  snrelydia"  The  identical 
threat  against  the  first  sinner  (Gen.  ii. 
17)  is  valid  throughout  all  generations. 
In  every  world  sin  is  death  as  contrasted 
with  life.  "  Nor  speakest  to  warn  the 
wicked  fh>m  his  wicked  way."  Once 
to  give  warning  is  not  to  fulfil  the 
charge  devolving  on  the  prophet.  There 
are  to  be  repetitions  and  perhaps  private 
appeals.  The  representations  are  to 
be  made,  moreover,  against  both  the 
man  and  his  doings;  for  there  are  sin 
and  sins — an  evil  disposition  and  exhibi- 
tions thereof.  "To  save  his  life."  The 
purpose  of  the  Lord  in  speaking  to  the 
wicked  man  ia  to  bestow  life  upon  him 
— not  merely  to  put  a  stop  to  iniquity. 
He  hath  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of 
the  wicked.  If  life  is  not  secured  he 
"  shall  die  in  his  iniq,nity,"  in  the  sins 
he  has  oommitted;  so  he  will  bring  the 

35 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.m. 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


penalty  upon  himself ;  '*  but  his  Uood 
will  I  reanire  at  thine  hand."     His 

bloud  is  typical  of  his  life,  aud  He, 
-whose  are  all  souls,  will  take  a  reckon- 
ing for  that  life  towards  the  loss  of  which 
a  guilty  negligence  has  contributed. 

Ver.  19.  "  Yet  if  .  .  .  he  turn  not 
from  his  wickedness,  nor  from  his 
wicked  way;"  if  he  do  not  repent — 
change  his  mind  and  conduct;  ''thou 
hast  delivered  thy  soul:"  thou  wilt 
stand  clear  of  any  accusations  of  having 
dealt  unfaithfully  in  thy  ofl^e.  In 
later  times  Paul  was  able  to  say,  ''  I  am 
pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men." 

Ver.  20.  A  parallel  case  to  that  of  the 
wicked  is  now  illustrated,  but  having 
reference  to  a  righteous  man.  It  is  sup- 
posed that  '*  a  righteous  man  doth  turn 
from  his  righteousness."  He  does  not 
show  a  simple  weakness  in  obeying,  but 
a  disposition  to  evil  He  yields  his 
members  to  '<  commit  iniquity,  and  I 
lay — give— 9k  stumblingblock  before 
him."  God  terapteth  not  any  man,  but 
He  arranges  the  circumstances  of  men 
80  that  an  evil  heart  finds  occasion  to 
assert  its  power,  and  to  draw  from  the 
paths  of  righteousness  into  the  ways  of 
sin.  Thus  gold  and  silver  (chap,  vil 
19),  and  a  regard  for  sensuous  worship 
(chap.  xiv.  4,  7),  affected  the  Israelites 
so  that  they  stumbled.     Pharaoh  is  an 


illustration  of  an  individual,  under  pro- 
vidential events,  becoming  hardened 
against  the  good  an«l  holy  will  of  the 
Lord  (Exod.  vii.  8,  22,  viii.  15).  "  Be- 
cause thou  hast  not  given  him  warn- 
ing, he  shall  die  in  his  sin."  The 
watchman  will  be  counted  guilty  of 
negligence,  but  his  neglect  will  not 
excuse  the  sin  of  the  wanderer  from 
righteousness.  That  will  bring  death. 
**  And  his  righteousness,"  his  external 
habits  and  actions,  which,  "  touching  the 
righteousness  which  is  in  the  law,"  were 
blameless, ''  shall  not  be  remembered," 
they  shall  be  regarded  as  if  they  had 
never  been. 

Ver.  21.  On  the  other  baud,  *'  if  thou 
warn  the  righteous  man  that  the 
righteous  sin  not ; "  or,  if  thou  team 
tlie  rigJUeous  not  to  tim  as  a  righteous 
man,  i.e.,  as  professing  to  have  a  charac- 
ter which  is  unspotted  by  iniquity,  and 
he  is  confirmed  in  his  right  standing  by 
your  words,  *'  thou  hast  delivered  thy 
souL" 

Thus  Ezekiel  learns  the  principles  by 
which  he  is  to  be  moved  in  carrying  on 
the  office  of  a  watchman.  Incidentally 
the  procedure  of  the  divine  goTemment^ 
in  respect  to  moral  character,  is  indi- 
cated, but  that  is  a  subject  deferred  to 
chaps,  xviii.  and  zxxiii  more  especi- 
ally. 


HOMIZETICS. 

Qod's  call  to  senrice  is  a  trust  (vers.  16,  17). 

Such  a  call  may  be  special  and  capable  of  being  distinctly  realised,  as  by  Esekiel; 
or  it  may  be  general  and  only  its  principles  appreciated,  as  by  those  on  whom 
wishes  to  do  good,  vague  aspirations,  dreams,  impressive  events  have  been  operating; 
but  whatever  be  the  method  in  which  the  call  is  made,  its  character  as  a  trust  is 
never  altered. 

L  Its  features  as  relating  to  God  show  this. 

1.  7^he  call  is  conveyed  by  God,  He  can  act  on  the  human  will  through  any 
one  of  tlie  faculties  which  affect  it.  Prepared  eyes  can  see  visions  of  Gbd,  as  did 
Ezekiel,  Paul  and  others ;  sensitive  ears  can  perceive  the  sounds  of  His  voice,  as 
did  Isaiah,  John,  and  others.  He  uses  the  means  for  producing  dear  views  of  duty, 
more  or  less  definite  desires  and  purposes,  firm  resolves ;  and  whether  these  tend 
towards  prophesying,  preaching,  teaching  in  families  or  schools,  directing  the  sickly 
or  dying,  they  who  experience  them  should  receive  them  as  coming  from  the  Father 
of  lights,  the  Ruler  of  all  events.  They  may  be  recognised,  so  far  as  they  issue 
from  Him,  as  sent  by  Him,  though  the  recipients  should  not  have  '*  heurd  His 
voice  at  any  time  or  seen  His  shape."  The  labourers  go  to  work  in  His  vineyard 
at  the  hour  in  which  He  finds  them  ^dle.  The  child  of  a  godly  mother  responds 
86 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MOMILBTIO  COMMBNTART :  BZBKIBL.  ohap.  iu. 

to  Hifl  impulse  with,  *'0  Lord,  trolj  I  am  thy  seryanf    An  apostle  affirma,  ''A 
dispensation  of  the  gospel  is  committed  to  me." 

2.  It  is  concerned  with  tJve  truth  of  God,  His  truth  contains  knowledge  for  the 
wayfaring  man,  guidance  for  the  lost,  bread  for  the  hungry,  healing  for  the  wounded, 
life  for  the  dead  iu  sins — who  will  dare  to  smother  its  virtue  ]  Let  the  methods 
of  the  call  be  what  they  may,  the  work  is  to  be  begun  and  continued  in  simple 
acquiescence  to  that  which  He  reveals.  He  will  not  allow  another  standard.  No 
herald,  soldier,  minister  should  think  of  modifying  the  terms  in  which  a  govern- 
ment made  a  declaration  of  war  or  a  proffer  of  peace  to  another  government.  Less 
reasonable  is  it  to  affect  to  modify  the  terms  which  the  mighty  Qod  may  instruct  His 
servants  to  bear.  '^The  foolbbness  of  Qod  is  wiser  than  men."  His  words  are 
perfectly  and  always  true.  One  man's  mind  may  apprehend  them  Bomewhat 
differently  from  that  of  another  man,  one  speaker  proclaim  tbera  less  vigorously 
than  another ;  but,  in  any  case,  the  truth  iu  Jesus  must  not  be  departed  from,  must 
not  be  tampered  with ;  it  must  be  set  forth  as  His. 

3.  Ii$  contents  are  meant  for  all  hearers,  Ezekiel  is  appointed  watchman,  not 
for  some  individuals  or  for  some  sections  of  his  people,  but  for  the  whole  house  of 
Israel.  The  Lord  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  has  teachings  for  the  young  and  adult, 
for  poor  and  rich,  for  wicked  and  righteous,  and  it  is  not  for  those  whom  He  calls 
to  be  His  messengers  to  alter  or  prescribe  limitations  to  the  reach  of  His  words. 
He  may  endow  one  with  a  gift  suited  for  children,  and  another  with  that  adapted 
to  the  rough  or  the  cultured,  and  a  third  with  that  fitted  for  the  unconverted  or 
believers ;  each  is  to  use  his  gift  in  the  distinct  understanding  that  the  truth  of 
Gk)d  is  applied  to  specific  conditiona  Underlying  this  conviction  of  the  adaptation 
of  God's  word  to  each  person  should  be  the  strong  living  thought  that  the  whole 
world  lies  within  the  scope  of  the  divine  holiness  and  love.  In  our  own  houses, 
or  outside  of  them,  there  are  those  for  whom  His  food  is  prepared,  and  are  we  not 
to  distribute  it)  *'I  am  debtor  both  to  the  Greeks  and  to  the  barbarians,  both 
to  the  wise  and  to  the  unwise." 

n  Its  features  in  those  who  are  called  show  this. 

1.  In  reference  to  the  messages  they  receive,  there  is  to  be:  (1.)  A  consistent 
impressibleness  to  their  power.  His  servants  must  stand  in  living  and  persistent 
regard  to  God.  Creeds,  catechisms,  systems,  churches,  and  ecclesiastical  assemblies 
of  all  kinds,  are  as  likely  to  interfere  now  between  Him  and  the  single- mindedness 
of  those  whom  He  sends  forth,  as  was  manifested  by  the  old  priesthood,  of  whom  it 
was  said,  ''  Te  have  caused  many  to  stumble  at  the  law."  We  need  to  abide  with 
the  Holy  Spirit,  so  that  the  truths  already  learned  of  Christ  should  retain  as  fresh 
a  divine  power  over  us  as  truths  which  may  have  been  newly  given  to  us ;  we 
should  seek  for  the  ability  to  link  on  the  one  to  the  other,  so  as  to  be  '*  perfect  and 
complete  in  all  the  will  of  God  "  whensoever  we  speak  for  Him.  (2.)  A  readiness 
to  accept  more,  Ezekiel  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  been  lifted  up  by  the 
Spirit,  but  he  is  to  expect  farther  revelations.  None  have  such  abundance  of  light 
and  impulse  for  service  that  they  need  no  more.  They  have  not  yet  attained. 
The  glory  and  grace  of  the  Only-begotten  cannot  be  comprehended  in  a  lifetime. 
Our  minds  must  receive  the  mould  which  is  suited  to  our  Lord's  own  promise, 
"To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given." 

2.  In  reference  to  the  responsibility  imposed  on  the  messengers.  They  are  required  : 
(1.)  To  look  at  things  in  the  light  of  God,  It  Lb  sometimes  an  object  of  desire  to 
see  the  truth  of  things  just  as  Qod  sees  them.  Such  desire  is  worse  than  foolish, 
whether  it  relate  to  our  sins  or  duties.  But  to  ask  that  we  may  rightly  perceive 
how  either  sin  or  duty  stands  in  view  of  the  Holy  One  is  wise,  and  fitted  to  move 
us  toward  conformity  to  the  mind  of  Christ.  Many  a  sailor  can  satisfactorily  tell 
what  he  must  do  with  his  vessel  in  a  storm,  and  yet  is  unable  to  measure  the  pres- 
•nre  or  the  velocity  of  the  wind.  And  the  simplest  servants  of  the  Lord  may  so 
learn  His  thoughts  and  ways  as  that  they  shall  be  practically  agreed  with  God,  and 

37 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  m.  EOMILETIC  COMMBNTARY:  BZEKIBL. 


yet  be  still  far  from  eomplete  knowledge  of  Him.  Nevertheless,  practical  walking 
in  the  light  of  His  countenance  is  to  be  maintained  continually.  (2.)  To  tell 
others  what  u  shown  of  God,  The  spiritual  eye  and  the  heart  sensitive  to  Ilis 
presentations  respecting  man's  procedure  and  what  roan  should  do  are  not  to  be 
unused.  They  are  to  be  made  means  of  convincing  all  and  judging  of  all  ungodly 
deeds  and  righteous  efforts.  Plainness  and  faithfulness  must  be  brought  to  the 
front  Evasion  or  compromises  are  out  of  place  in  the  service  of  Him  who  seeth 
not  as  man  seeth.  The  message  is  from  Him,  and  will  be  associated  with  His 
gracious  i>ower  working  in  as  to  will  and  do.  *'  If  a  watchman  want  eyes  and 
knowledge,  how  can  he  discern  danger,  instruct  the  ignorant,  heal  the  wounded, 
reduce  the  straying,  lift  up  the  fallen,  feed  the  hungry,  comfort  the  feeble,  resolve 
conscience,  and  compare  things  past  with  things  present  and  future  t " — OreenhUL 

Poetnlates  for  an  effective  watchmaa  (vers.  18*21). 

1.  DiscriminaHon  in  addresting  the  people.  He  has  to  act  for  all,  but  the 
wicked  are  to  be  spoken  to  as  wicked  and  the  righteous  as  righteous.  Human 
intelligence  may  not  be  capable  of  distinguishing  the  inward  moral  character  of 
persons ;  that  inability  must  not  lead  to  the  confounding  of  wickedness  with  right- 
eousness. The  warning  has  to  be  uttered  with  all  plainness,  in  reference  to  dispo- 
sition or  action.  The  application  must  be  somewhat  personal — like  that  of  Nathan 
to  David,  '*  Thou  art  the  man !  "  The  forms  of  application  may  be  indefinitely 
varied,  bat  the  gi»t  of  it  will  ever  de6ne  the  separation  which  discriminates  ''the 
precious  from  the  vile."  The  fear  or  the  gentleness  which  prevents  a  follower  of 
Christ  from  making  it  clear  that  sin  is  death — no  matter  whether  the  sinning  one 
be  poor  or  rich,  a  so-called  worldly  man  or  a  so-called  Christian — must  be  counter- 
acted by  the  remembrance  that  '*  Qod  cannot  be  mocked ;  for  whatsoever  a  man 
soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Preachers  and  teachers  of  the  gospel  may  be 
deficient  in  some  valuable  qualifications ;  they  must  not  be  deficient  in  determina- 
tion to  avoid  whatever  will  lead  into  a  mistake  as  to  moral  conduct  They  have 
nothing  to  learn  from  the  maxim,  *'  Live  and  let  live."  They  have  to  hold  forth 
the  word  of  life  to  those  who  may  be  dead  in  sins,  and  to  those  who  may  have 
been  freed  from  sin  but  been  tempted  to  go  back  to  their  former  master,  so  that 
they  may  know  they  have  not  life. 

2.  Singleness  of  aim,  Tlie  purpose  of  Qod,  in  calling  men  to  receive  and 
promulgate  His  messages,  is  to  save  from  death.  He  does  not  want  the  soul  to 
revise  its  past  records  but  to  make  new  records.  He  does  not  care  so  much  to 
avert  puninhment  as  to  repress  the  tendencies  to  punishable  conduct — to  turn  from 
wickedness  and  wicked  ways  to  righteousness  and  righteous  ways,  from  death  to 
life.  There  may  be  many  pleasant  results  following  our  religions  efforts,  yet  the 
labourer  most  not  aim  at  less  than  saving  the  souls  alive  of  those  for  whom  he  acta. 
He  is  intrusted  with  that  on  which  depends,  not  the  mere  pleasure  or  comfort  or 
happiness  of  men,  bat  their  lives,  and  no  consideration  should  be  allowed  to  divert 
the  directness  of  the  aim  he  is  appointed  to  take. 

3.  Certainty  of  influenee.  He  who  brings  the  word  of  the  Lord  does  not  work 
in  vain.  It  may  be  that  be  does  see  results  such  as  he  wishes  to  see,  or  results 
such  as  he  most  earnestly  deprecates  should  not  occur ;  but  the  Master  sees  that 
he  sheds  *'  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death.'*  Still  it  can  never  ba 
matter  of  indifference  to  learn  what  is  the  influence  which  is  exerted.  "  When  Jesus 
beheld  the  city  He  wept  over  it**  '*  There  b  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angele  of 
Qod  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  *'  What  is  oar  hope  or  joy  or  crown  of  r^oio- 
ing  t  Are  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  His  coming  t  ** 
How  needful  to  abide  under  the  seriousness  of  the  conviction  that  we  are  affecting, 
for  weal  or  for  woe,  thotie  with  whom,  as  Christ's  servants,  we  have  intercourse,  and 
seek  **  by  all  means  to  save  somOi"  **  Let  as  throw  the  net  oft,  we  may  catch  fish 
in  a  dead  sea.* 
88 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTIC  C0MMBNTAM7:  BZSKISL.  obat.  xxu 

4.  Subordination  io  Ood,  He  retains  in  His  own  power  all  decisions  as  to 
death  and  life,  and  His  messengers  are  bat  instraments  for  declaring  the  principles 
on  which  He  grounds  His  procedure.  He  calls  them  to  '*  be  not  weary  in  well- 
doing ** — to  be  "  instant  in  season,  out  of  season ; "  but  to  not  one  of  them  does  He 
give  a  title  to  pronounce,  over  the  wicked  or  righteous  man,  the  sentence,  '^  I  con- 
demn thee  to  die.  I  absolve  thee  from  thy  sins."  "  Who  art  thou  that  judgest 
another  V*  It  is  arrogancy  and  boldness  to  step  into  Christ's  place,  and  impose 
any  laws,  decrees,  or  inventions  of  men  upon  the  consciences  of  others,  or  to  judge 
the  conditions  of  men,  without  warrant  from  Christ  and  His  Word.  Prophets  may 
not  do  it,  much  less  others.  That  power  is  not  transferred ;  the  power  which  He 
does  confer  is  to  declare  that  GU)d  Himself  denounces  death  on  the  impenitent,  that 
He  gives  life  to  those  who  turn  to  His  ways.  He  who  teaches  otherwise  does  not 
stand  to  his  appointment  as  a  watchman  and  travesties  the  authority  which  he 
might  rightly  wield. 

6.  Award  according  to  faithfulneis.  Office  in  the  kingdom  of  Gk>d  does  not 
screen  its  holder  from  the  righteous  judgment  of  Gk)d  if  he  is  negligent  in  duties. 
He  will  reckon  with  them,  both  for  what  has  been  let  alone  or  unfaithfully  carried 
out,  and  for  what  has  been  attended  to  and  faithfully  fulfilled.  The  day  will  come 
when  He  will  announce  the  reward  or  woe.  Omission  of  duty  may  be  as  fatal  as 
commission  of  evil — the  negligence  which  does  not  extinguish  a  spark  may  occasion 
a  conflagration  as  destructive  as  that  which  intentional  malice  may  cause.  How 
earnestly  is  the  questioli  to  be  pondered  :  Do  we  watch  for  souls  as  they  that  must 
give  account^  that  we  may  do  it  with  joy  and  not  with  grief  f 

Laws  forjudging  moral  conduct  (vers.  18-21). 

1.  Impartiality  iviU  be  dealt  out  **  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God." 
The  righteous  man,  if  he  turn  to  evil,  is  condemned  equally  with  the  wicked  man, 
and  a  wicked  man,  if  he  turn  to  rigliteousness,  is  saved  equally  with  a  righteous 
man.  They  who  have  served  the  Lord  cannot  expect  that  He  will  wink  at,  or  take 
no  account  of  their  transgressions  of  His  law,  on  the  ground  that  they  have  been 
serving  Him,  just  as  they  whose  hearts  have  been  stout  against  Him  are  not  to 
suppose  that  He  will  be  indifferent  to  the  repentings  wliich  are  kindled  in  them. 
They  who  have  begun  wrong  may  turn  to  righteousness  and  will  be  treated  as 
righteous  doers,  while  they  who  have  done  right  may  turn  into  a  wrong  way  and 
will  be  treated  as  wrong.  This  rule  for  moral  life  has  to  be  looked  at  without 
blinking — I  am  to  have  sentence  passed  upon  me  by  the  holy  God  not  for  what  I 
profess  to  be,  but  for  what  I  do. 

3.  Judgments  proceed  ctccording  to  the  direction  of  conduct.  One  step  aside  does 
not  of  itself  proclaim  that  a  man  has  left  the  way  in  which  he  has  been  walking. 
His  fixed  departure  is  known  by  the  steps  which  succeed  to  the  first  Those  suo- 
cessive  steps  will  result  from  the  disposition  of  the  traveller,  and  God  alone  can 
judge  of  that  We  can  see,  however,  that  a  first  stumble  out  of  the  way  of  right- 
eousness may  be  the  commencement  of  a  new  course,  which,  if  followed  on,  will 
bring  to  the  way  of  wickedness.  The  man,  as  he  verges  away,  may  still  wear  some 
of  the  habits  he  has  used  hitherto,  and  may  speak  in  an  idiom  often  different  from 
that  of  the  country  whose  frontiers  he  has  crossed  over;  but  he  has  changed  his 
direction — the  light  falls  \\\)on  his  back,  and  his  face  is  becoming  more  suffused  with 
the  darkness  towards  which  ho  is  tending.  His  case  calls  for  the  warning  that  he 
has  left  the  right  way,  and  that  the  end  of  his  movement  is  death — no  matter  if  he 
does  retain  some  resemblance  of  his  firmer  gait  A  wicked  man  abides  in  death 
not  because  of  one  sin,  or  one  class  of  sins,  so  much  as  because  he  goeth  on  still  in 
bis  trespasses — because  he  '^hateth  the  light,  neither  cometh  to  the  light,  lest  his 
deeds  should  be  reproved." 

3.  0uiltine$9  it  not  trant/erahle.  One's  wicked  or  rightaoos  doing  is  from 
himself.     No  scheme  is  possible  to  be  devised  by  which  we  can  transfer  our  moral 

39 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  la  ROMILBTIO  OOMMMNTAUT:  BZEKIEL. 


Gondact  so  that  it  shall  be  no  longer  onrii  There  is  no  escape  from  the  righteous 
judgment  of  Oud.  Circumstances,  tempteiB,  preachers  can  never  bear  the  blame  of 
that  which  has  been  perpetrated  by  our  own  hearts.  We  raaj  not  have  been 
advised  or  warned  by  those  whose  duty  it  was  to  advise  or  warn  us ;  their  failure 
does  not,  in  any  degree,  alter  the  character  of  the  direction  we  have  taken.  "  Every 
man  must  bear  his  own  burden."  Ignorance  may  be  a  ground  for  iiiflictiug  few 
stripes  upon  a  disobedient  servant,  but  cannot  destroy  his  obligation  to  the  master. 
"  I  never  was  told  "  will  never  be  a  lever  by  which  we  can  lift  off  from  ourselves 
the  onrighteousness  and  the  death  which  is  by  sin. 

ILLUSTRATIONa 

Beadiness  to  serve. — It  is  infinitelj  sweet  and  lovely  to  be  the  otgan  and  Bpokesman 
of  the  Most  High.  The  most  painful  divine  truths  have  for  the  spiritual  man  a  gladdening 
and  quickening  side. — H. 

To  my  Master  I  stand  or  I  fall ;  what  to  me  is  the  world's  aodaimf 

I  hear  not  its  loud  applause,  I  heed  not  its  bitter  blame, 

I  am  not  bound  by  the  laws  of  Herod's  judgment-hall. 

When  it  praieeth  me,  it  hath  cause ; 

Yet  what  it  seeth  for  flaws 

It  seeth,  nor  seeth  it  all. — QreeModL, 

He  shall  die. — Christ  died  to  save  the  world  from  the  curse  of  death  onder  which  it  is| 
not  a  future  death  of  misery,  but  an  actual  death  of  worse  than  misery,  a  death  which  involves 
our  liking  that  which  is  evil.  It  does  not  occur  to  us  that  to  like  to  be  wicked  is  to  be  damned. 
We  say  that  mere  wickedness,  mere  self-indulgence,  merely  being  alienated  from  Qod,  is  not 
worthy  to  be  called  death  unless  there  be  misery  conjoined  with  it — that  sufTering  is  more  to 
be  feared  than  sinning.  In  that  speaks  the  death  of  roan.  That  is  death  which  fears  suflbring 
more  than  sinning.  A  sinful  state  is  the  chief  of  evils ;  sinning  is  damnation  ;  self-indulyrence 
is  to  be  cast  into  hell ;  the  worm  that  dieth  not  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched  are  unbridled 
passions.  To  be  damned  is  not  to  be  miserable  but  to  be  bad,  and  Christ  is  spoken  of  as 
saving  us  from  sin,  from  corruption,  from  vain  conversation,  from  this  evil  world,  never  from 
pain.  It  is  hard 'to  believe  that  damnation  can  be  a  thing  that  men  like.  Corruption  is  cor- 
ruption in  man's  view,  though  worms  like  it.  Is  damnation  less  damnation  in  Qod's  view, 
though  men  like  it  ?  To  be  loved  by  a  man  whom  we  treat  as  an  enemy  is  to  have  coals  of  fire 
heaped  upon  our  head.  To  be  loved  as  Qod  loves  us,  we  being  such  as  we  are,  is  to  be  cast  into 
a  lake  of  fire.  The  love  of  Christ,  the  sight  of  God  as  He  truly  is,  must  have  power  to  save 
men  from  sin.    They  learn  that  sin  is  damnation  and  understand  their  Maker. — ffmUm, 

▲  vrtoBg  direction  fatal. — 

The  painful  warrior,  famoused  for  fight. 

After  a  thousand  victories  once  foiled, 

Is  from  the  books  of  honour  razed  quite. 

And  all  the  rest  forgot  for  which  he  toiled. — SkaJcetpeoft, 

2.  Pbophbtio  Thraldom  (vers.  22-27). 

EXEOETICAL    NOTES.— A   fresh  to  go  to  them,  now  impels  him  to  go 

impulse  from  the  Lord  impresses  upon  from  tliem,  "  into  the  plain,"  or,  better, 

Ezekiel    another    characteristic   of    bis  valley^  as  in  chap,  xxzvii.  1  -  probably 

mission.     By   eating   the   roll   he    was  the  same  depression  of  ground  as  this 

taught  that  his  words  should  be  those  near  Tel-abib. 

of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  by  being  a  toatcfi-  Yer.  23.  ''And  behold  the  glory  of 

mail,  that  he  must  speak   boldly  and  the    Lord    stood    there."     The    same 

without  fear  of  consequences.     Now  he  manifestation   of    majesty,  which    had 

is  to  learn  that  there  is  a  time  to  he  commissioned    bim,   again    appears    to 

filent  as  well  as  a  time  to  epeak^  and  warrant  him  to  hear,  speak,  act  as  His 

that   both    are    appointed    by    God. —  messenger. 

Speaker's  Com,  Yer.  24.  '*  Then  the  Spirit  entered 

Yer.  22.  *'  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  into  me,"  as  the  power  which  enables 

there  upon  me.''    The  people  amongst  men  to  accept  communications  from  the 

whom  Ezekiel  sat  had  not  been  altered  Lord,  and  which  fulfilled  the  pledge  of 

by  seeing  bis  strange  condition,  and  the  ver.  22.    *'  And  he  spake  with  me,  and 

divine  power,  which  had  impelled  him  said  unto  me,  Gk>,  shut  thyself  within 


40 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTART:  EZEKIEL. 


oHAP.  m. 


thine  house."  Ezekiel  was  to  be  a  sign 
uuto  tbe  people,  and  here  is  commanded 
to  do  that  which  would  be  a  symbol  to 
teach  them.  In  ver.  15  he  had  sat 
^  astunbhed  among  them  seven  days/' 
bat  he  is  not  to  do  so  again.  They  are 
to  be  taught  by  the  fact  that  lie  had 
withdrawn  into  the  privacy  of  his  own 
house.  Thus  isolated  he  preaches  to 
them  through  their  eyes  at  any  rate. 

Ver.  25.  ''  They  ahall  put  bands  upon 
thee."  This  shows  that  the  people  had 
access  to  the  prophet  within  his  house ; 
but  it  is  not  to  be  taken  literally.  If 
the  ''they"  refer  to  the  captives,  the 
phrase  will  express  tlie  idea  that  their 
rebelliousness  would  interfere  with  the 
prophet's  mission  and  hinder  its  develop- 
ment— as  was  illustrated  in  after-times 
with  respect  to  the  mission  of  One  greater 
than  Ezekiel : ''  He  did  not  many  mighty 
works  there  because  of  their  unbelief." 
But  the  reference  is  probably  to  the  pro- 
cedure of  the  Lord  Himself,  since  in  cliap. 
iv.  8  it  is  said,  '*  I  will  lay  bands  upon 
thee."  Of  what  efficacy  they  will  be  is 
indicated  in  the  words,  *'and  thou  Shalt 
not  go  ant  among  them."  This  is  not 
merely  a  result  from  the  binding ,  it  is 
rather  a  command  of  the  Lord.  Eizekiel 
is  not  to  consider  himself  free  to  do  as 
he  likes.  He  must  confine  himself  strictly 
to  his  house ;  on  no  accoont  to  sit  where 
his  people  sit,  for  to  do  so  would  be  to 
obliterate  the  lesson  given  by  his  isolation. 

Ver.  26.  This  lesson  is  further  incul- 
cated by  enforced  silence.    '*  Thou  Shalt 


not  be  to  thorn  a  reprover,"  a  man  who 
will  endeavour  to  convict  them  of  their 
sins,  except  so  far  as  and  how  I  direct 
thee.  They  are  not  always  in  a  state  fit 
to  hear  rebukes,  *'  for  they  are  a  rebel- 
lions honse,"  and  nothing  effective  can 
be  accomplished  as  yet. 

Ver.  27.  ''When  I  speak  with  thee 
I  will  open  thy  month."  The  time  to 
declare  the  Lord's  uund  will  come,  and 
then  Ezekiel  must  openly  and  boldly 
announce  what  he  receives  from  Him  to 
communicate.  It  does  not  seem  that 
this  temporary  restraint  hindered  verbal 
statements  about  ordinary  matters,  but 
only  those  which  came  to  him  in  the 
word  of  the  Lord.  His  silence  or  his 
utterance  of  the  divine  message  was  to 
be  dependent  on  the  express  sanction  of 
his  Lord.  Thus  when  his  tongue  cleaves 
to  the  roof  of  his  mouth,  when  he  cannot 
speak  the  words  given  him  by  God,  if 
his  mouth  is  opened  the  words  he  utters 
will  appear  the  more  distinctly  divine. 
"  The  divine  injunction  extends  over 
the  whole  period  which  ends  in  the  ful- 
filment of  the  prophecies  of  threatening 
by  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  This 
appears  especially  from  this,  that  in 
zxiv.  27  and  xxxiii.  22  there  is  an  un- 
deniable reference  to  the  silence  imposed 
upon  him  in  our  verse,  and  with  reference 
to  which  it  is  said,  that  when  the  mes- 
senger should  bring  back  the  news  of 
the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  his  mouth  should 
be  opened  and  he  should  be  no  longer 
dumb."— Zwt 


HOMILETICS. 

BSSTRAIKTS  IN   SbRYINO  THB   LoRD. 

L  They  are  often  experienced.  The  whole  course  of  the  history  of  the  king- 
dom of  Ood,  as  traced  in  the  Old  Testament,  may  be  pointed  to  as  showing  that 
the  godly,  whose  service  is  outlined  therein,  met  with  recurring  impediments  to 
their  efforts.  The  like  feature  is  observed  in  the  New  Testament.  Every  true 
life  for  Christ,  at  one  step  or  another,  verifies  the  expression  of  Paul,  "  Without  are 
fightings,  within  are  fears." 

1.  The  restraints  may  he  in  the  servants.  They  may  be  ready  to  spread  the 
g(^pel,  but  are  forbidden  to  enter  the  door  which  is  apparently  opened,  or  are 
BSLxcted  with  disease  and  unable  to  enter,  or  are  prostrated  in  their  energies  by 
some  domestic  event  and  unfit  to  enter.  In  such  and  similar  cases  they  must  not 
conclude  that  they  have  offended  the  Lord  because  silence  is  imposed  on  them ; 
they  are  not  to  write  bitter  things  against  themselves ;  they  are  to  bow  in  acquies- 
cence and  wait  till  Ood  open  their  lipib 

^  41 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.m.  HOMILBTIO  COMMENT  ART:  BZEKIEL. 

%  71k€  rtstrainU  may  he  from  those  for  whom  the  service  is  required,  (1.)  lltey 
wuiy  become  violent  against  the  persons  who  stand  up  for  the  rigJUs  of  God.  A 
propbet  like  Jeremiah  was  *' cursed"  by  every  one,  and  cast  into  a  miry  dungeon ; 
an  apostle  like  Paul  was  mobbed,  beaten  and  imprisoned,  and  unnumbered  injuries 
have  been  committed  against  less-known  followers  of  Him  who  was  crucified  iy 
wicked  bands.  (2.)  Or  the  people  mxxy  he  rehellious  in  heart  It  was  because  uf 
this  their  state  that  Ezekiel  was  shut  up  and  trammelled.  The  8oil,  into  which  the 
seed  of  the  kingdom  was  to  be  cast,  had  not  those  elements  in  it  which  would  act 
upon  and  vitalise  the  germs.  The  gospel  is  unproductive  in  many  a  sphere,  not 
because  it  is  not  plainly  and  faithfully  set  forth,  but  because  men  are  irresponsive 
and  unimpressed.  They  reject  ihe  medicine  which  would  bring  them  health  and 
cure.  Such  sad  conditions  should  not  prevent  further  efforts  for  the  redemption 
of  souls,  though  former  ones  have  been  made  apparently  in  vain.  We  must  not 
repress  our  longings  for  a  change.  We  must  watch  as  servants  who  wait  fur 
the  Lord. 

n.  The  restraints  are  nnder  the  direction  of  the  Lord.  He  concerns  Him- 
self with  every  matter  relating  to  His  kingdom  amongst  men.  The  enforced 
silence  and  disablement  of  the  prophet  and  the  *'  gross "  heart  of  the  people  are 
controlled  for  His  righteous  and  good  ends. 

1.  2'races  of  His  working  are  perceptible.  Restraints  are  felt  teach hig  His  suf- 
fering servants  to  be  patient,  vigilant  for  Him,  and  so  qualifying  for  future  action 
and  future  reward.  "If  we  suifer  with  Him  we  are  glorified  together."  Also  by 
those  restraints  the  evil  which  lies  in  hearts  is  disclosed.  Their  enmity  to  God  is 
elicited.  Their  hardness  becomes  more  intense.  Blinded  thus,  they  lead  the 
blind  and  ''  provoke  *'  God  to  send  a  famine  of  His  Word.  What  more  deplorable 
state  can  a  lost  traveller  be  in  than  that  in  which  he  can  be  no  longer  tracked  by 
the  guides  who  go  in  search  of  him  t  What  more  painful  illustration  of  their  state 
can  there  be  than  when  the  wicked  and  the  righteous  hear  warnings  no  moref 

2.  Hopes  of  Bis  working  may  he  entertained.  When  men  make  void  His  law, 
that  is  a  time  to  ask  God  to  do  special  work.  The  restraints  which  lie  in  the 
prophet's  disablement  or  the  people  s  sin  will  not  always  continue  to  press.  God 
will  not  be  served  only  by  silence.  He  will  open  a  door  of  utterance,  and  again 
send  forth  His  words  to  the  people  that  He  may  prove  whether  there  is  yet  a  heart 
in  them  which  will  take  heed  how  they  hear. 

in.  Restraints  may  be  associated  with  commnnion  between  the  Lord  and 
His  servants. 

This  fact  is  brought  to  pass — 

1.  By  afresh  consciousness  of  Qod  in  His  service.  When  His  faithful  followers 
are  "  troubled  on  every  side,"  they  often  realise  the  power  of  God  and  the  precious- 
ness  of  Christ ;  when  they  are  weak,  then  are  they  strong  through  His  grace.  He 
seems  to  come  nearer  to  them,  and  they  say,  '*  Thou  boldest  me  by  my  right  hand." 

2.  By  a  deepened  conviction  tfuit  He  who  has  led  them  is  the  same  for  ever, 
Ezekiel  is  not  left  to  remember  that  he  had  seen  the  glory  of  the  Lord;  it  is 
shown  to  him  again.  He  learns  that  God  is  all  that  He  was.  The  glory  of 
Christ  which  we  see  when  He  is  first  revealed  in  us,  the  glory  which  moved  us  to 
consecrate  our  lives  to  Him  and  His  work  on  earth,  that  glory  will  be  shown 
again  and  again,  if  we  wait  for  Him.  It  is  not  the  memory  of  a  first  love  which 
is  to  sustain  us  in  suffering  and  duty ;  it  is  a  renewed  sight,  **  day  by  day."  We 
are  prostrated  before  His  glory,  but  we,  beholding  that  glory,  shall  be  changed 
into  the  same  image,  from  gloty  to  glory — from  the  glory  of  suffering  for  Christ 
to  the  glory  of  reigning  with  Christ. 

3.  By  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  is  given  to  dwell  in  our  body  as  His 
temple.  He  takes  the  things  that  are  Christ's  and  shows  them  to  us.  He  teaches 
to  profit,  and  we  receive  power,  love,  and  a  sound  mind.  The  efficacy  of  all  true 
ministry  depends  on  His  energy.     It  is  as  the  servants  of  the  Lord  live  in  the 

42 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILSTIO  OOMMMNTARY:  SZMKlSL 


OBAr.  IT. 


Spirit  and  walk  in  the  Spirit  that  they  adeqoately  fulfil  the  misaion  to  which  they 
are  called.  And  since  He  ia  freely  and  fully  proiuLied  for  the  asking — as  the  gift 
of  a  father  to  his  children — what  sorrow  and  shame  may  not  affect  us  who  might 
have  received  so  much  of  His  power  and  yet  have  been  satisfied  with  so  little  I 
"  Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  )     Are  these  His  doings  t  '^ 


8.  First  Ikstruotions  bt  Signs  and  their  Interpretation 
(Chaps,  iv.  1-v.  17). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTE&— Eaekiel  ia 
ordered  to  carry  out  certain  specified 
processes.  Their  purport  is  expressed 
by  the  words  (iv.  3),  ''  This  shall  be  a 
sign  to  the  house  of  Israel"  The  use 
of  such  signs  is  partly  to  be  accounted 
for  by  the  circumstances  of  a  prophet 
whose  dwelling  was  in  a  country  in 
which  symbolical  figures  were  striking 
and  not  unusual ;  partly  by  the  psycho- 
logical fact  that  his  actings  were  to 
educate  the  people  while  as  yet  his 
tongue  cleaved  to  the  roof  of  his  mouth. 
It  is  a  mootpoiut  with  students  of  pro- 
phecy whether  to  regard  all  actings  of 
this  sort  as  internal  sensations  vividly 
realised,  or  as  taking  form  externally. 
**  No  general  principle  can  be  laid  down 
by  which  to  determine  how  far  such 
actions  pertain  to  the  province  of  the 
external  or  internal'' — Oefder,  To  say, 
that  all  that  was  commanded  to  Ezekiel 
is  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  yividness 
of  his  mental  view,  seems  to  contravene 
such  statements  as  that  he  sat  astonied 
seven  days ;  that  he  removed  his  goods 
from  one  place  to  another  in  sight  of  his 
people ;  that  he  made  no  mourning  for 
his  deceased  wife.  To  say,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  all  are  to  be  taken  literally 
seems  to  land  us  amid  insurmountable 
difficulties,  such  as  that  he  lay  three 
hundred  and  ninety  days  without  turn- 
ing, while  he  is  during  that  period  to 
mc'ike  and  bake  cakes  of  unprecedented 
ingredients;  and  also  that  he  was  to 
bum  a  third  portion  of  his  shaved  hair 
in  the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  though  he 
was  in  Tel-abib.  We  need  not  be 
troubled  at  failing  to  find  a  satbfactory 
decision  on  this  matter.  What  is  of 
paramount  interest  is  to  find  the  mean- 
ing involved  in  each  symbolical  act 
That  that  meaning  will  not  be  agreed  in 
by  every  one  cannot  surprise  ua.     A 


large  element  of  indefiniteness  exists  in 
ail  symbolism,  and  men  of  difiPerent  dis- 
positions will  create  images  of  unlike 
contour  through  the  hase  of  the  inde- 
finiteness. Nevertheless,  thoughts  may 
be  expanded,  and  desires  for  light  and 
guidance  excited  and  heightened,  as  well 
as  deadened,  by  the  very  uncertainty. 
Act-symbolism  exists  under  similar  con- 
ditions as  word-symbolism.  "  To  you  it 
is  given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  but  to  others  in 
parables."  *'  By  hearing  ye  shall  hear 
and  shall  not  understand,  and  seeing  ye 
shall  see  and  shall  not  perceive."  With 
inwrought  modesty,  and  prayers  for  the 
opening  of  our  understanding  by  the 
Holy  Spirit,  should  all  Scripture-symbols 
be  considered. 

The  four  symbolical  processes,  which 
Ezekiel  is  here  required  to  employ,  form 
parts  of  one  whole  presented  in  varying 
phases.  That  whole  is,  Israel  given  up 
to  punishment  for  sins.  The  coincidence 
of  this  section  with  Lev.  xxvi.  is  note- 
worthy. The  most  probable  explanation 
thereof  ia  that  Esekiel  had  thoroughly 
studied  the  picture  drawn  in  the  law 
and  reproduced  its  salient  features 
freely. 

The  nege  of  Jerusalem  symbolised  (iv. 

y er.  1.  *'  Take  thee  a  tile,"  or  a  brick, 
shaped  in  clay  and  afterwards  dried 
by  the  sun  or  burnt  in  a  fire.  Multi- 
tudinous specimens,  of  the  kind  which 
Ezekiel  was  to  use,  may  be  seen,  in 
the  British  Museum,  with  letters  and 
also  warlike  scenes  depicted  on  them. 
^  And  pourtray  upon  it  the  city,"  or 
rather  a  city,  which  is  immediately 
specified  as  the  one  least  likely,  '*  Jeru- 
salem." 

Ver.  2.  ^'Buildafortagainstil"  An 
instrument  of  ancient  warfare,  so  con- 

43 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  IT. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKtSL. 


stnicted  as  to  overtop  the  walb  of  the 
besieged  placOi  and  so  to  give  oppor- 
tunity for  the  besiegers  to  reach  the 
defenders  with  their  weapons.  ''And 
cast  a  mount  against  it."  Baise  an 
embankment  from  which  to  attack 
advantageously.  "And  set  battering- 
rams  against  it  round  about"  Beams 
suspended  so  as  to  be  readily  driven 
against  the  walls.  ''At  Kouynijik  there 
is  the  monument  of  the  siege  of  an  im- 
portant city  in  which  no  less  than  seven 
battering-rams  are  employed." — Layard, 
The  prophet  is  to  regard  himself  as  doing 
that  which  he  pourtrays  on  the  tile. 
He  acts  under  commission  from  God, 
and  so  it  is  the  Lord  Himself  who 
is  to  be  viewed  as  operating  against 
Jerusalem  by  means  of  the  Chaldean 
army. 

y er.  3.  *'  Take  unto  thee  an  iron  pan." 
A  common  utensil  for  cooking  in  the 
East.  It  was  to  be  fixed  perpendicularly, 
as  ''a  wall  of  iron  between  thee  and 
the  city."  A  separation  was  thus  made 
between  the  prophet  and  the  city,  and 
the  iron  pan  symbolised  the  barrier 
which  had  been  produced  between  the 
Lord  and  His  unfaithful  people.  "  The 
decree  and  the  sentence  of  Qod  against 
them  would  be  rigidly  carried  out,  and 
Gk>d  would  not  hear  their  prayers  and 
complaints  and  bend  to  them  in  mercy. 
How  far  they  must  have  degenerated 
for  Him  to  deal  thus!''  ''And  thou 
Shalt  lay  siege  against  it."  The  siege 
would  be  in  Ezekiel's  lifetime,  and  by 
him  as  acting  for  the  Lord.  So  it  is 
declared  that  "this  shall  be  a  sign  to  the 
house  of  Israel,"  i.e.,  to  the  twelve  tribes 
scattered  abroad,  both  those  in  captivity 
and  the  remnant  still  in  their  native 
land.  In  the  time  of  Esekiel  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  ten  tribes  and  the 
two  tribes  was  fast  disappearing.  A 
trace  of  its  existence  is  still  seen  in  vera 
5  and  6,  but  rather  as  a  relic  irom  the 
past  than  a  reality  of  the  present  When 
the  ten  tribes  were  led  into  captivity 
Judah  represented  all  Israel,  and  in  the 
course  of  time  the  remainders  of  the 
several  tribes  were  amalgamated  with 
Judah.  This  event  is  not  dimly  pre- 
dicted in  Jeremiah's  words,  "  The  house 
of  Judah  shall  walk  with  the  house  of 
44 


Israel,  and  they  shall  come  together  out 
of  the  land  of  the  north  to  the  land  that 
I  have  given  for  an  inheritance  unto 
your  fathers"  (iii.  18).  All  attempts  to 
show  that  the  lost  ten  tribes  have  been 
found,  or  hopes  that  they  may  be,  must 
be  dismissed  as  based  on  untenable  sur- 
mises. 

The  period  of  punishment  eymholued 
(iv.  4-8). 

Ver.  4.  "Lie  thou  also  upon  thy  left 
side."  The  posture  which  Ezekiel  has 
to  assume  of  lying  continuously  for  a 
lengthened  time  on  the  same  side  is  a 
picture  of  the  low  condition  of  the 
people,  not  only  throughout  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem,  but  in  the  whole  period  of 
chastisement.  The  prophet  becomes 
their  representative  here,  not,  as  in  vers. 
1-3,  that  of  the  Lord.  In  t;iking  that 
unshifting  posture,  he  must  be  open  to 
no  slight  suffering,  "and,"  so  it  is  added, 
"  lay  the  iniatdty  of  the  house  of  Israel 
upon  it."  He  is  one  of  them,  and  shares 
the  punishment  of  their  guilty  conduct 
for  theallotted  time — a  symbol  of  penal ty, 
not  of  expiation.  Thus,  too, "  thou  shalt 
bear  their  iniquity,"  is  not  to  be  ex- 
plained as  meaning  that  his  action  was 
to  signify  the  forbearance  of  Gk)d  while 
the  people  were  sliming,  but  the  infiio- 
tion  of  chastisement  because  of  sins  they 
had  committed. 

Ver.  5.  "For  I  have  laid  upon,"  or 
I  have  given,  "  thee  the  years  of  their 
iniatdty  according  to  the  number  of  the 
days."  The  Lord  had  defined  the  limit 
of  time  beyond  which  the  punishment 
of  Israel  would  not  go,  and  He  required 
the  prophet  to  be  subject  to  the  con- 
straint of  lying  on  his  left  side  for  the 
number  of  days  corresponding  to  the 
years  during  which  Israel  would  bear 
their  iniquity.  A  similar  posture  was 
to  be  taken  for  Judah. 

Yer.  6.  "  Lie  again  on  thy  right  side, 
and  thou  shalt  bear  the  iniquity  of  the 
house  of  Judah  forty  days."  Any  ex- 
planations, referring  the  three  hundred 
and  ninety  and  the  forty  days  to  events 
which  took  place  before  the  degradation 
of  the  Israelitish  people  from  their 
national  position,  are  forbidden  by  the 
fact  that  Ezekiel  is  to  exhibit  what  ii 
to   happen.      The  children  are  to  bear 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMSNTART:  EZBKtSL, 


OH  A  P.  rr. 


stripes  for  the  nnfaithfalnesB  of  their 
fathers.  The  duration  of  the  punish- 
ment  threatened — four  hundred  and 
thirty  years — is  obviously  related  to  the 
bondage  of  the  chosen  people  in  Egypt 
and  their  wanderings  in  the  wilderness. 
The  condition  into  which  they  would 
fall  would  involve  a  suffering  for  their 
sins  comparable  to  that  '*  hardship  and 
discipline  which  had  of  old  been  laid 
\k\H\n  their  fathers,"  and  illustrative  of 
the  Deuteronomio  prediction,  "  The  Lord 
shall  bring  thee  into  Egypt  again/'  &c 
(Deut  xzviiL  68).  Moreover,  as  the 
ten  tribes  had  forsaken  the  worship 
appointed  by  their  Qod,  in  a  way  that 
Judah  had  not,  the  period  of  suffering 
to  the  former  is  prolonged  far  beyond 
that  designated  to  the  latter.  But  no 
satisfactory  elucidation  of  the  two  dates, 
as  exact  points  of  chronology,  is  forth- 
coming. It  is  best,  perhaps,  to  regard 
both  as  symbolical  of  a  lengthened  time 
of  punishment  such  as  might  be  paral- 
leled by  the  servitude  in  Egypt,  and  also 
of  a  brief  term  of  punishment  such  as 
might  be  compared  with  the  trials  of  the 
sojourn  in  the  desert.  And  while  the 
sojourn  in  the  desert  was  the  passage 
from  slavishness  to  freedom,  from  igno- 
rance to  knowledge  of  God's  laws,  so  the 
privations  and  calamities  befalling  Judah 
for  forty  years  would  be  an  education 
out  of  which  hope  and  peace  would 
oome.  The  captive  Israelites  would  thus 
be  taught  that  only  in  association  with 
the  captive  Jews  could  they  look  for 
shortened  suffering  and  following  bless- 
ing. '*  I  have  appointed  thee  eaich  day 
for  a  year."  A  reference  to  the  judg- 
ment passed  upon  the  tribes  of  Israel 
for  their  mnrmurings  on  account  of  the 
report  of  the  spies.  "After  the  number 
of  the  days  in  which  ye  searched  the 
land,  even  forty  days,  each  day  for  a 
year,  shall  ye  bear  yoor  iniquities,  even 
forty  years"  (Num.  xiv.  34).  Thus 
past  lustory  is  used  to  represent  the 
future — what  God  has  done  in  respect 
to  sins  God  will  do. 

Ver.  7.  "Thine  arm  8haU  be  nn- 
eorered.''  The  meaning  of  this  figure, 
drawn  from  ancient  habits  in  war,  may 
be  taken  to  be  that  action  was  to  be  pro- 
ceeded with — that  the  allotted  penalties 


were  to  be  now  begun.  By  this  gesture 
aitd  the  preceding  actions  "  thou  shalt 
prophesy  against  it,**  Le,,  Jerusalem, 
as  representative  of  the  whole  house  of 
Israel. 

Yer.  8.  "  Behold  I  wiU  lay  bands 
upon  thee  "  (cf.  iii.  25).  It  was  the  Lord 
who  put  Ezekiel  under  constraint,  and 
he  could  not  act  as  a  reprover  till  his 
mouth  was  opened  by  divine  sanction. 
Was  his  constraint  embodied  in  some 
form  of  disease,  first  in  his  left  side  and 
then  in  his  right?  Was  it,  like  Paul's 
thorn  in  the  flesh,  an  "  infirmity  "  which 
the  Lord  would  not  cause  to  depart! 
"  And,"  so  it  is  said,  ''  thou  shalt  not 
turn  thee  fk^om  one  side  to  another." 
There  will  be  no  averting  of  the  punish- 
ment and  no  relaxation  of  it, ''  till  thon 
hast  ended  the  dasrs  of  thy  siege," 
accomplished  the  full  time  of  being  a 
sign  to  Israel. 

This  paragraph  exhibits  one  of  the 
characteristics  of  Ezekiel  as  a  prophet, 
via.,  his  tendency  to  describe  surround- 
ing and  future  circumstances  by  terms 
and  events  found  in  the  byegone  course 
of  the  Lord's  people.  The  fact  of  his 
exile,  and  apparently  cast  out  of  the 
covenant  which  carried  the  destinies  of 
Israel,  moved  him  to  dwell  upon  the 
past  dealings  of  God  to  such  a  degree 
that  he  thought  and  felt  about  all  the 
matters  which  came  before  him  in  the 
light  and  forms  of  preceding  times.  But 
this  tendency  does  not  warrant  us  to  be- 
lieve that  the  present  and  future  should 
go  on  in  the  very  grooves  in  which  the 
past  had  left  its  traces :  rather  it  helps 
ns  to  see  that  He  who  had  begun  His 
wise  and  good  work  for  Israel  would 
carry  it  on  without  change  of  direction. 
Ezekiel  is  to  show  that  the  austere  and 
stem  aspects  of  God  had  not  been  oblite- 
rated by  the  years  in  which  He  had 
borne  the  sins  of  His  people  patiently, 
and  that  the  light  of  His  countenance 
had  not  been  forever  withdrawn  because 
of  their  failures  in  obedience  to  His 
wilL  The  commentator  who  would  treat 
Ezekiel's  prophecies  as  if  they  must  be 
expounded  literally  and  not  with  great 
freedom,  is  least  of  all  likely  to  unfold 
their  true  interpretation.  "  The  eye 
that  can  look  through  the  shell  into  tlio 

4b 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IT.  BOMILBTIC  COMMBNTARY:  BEEKIEL, 


kernel  may  see  the  fntare  things  of  image  of  what  is  to  be,  yet  its  essential 
Qod's  administration  mirrored  in  the  character  and  necessary  result" — Faif^ 
past— not^  indeed,  the  exact  copy  and     bairn, 

HOMILETICS. 
God's  Action  against  Iniquities  in  a  Pbopli. 

L  It  is  carried  on  by  Tarions  agencies.  The  cloud,  the  fire,  the  implements, 
the  composite  beings  of  Ezekiel's  inaugurating  vision,  are  all  ruled  from  the 
sapphire  throne,  and  Ezekiel  is  made  as  a  central  figure  round  which  their 
operations  proceed.  By  him  and  in  hiui  the  Lord  shows  that  pains  and  disabilities, 
soldiers  and  military  materials,  carry  out  His  will  and  yisit  for  iniquities.  People 
professing  His  name  must  know  that  there  is  no  8uch  thing  as  chance,  accident, 
human  ambition,  or  forces  apart  from  His  directing  word.  The  operator  at  the 
telegraph  clock  transmits  the  message  which  another  person  hands  to  him ;  so 
Ezekiel  or  the  army  of  Nebuchadnezzar  carries  out  what  the  righteous  Gk>d  has 
decided  on.  Whether  the  earth  rejoices  or  trembles,  everything  that  produces  the 
one  state  or  the  other  is  "  created  "  by  the  Lord  who  reigneth.  For  every  sin  there 
is  not  only  an  adapted  penalty  but  a  suitable  agency  for  inflicting  the  penalty. 
How  many  a  trouble,  in  State  or  Church  or  individuals,  would  lose  its  aspect  of 
incomprehensibleness,  if  faith  would  but  say,  '*The  Lord  is  there  and  He  ia  too  wise 
to  mistake." 

n.  It  Ib  resolute.  No  secondary  agent  which  He  employs  will  fail  in  execut- 
ing that  whereto  He  has  sent  it.  Ezekiel  is  laid  under  unrelazing  bands  till  he 
has  fulfilled  the  time  appointed,  and  the  Chaldean  forces  will  be  kept  persistently 
besieging  Jerusalem  till  the  sacred  city  is  subjugated.  The  Lord  will  not  be  turned 
aside.  He  will  not  stop  halfway  to  what  He  has  purposed  to  effect.  *'  Because 
sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed  speedily,  men's  hearts  are  fully  set  in 
them  to  do  evil ;  **  and  should  Gbd  refrain  to  strike  when  His  righteousness  and 
mercy  have  been  set  at  nought,  what  would  happen  but  that  His  people  would 
become  incredulous  as  to  His  sincerity  in  denouncing  sin,  and  be  uninstructed  as 
to  its  real  heinousness  in  His  view  ?  He  does  not  spare  the  rod  because  of  the 
mere  crying  of  His  children,  since  His  hatred  to  sin  and  regard  to  holiness  never 
change— 4;hange  what  else  may.  Whatsoever  His  hand  and  His  counsel  deter- 
mined  before  to  be  done  against  His  holy  child,  Jesus,  He  will  accomplish,  even 
though  it  be  by  wicked  hands.     God  is  faithful 

ni  It  is  impartiaL  All  who  are  involved  in  the  common  sin  are  the  objects 
of  suffering — rich  and  poor,  free  and  bond,  priest  and  prophet  Israel  was  His 
chosen  people,  Jerusalem  the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt ;  but  great  religious 
privileges  did  not  shelter  them  from  God's  '*  vengeance  "  when  they  neglected  and 
rejected  His  ways.  From  the  Churches  of  Christ,  from  the  families  of  the  godly, 
from  private  rooms  and  bended  knees  men  have  gone  into  paths  of  sin,  and  shall 
they  escape  f  No ;  they  shall  be  overtaken  by  suffering  and  woe  in  some  form  or 
other,  as  certainly,  if  not  more  so,  than  men  who  never  heard  of  the  Christ  of  God. 
Boast  of  being  perfect  in  love,  of  divine  right  on  your  side,  if  you  will ;  but  be 
sure  that  no  persuasion  of  sanctity  or  superiority  will  avert  from  you  the  messen- 
gers appointed  by  God  to  chastise  you  for  evil  yielded  ta 

IV.  It  is  according  to  estabUshed  order.  Every  generation  of  His  children 
must  learn  that  the  evil  He  has  hated  He  will  always  hate.  What  Gk>d  has  done 
Gk)d  will  do  again  when  the  same  moral  procedure  is  maintained  by  men.  Our 
days  of  levity  and  hardness  of  heart  and  backslidings  take  us  on  to  days  of  dead- 
ness  and  dishonour  as  indubitably  as  days  of  heat  lead  on  to  days  of  cold.  We 
may  see  the  consequences  which  shall  follow  our  pride,  our  wrong  companionshi{)Bt 
our  neglect  of  the  ways  of  Christy  in  the  hitter  griefs  and  pangs  which  befell  Israel ; 
46 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  C0MMBNTAR7 :  SZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  ty. 


the  scenery  in  which  we  suffer,  and  the  agencies  wliich  act  there  may  be  utterly 
unlike  those  of  ancient  Judea  or  Cbaldea,  but  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  is  our  Holy 
One.  In  the  old  centuries  the  judgment  of  God  was  according  to  truth :  it  is  so 
in  modem  centuries.  **  Thy  throne,  O  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever ;  a  sceptre  of 
righteonsness  is  the  sceptre  of  Thy  kingdom." 

V.  It  is  ivroportionate.  It  is  the  action  of  the  Just  One,  and  takes  steps  in 
proportion  to  the  nature  and  persistence  of  the  offences  against  Him.  Light 
neglected  or  misused  prepares  for  the  greater  condemnation.  Sodom  is  under  an 
easier  punishment  than  Chorazin,  Judah  than  Israel.  Ezekiel  could  not  appor- 
tion the  just  time  of  tribulation — that  is  ever  the  prerogative  of  the  Almighty 
King — ^but  Ezekiel  could  be  made  to  state  and  display  His  holy  sentences.  No 
doubt  He  allows  excuses  where  they  can  be  legitimately  made ;  but  that  is  only 
another  form  of  saying  that  He  weighs  the  doings  of  His  people  in  scales  in  which 
no  undue  element  is  present.  Then  He  gives  forth  His  decision  for  hundreds  of 
years  or  for  tens — for  half  a  lifetime  or  for  a  few  weeks.  Not  a  day  beyond  what 
18  right  and  fair  will  any  transgressor  be  afflicted.  What  trust  and  submission 
should  not  be  given  to  the  God  of  all  spirits  1 


Scanty  means  of  mbsUience  symhclinng  jmnishmmt  (chap.  iv.  9-17). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  9. 
The  several  sorts  of  vegetable  food — the 
richest  and  the  poorest  in  nutritive  ele- 
ments— being  placed  '^  in  one  ▼essel,'' 
signified  that  all  classes  of  the  popula- 
tion would  be  obliged  to  gather  every 
particle  they  could,  and  then  find  it 
difficult  to  obtain  sufficient  provisions. 
The  ''Inread''  from  such  a  mixture  was 
to  be  made  by  Ezekiel  in  a  quantity 
corresponding  to  ''the  number  of  the 
days  that  thou  shalt  be  on  thy  side, 
three  hundred  and  ninety  dajrs.''  This 
is  the  period  of  Israel's  punishment  as 
referred  to  in  ver.  5.  It  is  a  sign  of  the 
time  during  which  the  ten  tribes  should 
remain  in  captivity  among  the  Gentiles, 
and  of  the  low  estate  in  which  they 
would  be  there. 

Ver.  10.  Of  the  prescribed  food  Eze- 
kiel was  to  "  eat  hy  weight  twenty 
shekels  a  day,"  somewhere  about  ten 
ounces  of  English  measure,  and  a  very 
scanty  portion  for  ordinary  healthful 
nourishment;  but,  as  in  instances  of 
shipwreck  and  sieges,  meant  to  maintain 
life  as  long  as  possible — "  too  much  for 
dying,  too  little  for  living.**  "Prom 
time  to  time  shalt  thou  eat  it : "  not 
to  make  one  poor  meal,  but  to  take  a 
**  ration  "  at  stated  intervals. 

Ver.  11.  So  also  ''thou  shalt  drink 
water  by  measure,  the  sixth  part  of  a 
hin" — about  a  pint,  and  sadly  insufficient 
for  a  climate  like  that  of  Central  Asia. 


Ver.  12.  The  food  was  to  be  eaten,  as 
common  ''  barley  cakes"  still  are  in  the 
East,  after  having  been  baked  in  hot 
ashes;  but  with  a  strange  peculiarity, 
''  thou  shalt  bake  it  with  dung  that 
cometh  out  of  man  "  {ef,  Isa.  xxxii.  1 2). 
The  dung  was  not  to  be  used  as  an 
ingredient  of  the  cakes,  as  has  been 
strangely  supposed,  but  of  the  fuel. 
The  use  of  human  ordure  in  fuel  was 
not  practised,  and  the  order  to  employ  it 
was  meant  to  indicate  '*  in  their  sight " 
— for  clear  and  deep  impression — that 
which  is  stated  in 

Yer.  1 3.  *'  The  Lord  said.  Even  thus 
shall  the  children  of  Israel  eat  their 
defUed  bread  among  the  Gkntiles." 
The  children  of  Israel  would  find  them- 
selves, during  the  period  of  their  cap- 
tivity, in  such  a  condition  that  the  laws 
of  Moses  in  reference  to  foods  could 
hardly  be  kept  They  would  have  to 
eat  their  bread  defiled — what  their  souls 
might  loathe — and  so  would  become  al- 
most as  the  heathen.  They  would  not 
be  able  to  boast  of  their  special  separate- 
ness. 

Ver.  14.  Ezekiel  had  submissively 
accepted  the  divine  appointments  hither- 
to—  he  makes  a  protest  now.  **Then  said 
I,  Ah  Lord  Ck>dl  behold,  my  soul  hath 
not  been  polluted;''  and  he  goes  on  to 
specify  certain  kinds  of  forbidden  food 
from  which  he  had  rigidly  abstained. 
The  riRidness  was  all  tiie  more  appro* 

47 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  IT. 


nOMJLSTW  C0MMESTAH7:  BZBKISL. 


priate  in  that  Ezekiel  was  dwelling  in  a 
heathen  country.  By  means  of  atihering 
to  all  ritual  observances  a  fence  was 
planted  round  Israel  against  the  en- 
croachment of  conquering  heathendom, 
and  the  prophet  was  a  rallyingpoint  for 
strength  to  the  exiled  people  when  they 
strove  to  live  not  as  did  the  heathens. 
The  observance  of  legal  institutions  that 
could  be  observed  outside  of  the  Holy 
Land  was  consistently  maintained  by 
Ezekiel,  and  he  argues  from  the  particular 
commands  in  reference  to  foods  to  the 
general  obligation  which  he  acknowledged 
in  reference  to  everything  by  which  he 
would  have  been  consciously  defiled.  It 
is  the  appeal  of  a  servant  who  has  gone 
far  beyond  obedience  to  the  mere  letter — 
who  is  sensitively  alive  to  being  clean  in 
heart  as  well  as  in  act — who  would  shun 
the  appearance  of  evil.  For  he  could 
not  plead  any  commandment  prohibiting 
the  use  of  the  prescribed  fuel ;  he  could 
make  a  plea  only  from  his  own  disgust, 
which  was  not  simply  that  of  his  senses, 
but  also  of  his  moral  feelings.  It  is  no 
sign  of  priestism  in  Ezekiel.  Peter  the 
apostle,  who  was  not  a  priest,  showed 
something  of  the  same  spirit.  But  the 
case  of  Peter  (Acts  z.  14),  who  was  not 
a  captive,  is  not  altogether  parallel  to 
this.  The  only  point  of  sinii  larity  is  that 
Peter  had  ''  not  eaten  anything  common 
or  unclean." 

Ver.  15.  The  answer  to  Ezekiel's  pro- 
test is  a  relaxation  of  the  original  order. 
''Then  he  said  unto  me,  Lo  I  have 
given  thee  cow's  dnng  for  man's  dnng." 
Nothing  is  more  usual  in  those  parts  of 
the  East  than  to  observe  cow's  dung, 
mixed  with  grass,  straw,  dbc,  made  up 
into  fuel  for  cooking.  It  is  not  likely 
that  Ezekiel,  any  more  than  his  neigh- 


bours, would  consider  himself  polluted 
by  eating  cakes  baked  with  this  inodorous 
material,  and  so  he  makes  no  objection 
to  the  command,  <'  Thou  shalt  prepare 
thy  bread  therewith." 

Ver.  16.  ^'IwlU  break  the  staff  of 
bread  in  Jerusalem."  This  alludes  to 
the  forty  d^iys  during  which  Ezekiel  was 
to  lie  on  his  right  side,  and  signified 
that,  in  the  period  of  Judah's  sufferings 
corresponding  thereto,  a  lack  of  sufficient 
nourishment  to  sastain  activities  with 
energy  would  be  experienced.  The  bread 
would  not  be  polluted,  as  the  bread  given 
in  the  wilderness  was  not  polluted,  by 
the  place;  but  as  the  natural  supply 
found  there  was  not  sufficient  for  the 
wants  of  a  multitude,  so  the  supplies 
for  Jndah  would  be  marked  by  scanti- 
ness: stiU  the  punishment  would  not 
be  so  severe  or  so  continuoos  as  that  of 
Israel  It  was  that  of  a  remnant^  and 
would  be  "  cut  short  in  righteousness." 
In  the  besieged  city  ''they  shall  eat 
bread  by  weight  and  with  care,"  as 
those  who  are  hard  put  to  and  anxious; 
'^  they  shall  drink  water  by  measure 
and  with  astonishment,"  as  in  perplexed 
wonder  whether  and  when  the  sources 
would  run  dry. 

Ver.  17.  The  Lord  had  reason  for 
this  procedure.  His  broken  covenant 
necessitated  that  they  should  feel  a 
deficiency  of  "bread  and  water,  and 
be  astonied,"  be  in  perplexity  and 
wonder,  *'  one  with  another,"  each  and 
all,  *'and  consume  away,"  become 
gaunt  and  ofi'ensive,  ''for  their  ini- 
quity." Hunger  and  thirst,  sorrow 
and  dismay,  would  fall  upon  the  sinners 
in  Zion,  as  the  ancient  book  of  the  Itfw 
had  threatened '(Lev.  xxvL  39). 


HOMILETICS. 

00D*8  AOTION  AGAINST  InIQUITIBS  AfFEOTINO  HiS  SERVANTS. 

1.  Servants  who  know  the  LorcTs  will  and  do  it  not  sink  into  destitution  and  perils 
similar  to  theirs  tcho  sit  in  darkness  and  have  no  light  This  aggravation  of  the 
misery  cannot  but  be  experienced,  vis.,  contrast  with  the  blessings  which  they  have 
forfeited  by  misuse.  Israel  had  rejected  its  Qod,  had  chosen  the  way  of  the  heathen, 
and  having  thus  broken  the  conditions  of  its  covenant  with  Gk>d,  nothing  remained 
but  that  it  should  be  treated  as  the  heathen.  The  son  has  left  his  father's  house, 
wasted  his  substance,  fallen  into  want,  and  is  on  the  verge  of  perishing  with  hunger. 
48 


f- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMBNTARr:  EZBKIBL.  chap.  it. 


Not  the  wortliiness  of  godly  friends,  not  the  calling  onrselves  Chri.^tians,  not  obser- 
Tance  of  the  external  rites  of  worship  can  h hide r  from  entering  into  the  state  of 
those  who  live  as  without  God  in  the  world.  A  professedly  Christian  nation  may 
be  largely  affected  by  commercial  depression,  sorrow,  despondency,  doubt,  and  dark 
fears  for  the  future,  if  it  is  not  true  to  Qod.  The  statement  is  sometimes  mado 
that  Christian  nations  are  no  better  than  heathen  nations,  and  the  grounds  for  it, 
if  we  could  see  clearly,  might  be  perceived  in  some  indifference,  neglect,  antagonism 
to  the  holy,  just,  and  good  law  of  God.  All  evil  things  which  transpire  prove 
that  He  will  not  be  mocked ;  least  of  all  by  those  to  whom  He  has  manifested  His 
righteousness  and  love.  They  must  bear  the  fate  of  the  heathen,  whatever  be  their 
surprise  and  repugnance  at  what  is  undergone. 

3.  ServaiUs  who  do  Hi$  mil  are  mbje^ed  to  trials  in  eamman  with  those  by  whom 
they  are  surrounded.  The  bands  which  bind  men  into  society  are  not  forged  so 
as  to  allow  an  escape,  from  evils  which  are  rife  in  the  community^  for  one  of  its 
constituent  parts.  'Hiey  who  fear  the  Lord  fall  into  straitness,  hunger,  become 
weakly,  if  the  circumstances  in  which  they  dwell  are  replete  with  the  influences 
which  produce  such  effects.  Innocent  children  suffer  from  famine  as  well  as  men 
whose  actions  have  contributed  to  the  intensity  of  the  famine;  so  does  the  man 
who  humbly  prays  for  relief  as  well  as  the  man  who  curses  the  hardships  he  has  to 
put  up  with.  It  is  not  in  ^edom  from  the  troubles  which  stir  in  their  environ- 
ment that  the  sons  of  God  are  to  find  their  comfort ;  it  is  in  the  conviction  that  they 
have  not  gone  with  a  multitude  to  do  evil,  and  that  God  writes  their  names  in  His 
book  of  remembrance.  If  they  receive  good  in  society  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord, 
ihall  they  not  receive  evil  also  f 

Every  one  who  wants  to  be  where  the  Supreme  Will  directs  him  to  be,  and  to 
help  the  brothers  who  are  within  his  power  to  reach,  must  be  ready  to  encounter 
pinchings,  disgusts,  wearyuig  hopes,  anguish  as  well  as  sufficient  grace.  The  Christ 
must  needs  ^'suffer  many  things"  by  coming  amongst  men,  and  His  servants  who 
would  walk  in  His  spirit  may  look  for  trials  which,  in  a  sense,  they  do  not  deserve. 
Let  them  see  in  Ezekiel  one  who,  like  themselves,  had  neither  the  mission  nor  the 
resources  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  be  instructed  to  take  up  and  endure  galling  burdens 
for  the  welfare  of  the  people  in  whose  sufferings  they  are  associated.  Not  in  vain 
shall  they  suffer  accorduig  to  the  will  of  God. 

'*  Those  periods  of  tribulation  and  chastisement,  which  the  prophet  here  repre- 
sents, have  they  not  a  voice  for  other  times  f  •  .  •  The  lukewarm  and  fruitless 
professor — so  long  as  he  cleaves  to  the  way  of  iniquity,  and  refuses  to  yield  a 
hearty  surrender  to  the  will  of  God — is  in  bondage  to  the  elements  of  the  world, 
and  therefore  can  have  no  part  in  that  good  land  which  floweth  with  milk  and 
honey.  The  doom  of  Heaven's  condemnation  hangs  suspended  over  his  head ;  and 
if  not  averted  by  a  timely  submission  to  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  a  cordial 
entrance  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant,  he  shall  infallibly  perish  in  the  wilderness 
of  sin  and  death." — Fairbaiiii. 

Sensitiveness  to  Spiritual  Evil  (Chap.  iv.  1216). 

Burden-bearing  with  others,  and  to  any  extent  for  them,  may  expose  to  unplea- 
sant associations  and  proceedings.  Past  habits  and  confirmed  tastes  may  receive 
shocks  which  are  hard  to  withstand.  Yet  the  duty  has  to  be  done  for  the  Lord. 
Li  such  difficulties  against  service  we  must  not  accept  their  darkest  aspects.  We 
must  leani  to  apply  our  natural  shrinking  from  what  is  unpleasant  to  the  case  before 
OS,  and  proceed  according  to  the  light  which  may  be  given  to  ns.  Our  sensitive- 
ness to  anything  that  we  feel  unbecoming  should  inform  us — 

1.  That  toe  have  to  maintain  past  faithfulness  to  duty,  Ezekiel  did  not  like  the 
thought  of  turning  out  of  the  way  in  ^^  hich  he  had  hitherto  walked  and  kept  him- 
self pure.     It  was  no  ignoble  ^consistency  he  was  desirous  to  preserreii     ConsLsteucy 

D  49 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  !▼.  HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


may  be  a  fault  i^hen  it  weds  ub  to  what  is  unwise  and  not  truly  kind.  It  is  a  grand 
thing  when  it  impresses  the  need  of  being  able  to  hold  ourselves  in  self-respect  by 
being  obedient  to  what  we  regard  as  right  and  sacred.  What  more  honourable  in  a 
young  man  than  that  he  will  say,  "  I  have  not  been  discredited  by  low  and  offenaive 
habits,  and  I  shrink  from  them  with  loathing  "  ?  Or  for  a  man,  who  is  known  to 
profess  allegiance  to  Christ  the  King,  to  say,  '^  I  have  not  been  contracting  the 
taints  of  the  spirit  of  the  world ;  I  have  not  been  a  ciiuse  of  reproach  to  the  Blessed 
Name  by  my  cold  disregard  of  the  interests  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  I  shudder 
at  the  idea  of  doing  anything  which  will  seem  contrary  to  my  past  conduct"? 
Tet  there  may  be  something  more.  There  may  be  siicli  a  susceptibility  to  the 
appearance  of  evil  that  men  will  deprecate  being  taken  into  a  course  on  which 
they  may  have  to  touch  that  which  is  not  morally  wrong,  but  which  offends  their 
taste  for  what  is  spiritually  pure.  It  is  bad  to  have  one  string  out  of  tune.  In 
seeking  our  own  improvement,  a  book  whose  suggestions  are  not  altogether  true  and 
holy  could  be  read  ;  in  seeking  the  best  way  of  helping  others  we  might  see  unclean 
courts  and  houses,  and  contact  with  smutty  persons  might  appear  in  view.  What 
man  or  woman,  sensitive  to  the  continuance  of  their  pureness  of  thought  and  con- 
duct, would  not  rise  up  with  the  cry,  *'  O  my  soul  1  come  not  thou  into  their  secrets; 
unto  their  assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not  thou  united  'M  fiypast  separateness  from 
evil  becomes  a  ground  from  which  to  act  against  approaching,  apparently  defiling 
influences.  The  man  who  has  lived  **  unspotted  from  the  world  "  will  not  readily 
reconcile  himself  to  step  into  a  place  where  his  garments  may  become  soiled.  Hia 
faithfulness  heretofore  to  the  requirements  of  the  holy  law  will  impel  him  to  repu- 
diate what  might  seem  to  defile  him  now. 

How  blessed  would  this  eiirth  be  if  the  hearts  of  all  people  deprecated  every- 
thing which  would  lower  the  standard  of  moral  taste  or  shake  confidence  in  the  . 
prosecution  of  the  high  prize  of  a  stainless  life  ! 

2.  TIuU  toe  iliould  regard  our  inward  feelings  cu  toell  as  the  external  act  in 
respect  to  what  is  required  of  us.  The  inward  is  not  to  be  sullied.  The  Master's  deci- 
sion has  for  ever  placed  the  state  of  men's  hearts  in  a  more  important  position  than 
that  of  their  words  and  deeds.  That  which  comes  out  of  the  heart  is  that  which 
defiles,  and  every  one  who  would  be  as  his  Master  must  endeavour  to  keep  the  heart 
80  clean  as  that  no  pollution  shall  mingle  in  its  movements.  It  is  a  true  stimulus  to 
struggling  believers  to  hear,  from  the  lips  of  one  of  ancient  days,  such  an  appeal  as 
this  of  the  burdened  prophet.  How  it  may  urge  us  to  guard  our  acquired  sensitiveness 
to  defiling  acts,  to  keep  that  which  we  have  already  attained,  and  long  to  be  pre- 
vented from  all  filthiness  of  the  spirit,  so  as  to  perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  I 

T/ie  outward  is  not  to  be  accepted  witJiout  appeal.  The  hard  and  irksome 
processes  appointed  for  Ezekiel  might  be  entered  into  by  him,  but  he  wanted  part 
of  them  to  be  less  unpleasant  and  trying  to  his  tender  conscience.  So  he  sought 
for  an  alteration  in  the  requirement.  Thus  it  seems  that  what  is  the  present  will 
of  Qod  may  not  be  followed  by  immediate  acquiescence.  An  attack  of  disease 
does  not  compel  the  patient  to  say,  ''  I  must  submit,  without  an  effort  to  get  rid 
of  it."  The  disobedient  act  of  a  child,  which  must  be  punished,  does  not  demand 
the  parent  to  inflict  that  kind  of  punishment  against  which  the  child  revolts.  The 
content-s  of  that  cup,  in  which  the  venom  of  the  world's  sins  was  concentrated, 
eould  not  be  drank,  by  Him  who  came  on  purpose  to  drink  it,  without  a  cry  of 
aversion  towards  the  awful  tftsk  of  love.  And  we  are  bound  to  make  every 
attempt  at  extrication  from  external  proceedings  with  which  we  have  to  do,  if  we 
are  likely  to  suffer  any  moral  defilement  by  them.  ''  It  were  better  for  me  to  die 
than  that  any  man  should  make  my  glorying  void."  But  no  outer  event  can  hurt 
our  souls  unless  our  souls  turn  it  to  evil. 

3.  That  allevicUion  to  our  souls  mil  be  granted  by  God,  No  command  of  Qod 
to  His  servants  can  have  an  element  in  it  which  will  really  deprave  their  souls. 
Btill  that  fact  does  not  dim  His  fatherly  pity  so  that  He  cannot  see  their  shrink- 

50 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ffOMILBTIC  COMMENT  ART:  BZBKIBl. 


CHAF.  ▼. 


logs.  Let  a  change  not  disparage  His  jufttice,  holiness,  truth,  and  He  is  willing 
to  alter  the  conditions  of  His  instructions,  and  make  them  less  dreadful  to  the 
moral  fastidiousness  of  His  own.  He  has  a  respect  even  for  their  exaggerated 
feelings,  and  in  His  wisdom  and  love  mitigates  that  which  pains  them.  He  pities 
them  "like  a  father. **  He  does  not  desire  to  impose  one  unnecessary  pang  upon 
them.  Thej  may  ask  Him  for  whatsoever  alleviation  might  ease  their  trouble 
and  revulsions,  in  the  hope  that  He  will  relax  the  stringency  of  His  demands,  if 
He  does  not  renounce  them.  We  have  to  do  with  Gk)d,  who  has  tender  compassion 
for  every  one  who  wants  to  be  pure  in  heart  He  does  not  quench  the  smoking  flaxi 
''  Let  it  teach  us  not  to  be  rigid  and  stick  to  our  wills,  and  think  it  disparage- 
ment to  abate  of  our  wills  and  right,  and  yield  to  others,  when  God,  who  is  infi- 
nitely above  us,  can  yield  to  us,  and  doth  lo  daily,  bearing  our  infirmities.'' — 
GreenhUL 


The  last  tnethodi  of  punishment  symbolised  and  interpreted  (chap.  v.  1-17). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  re- 
quirements  made  of  Ezekiel  still  pro- 
ceed in  his  house.  Already  he  has  been 
a  sign  that  Jerusalem  would  undergo  a 
thorough  siege;  that  specified  periods 
of  stringent  suffering  should  be  allotted 
to  both  portions  of  the  house  of  Israel ; 
that  hunger,  anxiety,  and  defilement 
would  be  encountered ;  and  furthermore, 
he  is  to  be  a  sign  of  the  various  forms 
of  penalty  which  should  be  incurred  as 
the  closing  manifestations  of  the  Lord's 
dealing  justly  with  iniquities.  In  this 
case,  as  in  the  preceding  three,  we  ap- 
pear necessitated,  by  the  very  conditions 
of  the  requirement,  to  suppose  that 
Ezekiel  could  not  be  expect^  to  carry 
on  literally  the  processes  assigned  to 
him.  How  could  he,  in  the  disabled 
state  to  which  he  must  have  been  re- 
duced if  he  had  externally  obeyed  the 
previous  requirements,  shave  his  head 
and  beard  with  a  sword,  or  burn  the 
appointed  part  of  hair  in  Jerusalem 
itself  t  Even  if  it  were  certain  that  he 
could  do  so,  it  would  be  unbecoming  to 
believe  that  the  Lord  Himself  literally 
drew  a  sword  after  the  third  part  of 
hair  which  was  scattered  to  the  wind. 
Notwithstanding  these  difficulties,  we 
are  sure  that  the  actuality  of  the  things 
signified  was  somehow  conveyed  to  the 
minds  of  his  captive  countrymen — the 
method  of  doing  so  being  unknown. 

Yer.  1.  ''And  thou,  son  of  man, 
take  tliee  a  sharp  knife" — rather  stvord, 
as  in  the  end  of  ver.  2.  He  was  not, 
besides  the  sword,  to  ''take  a  barber's 
raaor, "  hnt  he  was  to  use  the  sword  as  a 


barber's  razor.  A  closer  rendering  of 
the  Hebrew  warrants  this  explanation. 
"  A  razor  of  barbers  thou  shalt  take  it " — 
«.«.,  the  sword,  as  the  gender  intimates — 
"^0  thee;'*  "and  canae  it  to  pass 
upon  thine  head  and  thy  beard."  In 
the  hands  of  an  earlier  prophet  the  use 
of  a  razor  had  already  been  made  signi- 
ficant of  punishment  by  the  Lord.  "  In 
the  same  day  shall  the  Lord  shave  with 
a  razor  that  is  hired  .  .  .  the  head  and 
the  hair  of  the  feet;  and  it  shall  alfo 
consume  the  beard  "  (Isa.  vii.  20). 
Moreover,  in  accordance  with  biblical 
representations,  shaving  off  the  hair  of 
the  head  and  beard  was  one  of  the  signs 
of  mourning  and  reproach,  and,  besides, 
it  was  forbidden  to  priests  (Lev.  xxi.  5). 
€k)d,  enjoining  a  priest  to  reverse  his 
own  ritual  observance,  would  give  addi- 
tional emphasis  to  the  keenness  of  the 
calamity  shadowed  forth  :  "  then  take 
thee  balances  to  weigh  and  divide" 
(lit.)  "them,"  ie.,  the  hair.  An  ap- 
portionment of  distinct  sufferings  is  to 
be  carefully  measured  out,  so  that  all 
may  feel  "the  judiciary  providence  of 
God."  We  modify  the  words  of  an 
old  Latin  commentator,  and  say,  "The 
sword  or  razor  signifies  divine  ven- 
geance, the  head  the  city,  the  balances 
its  equity,  and  the  hair  the  people  to 
whom  punishments  shall  be  distributed." 
Or,  as  Theodoret  says,  '*  The  sword  in- 
dicates avenging  power,  the  shaving  of 
the  beard  the  removal  of  grace  and 
glory,  the  scales  and  weights  the  deter- 
mination  of  divine  justice." 
Ver.  2.  Ezekiel  is  oommanded  to 
^1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


muLt.  ▼. 


nOMllBTIC  COMMENTAMT:  BZEKIBL. 


arrauge  the  hair  in  proportiunate  parts, 
and  to  dispose  of  each.  ''Thou  flhalt 
bnrn  with  fire  "—in  a  flame — <*  a  third 
part  in  the  midst  of  the  city '' — in  the 
midst  of  the  model  of  tbe  besieged  city 
which  lay  l>efore  him — '*  when  the  days 
of  the  siege  are  fnlfilled''— when  the 
days  for  his  symbolical  completion  of 
tbe  siege  had  come  to  an  end ;  "  and 
thou  Shalt  take  a  third  part  and 
smite  about  it" — ie.,  the  city — "with 
a  knife/'  or  sword,  as  ver.  1 ;  **  and  a 
third  part  thou  ^lalt  scatter  in  the 
wind."  The  rest  of  the  people  have 
perished ;  this  third  alone  survives.  It 
must,  therefore,  include  within  itself 
both  the  poor,  who  might  be  left  un- 
settled in  Judea,  as  well  as  tbe  numbers 
who  had  been  dispersed  among  otiier 
countries.  And  there  seems  no  valid 
objection  against  considering  that  it  in- 
cluded the  people  of  a  more  distant 
future  than  tliat  which  would  be  passed 
through  by  tiie  living  generation.  The 
lot  of  the  nation,  as  a  nation,  is  involved 
in  the  action  of  the  Lord.  The  next 
words  show  the  symbol  passing  into  a 
reality,  while  an  intimation  of  sufferings 
in  the  land  of  exile  is  made:  "and  I 
will  draw  out  a  sword  after  them." 
They  shall  not  escape  because  of  ciiange 
of  locality.  By  this  procedu re  of  Ezekiel 
three  kinds  of  punishment  are  set  forth. 
One  part  of  the  people  dies  in  flames — 
ver.  12  interprets  this  of  famine  and 
disease;  a  second  part  dies  in  flight, 
sallies,  battles ;  the  surviving  part  be- 
comes *'  tribe  of  the  wandering  foot  and 
weary  breast"  But  the  people  will  not 
be  absorbed  or  obliterated. 

Ver.  3.  "Thou  shalt  also  take 
thereof" — from  that  scattered  portion 
— "a  few  in  number,  and  bind  them'' 
— this  "very  small  remnant"  of  hairs — 
"in  thy  skirts,"  ends  of  his  garment 
Qod  has  to  fulfil  His  covenant  of  mercy; 
seed  must  be  preserved  as  the  instru- 
ments of  His  purposes;  and  Ezekiel  is 
required  to  signify,  by  caring  f«>r  the 
safety  of  a  few,  the  eternal  purpose  of 
Gk>d.  But  even  of*  this  few  not  all 
would  be  delivered. 

Ver.  4.  "  Then  take  of  them  again, 
and  cast  them  into  the  midst  of  the 
fire" — a  different  word  from  that  of  ver. 
52 


2,  and  signify hig  a  somewhat  diverse 
mode  of  suffering  al>out  to  befiall  the 
reduced  number  of  people.  They  were 
not  all  right  in  heart,  the  best  were 
tainted  and  needed  a  purgation,  a  proof 
of  how  deplorable  was  the  spiritual  con- 
dition of  the  surviving  people.  This 
infliction  would  not  be  confined  to  the 
unfaithful  among  the  gathered  ones : 
"thereof" — from  this  consuming  fire — 
"  shall  a  fire  come  forth  into  all  the 
honse  of  Israel : "  the  doom  of  the  few 
involves  the  doom  of  the  whole  people 
as  such.  "  Judgment  must  begin  at  the 
house  of  Qod,  and  what  shall  the  end 
be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  gospel  of 
Qodt"  A  striking  parallel  to  this  de- 
claration to  Ezekiel  is  found  in  Isaiah. 
"  And  if  there  should  yet  be  a  tenth  in 
it,  this  shall  again  be  consumed ;  (yet), 
as  the  terebinth  and  the  oak,  though 
cut  down,  have  their  stock  remaining, 
(even  so)  a  sacred  seed  (shall  be)  the 
stock  thereof"  (vl  \Z).—Cheyne. 

A  divine  interpretation  of  his  sym- 
bolical action  is  given  to  £xekiel.  He 
hears  words  describing  the  guilt  of  and 
the  judgments  which  shall  fall  upon 
Jerusalem  and  his  people ;  and,  first  of 
all,  there  is  conveyed  a  meaning  which 
is  to  be  attached  to  Jerusalem. 

Ver.  5.  "Thns  saith  the  Lord  Ck>d; 
This  Jemsalem" — it  is  unnecessary  to 
supply  u— "I  have  set  iV  her,  "in  the 
midst  of  the  nations  and  conntries 
that  are  ronnd  abont  her.''  It  has 
been  common  for  nations,  whose  means 
of  locomotion  are  neither  convenient  nor 
rapid,  to  consider  their  country  the  cen- 
tral point  around  which  other  countries 
are  clustered.  Such  a  notion  might  have 
been  accepted  by  the  Jews  in  reference 
to  Judea;  but  it  is  not  with  such  a 
reference  that  the  situation  of  Jerusalem 
is  specified  here.  In  explaining  this 
reference  it  is  not  requisite  to  point  out 
how  the  Holy  Laud  stands  in  relation 
to  Egypt  and  Syria,  to  Assyria  and  the 
Isles  of  the  Gkntiles.  We  decline  the 
merely  local  limitations  as  not  expres- 
sive of  the  fact  intimated,  while  we  still 
perceive,  in  the  then  active  influences  of 
the  world,  certain  advantages  adhering 
to  the  site  which  Jerusalem  occupied. 
The  true  interpretation  is   elsewher«b 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  OOMMENTART:  BZEKIBL. 


OHAKT. 


It  is  thus  stated  by  Keil :  '*  Jerusalem 
is  described  as  forming  the  central  point 
of  the  eartl),  neither  in  an  external, 
geographical,  uor  in  a  purely  typical 
sense,  as  the  city  that  is  blessed  more 
than  any  other,  but  in  a  historical  sense, 
in  so  far  as  '  Gk>d*8  people  and  city  actu- 
ally stand  in  the  central  point  of  the 
Qod -directed  world-development  and  its 
movements;'  or,  in  relation  to  the  his- 
tory of  .'-alvfttioD,  as  the  city  in  which 
God  hath  set  up  His  throne  of  grace, 
from  which  shall  go  forth  the  law  and 
the  statutes  for  all  nations,  in  order  that 
the  salvation  of  the  whole  world  may  be 
accomplished.'' 

Yer.  6.  ''And  she  hath  changed"— 
the  ordinary  ui^age  of  the  word  dvanged 
refers  to  murmuring,  opposing,  rebelling 
against,  or  some  such  action,  and  often 
with  a  statement  of  the  object,  as  here, 
against  which  the  act  operates  —  $he 
rebelled  againU  "my  Judgments" — 
though  they  were  known,  yet  were  they 
80  disregarded  as  to  incur  the  crime  of 
turning  them  ''into  wickedness  more 
than  the  nations  " — to  a  degree  of  evil 
which  even  the  heathen  could  not  be 
charged  with,  "and"  she  rebelled  against 
'*  my  statutes  more  than  the  countries 
that  are  round  aboat  her;  for  they" — 
oi  this  Jerusalem — "have  refused  my 
judgments  " — with  a  kind  of  disdain — 
"and  my  statutes  they  have  not 
walked  in  them."  The  penalty  of  such 
a  course  follows. 

Yer.  7.  'Therefore  thus  saith  the 
Lord  God  ;"  but  before  announcing  the 
doom  an  emphatic  presentation  of  their 
unhallowed  conduct  is  made:  "Because 
ye  multiplied" — a  somewhat  infelicitous 
rendering  of  a  di£Bcult  term,  for  which 
a  translation  like  "  ye  raged  "  is  better, 
i,e,,  made  a  turmoil  in  acting  as  rebels — 
"  more  than  the  nations  that  are  round 
about  you/'  and  "  have  not  walked  in 
my  statutes,  neither  have  kept  my 
judgments,  neither  have  done  accord- 
ing to  the  judgments" — laws  and  ways 
of  living  and  worshipping — "of  the 
nations  that "  are  "round  about  yon." 
Further  on  (chapi.  zi  1 2)  Ezekiel  accuses 
the  people  thus,  "  Ye  have  done  after 
the  manners  (liL  judgments)  of  the 
heathen   that  are  round    about  you." 


There  is  no  real  contradiction  between 
the  two  representations.  The  heathen 
pursued  courses  which  were  opposed  to 
Gkni's  will,  and  Israel  did  the  same ;  but 
the  former  showed  also  that  the  word 
of  the  law  was  written  in  their  heart, 
and,  so  far  as  they  had  obeyed  that 
transcript,  they  had  done  that  which 
Israel  had  not  done.  Israel  had  resisted 
both  revealed  and  natural  obligations. 

Yer.  8.  '*  Therefore  thus  saith  the 
Lord  God  " — the  suspended  threatening 
is  now  pronounced — "Behold  I,  even  1^ 
am  against  thee  " — a  solemn  assevera- 
tion that  the  covenanted  relationship  to 
the  Lord,  however  boasted  of,  would  not 
shield  from  the  punishment  due  to  Israel 
for  their  violation  of  the  covenant.  He 
would  prove  that  He  was  not  a  dead 
God — a  mere  name  of  power  and  holi- 
ness— "  and  will  execute  judgments  in 
the  midst  of  them" — the  means  of 
punishment  shall  be  forthcoming  and 
effective  "in  the  sight  of  the"  he«ithen 
"  nations."  Thus  one  aspect  of  retribu- 
tive justice  is  unfolded — it  will  be  public : 
the  heathen  shall  know  that  He  is  Lord 
by  the  judgment  which  He  executeth. 
Another  is  presented — it  is  exceptional 

Yer.  9.  "  And  I  will  do  in  thee  that 
which  I  have  not  done,  and  whereunto 
I  will  not  do  any  more  the  like" — 
there  would  be  peculiarities  in  the  woes 
which  should  befall  Israel  that  would  be 
marked  as  unique  throughout  all  time. 
If  acts  as  shocking  as  those  referred  to 
in  next  verse  are  observed  in  the  dis- 
tressed periods  of  other  nations,  we  must 
remember  that  when  a  wife  or  child  is 
expelled  from  the  home,  the  calamity, 
though  similar,  is  far  worse  than  when  a 
guest  or  servant  is  expelled.  Such  wjis 
the  relation  of  Israel  to  Qod  that  their 
punishment  had  elements  of  horror  in  it 
which  the  same  suffering  happening  to 
another  people  had  not.  The  primary 
reference  of  the  threatening  is  clearly  to 
the  then  existing  Israel,  but  seems  to  be 
applied  by  the  Lord  Jesus  to  that  genera- 
tion of  the  Jews  who  were  subjected  to 
terrible  calamities  when  Jerusalem  was 
besieged  and  destroyed  by  the  Romans. 
"  Then  the  tribulation  shall  be  such  as 
was  not  since  the  beginning  of  the  world, 
nor  ever  shall  be"  (Matt.  xxiv.  21) — 

63 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  ▼. 


HOMILETIO  COMMBNTART:  BZBKIBL. 


**  beeatuie  of  all  tbine  abominatioiiB  " — 

a  frequently  used  word,  expressing  actions 
and  habits  which,  however  common  and 
palliated,  were  such  as  the  Lord  could  not 
endure  to  hear  and  see  in  Hid  priifessed 
people-— each  sin  had  done  harm  and 
each  would  be  reckoned  in. 

Ver.  10.  The  punishment  will  be 
characterised  by  such  intensity  of  suffer- 
ing that  family  ties  will  be  ruthlessly 
disrupted  ''  The  fiathera  shall  eat  the 
sons,"  as  had  been  predicted  should 
come  to  pass  if  they  would  not  hearken 
to  the  Lord,  but  walked  contrary  to 
Him  (Lev.  xxvi.  29),  ''and  the  Bona 
shall. eat  their  fathers,"  and  all  who 
survive  "  will  I  scatter  into  all  the 
winds.'' 

Ver.  11.  From  this  verse  to  the  end 
of  the  chapter  the  punishment  is  more 
fully  announced  as  from  the  Lord.  The 
emphatic  ''therefore"  (Heb.),  which  is 
prefixed  to  several  of  the  declarations 
of  this  chapter,  is  here  followed  by  the 
solemn  oath,  ''As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord 
God."  I,  the  Living  One,  shall  die  if  these 
judgments  are  not  executed.  This  oath 
is  sustained  by  His  self-existence — ^tliat 
which  is  the  basis  of  all  truth  and  reality, 
and  a  guarantee  that  there  will  be  no 
revocation,  no  reversion:  "  He  can  swear 
by  no  greater. **  "  Surely  because  then 
hast  defiled  my  sanctuary."  They  had 
entered  into  the  place  where  His  honour 
tabernacled,  and  taken  a  course  there 
which  proved  how  completely  they  had 
cast  off  His  supremacy.  They  had  not 
been  restrained  by  any  reverence  or 
attach  men  t.  Tli  ey  had  occupied  it "  with 
all  thy  detestable  things  and  with 
all  thine  abominations" — wickedness 
of  all  kinds  had  been  practised,  and  the 
way  in  which  it  was  carried  on  is  shown 
in  chap.  viiL  We  shall  mistake  this 
accusation  if  we  confine  its  reference 
solely  to  the  employment  of  the  Temple 
for  idolatrous  proceedings.  The  Temple 
was  the  ideal  heart  of  the  theocracy. 
All  spiritual  energy  proceeded  from  it ; 
all  objects  of  that  energy  reacted  on  it. 
So  that  if  the  people  indulged  in  evil 
elsewhere,  and  came  impenitent  into  the 
courts  of  the  Lord's  house,  they  defiled 
the  sanctuary,  and  their  ears  were  made 
to  tingle  with  the  indignant  remonstrance 
54 


of  Isaiah,  ''Who  hath  required  this  at 
your  hands  to  tread  my  courts!"  or 
with  that  of  Ezekiel  afterwards,  "  Should 
I  be  inquired  (»f  at  all  by  them  ? "  The 
glory  due  unto  the  name  of  the  Lord 
had  been  polluted,  and  He  will  take 
steps  to  clear  it  "I  will  also  dimi- 
niidi,"  our  English  version  supplies  tliee. 
In  comparing  Deut.  iv.  2,  where  this 
same  Hebrew  word  is  employed,  "Ye 
shall  not  add  to  this  word  which  I  com- 
mand you  and  ye  shall  not  diminish 
from  it,"  the  expression  seems  sufficient 
without  adding  thee.  As  the  Israelites 
had  taken  away  from  the  rights  of  Qod 
to  His  sanctuary,  so  He  will  diminish 
the  benefits  He  had  hitherto  bestowed 
on  them. 

Ver.  12.  An  explanation  is  now  given 
of  the  symbolical  actions  prescribed  in 
ver.  2.  From  this  it  is  made  clear  that 
the  fire  there  is  to  represent  disease 
and  starvation  as  among  the  destructive 
agencies  affecting  the  sinful  people. 

Ver.  13.  The  menaced  penalties  being 
carried  out,  ''mine  anger  shall  be  ac- 
complished;" its  full  force  will  be  brought 
to  act  so  as  to  inflict  every  item  of  the 
penalties  due  to  such  transgressors. 
"And  I  will  cause  my  fury  to  rest 
upon  them;"  it  will  find  its  goal  in  those 
who  suffer  from  it,  and  there  come  to  an 
end  :  it  will  have  finished  "  His  strange 
work."  "And  I  will  be  comforted." 
We  might  translate,  in  accordance  with 
another  signification  of  the  Hebrew,  / 
repent  myself.  It  is  preferable  to  retain 
the  translation  of  our  version,  as  better 
expressing  the  idea  that  the  old  has 
ended  and  that  the  ground  for  a  new 
procedure  will  be  laid.  {Vide  Isa.  x. 
24-27,  in  reference  to  Assyria.)  This 
betokens  one  mode  of  the  divine  life. 
It  is  a  highly  figurative,  and,  of  course, 
imperfect  token ;  but^  so  far  as  we  can 
explain,  it  shows  that  the  Lord  receives 
satisfaction  in  vengeance  accomplished, 
since  the  violators  of  His  honour  are 
fairly  punished  and  His  rights  are  fully 
vindicated.  A  Gk>d  who  could  not  assert 
and  maintain,  at  any  cost,  His  own  just 
and  perfect  authority,  would  be  only 
an  idol-god.  Nor  is  it  Himself  alone 
whom  the  finished  punishment  concerns. 
"They,"  the  next  verse  is  proof  that  it  ia 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL.  ob4P.  ▼. 

other  nations  who  "  ahall  know  that  I  here  are  those  ''  of  fiunine,"  which  shall 

the  Lord  have  spoken  in  my  zeal,''  and  be  bitter  and  destructive  and  accumu- 

nut  the  prophet  in  over-eagemess  or  fao-  lative  in  its  horrors :  **  I  will  increase 

tiousneas.    The  words  are  again  repeated  the  famine ;  **  hunger  upon  hunger  will 

in  vers.  15  and  17,  and  show  that  Ezekiel  come  ''  upon  you.'' 
was  speaking  by  direction  of  tiie  living  Yar.  17.  Another  element  of  terror  is 

God  of  Israel,  who  would  not  allow  Hid  mentioned    for    the    first   time,    '^  evil 

righteous  laws  to  be  trampled  under  men's  beasts/'     We   may  suppose  that  they 

feet     History  has  become  a  guarantee  are  to  be  taken  literally ;  but  it  is  diffi- 

for  the  divine  origin  of  the  threaten-  cult  to  see  how  they  could  be  a  notice- 

ings.  able  ingredient  in  the   cup   of   misery 

Yer.  14  is  a  further  statement  of  the  which  was  to  be  drank  by  a  beleaguered 

penalty  which  was  to  be  executed  on  city,  and  Hengstenberg  is  probably  right 

the  devoted  city.     '^  Waste  and  a  re-  in  referring  the  phrase  to  the  heathen, 

proach,"  a  rg^rooc^^'among  the  nations  on  the  ground  that  the  designation  of 

that  are  round  about/'  and  umuU  *^ia  brutal ised  men,    who  have   no   breath 

the  sight  of  all  that  pass  by."  from  Qod,  as  beasts  is  deeply  rooted  in 

Yer.  15.  "So it" — Jerusalem — **shall  the  Scrijtures.     "And  p^ilence  and 

be  a  reproach,*" <kc.     Inferences  of  seve-  blood" — some  terrific  diseases — ''sliall 

ral  kinds  will  be  drawn  from  the  sad  pass  through  thee."     A  solemn  appeal 

and  ruined  state  of  the  punished  people,  to  the  certainty  of  tlie  accomplishment 

and  lessons  of  moral  worth  become  dis-  comes  in,  as  already,  on  the  ground  of 

tincter.  the  Lord  being  the  speaker  in  reality. 

Yer.   16.    According  to  the  ground-  Repetition  of  the  same  expression  is  a 

text,  Dent,  zxxii  23,  **  the  evil  arrows  "  characteristic  of  Esekiel's  style. 

EOMIZJBTICS. 

Where  Much  is  Given,  Much  is  Required  (vers.  6-1 7), 

As  each  stage  of  a  physical  process  manifests  another  condition  of  the  materials 
which  are  under  the  action  of  forces,  so  each  stage  in  national  affairs  expresses  a 
changed  aspect  of  the  relations  between  the  Creator  and  the  creature,  the  great 
King  and  His  subjects,  the  Holy  and  the  unholy.  If  the  punitive  treatment  of  the 
Jews  was  painfully  startling,  the  presentation  of  it,  which  the  prophet  is  com- 
missioned to  make,  is  meant  to  unfold,  to  the  existing  and  other  generations,  a 
fresh  development  of  the  thoughts  and  ways  of  Qod.  These  verses  may  be  held  to 
show  that  the  sorest  penalties  will  be  a  consequence  of  privileges  set  at  naught 
In  them  observe — 

I.  The  advantages  conferred. 

1.  A  favourable  position :  "  Set  in  the  midst  of  the  nations.**  It  is  obvious  that 
certain  countries,  certain  cities,  are  distinguished  above  others  by  climate,  materials 
for  traffic,  openings  to  surrounding  people.  In  some  such  bene^cial  conditions  the 
ancient  Jerusalem  was  situated ;  but  above  them,  and  of  greater  importance  still, 
wa^  the  fact  that  there  was  His  sanctuary — the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt. 
Both  temporal  and  spiritual  benefits  come  from  God,  and  each  advantage  should  bs 
regarded  as  enforcing  a  higher  obligation. 

2.  The  pei'sonal  interest  of  God,  It  is  He  who  condescends  to  speak  to 
them,  to  punish  tliem  Himself.  He  did  not  treat  them  on  the  same  lines  as 
He  did  the  other  tribes  of  men.  No  nation  had  Qod  so  nigh  it  as  this  people. 
They  were  the  children  of  Abraham,  His  friend.  He  bare  them  and  carried  them 
all  the  days  of  old.  Whosoever  touched  them  touched  the  apple  of  His  eye.  Their 
offences  we<*e  offences  against  Him — ^not  against  some  vague  "accusation''  of  their 
own  consciences.  It  is  well  to  come  to  that  position  from  which  we  see  that  Qod 
is  with  us  in  a  wider  sense  than  Israel  surmised,  that  in  Christ  He  reconciles  the 

ad 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  ▼•  EOMILBTia  OOMMBNTART:  BZBKIBL. 


world  unto  Himself,  that  we  stand  amid  the  light  of  that  life  which  is  given  to 
**  whosoever  wiU,** 

3.  OpportunUy  for  mflueneing  atken.  To  fancy  that  this  Jewish  people  was 
chosen  simply  to  be  the  worshippers  of  the  only  true  God  is  to  suppose  that  which 
w(»uld  not  accord  with  other  manifestations  in  His  realm.  His  sun  exhales  vapour 
from  water,  the  vapour  is  turned  into  shower-s,  the  showers  fall  upon  the  earth  and 
make  it  bring  forth  and  bud.  So  is  it  that  every  person  is  to  contribute  to  the 
good  of  others,  and  so  His  chosen  nation  was  to  be  instrumental  in  making  known 
His  way  and  saving  health  among  the  people  sitting  in  darkness.  His  purposes  to 
bless  that  we  may  be  blessings  are  not  changed.  He  works  to  form  vessels  fit  for 
His  use,  and  one  of  the  most  potent  influences,  with  souls  which  have  been  made 
alive  to  Qod  through  Jesus  Christ,  should  be  this — the  Lord  my  Qod  supplies  me 
with  grace,  and  I  should  live  so  as  to  promote  His  holy  and  good  claims  over  men. 
Alas  !  so  many  do  not  realise  their  position  as  stewards  of  God,  and  many,  like  the 
Jews,  cause  His  name  to  be  blasphemed  instead  of  honoured.  Yet  much  has  been 
given, 

IL  The  unhallowed  disposition  cherished  by  the  advantaged.  That  they 
who  have  known  the  true  God  should  **  change  His  judgments  into  wickedness 
and  should  not  walk  in  His  statutes,"  evidences  their  disp<isition  to  be — 

1.  Marked  with  contempt  for  God,  Their  own  judgments  are  preferred  to  His. 
And  even  where  there  might  be  a  formal  agreement  with  His  revealed  will,  it  is, 
on  their  part,  no  submission  to  Him,  but  a  carrying  out  of  their  own  desires.  They 
act  as  if  God  were  of  less  consideration  than  themselves.  They  will  not  have  Him 
to  reign  over  them.  They  feel  at  liberty  to  make  that  which  He  intended  for  good 
into  a  means  for  doing  wickedly.  Prayers  will  be  repeated,  public  worship  will  be 
patronised,  and  still  the  heart  will  continue  to  cherish  its  selBsh,  worldly  pursuits, 
as  if  God  could  be  mocked  and  overcoma 

2.  More  guilty  than  that  of  the  heathen.  The  Jews  gloated  over  the  ignorance 
and  low  hopes  of  the  uncovenanted  peoples,  and  yet  the  latter  had  been  more 
faithful  to  their  streaks  of  light  than  the  Jews  to  their  dayspring.  There  is  no 
monopoly  by  the  Jewish  people  of  this  inconsistency.  Not  a  few  among  Christians 
take  pleasure  in  telling  of  the  cruelties,  falsehoods,  lusts  which  are  observed  among 
the  tribes  and  people  who  are  not  Christian,  and  turn  such  sad  aspects  into  a  means 
of  setting  off  how  much  purer  and  better  a  state  is  their  own.  The  comparbon  is 
often  very  unfairly  made.  And  even  if  it  were  not — if  the  sins  of  heathendom 
were  gross  and  numerous  beyond  those  of  Christendom — the  rules  of  Christ  are 
too  often  toned  down  and  laid  aside,  both  in  the  practice  of  Churches  and  the  con- 
duct of  individuals.  Their  guilt  in  tampering  with  duty  is  far  more  offensive  than 
that  of  the  heathen  can  be.     **  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin  !  woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida  I " 

m  The  severe  punishment  which  manifests  the  guiltiness  of  those  who 
have  received  much.  When  favoured  children  go  out  of  the  ways  of  their  Holy 
Father,  they  walk  upon  hard,  thorny,  desolate  tracts,  where  they  perish. 

1.  In  those  troubles  Hiey  are  treated  by  the  Lord  Hvnmdf  "  Behold  I,  even  I, 
am  against  thee.'*  Secondary  agents  will  be  employed,  but  in  poverty  or  losses^ 
diseases  or  hostile  actions  by  other  people,  are  to  be  recognised  weapons  wielded 
by  the  Lord  against  whom  we  have  sinned.  He  docs  not  abdicate  His  authority 
to  things  which  cause  pain  and  ruin,  so  that  they  do  their  will.  We  receive  evil 
from  His  hand  as  well  as  good.  And  emphatically  so  if  we  have  been  living  in 
open  sins  against  Him.  It  is  always  a  difficult  matter  to  say  what  the  sins  are 
which  bring  about  special  stripes  from  the  Lord ;  but  there  need  be  no  diflOiculty 
in  acknowledging  that  He  '^  will  execute  judgments  in  anger  and  in  fury  and  in 
furious  rebukes,"  and  that  those  judgments  need  not  be  the  same  for  the  same  sins. 
Dishonesties,  untruths,  intemperance,  will  produce  misery  sooner  or  later,  but  the 
misery  which  comes  in  consequence  of  such  transgressions  is  very  different  in  its 
actions  upon  the  individual  sinners  and  their  families.  God  knows  how  to  deal 
56 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  SZSKIEL,  chip.  T. 


out  in  perfect  wisdom  the  sufferings  appropriate  to  the  several  cases,  and  the 
keenest  pang  of  their  suffering  ought  to  be  this,  '*  My  King,  my  Father,  has  be- 
come mine  enemy,  and  fights  against  me.*' 

2.  Tlie  punishment  i$  intense,  "  I  will  do  that  which  I  have  not  done,  and 
whereunto  I  will  not  do  any  more  the  like.  Neitlier  shall  mine  eye  spare,  neither 
will  I  have  any  pity."  There  will  not  be  a  grain  of  excessiveness  in  the  punish- 
ment :  it  will  be  balanced  to  a  hair's  weight  by  the  amount  of  sin.  The  perfect 
Judge  alone  can  so  accurately  poise  the  scales ;  but  none  who  know  the  right  will 
fail  to  see  that,  however  unparalleled  the  severity  may  seem,  it  is  altogether  pro- 
portioned to  the  offences,  and  will  exhibit  the  magnitude  of  the  guilt  incurred. 

3.  The  lesson  is  intended  to  be  widely  tauglU,  The  Lord  will  not  do  '^  His 
strange  work"  in  secret  Other  souls  must  be  made  to  hear  and  fear,  and  His 
judgments  shall  be  shown  to  ''  the  nations  round  about  in  the  sight  of  all  that 
pass  by."  They  will  be  differently  affected  by  the  lesson.  Some  will  utter  re- 
proaches, others  will  frame  taunts,  and  others  will  be  instructed ;  but  in  some  sort 
of  dim  form  those  proceedings  against  sin  will  make  their  principle  enter  into  the 
thoughts  of  men,  and  contribute  to  the  shaping  of  that  unwritten  law,  with  its 
penalty  for  wrong-doing,  which  has  become  established  among  nations  who  have 
lived  in  different  spheres  of  growth.  Where  do  we  not  find  the  maxim,  that  the 
heavier  the  punishment,  the  greater  the  guilt  ? 

IV.  The  continued  maintenance  of  the  justice  of  God's  rule.  ''  I  the  Lord 
have  spoken  it " — however  unlike  it  may  appear  that  He  should  punish  so,  how- 
ever awful  the  sufferings  inflicted  may  be.  **  The  divine  righteousness  remains 
always  equally  energetia" — Ueng.  Ezekiel  is  a  medium  for  conveying  the  denun- 
ciations, but  below  those  denunciations  it  is  to  be  believed  that  righteousness  and 
truth  stand.  They  will  not  be  moved  by  the  assaults  of  men,  let  men  beat  against 
them  as  they  wili  And  the  prophet  is  a  pattern  from  whom  all  preachers  and 
teachers  may  learn  to  let  the  thoughts  of  Gk)d  so  enter  into  them,  that  when  they  do 
tell,  as  tell  they  must  if  they  will  be  faithful  servants,  of  the  "  weeping  and  wailing 
an^  gnashing  of  teeth  "  which  shall  be  endured  by  those  who  make  light  of  the 
Son  of  Gk)d,  they  should  do  it,  not  with  extravagance  or  with  mitigation,  but  with 
the  strictest  adherence  to  the  manifestation  made  of  the  terror  of  the  Lord.  The 
gospel  enters  into  no  terms  with  those  who  forsake  the  Lord ;  it  insists  on  repent- 
ance or  destruction.  If  He  is  '*  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,"  He  would 
sooner  see  them  perishing  than  that  they  should  continue  persistently  to  defile  His 
holy  presence.  In  Churches  and  out  of  them  the  solemn  asseveration  holds  sway, 
^  He  that  despised  Moses'  law  died  without  mercy  under  two  or  three  witnesses ; 
nf  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall  he  be  thought  worthy  who  hath 
trodden  underfoot  the  Son  of  Qod,  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant, 
wherewith  he  was  sanctified,  an  unholy  thing,  and  hath  done  despite  to  the  Spirit 
of  grace  t*' 

God's  Comfort  in  Punishment  Aohibved. 

**  /  wiU  cause  my  fury  to  rest  upon  them,  and  I  wiU  he  comforted^  (ver,  13). 

There  are  conventional  ideas  about  Qod,  just  as  there  are  about  what  is  proper 
procedure  in  society.  C(»nventionalismR  cannot  hold  their  ground  in  the  latter 
when  a  strong,  clear  impulse  fntm  the  realities  of  life  breaks  upon  them;  and,  in 
the  former,  superficial  conceptions  regarding  divine  procedure  will  be  tested  and 
remodelled  when  men,  who  see  visions  of  God,  set  forth  their  impressions  of  Him 
"  who  ruleth  by  His  power  for  ever."  Their  utterances  may  sound  as  if  bordering 
on  what  is  harsh  and  untenable,  or  as  if  altogether  too  familiar;  but  they  will  lay 
open  aspects  of  the  Almighty  which,  from  one  cause  or  other,  have  been  dimmed 
and  disturbed.  Thus  it  might  happen  that  deep  convictions  of  the  pity  of  the 
Lord  for  suffering,  and  His  patience  with  wrong-doers,  would  foster  a  mode  of 

67 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.T.  HOMILBTW  OOMMBNTAMT :  BZBKIBL. 

speaking  of  His  dealings  with  people  whom  He  had  favoured,  as  if  He  could  be 
nothing  but  soft  and  eoothiiig  and  pleading,  as  if  in  His  nature  there  were  no 
materials  for  an  unflinching  resolution  to  see  right  dune,  even  though  the  punish- 
ment of  the  wrong-doers  was  unexampled.  Then  a  holy  man  will  exclaim,  in  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  ''I  will  laugh  at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock  when  your  fear 
Cometh ;''  or,  ''  Ah  I  I  will  ease  me  of  mine  adversaries."  Lax  notions  are  shaken 
off,  and  we  learn  to  think  that  ''our  Qod  is  a  consuming  fire,"  who  is  comforted 
when  His  fary  has  found  a  resting-place.  Making  allowance  for  the  somewhat 
figurative  turn  of  these  words,  we  win  perceive  in  them — 

I.  All  pimiBluneiits  are  measured.  He  that  maketh  the  stormy  wind  to  fulfil 
HLb  word,  that  says  to  the  sea,  "  Hitherto  thou  shalt  come  and  no  further,"  He 
says  to  every  consequence  of  sin,  ''  Thou  shalt  not  put  a  hair's  weight  of  distress 
more  than  I  appoint"  Men  may  talk  of  the  germs  of  disease  which  settle  upon  a 
Tine  as  if  they  will  increase  so  as  to  destroy  it,  unless  checked  by  human  appli- 
ances ;  politicians  may  speak  of  armies  invading  a  country  as  if  they  would  ravage 
it  till  it  was  made  waste,  unless  human  diplomacy  intervene.  It  is  not  often  con- 
sidered that  behind  every  disease  and  every  army  the  Divine  Will  means  to  control 
each,  and  exactly  fix  what  it  shall  do.  We  are  under  a  Lawgiver  whose  preroga- 
tive can  never  be  contravened,  and  who  claims  to  define  every  event  by  His  hidden 
or  revealed  decree.  Every  sufferer  may  believe  that  he  bears  just  what  and  just 
as  is  suitable  to  perfect  righteousness  and  wisdom. 

n.  Bight  is  vindicated.  When  the  evil  ways  of  men  have  taken  them  into 
woe  then  the  Judge  of  the  earth  is  satisfied,  for  they  have  received  the  due  reward 
of  their  deeds.  This  means  more  than  is  often  understood  by  the  expression,  "  Sin 
is  its  own  punishment.''  If  that  were  all  the  punishment,  then  every  prosperous 
tyrant,  every  unconfessing  murderer,  every  successful  mercantile  swindler,  every 
unabashed  liar  would  have  endured  all  possible  suffering.  The  sin,  the  veiy  thing 
which  stands  out  as  the  worst  of  evils  to  a  holy  mind,  being  regarded  as  an  advan- 
tageous proceeding  by  the  unholy,  could  hardly  be  punished  in  the  actor,  since  he 
delights  in  it  or  is  unimpressed  by  its  vileness.  Thus  viewed  there  would  be  little 
in  sin  to  fear ;  it  could  be  made  a  subject  for  despisal ;  and  the  moral  order  would 
be  abandoned.  It  is  not,  however.  Qod's  rule  is  not  so  feeble  and  uncertain  in  its 
operation  as  to  let  it  be.  '*  He  sitteth  on  the  throne  judging  right,"  and  He  executes 
punishments  which  prove  that  there  are  retributions  attached  to  the  committal  of  sin 
entirely  independent  of  the  thoughts  of  sinners  about  their  conduct  These  retri- 
butions will  find  out  their  appropriate  objects,  as  a  resting-place  is  found,  and  will 
remain  till  the  just  award  has  been  measured  off.  It  is  an  awful  fact  for  those 
who  have  sinned  and  have  not  repented.  To  neglect  its  bearing,  to  refuse  to  face  its 
reality  may  be  common,  but  the  sentence  against  evil  will  not  be  annulled.  Let  those 
who  reject  Christ  Jesus  realise  the  solemn  contents  of  the  words,  '*  He  that  believeth 
not,  the  wrath  of  God  abide th  on  him  " — His  fury  rests  upon  them.  Then,  when 
bitter  wrong  has  been  righted,  when  vengeance  has  placed  its  marks  upon  the 
rebellious,  when  the  hideous  past  has  been  swept  over  by  an  obliterating  storm  of 
justice,  then  the  Holy  One  sees  that  right  has  proved  its  power  to  crush  wrong  and 
maintain  its  supremacy,  and  He  is  comforted. 

m  The  ground  is  cleared  for  a  new  movement.  The  Lord  is  not  comforted 
merely  because  He  sees  the  flaunting  edifices  of  wrong  utterly  in  ruins.  Withered, 
scattered  leaves  form  materials  for  the  growth  of  a  coming  spring ;  the  refuse  of 
fallen  buildings  becomes  a  location  in  which  plants  and  insects  make  a  home,  and 
the  desolation  of  a  country  or  the  depression  of  a  people  gives  an  opening  through 
which  stirring  influences  may  enter.  Gibbon's  statement  in  *'  The  Decline  and 
Fall  ^ — ^that  when  ''  the  fierce  giants  of  the  North  broke  in  ^  upon  an  enervated 
people  who  were  but  "  a  race  of  pigmies,"  they  "  mended  the  puny  brood  " — asserts 
this  principle.  By  Ezekiel's  time  the  Israelites  had  become  boasters,  sensual,  hypo> 
crites ;  the  covenant  Qod  made  with  their  fathers  had  been  shiTered  into  fragments  j 
»8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL, 


CBaP.  ▼!. 


what  good  could  accrue  from  the  continuance  of  such  a  state  of  thiigs  ]  Abolish 
it  or  suspend  it,  and  a  way  will  be  opened  for  operating  in  new  metiiods  of  right- 
eousness, wisdom,  and  grace.  Tliat  opening  is  a  comfort  to  the  Inird.  He  will 
enter  upon  a  course  from  which  higher  and  better  results  will  be  attained.  The 
old  has  vanished,  the  new  will  arrive.  So  the  Lord  Jesus  refers  to  Jerusalem  and 
says,  '*  Behold,  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate" — that  is  the  close  of  the  bad 
past— and  He  goes  on  to  add,  ''Ye  shall  not  see  Me  henceforth  till  ye  shall  say. 
Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  " — that  is  the  pledge  of  better 
movements. 

1.  "  The  Lord  reigneth,  let  the  people  tremble,'*  He  "  will  execute  judgment 
npon  all,  and  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  of  all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  they 
have  ungodly  committed." 

2.  "  The  Lord  reigiieth,  let  the  earth  r^iceJ*  However  long  His  will  may  be 
disobeyed,  yet  a  King  shall  reign  in  righteousness.  *'  Also  unto  Thee,  O  Lord, 
belongeth  mercy,  for  Thou  reuderest  to  every  man  according  to  his  work."  Judg- 
ment and  mercy  shall  complete  the  purposes  of  Him  who  inhabiteth  eternity,  whose 
name  is  Holy. 

4.  Further  Instructions  as  to  the  C!onskquencb8  of  Israel's 
(JoNDUOT  (Chap,  vi.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— n^  ytd^^- 
ment  on  places  of  idolatry/  and  tl^e  wor- 
ehippera  (ver.  1-7).  After  asserting,  in 
ver.  1,  his  renewed  consciousness  that 
he  was  to  speak  from  the  in  working 
power  of  the  Lord,  Ezekiel  unfolds  the 
procedure  which  will  be  taken.  Here 
be  has  special  reference  to  the  whole 
country,  as  in  chaps,  iv.  and  v.  the  city 
Jerusalem  was  chiefly  in  view. 

Ver.  2.  "  Son  of  man,  set  thy  face,'' 
a  frequent  command  given  to  the  pro- 
phet, and  intended  to  impress  him  with 
a  vivid  sense  of  the  objects  he  was  to 
address;  ''towards  the  mountains  of 
Israel  and  prophesy  against  them.'' 
The  Lord  has  a  controversy  with  the 
mountains  and  their  prominent  physical 
features,  as  if  they  had  ears  and  faculties 
for  understanding.  He,  as  it  were, 
directs  His  admonitions  through  them 
to  the  men  who  had  disordered  those 
features  by  setting  up  forbidden  idols 
and  paying  open  dishonour  to  His  holy 
name. 

Ver.  3.  ''And  say  .  •  .  Thns  saith 
the  Lord  God  to  the  mountains  and 
to  the  hills,  to  the  rivers" — the  last 
word  is  used  of  the  beds  or  channels  in 
which  waters  ran,  and  should  be  trans- 
lated here  by  gorges  or  ravines ;  it  thus 
forms  a  more  exact  parallelism  "  to  the 
Valleyi."  "They  sacrifice  upon  the 
tops  of  the  mounUiins,  and  bum  incense 


upon  the  hills,  under  oaks  and  poplars 
and  elms,  because  the  shadow  thereof  is 
good  "  (Hosea  iv.  13).  Cf.  ver.  13  beh»w. 
"  Behold  I,  even  I,  will  hring  a  sword 
upon  you,  and  I  will  destroy  your  high 
placea"  The  Hebrew  word  for  high 
places  is  occasionally  employed  simply 
to  signify  elevated  spots,  but  more  com- 
monly refers  to  them  as  the  shrines  for 
worship  habitually  carried  on.  The 
worship  in  such  places  was  part  of  that 
nature-worship  which  has  prevailed  in 
many  regions  of  the  world,  and  in  which 
Baal,  the  sun -god,  had  a  prominent 
share  (Num.  xxii.  41,  Josh.  xiii.  17). 
From  what  quarter  the  Israelites  were 
influenced  towards  Baal- worship  is  doubt- 
ful, but  they  liad  yielded  to  it,  and 
crowned  the  high  places,  which  lay  ex- 
posed to  the  rays  of  the  sun,  with 
figures  of  some  sort.  How  far  that 
worship  was  alien  to  the  mind  of  the 
living  Qod  is  illustrated  by  what  the 
reforming  Eling  Josiah  did  in  his  zeal 
for  the  Lord  (2  Kings  xziii),  and  in 
what  Ezekiel  adds. 

Ver.  4.  All  the  apparatus  belonging 
to  this  idol-worship  is  doomed  to  destruc- 
tion, "your  altars  shall  be  desolate/' 
not  fit  to  be  resorted  to,  "and  your 
images,"  in  margin,  sun -images,  but 
probably  figures  of  some  kind  represent- 
ing Baal,  the  god  of  the  sun,  and  Astarte, 
goddess  of  the  moon,  "  shall  be  broken, 

69 


Digitized  by 


Google 


0B4P.  TL 


nOMILETIC  OOMMBNTAMT:  SZBKISl. 


and,"  directing  the  address  to  the  people, 
''I  will  cast  down  yonr  slain  before 
yonr  idola.''  This  is  a  reference  to  Lev. 
XX vL  30,  though  tliis  special  word  for 
idols  is  found  chiefly  in  Ezekiel  It  is 
probably  connected  with  a  root  which 
signifies  filth,  and  is  a  contemptuous 
description  of  them — they  are  dung,  or 
refme-gods. 

Yer.  5.  <' And  I  will  lay  the  dead 
carcases  of  the  children  of  Israel  be- 
fore their  refiise-gods  " — the  gods  they 
cried  to  could  not  defend  from  death, 
and,  their  nothingness  having  been 
proved,  they  would  be  defiled  by  the 
corpses  pf  their  unhelped  devotees ; 
"and  I  will  scatter  yonr  bones  round 
abont  yonr  altars" — the  utmost  igno- 
miny would  be  cast  upon  idolatry  by 
this  utter  desecration  of  its  materials 
for  worship. 

Yer.  6.  The  declaration  is  made  that, 
beside  the  destruction  in  the  high  places, 
<ka,  extreme  desolation  would  be  pro- 
duced wherever  population  had  gathered. 
The  ground  of  this  extension  of  punish- 
ment is  indicated  in  Isaiah's  words, 
"  According  to  the  number  of  thy  cities 
so  are  thy  gods,"  and  the  end  aimed  at 
is  to  sweep  away  every  trace  of  idol- 
service,  ^that  your  altars  may  be  laid 
waste  and  made  desolate."  The  Hebrew 
word  in  the  preceding  portion  of  this 
verse  and  translated  desolate  is  different 


firom  this  one,  which  more  appropriately 
should  be  translated  be  guilty.  The 
altars  are  regarded  as  participating  in, 
and  so  held  guilty  of  the  sin  which  they 
were  used  to  carry  out  A  similar  sen- 
tence was  passed  by  the  prophet  sent  to 
Jeroboam  in  the  word  of  the  Lord. 
When  the  king  '*  stood  by  the  altar  to 
bum  incense  *'  the  prophet  cried,  "  O 
altar,  altar,  thus  saith  the  Lord,  Behold 
.  .  .  upon  thee  shall  Josiah  offer  the 
priests  of  the  high  places  that  bum 
incense  upon  thee,  and  men's  bones 
shall  be  burnt  upon  thee."  The  refuse- 
idols  should  be  done  away  with  and  the 
sun-pillars  be  hewn  down  and  a  complete 
abrogation  ensue  of  all  that  had  been 
unfaithfully  done.  "  And  your  works" 
— **  whatever  can  be  ascribed  to  men 
which  they  have  not  taken  from  the 
mouth  of  Qod  and  the  connnands  of  Ilis 
law  " — "  may  be  abolished." 

Yer.  7.  *'  And  the  slain  "—a  word  in 
the  singular,  as  if  to  show  that  one  mind 
had  animated  the  mass  of  the  slain  in 
practising  idolatry — ''shall  fall  in  the 
midst  of  yon."  There  will  be  survivors 
to  see  the  slaughtered  idolaters,  and  the 
eye  will  affect  their  heart  so  that  they 
shall  recognise  the  action  of  the  al- 
mighty, righteous  One,  ''and  ye  shall 
know  that  I  am  the  Lord.**  Tiius  a 
ground  is  laid  for  the  following  pro- 
mise. 


H0MILETIC8.  s 
Cbeation'b  Materials  Instruotino  Men  (vi.  1-7). 

It  is  common  enough  for  men  of  all  countries,  when  under  the  influence  of 
strong  emotions,  to  appeal  to  inanimate  objects  as  if  they  were  animated.  It  is  a 
natural  form  of  speech,  proceeding  from  the  formative  hand.  ^'  He  that  formed 
the  ear  shall  He  not  hear  t "  There  is  a  likeness  of  the  Creator  in  the  creature ; 
and  when  the  impulse  of  feeling  moves  us  to  speak  to  sun  or  stars,  to  mountains  or 
glens,  as  if  they  could  comprehend  our  meaning,  we  are  imitating  Him  who  made  all 
things  and  knows  to  what  uses  He  can  put  them  all.  In  His  Word  prophets  and 
poets  apostrophise  created  objects  as  witnesses  of  the  Lord's  doings.  Thus  Ezekiel 
does,  and  here  we  may  consider — 

1  There  is  a  life  in  created  objects.  "  Prophesy  against  the  mountains. ** 
This  susceptibility  in  creation  was  signified  to  Ezekiel  in  his  "  visions  of  Qod  : " 
this  is  signified  by  Apostle  Paul  in  the  words,  "  All  things  have  been  created  for 
Christ,  and  in  Him  all  things  consist" — have  their  continuance  and  order. 
Each  has  its  post  and  its  purpose  in  the  administration  of  Clod ;  and  because  it 
helps  to  accomplish  His  far-reaching  will,  it  may  be  truly  regarded  as  having  a 
portion  in  that  life  with  which  He  fiUs  all  things.  All  things  may  not  be  called 
pO 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  OOMMBNTART:  BZBKIBL.  o&ap.  n. 

Kving,  bat  they  are  sustained  by  that  life  which  is  present  everywhere.  They 
suffer  in  man's  bondage  to  corruption — "The  whole  creation  groauetli  and  travaileth 
in  pain  together."  They  are  abashed  and  silent  when  ordered  to  be  so  by  the  Son 
of  Man — "  He  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea,  and  there  was  a  great  calm."  Not 
as  a  freak  of  fancy,  but  as  a  suggestive  and  awful  fact,  we  may  look  at  the  materials 
of  nature  and  find  tokens  of  the  living  Clod,  observant  of  us  and  interested  in  ns 
and  our  ways.  In  view  of  mountains  and  hills,  girded  by  ravines  and  valleys, 
we  may  exclaim,  "  Thou  hast  beset  me  behind  and  before,  and  laid  Thine  haiid 
upon  me  I " 

n.  There  is  a  perversion  of  created  oUecta.  Men  who  look  at  and  act  upon 
nature  colour  it  and  swathe  it  with  their  own  thoughts  and  aims.  Advantages  of 
position,  capabilities  for  the  application  of  human  strength  and  skill  to  m.iterial 
things,  are  turned  into  means  of  doing  that  which  pleases  men  and  displeases  the 
Lord.  Mountains  and  valleys,  heaps  of  stones  ^and  carved  pillars,  are  thus  associ- 
ated with  man  in  man's  sins.  They  are  placed  under  a  sentence  of  condemnation, 
and  marked  with  signs  of  disorder  and.  destruction.  What  though  they  have  no 
consciousness  of  good  and  evil,  what  though  they  have  no  power  of  action  against 
the  will  of  man,  they  are  made  into  his  instruments  fur  evil,  and  must  be  broken 
when  he  is  broken.  For  God  does  not  abandon  His  claim  over  them.  Every 
creature  of  His  is  good,  only  the  dark  shadow  has  fallen  on  them ;  their  glory  is 
tarnished ;  their  tribute  to  the  Maker's  praise  is  obstructed ;  their  pollution  is  as 
<'  a  smoke  in  His  nose,"  and  He  '<  will  make  them  desolate."  But  man  is  the  cause 
of  all  the  evil  It  is  his  procedure  with  the  forms  of  things  which  depraves  them  ; 
the  mountain  is  occupied  with  the  worship  of  the  created  sun,  the  shade  of  trees 
becomes  the  haunt  for  immoralities  under  the  sanction  of  the  gods.  Thus  are  the 
creatures  perverted.  In  olden  times,  altars  were  polluted,  oblations  were  vain, 
incense  was  an  abomination ;  in  modern  times,  our  buildings  for  public  worship, 
with  their  decorations,  our  church  music,  with  its  display  or  its  listlessness,  may  be 
perverted  so  as  to  be  a  condemnation  of  the  worshippers.  What  need  is  there  to 
serve  the  Lord  in  the  beauty,  not  of  any  outward  appearance,  but  of  holiness ! 

in.  There  are  tokens  of  doom  on  created  objects. 

1.  In  their  desolation,  "  I  will  bring  a  sword  upon  you  [mountains],  and  will 
destroy  your  high  places."  The  ruins  and  the  dreariness  of  spots,  in  which  people 
were  accustomed  to  serve  their  gods,  suggest  to  inspecting  eyes  that  the  supremacy 
and  sanctity  of  the  Most  High  had  been  invaded  there,  and  the  invasion  had  been 
repelled  with  unsparing  vehemence.  Judgments  were  executed  upon  them,  not 
because  they  could  be  held  guilty,  but  because  they  had  been  the  scenes  of  human 
wrong-doing.  We  are  taught  the  needed  lesson  that  sin  is  to  be  abhorred,  not 
only  because  it  defiles  the  sinner,  but  also  because  it  draws  the  trail  of  the  serpent 
over  all  he  uses  in  his  sin.  *' Every  prospect"  does  not  '' please'*  where  '*  man  is 
vile." 

2.  In  the  human  sufferinge  they  are  made  witnenes  of,  "I  will  lay  the  dead 
carcases  .  .  .  before  their  idols."  The  very  places  to  which  they  would  flee  for 
shelter  will  be  turned  into  shambles ;  the  reed  they  leaned  on  shall  pierce  their 
hand.  So  deserted  would  the  districts  become  that  the  bodies  would  lie  unbnried, 
be  made  into  ghastly  skeletons,  be  bleached  and  crumble  into  pieces ;  their  ^^  bones 
would  be  scattered  round  about  their  altars."  The  fields  of  battle,  the  shores  of 
surging  seas,  the  ruins  of  earthquakes,  with  more  or  less  distinct  utterance,  declare 
in  Reason's  ear.  We  are  witnesses  of  the  pains  and  death  inflicted  on  a  world  over 
whose  physical  features  the  dishonour  done  to  God  has  been  imprinted,  and  we 
tell  back  to  hearing  ears  that  that  Qod  is  holy  in  all  His  ways,  cannot  look  upon 
sin,  and  will  make  good  His  title  to  supreme  power  and  righteousness." 


61 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


mkt.fh 


SOMILSTIO  OOMMSNTABT:  BZBKISL. 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vera.  8- 

10.  ^  gleam  of  eon^mi.  Ezekiel  has 
told  bow  bitter  ruin  and  slaagbter 
should  teach  the  children  of  Israel  that 
*'  Qod  ruleth  in  Jacob  unto  the  ends  of 
the  earth/'  and  now  he  will  tell  that 
that  same  truth  would  be  learned  in 
another  way.  Some  of  those  who  have 
surviyed  and  been  taken  into  captivity 
bhall  be  moved,  by  the  hard  conditions 
of  their  lives,  to  acknowledge  that  they 
have  done  very  wickedly,  and  that  God 
has  done  righteously. 

Yer.  8.  ''Yet  will  I  leave  a  rem- 
nant that  ye  may/'  or,  in  that  ye  sluUl^ 
'*liay6  some/'  because  they  have  been 
preserved  so  as  to  "escape  the  sword 
among  the  nations,"  and  who  will  be 
found  amongst  their  fellow-countrymen 
"  scattered  through  the  oomitrieB." 

Yer.  9.  Iti  the  privations  and  sorrows 
uf  exile,  like  the  prodigal  son  in  feeding 
on  husks,  they  would  come  to  them- 
selves, and  recall  what  they  had  been 
and  done.  *'  They  that  escape  of  yon 
shall  remember  me."  The  thought  of 
God  Himself  would  be  brought  dis- 
tinctly into  their  hearts,  and  that  would 
alter  their  convictions  as  to  their  by- 
gone life.  They  would  perceive  that 
against  Him,  Him  only,  they  had  sinned; 
"because  I  am  broken  with  their 
whorish  heart.'*  The  "Speaker's  Com- 
mentary," in  agreement  with  others^  pro- 
poses to  translate  thus :  Because  I  have 
broken  their  whorish  heart,  which  hath 
departed  from  Me^  and  their  eyes^  <fec. 
Hengstenberg,  with  others  also,  says, 
"The  word  properly  means,  *I  was 
broken : '  this  stands  for,  '  1  have 
broken  for  myself/"  a  translation  which 
Ib  equivalent  to  the  former.  Both  signify 


that  it  was  not  what  their  whorish  heart 
did  to  Him,  but  what  He  did  to  it,  that 
is  set  forth.  We  cannot  acquiesce  in 
this  opinion.  The  remnant,  who  re- 
membered the  Lord,  perceived  also  that 
by  various  methods  He  had  shown  how 
grieved  and  provoked  and  wounded  He 
was  by  the  people  turning  awny  from 
His  worship — tbat  He  was  broken  by 
their  unfaithfulness.  The  expiession  is 
peculiar — is  it  more  so  than  others  in 
reference  to  the  Lord  1  "I  also  will 
laugh  at  your  calamity,  I  will  mock,** 
4k5.  (Prov.  L  26).  "  Wilt  thou  be  alto- 
gether unto  me  as  a  liar,  and  as  waters 
that  faill"  (Jer.  xv.  18).  "Behold  I 
am  pressed  under  you,  as  a  cart  is 
pressed  that  is  full  of  sheaves "  (Amos 
il  13).  This  pain  to  God  was  occa- 
sioned, not  by  the  inward  only,  but  also 
by  the  outward  proceedings  of  Israel, 
"  with  their  eyes,  which  go  a  whoring 
after  their  refose-idoLi :  and,"  in  con- 
sequence of  this  remembrance  of  "the 
Lord  and  the  words  of  His  holiness,'' 
"they  shall  loathe  themselTes,"  will 
look  into  the  face  of  their  past  con- 
duct with  deepest  aversion,  "becanae 
ofaUtheeTiLi,"<kc. 

Yer.  10  should  be  read,  "And  they 
shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  have  not 
said  in  vain  that  I  would  do  this  evil 
nnto  them."  The  words  do  not  assert 
tbat  the  remnant  should  know  He  was 
the  living  God,  but  that  He  was  true 
to  all  Hb  warnings  about  the  evil 
things  which  had  come  to  pass  among 
"a  disobedient  and  gainsaying  people." 
"By  the  correspondence  of  utterance' 
and  event,  they  know  that  He  who 
spoke  by  the  son  of  man  is  Jehovah 
— is  €k)d  in  the  fullest  sense.'* 


H0MILETIC8. 
Conditions  of  Spiritual  Enowledgb  (vers.  8-10). 

Among  those  indicated  by  the  verses  are — 

I.  A  specialising  action  of  the  Lord.  "  I  will  leave  a  remnant"  Out  of  the 
idolatrous  people ;  out  of  their  broken-down  trust  in  their  land,  their  Temple,  their 
covenant  with  God ;  out  of  their  ranks  as  they  were  living  amidst  heathenism,  what 
hope  could  there  be  that  one  even  would  receive  a  new  life  in  his  spirit  t  For 
men  it  might  be  impossible,  but  not  for  God.  It  is  Bis  spontaneous  action.  They 
would  not  have  sought  Him.  They  would  have  continued  in  sin  and  sorrow  unless 
a  power  external  to  themselves  had  moved  upon  them.  "Except  the  Lord  of 
62 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIO  COMMBNTAltr:  B2EK1EL  ouaf.  tl 


hosts  had  left  us  a  very  small  remnant/'  <kc.  '*  We  love  Him  because  He  first 
loved  us."  It  w  an  action  superior  to  circumstances.  Sins  may  h^.  still  prevailing, 
judgments  in  course  of  execution,  the  moral  atmosphere  of  the  places  in  which  the 
sinners  live  apparently  repulsive  to  spiritual  health,  yet  the  Lord  is  able  to  iivork 
there  upon  whom  He  will.  He  can  make  His  mercy  as  well  as  His  fury  rest  wheie 
all  circumBtances  seem  unfavourable.  He  can  deliver  a  soul  in  Babylon  as  well  as 
in  Zion.  It  it  a  mysterious  action.  We  may  try  to  conjure  up  suppositions  about 
reasons  why  Qod  does  not  at  once  do  all  the  evil  which  He  threatens,  or  why  He 
bestows  on  some  that  which  He  does  not  bestow  on  others ;  but  a  duly  reverent 
heart  will  rather  repeat  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  Even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good 
in  Thy  sight."  For  not  in  ourselves  can  we  discover  fitness.  The  acknowledgment 
of  every  sin-conscious  soul  must  be,  *^  I  shall  perish  if  He  does  not  save  me."  It  is 
a  comforting  actiofi.  It  tells  that  greater  is  He  that  is  for  us  than  all  that  can  be 
against  us ;  that  He  is  able  to  redeem  souls  from  death ;  that  however  low  His 
cause  may  have  fallen,  as  if  it  were  even  destroyed,  its  preservation  is  with  Him. 
He  will  not  let  it  disappear.     He  will  revive  it  in  many  or  in  few. 

U  The  pressure  of  tribulations.  They  did  not  serve  the  Lord  when  they 
were  in  their  native  land,  when  the  Temple  and  its  ordinances  were  accessible, 
.  when  early  and  late  prophets  were  addressing  them  in  the  Word  of  the  Lord  ;  but 
they  do  so  when  they  are  scattered  among  the  nations,  when  they  have  seen  deatli 
mowing  down  numbers  of  their  friends,  when  they  are  in  heaviness  because  of  the 
loss  of  so  much  which  they  had  formerly  possessed.  The  gods  they  had  trusted 
in  had  utterly  failed  to  protect  them,  and  they  were  made  to  feel  that  their  own  folly 
and  wickedness  had  brought  all  the  evil  to  pass,  and  they  judged  themselves,  their 
lusts,  their  corruptions,  their  unfaithfulness  to  the  Lord.  "  When  He  slew  them, 
then  they  sought  Him."  Tribulations  we  may  have,  but  Christ  can  give  His  peace. 
We  may  not  have  relief  from  them,  aud  yet  be  taught  of  Gk>d.  Cast  into  beds  of 
affliction,  surrounded  by  those  who  regard  not  the  Lord,  deprived  of  the  means  of 
grace,  we  may  find  spiritual  blessings  which  a  state  of  worldly  comfort  had  not 
brought  to  us.  ''  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  siffliction,"  and  reconciliation 
to  Qod  makes  up  for  all  trouble  in  earthly  things. 

m  A  conscionsnesB  of  God.  '^  I'hei/  shall  remember  me."  They  will  recall 
His  doings,  and  see  how  utterly  He  is  different  from  the  creatures  they  had  wor- 
shipped ;  how  they  had  been  fed  by  His  bounty ;  how  they  had  heard  His  words ; 
how  patiently  He  had  borne  with  their  offences ;  how  just  He  is  in  punishing ;  how 
good  in  preserving  them  from  famine,  pestilence,  and  the  sword ;  how  full  of  gracious 
love  in  acting  upon  their  long-shut  hearts.  They  set  the  Lord  Himself  before  their 
faces.  We  may  desire  to  be  at  peace  with  an  armed  man  who  is  stronger  than  we, 
and  yet  not  care  to  live  with  him ;  but  let  penitence  kindle  at  the  remembrance  of 
the  strong  Lord,  and  we  do  not  want  to  think  about  His  pardon  only,  we  want  to 
live  and  walk  in  His  presence.  *'  Because  I  am  broken  with  their  whorish  hearts"  &c 
They  learn  truly  of  God,  not  because  they  were  under  the  stripes  of  His  wrath,  and 
said  as  Cain,  *'  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I  can  bear,"  but  because  they  had 
produced  disappointment  and  pain  to  Him.  In  His  light  they  see  light.  The 
thought  that  His  heart  was  broken  breaks  theira  They  are  humbled  before  His 
wonderful  pity.     His  goodness  leads  them  to  repentance. 

IV.  A  deep  sense  of  personal  nnworthiness.  ^*  They  shall  loathe  themselves 
for  the  evils,"  &c.     We  find  in  this — 

1.  That  their  hearts  were  affected.  The  effect  of  a  consciousness  of  Qod  was,  as 
it  was  with  Job,  to  make  them  abhor  themselves  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes. 
No  more  palliation  of  their  idolatry,  no  attempting  to  lessen  the  blamableness  of 
their  conduct,  could  be  entertained.  From  the  depths  of  their  souls  they  heaved 
sighs  and  groans  of  shame.  It  was  sorrow  according  to  Qod,  and  it  wrought 
revenge,  &c. 

2.  TlwX  they  understood  the  controversy  of  Ood  against  them.     They  did  not 

83 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  tl.  BOMILETIL  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIBt. 


ioatbe  tbemselves  because  of  their  banishment,  their  poverty,  tlicir  bereavements, 
the  contempt  of  the  heaihen,  but  because  they  had  done  evil.  They  had  left  Him, 
the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and  hewed  out  broken  cisterns  that  could  hold  no 
water;  they  had  treated  their  Lord  unkindly,  and  wounded  Him  by  offending  againet 
His  majesty  and  grace.  They  saw  that  He  had  brouglit  them  into  grievous  sufferings ; 
but  it  was  when  they  saw  that  they  had  in  sin  disobeyed  their  Qod  that  they  took 
right  views  of  tbemselves  and  justified  Him.  Ah  !  we  shall  not  escape  c«mdem- 
nation  because  we  have  never  worshipped  an  idol,  never  perpetrated  any  open 
transgression.  Worldliness  of  temper,  unkindness  to  a  brother,  formality  in  the 
worship  of  Qod,  are  bitter  and  abominable  things  before  the  Heart-searcher,  and 
which  He  rebukes  sternly.  For  such  evils  He  will  not  need  to  condemn  us  \  we 
•hall  condemn  ourselves. 

3.  That  they  made  not  one  reserve.  ''  The  evils  committed  in  all  their  abomi- 
nations." They  would  not  defend  any  course  they  had  taken.  Sins  in  any  place  or 
with  any  person,  sins  in  business  or  religion,  sins  in  secret  or  in  the  railway,  sins 
meant  to  be  done  or  not  looked  on  as  sins,  will  form  part  of  our  confession  of  the 
unworthy  conduct  for  which  we  loathe  ourselves. 

Look  on  your  ways,  look  into  your  hearts,  let  the  light  of  Christ  shine  on  them, 
and  shall  ye  not  be  ashamed  and  confounded  for  all  ye  have  donef  No  door 
of  hope  for  men  can  be  opened  other  than  that  which  brings  us  to  God.  With 
Him  we  should  be  blessed  with  spiritual  blessings,  and  we  should  act  as  heralds 
to  make  known  His  coming  to  save  and  reign.  ^*  When  I  am  weak,  then  am 
I  strong.'' 

The  Powbr  of  the  Wobd  of  God  (ver.  lO)* 

L  Before  men  are  afflicted  and  hnmbled  for  their  sin,  they  reftise  and 
slight  the  Word  of  Ood.  Let  prophets  preach  powerfully,  and  lay  God's  judgments 
before  the  evildoers ;  they  do  not  pay  heed,  but  they  shall  know  that  their  hearts 
were  stout  against  God  and  His  truth. 

n.  A  heart  nnder  affliction,  loathing  itself  for  its  sins,  will  give  due  honour 
to  the  Word  of  God.  '*  Then  shall  they  know."  Blows  beget  brains,  and  ingrati- 
tude and  abase  of  the  threatenings  and  promises  which  the  Lord  had  made  known 
will  be  acknowledged.  The  truest  penitent  doth  most  abhor  himself,  and  the 
more  of  that  self-abhorrence,  the  more  complacency  in  the  faithfulness  of  God  in 
His  word  and  His  infinite  love  in  Christ 

m  The  Lord  will  not  let  His  Word  be  nnaccomplished.  ^  I  have  not  said 
in  vain  that  I  would  do  this.  A  word  is  in  vain  when  it  is  not  fulfilled,  ineffica- 
ciously  fulfilled,  or  unseasonably  fulfilled ;  but  none  of  these  befall  the  Word  of 
the  Lord.  It  shall  accomplish  that  which  He  pleases,  and  prosper  in  the  thing 
whereto  He  sent  it." — OreenhtU  (abridged), 

EXEOETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  11-         Ver.  11.   '<  Smite  with  thine  hand 

14.  The  doom  assured.     The  break  in  and  stamp  with  thy  foot.''      These 

the  dark  threatening  clouds  is  but  for  a  gestures  do  not  signify  derision  of  the 

moment.     The  time  is  not  yet  for  the  unhelping  refuse -idols  or    their  wor- 

prophet  to  unfold  the  bright  sunshine  shippers;  or  pain  at  the  sufferings  or 

of  rich  mercy.      He  has  pointed  to  a  revulsion  at  the  iniquities  of  the  people, 

blessing  among  penitent  exiles,  but  cala-  A  sharp,  almost  unconscious,  clapping 

mities  are  nearer  than  that  is,  and  once  of  the  hand  and  stamping  with  the  foot 

more  he  recurs  to  the  sombre  and  painful  is  occiisionally  seen  when  a  thing  has 

scene  which  must  be  the  precursor  of  turned  out  badly,  and  all  hope  of  ae- 

blessings.      It  is,  with  a  few  additional  complishing  anything  by  it  is  at  an  end. 

touches  of  oolonr^  a  repetition  of  former  This  is  the  idea  which  has  been  wrapped 

words.  up  in  similar  gestures,  op  the  part  of 
64 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMSNTART:  EZSKISL. 


0H4P.  TL 


Qod  ur  man,  which  are  recorded  in  the 
Scriptures  (chape,  xxi.  14,  17,  xxiL  13, 
XXV.  6 ;  Num.  xxiv.  10 ;  Job  xxvii.  23). 
The  gestures  are  consequeut  on  the  be- 
lief that  the  last  scene  of  the  observed 
proceedings  is  played  out.  To  his  ges- 
tures tbe  prophet  adds  the  exclamation, 
«  Ah ! "  and  affirms  its  reference  *'  to  all 
the  evil  abomiiiatioiiB  of  the  house  of 
Israel ;  for/'  because  of  the  evils,  *'  they 
shall  faU  by  the  sword,"  kc  The 
three  great  means  of  punishment  for- 
merly threatened  to  the  city  (chap.  iv. 
2,  12)  shall  be  applied  to  the  country 
also. 

Ver.  12.  "He  that  is  far  oif;''  out 
of  the  range  of  the  invading  Chaldeans, 
''shall  die  of  the  pestilence,  and  he 
that  remaineth,  and  he  that  is  be- 
sieged," or  rather  he  that  is  preserved — 
as  in  Isa.  xlix.  6,  '*  To  restore  the 
preserved  of  Israel" — from  pestilence 
and  sword,  "  shall  die  by  the  famine," 

Ver.  13  (comp.  Yen,  3,  6,  7).  A  fuller 
characterisation  of  the  localities  in  which 
tbe  people  had  reared  idol-shrines  is 
here  given,  and  shows  that  'Hlie  land 
was  full  of  idols,"  and  that  there  should 
be  an  utter  desecration  of  each  "  place 


where  they  did  offer  sweet  savour  to 
all  their  refnse-idols.''  They  were  as 
eager  to  gratify,  if  they  could,  tbe  in- 
animate idols  as  true  worshippers  were 
to  offer  what  would  be  acceptable  to  the 
holy  Qod ;  as  Noah  when  he  presented 
burnt-offerings  for  the  first  time  on  the 
renovated  land  (Qen.  viii.  21). 

Ver.  U.  "  Andl  will  stretch  out  my 
hand  against  them ;"  they  had  placed 
idols  all  oyer  the  country,  and  He,  too, 
would  exert  His  power  so  as  to  *'  make 
the  land  desolate  utterly,  more  deso- 
late than  the  wilderness  toward  Dib- 
lath ; "  an  obscure  reference,  but  prob- 
ably applicable  to  the  Moabitish  double 
city  of  Diblathaim  (Num.  xxxiii  46), 
which  lay  westward  from  the  Arabian 
desert  A  name,  closely  allied  to  this, 
is  found  on  the  lately  discovered  Moab- 
itish stone  as  the  name  of  some  place. 
The  thought  is  expressed  that  this  deso- 
lation would  be  *' in  all  their  habita- 
tions." No  dwelling-house  would  exist 
where  the  sense  of  wasteness  and  loneli- 
ness should  not  be  felt.  This  verse  is 
ended,  as  ver.  13  had  been  begun,  with  a 
declaration  that  by  such  inflictions  there 
would  be  im))ressed  on  the  people  a 
knowledge  of  the  Eterua!,  Holy  One. 


HOUILETICS. 
Bomb  Conolusions  as  to  Sin  (vers.  11-14). 

I  That  its  results  will  be  a  manifest  wonder  and  pain  to  servants  of  the 
ZiOrd.  They  will  not  merely  "  muse  "  upon  the  evils  which  are  presented  to  them  ; 
they  will  at  times  give  way  to  external  expression  of  feeling.  They  will  clap 
with  their  hands,  &c  ;  rivers  of  water  will  run  down  their  eyes ;  they  could  wish 
themselves  accursed  from  Christ  Nowhere  should  there  be  such  intense  interest 
in  watching  the  development  of  individual  and  national  procedure  as  among  those 
who  believe  in  God  who  is  light  and  love. 

n.  That  all  sins  are  considered  in  the  judgments  of  the  Lord.  '*  All  the 
evil  abominations."  And  with  reason.  An  inner  or  outward  evil  is  a  violation  of 
law,  and  exerts  a  certain  influence  in  contrariety  to  the  will  of  Qod.  Each  is  taken 
into  His  estimate  of  what  He  must  do  when  He  visits  for  transgressions. 

m  That  yarions  forms  of  penalty  against  sin  shaU  be  inflicted.  Through 
disease,  violence^  hunger,  or  some  other  method,  every  sinner  shall  become  an 
object  on  which  holy  wrath  will  fall  in  greater  or  less  heaviness.  What  if  we  do 
not  understand  the  meaning  of  the  manifold  variety  of  griefs,  pains,  hardships, 
which  beset  men  on  their  way  to  death,  is  our  ignorance  a  measure  by  which  to 
judge  of  the  knowledge  and  justice  of  the  Lord,  or  not  rather  a  ground  for  making 
us  dumb,  not  opening  our  mouth,  because  He  has  done  it?  Multiform  sufferings 
betoken  multiform  sins. 

17*  That  the  punishment  has  a  correspondence  to  the  sin.    It  was  declared 

M  65 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ctur.  ▼!.  HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL. 


to  the  Israelites,  Acknowledge  the  sopremaoy  of  idols,  and  your  carcases  will  defile 
the  places  m  which  you  Lave  worshipped.  It  is  declared  to  those  who  may  never 
have  kissed  their  hands  to  any  images,  Indulge  your  appetites  in  an  illegitiniate 
way,  and  your  bodies  will  be  infected  by  the  virus  of  the  lust  which  is  specially 
gratified ;  be  insincere  or  dishonest  or  proud,  and  your  souls  will  be  cowed  and 
btagger  before  the  flashes  of  truth ;  be  a  professing  worshipper  of  Grod  whose  heart 
has  not  taken  the  way  to  the  Father  by  Christ,  and  to  you  the  perfect  peace  which 
He  gives  shall  be  altogether  a  stranger  True,  it  is  rarely  possible  for  men  to 
Siiy  why  one  person  should  be  laid  under  a  different  kind  of  affliction  from  that 
which  another  bears ;  but  could  we  see  the  invisible  links  which  bind  the  sin  and 
its  own  penalty,  should  we  not  learn  the  true  source  of  many  sufferings  which  are 
now  wholly  inexplicable  ?  The  Lord's  judgments  are  a  great  deep,  but  in  that 
deep  uniform  forces  are  ever  at  work. 

y.  That  Ood  alone  deahi  with  sin.  Qerms  of  disease,  invading  bands  of  men, 
unpropitious  seasons,  irreverence  and  neglect  of  the  means  of  grace  apparently 
occasion  pains,  bereavements,  struggles  for  life,  a  Qod  who  does  no  mighty  work ; 
but  the  apparent  factors  are  His  methods  of  acting.  Behind  the  laws  of  nature 
and  the  forces  which  operate  through  social  man,  and  which  are  operating  in 
punishing  wrong-doingj  a  spiritual  mind  will  perceive  the  I^ord's  hand.  Judgment 
and  mercy  come  from  Him.  Understanding  this,  Jesus  Christ,  "  bearing  our  sins 
in  His  own  body  on  the  tree,"  will  be  accepted  and  adored  as  the  Son  of  Qod  who 
came  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  deviL 

The  JuDioiAKY  Administration  of  God  (vers.  1-14), 

Ood  connected  Himself  with  Israel  in  a  manner  He  never  had  done  with 
any  nation  before,  nor  would  with  any  other  again.  In  their  case  the  actual 
experience  of  suffering  on  account  of  sin  must  have  a  certain  singularity  ih  it, 
so  that  it  is  possible  to  trace  the  execution  of  His  judgments  upon  them.  Still 
there  is  no  caprice  in  His  dealings ;  whensoever  Israel's  guilt  is  incurred,  there  will 
infallibly  be  a  renewal  of  Israel's  doom.  The  gospel  has  brought  no  suspension  of 
God's  justice,  and  only  after  it  had  been  sent  and  put  from  them  did  the  wrath 
fall  upon  the  Jews  to  the  uttermost,  as  it  will  upon  similar  transgressora  The 
reasonableness  of  the  severity  exercised  may  be  perceived  by  glancing  at  the  guilt 
and  the  punishment. 

1.  Tke  peculiar  calling  of  ItraeL  They  were  placed  in  a  region  that  afforded 
obvious  and  varied  facilities  for  exerting  a  beneficial  and  commanding  influence  on 
the  mind  of  ancient  heathendom.  They  were  to  take  advantage  of  this  position 
so  as  to  make  known  the  character  and  extend  the  worship  of  Jehovah.  Thus 
Moses  declared,  ''  All  the  people  of  the  earth  should  see  that  the  Lord  had  estab- 
lished them  to  be  a  holy  people  to  Himself  and  called  them  by  His  name.**  They 
were  settled  on  a  high  vantage-ground  for  acting  the  part  of  the  world's  benefactors. 
This  calling  of  Israel  in  respect  to  the  nations  now  rests  upon  the  Christian  Church  ; 
only  owing  to  dispensations!  changes  the  impulse  is  communicated  individually,  not 
nationally.  Besides,  the  Jewish  religion  was  predominantly  of  a  symbolical  char- 
acter, and  outward  prosperity  had  to  play  an  essential  part  in  its  propagation.  N'aw 
the  great  element  of  power  lies  in  the  truth  itself  and  in  its  influence  exhibited  by  the 
lives  of  God's  people.  With  differences  as  to  method  of  working,  the  obligation 
remains  substantially  the  same.  The  possession  of  the  world  is  Christ's  by  right, 
and  He  commits  it  to  His  people  to  make  good  the  title.  Happy  if  they  do  so ;  but 
if  not,  heavy  must  be  their  condemnation. 

2.  l^ke  condemnation  of  Israel  They  did  not  extend  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  the  Lord,  but  adopted  the  corrupt  worships  of  surrounding  nations,  and 
did  worse  than  they.  In  the  face  of  all  remonstrances  and  warnings  the>  fell  in  with 
Gentile  superstitions.    They  did  so  because  of  their  prevailing  carnality  and  corrap- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIO  OOMMBNTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


OBAP.  YD. 


tion  of  heart,  which  the  nature-religions  of  heathenism  did  nothing  to  check,  but 
rather  fostered.  In  those  religions  eveiy  god  had  its  representation  in  a  visible 
idol,  but  the  gods  themselves  were  such  as  the  natural  heart  desires  —  gods 
**  whose  attributes  were  pride,  revenge,  and  lust ; "  while  in  Judaism  there  was,  in 
the  bosom  of  every  service,  a  spiritual  and  holy  Qod  as  the  sole  object  of  venera- 
tion, and  conformity  to  His  will  the  one  great  end  to  be  aimed  at  With  the  loss  of 
a  spirit  of  piety  they  became  unfit  for  the  duties  of  a  pure  service  and  ashamed  of 
its  sanctity,  and  accepted  from  their  neighbours  a  more  palatable  religion.  The 
same  perversity  lives  in  the  Christian  Church,  and  in  every  country  in  Christendom 
Israel's  folly  is  perpetually  repeating  itself  What  is  Popery  but  an  accommodation 
of  the  pure  spirit  of  the  gospel  to  the  grovelling  tendencies  of  the  flesh  1  And  in 
Protestant  lands  the  thoughts  and  maxims  of  the  world  are  mixed  up  with  those  of 
the  gospel,  so  that  a  compound  is  formed  which  the  natural  man  does  not  quarrel 
with  or  blush  for.  Hence  the  spiritual  languor,  the  worldly  mindedness,  the 
numberless  forms  of  vanity  and  pollution,  which  are  so  commonly  seen  going  hand 
in  hand  with  a  religions  profession,  and  which  rob  the  Church  of  her  power  to  con- 
quer and  bless  the  world.  Nor  can  she  fulfil  her  destiny  or  be  safe  from  the  rod 
of  chastisement  and  rebuke  till  the  foul  admixtures  are  purged  out,  and  in  reliance 
on  the  Divine  Word,  and  in  unswerving  adherence  to  righteousness  and  truth,  she 
goes  forth  to  resist  and  put  down  whatever  is  opposed  to  the  will  of  Heaven.^- 
Fairhairn  {abridged). 


5.  Lamentation  ovbr  thb  Dbsolatbd  Land  (Chap,  vil) 


EXEQETICAL  NOTES.— In  this 
chapter  we  have  not  so  much  an  addi- 
tional prophecy  as  a  re-statement  of  prin- 
ciples and  denunciations  whicli  hud  been 
already  formulated.  It  .iffonls  abundant 
illustration  of  the  tendency  of  Ezekiel 
to  repeat  his  messages,  and  to  use  even 
the  same  forms  of  expression.  But  some 
of  the  repetition  here  must  be,  moreover, 
accounted  for  by  the  highly  excited  emo- 
tions under  whose  influence  he  wrote. 
That  these  emotions  should  tiike  poetical 
modes — abrupt  utterances,  rhythmical 
combinations,  refrains,  and  demand  again 
and  again  an  avowal,  these  are  nnitters 
which  may  receive  many  confirmations 
from  ancient  and  modern,  front  biblical 
and  secular  literatures.  Especially  might 
a  prophet,  who  was  abiding  under  the 
shadow  of  God  and  was  suffering  in  the 
sufferings  of  His  people,  give  forth  the 
signs  of  strong  feeling  in  his  words,  and 
they  with  appropriateness  present  hints 
of  the  mighty  power  which  constrained 
him — of  the  divine  voice  which  sounded 
in  the  chambers  of  his  heart.  We  shall 
miss  one  purport  of  the  message  if  we 
do  not  find  it  apprising  us  of  visions 
suggesting  the  nature  of  the  living  and 
revealing  Lord. 


Vers.  1-4.  The  imminence  of  the  landP$ 
doom, 

Yer.  2.  ''Thns  saith  the  Lord  Ood 
unto  the  land  of  Israel,  An  end."    It 

seems  preferable  to  read,  "  Thus  saith 
tlie  Lord  God,  Unto  tlie  country  of  Isi-ael 
an  eitcL"  By  this  reading  it  is  more 
apparent  that  the  prophet  was  not  to 
address  the  country,  but  give  a  message 
respecting  its  impending  downfall  as  a 
territory.  This  end  was  to  be  no  minor 
end,  but  one  in  which  many  a  past 
penalty  culminated :  ''the  end  is  come 
upon  the  fonr  comers  of  the  land." 
Events  in  our  own  generation  have  shown 
that  invading  armies  give  birth  to  out- 
rages on  persons,  waste  of  stores  of 
food,  outbreaks  of  pestilent  diseases. 
The  unearthed  Assyrian  sculptures  may 
be  taken  as  proofs  that  all  such  calami- 
ties were  still  more  hideously  evolved 
by  the  armies  of  Chaldea.  Once  and 
again  that  "bitter  and  hasty  nation** 
had  launched  its  hordes  across  the  land 
of  Israel.  They  would  not  spare  age 
or  sex ;  they  would  burn  up  crops  and 
destroy  grain  which  they  could  not  carry 
away;  they  would  leave  behind  them, 
where  they  did  leave  any,  a  depressed, 
impoverished  population^  amongst  whom 

67 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GBAF.  TIL  BOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL, 


peBtilencd  would  find  a  wide  field  for  its  y«r.  4.  The  three  chief  elaoses  have 
ravages.  Every  quarter  of  the  region  been  stated  before.  The  first  agrees 
of  Israel  would  have,  as  it  were,  come  with  cliap.  v.  11  ;  the  second  with  ver. 
to  its  end  when  the  Chaldean  soldiers  3,  except  that  the  threatenings  here  in- 
had  made  their  last  inroad,  and  there  timate  a  closer  connection  between  the 
would  be  nothing  more  of  a  monarchy  painful  consequences  to  the  people  and 
filled  by  the  house  of  David.  their  doings ;  "I  will  lay  upon  thee 
Yer.  3.  ''Now  the  end  is  upon  thy  ways,"  is  put  for  judging  them 
thee  ; ''  it  is  just  at  hand,  and  the  har-  according  to  tlieir  ways  ;  and  instead  of 
vest  for  which  that  and  preceding  laying  on  them  all  their  abominatioTUf 
generations  has  been  sowing  will  be  as  a  burden  external  to  them,  ''thine 
immediately  reaped.  Iniquity  was  full,  abominations  shall  be  in  the  midst  of 
and  no  more  space  for  confessions  and  thee/'  affecting  from  within  as  well  as 
promises  of  amendment  would  be  given.  from  without  The  third  clause  is  an- 
The  end  would  come  through  the  opera-  other  repetition  of  the  purpose  with 
tions  of  the  Lord :  ^'I  will  send '' — "  I  which  this  terrible  end  as  well  as  other 
will  judge"  .  .  .  "Iwill  recompense**  moral  punishments  was  carried  out, 
^give,  or  lay,  &c  ;  but  His  operatii»ns  "  Te  shall  know  that  I  am  the 
would  be  instigated  by  the  ''ways'  Lord." 
and  "  abominations  "  of  the  people. 

HOMILETICS. 

SOMK    ASPBOTS    OF    God's    GOVERNMENT    OYER  HlH. 

Ezekiel,  like  the  Hebrew  prophets  in  general,  saw  the  working  of  other  than 
material  forces  among  the  inliabitants  of  the  world,  and  that  with  a  clearness 
which  cannot  be  paralleleil  in  any  nation's  rec«»rds.  In  this  short  paragraph  the 
traces  of  such  insight  are  perceived  to  be  set  in  no  ambiguous  phraseology. 

L  There  is  progressive  spiritual  development  in  human  history.  The  whole 
Bible,  when  rightly  considered,  is  a  witness  to  this.  Eacii  part  of  it  is  laid  as  an 
organic  accretion  on  th.it  part  which  went  before.  Nor  is  this  conclusion  to  be 
referred  only  to  events :  it  is  as  certain  in  regard  to  principles  and  truths.  Moral 
and  religious  ideas  and  practices  contained  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ  are  seen  to  be 
vaguely  and  inadequately  appreciated  before  they  are  clearly  and  more  fully  per- 
ceived. And  not  a  thing  of  His  is  stationary.  It  will,  doubtless,  take  new  forms 
in  the  mind  of  every  believer  as  he  passes  through  the  n<>nnal  stages  of  growth. 
He  is  first  a  babe  using  milk,  and  he  has  to  go  on  unto  tiie  stiiture  of  a  perfect 
man.  As  it  is  with  individuals,  so  is  it  with  a  nation  and  with  the  race.  They 
will  learn  the  evil  of  sin  and  the  obligation  of  holiness,  not  by  a  sudden  catastrophe 
and  revelation,  but  by  slowly  evolving  processes  of  loss  and  pain,  of  yearning  and 
hope.  The  development  may  seem  very  often  retarded,  *<the  divine  event,"  in 
which  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea, 
may  be  far  off,  nevertheless  the  end  shall  come,  for  which  other  ends  have  been 
arrived  at — ^the  end  at  which  all  things  shall  be  seen  subjected  to  Him  who  is  all 
in  all. 

n.  There  is  a  signal  doom  for  progressive  phases  of  wrongdoing.  The 
Israelites  had  been  again  and  again  afflicted  **  very  sore  "  l)ecause  of  tlieir  iniquities, 
but  they  had  continued  to  possess  sometliing  like  a  national  life  throughout  those 
calamities.  Their  chastisement  had  produced  no  true  amendment,  however,  and 
that  judgment  which  should  include  in  its  operation  the  consequences  of  all  their 
unrighteousness  would  entirely  alter  the  aspects  of  the  chosen  people.  They  had 
been  moving  on  to  thb  catastrophe,  and  Ezekiel  was  enlightened  to  see  its  near 
approach.  He  understood  the  signs  of  his  times ;  he  interpreted  their  meaning, 
and  pressed  upon  the  understiiudin*^'  and  consciences  of  the  people  the  awful  guilt 
68 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  OOMMBNTAR  Y :  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  to. 


in  which  they  were  involved,  by  the  sins  of  their  fathers  as  by  their  own  sins.  He 
declared  that  there  would  be  .iiu  suspension  now ;  the  end  of  Israel  as  a  society, 
organised  according  to  forces  which  had  been  existing  for  generations,  was  reached. 
Whatever  may  be  its  influence  in  the  world  hereafter,  it  will  be  exerted  under 
different  conditions  from  that  of  its  past  The  lines  over  which  its  future  will 
move  must  be  projected  into  new  scenery.  In  signifying  this  fact  the  prophet  may 
be  held  to  propose  two  principles — 

1.  A II  calamities  are  hound  up  in  preceding  events  and  tendencies.  An  effect 
is  nothing  but  the  sequence  of  causes.  However  different  it  appears  from  them, 
not  one  thing  is  in  it  which  is  not  the  product  of  that  which  has  gone  before. 
There  was  no  weight  pressing  the  Jewish  people  into  the  dost  which  they  had  not 
lifted  upon  themselves ;  there  was  no  stripe  inflicttid  bat  was  drawn  down  by  a  dis- 
obedience. The  punishment  was  only  another  form  of  the  abomination  indulged  in, 
as  the  slag  is  but  another  form  of  ingredients  in  metals  which  have  been  exposed 
to  fire.  We  are  what  we  are,  we  suffer  what  we  suffer,  not  by  any  chance,  but  by 
reason  of  what  has  already  happened  to  us.  There  is  judgment  and  mercy  in 
this.  We  learn  what  our  disposition  and  conduct  lead  to.  We  shall  bear  our  own 
burden,  whatever  it  be,  because  we  have  first  put  our  shoulder  under  the  yoke 
which  makes  that  burden. 

2.  Calamities  are  specially  painful  in  the  last  stage  of  critical  changes.  Israel 
had  grossly  belied  its  Qod,  had  practised  debasing  superstitions,  had  walked  amid 
the  festering  swamps  of  what  was  lowest  and  vilest.  There  was  no  remedy  unless 
it  might  come  throngh  a  judgment  which  would  fill  them  with  terror  and  anguish. 
By  sword,  famine,  pestilence,  the  land  would  be  harried.  Tet  the  terribleness 
of  the  inflicted  evil  was  but  the  incoming  of  wicked  ways  and  defiling  abominations 
to  roost 

**  The  wise  gods  seal  our  eyes 
In  our  own  filth,  drop  our  clear  jndgmentii  make  ut 
Adore  our  errors,  laugh  at  us  as  we  strut 
To  our  confusion." 

The  effort  to  turn  unfair  privileges  into  fairness  for  all,  or  to  make  bad  laws 
into  good,  is  never  easy.  The  discomfiture  of  interests  which  are  hurtful  to  the 
moral  welfare  of  a  people  cannot  be  brought  about  without  serious  conflict  and 
losses.  The  attempt  to  promulgate  new  land  laws  for  Ireland,  the  struggle  with 
the  slave-power  in  the  United  States,  the  shattering  of  the  ancien  regime  of 
France,  the  perilous  turmoil  of  the  Reformation,  the  destruction  of  feudalism 
throughout  Europe,  are  witnesses  that  no  revolution  of  thought  or  practice  is  pain- 
less.    In  a  sense  it  is  sin  finding  out  the  sinners,  as  in  this  end  of  Israel 

Such  an  end,  however,  introduces  a  new  process.  The  old  passes  away  never 
to  reappear.  The  suffering  which  characterises  the  transition  prepares  for  another 
condition  in  which  trouble  and  pain  may  still  be,  but  which  is  the  foretoken  of 
richer  blessings  in  coming  days. 

m  There  i8  a  divine  will  sliaping  0Tent&  Natural  or  social  forces  cannot^ 
when  regarded  simply  as  natural  agents,  light  upon  the  persons  who  have  done 
wickedly.  They  are  weapons  held  in  the  hands  of  the  righteous  Lord.  They 
strike  where  He  directs  them  to,  and  with  the  weight  which  He  chooses  to  employ. 
It  is  the  tendency  of  our  modern  thinking  to  set  forth  the  external  phenomena  as 
all  that  requires  attention — as  if  we  were  to  be  concerned  with  the  powder  which 
exploded,  and  not  with  the  person  who  had  laid  it  and  lighted  the  match.  But  it 
is  the  living  Ruler  who,  in  the  operation  of  moral  laws,  gives  to  them  their  power 
to  punish  and  to  improve.  Individuals  and  nations  are  not  atoms  vibrating  under 
unconscious  forces  and  sequences ;  they  are  sinners  judged  for  their  sins,  and 
judged  if  so  be  they  will  learn  righteousness  and  turn  to  Him  who  smites  them. 
When  He  destroys  one  house  it  is  that  He  may  build  another.  When  He  buries  the 
worm-pierced  shell,  it  is  that  by  its  decomposition  a  more  fertile  soil  may  be  formed. 

69 


Digitized  by 


Google 


'.  YII. 


BOMILBTlt  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIMJL 


It  is  thus  throughout  all  generations.  The  Eternal  Gbd  manifests  no  change  in 
His  judgments  on  right  and  wrong.  All  events  convey  indications  of  His  judg- 
ment and  of  the  winding  up  of  earth's  chequered  story  on  the  last  day  ;  and  they 
also  convey  indications  of  His  gracious  purpose  to  make  "the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  How  the  judgment  and  the 
mercy  will  be  worked  into  the  changing  thoughts  of  the  world  is  too  deep  a  pro- 
blem for  us  to  solve.  But  nevertheless  we  may  hold  unwaveringly  to  the  principle 
that  "  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  ever,  the  thoughts  of  His  heart  to  all 
generations." 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  5-9. 
No  necessity  exists  for  supposing  that 
the  text  of  this  strophe,  on  account  of 
its  close  resemblance  to  the  preceding 
veri^es,  is  corrupt.  A  better  interpreta- 
tion would  make  us  believe  that  the 
deep  feeling  of  the  prophet's  Lord  seeks 
again  to  utter  itself  through  the  feeling 
of  the  prophet  It  is  natural  to  repeat 
a  cry  of  anguish  or  a  complaint  under 
the  pressure  of  that  which  distresses  us. 

Ver.  5.  "An  evil,"  which  is  placed  in 
a  specially  distinct  light  by  the  epithet 
added,  "an  only  evil,  behold,  is  come." 
The  calamity  about  to  befall  Israel 
would  be  of  a  singular  kind,  for  which 
no  parallel  could  be  found  (chap.  v.  9). 
"  The  Lord  will  make  an  utter  end  ; 
trouble  shall  not  rise  up  the  second 
time"(Nah.  I  9). 

Yer.G.  This  unique  evil  would  be  folded 
up  in  "an  end "  of  Israel's  state,  which, 
now  inevitable,  "  is  come."  It  had  been 
slumbering,  but  "the  end watcheth for 
thee."  It  is  wakeful  and  observant.  It 
is,  as  a  pent-up  flood,  held  back  by  a 
sole  remaining  obstacle,  and  that  also 
showing  signs  of  giving  way.  The 
measure  of  iniquity  is  full  and  the  con- 
demnation will  no  more  linger.  "Be- 
hold, it  is  come,"  and  includes  in  itself 
the  completion  of  all  that  is  embraced 
in  the  divine,  righteous  judgments. 

Ver.  7.  "The  morning."  The  Heb- 
rew  word  thus  translated  is  of  uncer- 
tain import  Besides  here  and  ver.  10, 
the  only  other  place  in  which  it  occurs 
is  Isa.  xxviiL  5,  and  there  it  is  trans- 
lated by  diadem.  That  meaning  cannot 
be  accepted  for  this  chapter.  A  proi)he- 
tical  morning  is  generally  applied  to  the 
breaking  forth  of  light,  deliverance,  <kc., 
yet  an  explanation  seems  requisite  that 
is  not  in  accordance  with  such  an  idea. 
The  most  favoured  conclusion  is  that 
70 


which  connects  the  word  with  an  allied 
root  indicating  that  the  word  here  means 
something  i»  hich  makes  a  round  or  circle, 
and  is  metaphorically  interpreted  of  that 
which  the  revolution  of  time  promotes : 
the  tuifi.,  the  fate,  that  which  is  destined 
"is  come  nnto  thee  .  .  .  the  day  of 
trouble  is  near."  The  laws  of  Hebrew 
parallelism  suggest  that  the  word  trans- 
lated troitble  is  in  a  relation  of  contrast 
to  the  next  clause  of  the  verse,  "and 
not  the  -sonnding  again  of  the  moun- 
tains." This,  as  it  stands,  is  somewhat 
unmeaning.  To  say  that  the  phrase 
alludes  to  the  joyous  shoutings  at 
vintage-time,  and  to  understand  it  as 
intimating  that  there  would  be  no  more 
the  exuberant  joy  of  harvest  upon  the 
mountains,  appears  to  be  rather  far- 
fetched. More  probable  is  it  that  the 
allusion  is  to  idolatrous  festivities  upon 
the  mountains  of  Israel,  as  was  illus- 
trated by  the  prophets  of  Baal  when, 
sacrificing  to  their  god  upon  Mount 
Carmel,  they  made  loud  and  prolonged 
sounds.  We  prefer  to  translate  thus: 
The  day  is  near;  a  tumult — as  in  a 
panic  of  fugitives  from  the  sword  and 
famine  (cf.  vL  4-6) — and  not  shouts  of 
idolaters  when  worshipping  upon  ths 
mountains.  The  silence  of  death  would 
fall  upon  the  scenes  where  dishonour 
was  done  to  the  living  God. 

Ver.  8.  The  end  cannot  be  retarded. 
"  Now  will  I  shortly  " — immediately — 
"  pour  ont  my  Airy  upon  thee."  His 
judgment  will  not  linger  any  more.  The 
course  of  evil  will  take  Israel  into  the 
woes  and  horrors  produced  by  their  own 
sins.  The  following  clauses  have  been 
already  presented,  with  slight  verbal 
differences ,  in  ver.  8,  and  ver.  9  is  a 
similar  repetition  of  ver.  4.  "The 
abominations  stand  in  IsraeFs  midst  not 
in  their  alluring,  seductive  fom,  but 


Digitized  by 


Google 


aOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTARY:  BZEKIBL.  ohap.  ^n. 


with  all  the  woe  which  comes  in  their  Eternal  Holy  King  who  was  inflicting 
train"  (Haev).  The  point  of  defiuite-  the  punishment  and  claiming  recognition 
ness  which  is  to  be  recognised  is  the  un-  and  submission.  The  Lord  **  the  life- 
changing  purpose  of  all  the  Lord's  deal-  giver,  who  would  die  to  preserve  His 
ings.  ''  Ye  shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  children,  but  would  rather  slay  them 
smite.'*  The  people  were  to  realise  that  than  they  should  live  the  aervants  of 
it  was  really  not  the  Chaldeans,  bnt  their  eviL" 

H0MILETIC8. 
Troxtblb  on  Trouble  fob  Sik  (vera  5-9)« 

Human  experiences  have  caused  the  formulating  of  such  proverbs  as  ''  It  never 
lains  but  it  pours,"  '^Misfortunes  never  come  alone."  If  many  who  use  such 
wortls  make  no  reference,  when  another  weight  of  suffering  is  laid  upon  one  already 
imposed,  to  the  primal  power  which  maintains  this  course  of  affairs,  there  was  no 
omission  in  respect  to  that  power  among  the  statements  of  Hebrew  prophets. 
They  discerned  the  shadowy  movements  of  a  righteous  Ruler,  producing  not  only 
an  isolated  trouble,  but  also  clusters  of  troubles.  They  were  well  aware  that  truth, 
if  unpalatable,  required  to  be  enforced  again  and  again,  and  that  a  true  lesson, 
which  might  not  be  learned  under  the  infliction  of  one  pain,  might  be  learned 
when  pain  was  followed  by  pain.  The  same  method  was  observed  in  Him  who 
"spake  as  never  man  spake."  The  stem  repetition  of  "woe  unto  you,"  which 
Jesus  deemed  it  fitting  to  emit,  must  have  made  the  ears  of  scribes  and  Pharisees 
to  tingle ;  even  to-day  the  awe  and  dread  survive  when  they  are  read.  It  seems 
established  as  a  principle  of  divine  procedure  that  transgressors  may  learn 
righteousness  by  reiterated  judgments.  We  may  receive  directions  as  to  a  becom- 
ing way  of  regarding  repeated  trials  from  our  prophet.     He  suggests — 

L  That  Bufferings  for  sins  will  be  completed.  An  evil  first  comes,  and  after- 
wards an  evil  which  will  make  a  singularly  deep  impression, — "an  only  evil."  The 
end  which  utterly  condemns  the  sin  is  not  brought  about  at  once.  Stages  of  pro- 
gress towards  it  are  taken.  Some  of  the  sinners  may  repent,  or  may  die  before 
the  last  point  is  reached,  but  they  who  do  arrive  there  have  passed  other  stages 
previously.  The  suffering  may  be  so  slight  that  the  individuals  or  nations  affected 
can  afford  to  make  light  of  it  and  go  on  their  usual  way.  It  may  be  so  serious 
that  they  stand  for  days  or  months  in  a  sort  of  fear  of  doing  wrong,  then  their 
goodness,  like  the  morning  cloud  or  early  dew,  vanishes  away.  The  end  of  inflict- 
ing the  various  sufferings  will,  nevertheless,  come.  The  house  whose  foundation 
has  been  laid  in  sand  will  be  touched  in  successive  years  by  casual  floods,  but  not 
till  the  fatal  year,  when  a  dire  flood  will  descend,  shall  the  house  be  overthrown. 
A  nation  may  continue  for  one  century  or  more  to  indulge  in  luxurious  living  and 
to  practise  ungodly  conduct ;  but  the  blows  of  truth  and  right  will  be  repeated 
nntil  the  old  evil  state  falls  down.  "Their  feet  will  slide  in  due  iimeJ'  They  will 
reap  what  they  have  sown  and  the  end  of  justice  will  be  attained. 

U.  That  sufferings  for  sins  are  of  varying  degrees.  Similar  sins  may  be 
ehargeable  against  different  individuals,  but  similar  sufferings  are  not  endured  in 
consequence.  It  is  a  perplexity  in  modern  days,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  Job, 
•  and  as  insoluble  to  us  as  it  was  to  him  and  his  friends.  The  messages  of  Ezekiel 
threw  a  streak  of  light  into  our  perplexity.  They  indicate  that  the  utmost  suffer- 
ing— that  which  will  be  recognised  as  greater  than  any  other — comes  as  a  result 
of  loosening  the  ties  which  should  hold  men  to  Qod.  Let  there  be  disregard  to 
divine  rights,  and  sooner  or  later  there  will  be  disregard  to  human  rights.  And 
when  both  God  and  our  brethren  are  sinned  against,  the  penalty  for  the  misdeeds 
may  well  be  felt  as  singular  in  its  intensity,  and  evoke  comments  in  marts  of 
business  as  well  as  in  meetings  for  religious  objects.     Thus  the  observarit  eye  is 

71 


Digitized  by 


Google 


o«AP.  viL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL 


trained  to  see  striking  differences  in  the  inflictious  befalling  men  who  go  in  wrong 
courses. 

m  That  sufferings  for  sin  maybe  rapidly  accelerated  in  their  final  stage. 

The  Babylonian  army  kept  hovering  over  Judea  and  now  and  then  swooping  down 
upon  it ;  but  at  length,  when  that  watchful  foe  came  in  aggravated  wrath,  the  ruin 
of  Jerusalem  was  speedily  consummated,  and  the  Jewish  nationality  was  crumpled  up 
as  by  a  sudden  blight  The  Babylonian  Empire  in  its  turn,  after  resisting  various 
shocks,  fell  to  pieces  as  in  a  moment :  ''  In  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  king  of 
the  Chaldeans  slain,  and  Darius  the  Mede  took  the  kingdom"  (Dan.  v.  30,  31). 
Our  generation  has  seen,  in  the  war  between  France  and  Germany,  how  the  £nipire 
which  had  been  raised  by  '*  gunpowder  and  glory  "  collapsed  with  startling  abrupt- 
ness. This  event  need  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  the  French  Empire  was  deluding 
and  wicked  beyond  all  other  governments ;  yet  at  least  it  may  be  taken  to  mean 
that  *'a  short  work  on  the  earth  "  may  be  made  with  communities  which  allow 
themselves  to  be  misled  by  interested  and  pretentious  designs.  They  will  not 
use  time  to  repent  till  confusion  seizes  them.  Whether  that  confusion  will 
become  ruinous,  as  was  the  case  with  Babylonia,  or  whether  it  will  prepare  for 
new  conditions  of  national  existence,  as  was  the  case  with  Israel,  cannot  be  foretold 
by  merely  human  perspicacity.  Any  way  the  contingency  is  instructive  in  showing 
that  it  is  not  wise  to  make  light  of  troubles  which  are  regarded  as  inconsiderable. 
The  moans  of  the  forest-trees  presage  an  approaching  hurriccme :  slight  pains  prog- 
nosticate the  attack  of  a  virulent  fever ;  and  the  temporal  and  mental  sufferings 
which  come  in  consequence  of  sins  should  ever  be  taken  as  warning  of  an  end 
that  may  be  destruction.  What  thongh  you  can  bear  the  uneasiness  or  dbregard 
it,  yet  remind  yourselves  that  that  brings  no  pledge  of  safety  from  a  sad  and 
fearful  aggravation  of  trouble  some  day.  "How  are  they  brought  into  a  desolation 
as  in  a  moment !  they  are  utterly  consumed  with  terrors." 

1.  It  becomes  peoples  and  persons  to  be  earnest  in  learning  the  lessons  which 
are  given  by  repeated  disappointment  checks,  pains,  sorrows,  lest  evil  come  upon 
them  from  which  they  shall  not  escape. 

2.  It  becomes  them  to  stand  in  awe  of  the  Invisible  Worker  whose  varying  pro- 
cesses manifest  Hb  will  to  restrain  and  to  deliver  from  sin. 

Ebnewbd  Assertion  of  the  Approach  of  the  Calamitt  (vers.  10-18). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  10.  their  phenomena  were  already  deter- 
'*  Behold  the  day,  behold  it  is  come."  mined.  <'  The  [morning]  destiny  goes 
It  is  lemarkable  with  what  unity  the  fortii, the  rod  blossoms, pride  bnddeth.*' 
various  prophets  speak  of  the  troubles  The  reference  of  these  words  is  not  to  an 
which  they  threatened  as  culminating  in  evil  which  germinated  within  the  terri- 
a  day.  It  seems  as  if  they  saw  in  tory  of  Israel,  but  to  an  evil  external  to 
calamities  an  ever-recurring  omen  of  it,  which  was  springing  up  and  would 
that  day  in  which  earth's  story  would  become  an  instrument  of  execution, 
be  judged  of  as  a  whole.  If  that  final  The  rod  is  the  rod  of  the  Lord's  anger 
jiai^'Uient  could  not  distinctly  loom  — the  rod  of  the  oppressor,  repre- 
before  their  gaze,  it  cast  its  dark  and  sented  in  the  Babylonian  Nebuchad- 
troubled  shadows  across  the  scene  in  nezzar.  Like  a  shoot  his  power  was 
respect  to  which  ihey  had  to  utter  the  growing,  giving  signs  of  vigorous  vita- 
burden  of  the  Lord.  To  us,  as  to  them,  lity,  rapidly  taking  the  form  which  would 
all  suflferings  for  wickedness  are  fore-  render  it  fit  to  strike  hard,  and  to  do 
tokens  of  tlie  last  great  day,  when  the  so  with  a  will  energised  by  boasting 
fire  shall  try  every  man's  work  and  con-  pride. 

sume  all  that  is  not  fit  to  abide  in  a  Ver.    11.    ^*  Violence   rises  into  a 

renovated  world  wherein  dwelleth  right-  rod  for  wickedttess."     The  cruelty  and 

eousness.      Those    recurring   days   and  outrages  of  the  Chaldeans^  against  which 


72 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTIC  COMMBNTART:  SZEKIBL. 


tMkt.  TTtL 


the  prophets  Habakkuk  and  Jeremiah 
deal  oat  strong  invectives,  would  be  me- 
thods for  punishing  the  wicked  doings  of 
IsraeL  Ac  the  sight  Ezekiel  becomes  too 
deeply  affected  to  fill  up  with  verbs  the 
four  following  brief  sentences,  and  he 
merely  jirefixes  to  each  a  negative.  We 
might  render  them  literally,  in  terms  of 
the  English  version,  ''not  from  them,  and 
not  firom  their  multitude,  and  not  from 
them  of  them,  and  not  wailing  in  them." 
The  compression  and  uncertain  allu- 
sions make  the  sense  somewhat  doubtful. 
Besides,  the  meanings  assigned  to  the 
several  words  are  not  generally  accepted, 
as  marginal  readings  testify.  The  inter- 
pretation given  in  the  Speaker's  Com- 
mentary is:  "The  furious  Chaldean  has 
become  an  instrument  of  Qod's  wrath, 
endued  with  power  emanating  not  from 
the  Jews,  or  from  the  nuiltitude  of  the 
Jews,  or  from  any  of  their  children  or 
people ;  nay,  the  destruction  shall  be  so 
citmplete  that  none  shall  be  left  to  make 
lamentation  over  them."  Though  this 
comment  scarcely  satisfies  the  demands 
of  linguistic  accuracy,  it  sufficiently 
shows  the  bearing  of  the  prophet's  utter- 
ances. The  catastiophe  would  be  such 
that  no  one  would  be  left  to  resist. 
"  Stroke  will  so  come  upon  stroke  that 
lamentation  will  be  forgotten  in  despair. 
It  is  the  highest  degree  of  pain  when  the 
capacity  to  complain  expires"  (Heng.) 
The  weight  of  scholarship,  however,  as 
to  the  last  clause,  gives  for  its  transla- 
tion, and  there  is  no  attracHvenest  in 
them ;  all  that  beauty  of  the  Lord  their 
God  which  had  been  upon  them  shall 
be  consumed  away  and  utterly  disap- 
pear. 

Yer.  12.  In  that  state  of  affairs,  pro- 
)>erty,  upon  which  such  high  value  is 
het,  would  produce  no  comfort.  "Let 
not  the  buyer  rejoice,  nor  the  seller 
mourn."  "  It  is  natural  for  the  buyer 
to  rejoice  and  for  the  seller  to  lament," 
but  no  ground  of  joy  should  be  found  in 
that  which  might  seem  to  be  a  good 
purchase,  because  it  will  turn  out  to  be 
a  source  of  trouble  and  pain.  There 
would  be  as  little  ground  for  grief  in 
parting  with  property.  The  enemy 
would  seize  it  all,  taking  goods,  cattle, 
houses,  land,  without  distinction  of  per- 


sons. ''When  slavety  and  captivity 
stare  you  in  the  face,  rejoicing  and 
mourning  are  equally  absurd"  (Jerome). 
And  no  one  should  be  passed  by,  "he- 
cause  wrath  is  upon  all  its  multitude;" 
upon  all  who  dwell  in  the  territory  of 
Israel  whose  "  end  "  is  pronounced. 

Yer.  13  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  de- 
velopment of  what  was  just  said  con- 
cerning the  universality  of  wrath.  "The 
seller  **  is  not  to  mourn,  for  he  "  shall 
not  return  to  that  whidi  is  sold. "  He 
may  have  become  an  exile;  the  fall  in 
the  value  of  property  may  have  made  it 
burdensome  to  hold;  there  may  have 
been  forced  sales  of  substance  which  had 
been  prized  by  the  seller — he  need  not 
allow  one  regret  He  will  never  find  an 
opportunity  to  get  back  what  he  bad 
thus  let  go :  not  "  although  they  were 
yet  alive,"  i^.,  whoever  of  the  sellers 
might  be  counted  among  the  living  were 
not  to  cherish  any  hope  that  in  time 
they  should  recover  the  pro[)erty  which 
they  had  sold.  As  parts  of  the  surviv- 
ing remnant  they  would  be  in  a  captive 
state  from  which  they  would  have  no 
restoration,  or  the  waves  of  Chaldean 
rapine  would  so  beat  upon  the  whole 
territory  as  to  obliterate  every  trace  of 
former  arrangements.  life  would  not 
bring  back  again  past  enjoyments. 
Again  Ezekiel  emphasises  the  indiscn- 
minateness  of  the  punishment :  "  for 
the  vision  "  which  he  has  described  as 
shadowing  forth  the  imminent  evil  "is 
upon,"  has  reference  to,  "  all  its  multi- 
tude." In  the  words  which  immediately 
follow,  the  prophet  does  not  intimate  a 
possible  event  happening  to  the  multi- 
tude, but  repeats  that  which  had  been 
already  said  of  the  seller — "he  shall 
not  return."  Tet  should  any  one  sup- 
pose that,  by  fraud,  violence,  or  other 
immoral  way,  he  would  be  able  to  re- 
assert his  title  to  the  possessions  he  once 
had,  he  must  disabuse  his  mind  of  the 
folly,  ''neither  shall  any  strengthen 
themselves  in  the  iniquity  of  his  life ;  '^ 
or,  to  put  it  literally,  and  a  man  in  the  inu 
quity  of  kUlife — ttiey  shall  not  strengtJien 
themselves.  The  same  movement,  viz., 
from  a  single  representative  to  all  the 
individuals,  which  we  see  in  the  first 
half  of  the  verse,  is  repeated  in  this  last 

73 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  vn. 


OMJLKTIC  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


clause,  and  scope  is  given  for  varitty  of 
translation.  Keil's  is,  and  no  one  will 
gtrengthen  himself  as  to  his  life  through 
his  iniquity.  But  whatever  order  the 
words  may  be  pat  into,  the  meaning  is 
conveyed  that  no  one  whosoever,  so  long 
as  he  is  alive,  will  have  any  ease  by  his 
iniquity ;  he  will  be  weak  and  crippled 
stilly  unable  to  escape  the  doom  of 
wrath. 

Many  commentators  find  in  these 
two  verses  distinct  references  to  the 
continued  yigorous  usages  of  the  law 
for  the  jubilee  year,  according  to  which 
land  and  houses  reverted  to  their 
original  owners.  It  is,  to  say  the  least, 
doubtful  if  this  idea  can  be  sustained. 
That  the  phrases  of  the  prophet  are 
moulded  by  principles  inherent  in  the 
law  of  jubilee  is  not  at  all  unlikely, 
but  that  his  popular  phraseology  should 
be  held  to  intimate  that  the  processes 
incident  to  that  law  were  validly  main- 
tained is  more  than  can  be  granted.  It 
is  very  questionable  whether  the  law 
was  observed  at  all  in  the  later  periods 
of  Jewish  history,  if  in  the  earlier. 
The  remarkable  omission  of  any  satis* 
factory  indication  of  its  operation,  of 
course,  cannot  be  pleaded  as  a  proof 
that  the  enactment  had  become  alto- 
gether obsolete ;  but  it  may  be  taken  to 
show  that,  like  the  community  of  goods 
in  the  primitive  Jerusalem  Church,  the 
plan  became  unworkable  in  a  society 
fermenting  with  the  elements  of  social 
changes.  With  the  exception  of  a  very 
few  indecisive  expressions  in  Isaiah  and 
Jeremiah,  as  well  as  this  one  here,  not 
a  single  prophet  has  condemned  neglect 
of  jubilee  enactments  or  acknowledged 
their  fulfilment.  Perhaps  it  should  be 
regarded  as  a  collateral  proof  of  the  law 
of  jubilee  being  in  abeyance,  that  that 
section  of  the  law,  which  required 
Hebrew  bond-servants  to  be  set  free  in 
the  jubilee  year,  was  certainly  disre- 
garded in  practice.  Jeremiah  (chap, 
xxxiv.)  shows  that  there  had  been  a 
momentary  reaction  towards  obedience 
to  the  aforesaid  section;  but  that  un- 
brotherliness  and  greed  had  soon  brought 
a  return  of  the  prohibited  oppression. 
Man's  failure  to  carry  out  such  a  law 
is  not  a  sign  that  its  principles  are 
74 


unsound  or  its  practice  impossible  in 
human  societies.  Both  it  and  the 
having  all  things  common  in  Christian 
Churches  have  these  characterising 
features,  that  God's  authority  is  placed 
over  all  things,  and  that  all  men  are 
brethren.  We  look  for  an  age  in  which 
these  shall  be  supremely  prominent — 
the  good  time  coming,  when  love  shall 
reign  over  all  the  earth.  Ezekiel  men- 
tions the  development  of  the  slighted 
principles  of  those  old  decrees  as  sure  to 
appear  in  that  new  theocnK^,  whose 
details  he  will  afterwards  set  forth 
(chap.  xlvi.  16-18). 

Vers.  14,  15.  A  more  disastrous  re- 
sult than  the  depreciation  and  aban- 
donment of  property  would  be  evident 
in  the  unhinged  and  demoralised  spirit 
of  the  people.  The  biblical  history  of 
the  Jews  goes  to  prove  that  on  the 
whole  they  were  brave  and  courageous, 
ready  boUi  to  defend  themselves  and 
attack  others.  This  characteristic  would 
be  lost  in  the  grievous  period  of  the  end 
so  close  at  hand.  '<  They  hava  Uown 
the  trumpet,  and,"  with  the  view  "to 
make  all  ready" — a  call  to  all  capable 
of  bearing  arms  is  sounded,  and  they 
are  summoned  to  stand  equipped  in 
every  particular  for  meeting  the  foe. 
It  is  in  vain;  there  is  no  martial  re- 
sponse. It  is  not  for  want  of  men, 
money,  weapons.  Besides  country,  pro- 
perty, religion,  life  are  at  stake,  *'  bat 
none  goeth  forth  to  the  battle.''  The 
consciousness  of  lying  under  divine  pun- 
ishment unmans  them :  "  for  my  wrath 
is  upon  all  the  multitude  thereof.'* 
This  would  be  shown  in  the  fatal 
sufferings  which  they  would  endure. 
They  would  be  cut  down  in  the  open 
by  the  sword  of  the  enemy.  They 
would  perish  in  pent-up  streets  or  closed 
houses  by  hunger  and  disease.  ''The 
issues  of  death*  would  fatally  work 
upon  them. 

Yer.  16.  Tet  the  door  of  mercy 
will  not  be  utterly  walled  up ;  some 
fugitives  will  reach  safety  through  it^ 
though  they  may  be  few.  For  them  it  is 
provided,  and  they  ''  shall  escape,  and 
shall  be  on  the  mountains  liko  doros 
of  the  valleys."  Those  survivors  will 
seek  refuge  in  elevated,  retired  districts, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZSKIBL. 


CftAP.  VII. 


acting  on  the  idea  which  was  enunciated 
at  a  later  day  by  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
''  Let  them  which  are  in  Judea  flee  to 
the  mountains."  In  such  a  condition  of 
hardiihip  they  will  keep  together — be 
like  flocks  of  pigeons  which  have  been 
disturbed  in  their  resorts  on  the  lower 
ground,  and  maintain  a  continual  cooing 
among  the  rocky  heights  up  to  whi(£ 
they  have  flown  for  safety — "all  of 
them  monrning.''  Similar  expressions 
used  by  other  prophets  indicate  that  the 
sound  natural  to  doves  was  regarded  by 
the  Hebrews  as  suggestive  of  sorrow. 
Ewald  says,  "The  Arabian  poets  still 
find  in  cooing  the  sounds  of  lamenta- 
tion, as  if  the  bird's  notes  came  from  a 
feeling  of  pain."  In  English  poetry  we 
find— 

*'  The  stockdove  only  through  the  forest  coca, 
Moumfolly  hoarse." 

This  mouniiug,  on  the  part  of  all 
those  who  had  escaped  from  the  terrors 
of  death,  would  be  aggravated  by  an 
element  for  which  there  was  no  alleviat- 
ing counteractive  in  earthly  means ; 
<*  every  one  for  his  iniaQity."  Each 
sees  not  only  that  sin  had  been  no 
defence,  but  also  that  it  brings  bitter 
regrets,  and  he  could  complain  of  its 
deceitfulnesa  This  recoil  from  iniquity 
was  not  an  unusual  course  for  the  Israel- 
ites. Successive  eras  of  their  national 
history  furnish  illustration  of  those  words 
of  Isaiah,  "  In  trouble  have  they  visited 
Thee ;  they  poured  out  a  prayer  when 
Thy  chastening  was  upon  them."  They 
could  perceive,  in  the  evils  which  befell 
them,  tokens  of  the  wrongs  they  had 
been  guilty  of,  as  no  other  people  con- 
temporary with  them,  and  perhaps  no 
people  of  any  period  whatever,  could  do. 
The  rights  of  God  over  them  were  again 
and  again  brought  into  distinctness  after 
seasons  of  efiacement.     They  then   re- 


cognised that  relief  was  to  be  sought 
nowhere  save  in  God  alone,  and  they 
afflicted  their  souls  before  Him.  Too 
often,  with  the  majority,  it  was  not  with 
godly  sorrow,  but  with  the  sorrow  of 
the  world.  They  grieved  over  the  hard 
consequences  of  sin  rather  than  over 
its  dishonouring  of  the  Father,  They 
longed  for  the  removal  of  its  punishment 
rather  than  for  deliverance  from  its 
power  and  guilt 

Vers.  17,  18.  The  weakness  and  gen- 
eral helplessness  of  the  fugitives  are 
depicted  in  strong  figurative  terms, 
"  All  hands,  all  Imees,"  as  inadequate 
for  their  functions  as  if  their  strength 
had  wholly  slipped  away — a  repetition  of 
the  scene  in  the  wilderness,  when  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  were  smitten  by  the  men 
of  Ai  and  "the  hearts  of  the  people 
melted  and  became  as  water  "  (Josh.  vii. 
5).  In  addition  to  this,  demonstrative 
expressions  of  defencelessness  would  be 
displayed.  The  conspicuous  parts  of 
their  bodies  would  be  visibly  made  to 
show  their  utter  abandonment  to  fear 
and  grief.  "  Sackcloth  "  would  "  gird  " 
them;  ''trembling"  would  "cover" 
them;  the  "shame"  of  vexation  and 
punishment  would  suffuse,  itself  over 
their  countenances,  and  "baldness" 
overrun  their  "  HHiADa"  The  baldness 
might  be  self-inflicted  in  the  manner 
narrated  by  Ezra  (ix.  3),  when  he  was 
overwhelmed  with  horror  for  the  trans- 
gression of  his  people.  It  has  been 
often  said  that  such  baldness  was  pro- 
hibited to  Israel,  but  the  reference  usually 
made  for  that  statement  (Deut  xiv.  1) 
does  not  prove  it  That  verse  speaks  of 
taking  hair  from  a  certain  part  of  the 
head  only.  At  any  rate,  allusions  in 
Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Amos,  Micah  signify 
that  depriving  the  head  of  its  hair  was 
not  an  uncommon  procedure  in  seasons 
of  deep  griel 


HOMILETICS. 

How  Man's  Destint  is  Brought  About. 

<'  The  destiny  goesforth^  the  rod  bloe$om8f  pride  huddeth,  ffioUnee  riwt  Mo  arod 
for  wickedness'*  {vera.  10,  11). 

These  words  allude  to  the  Babylonian  monarchy  as  growing  in  power,  and 
having  in  it  the  destiny  to  shatter  the  Jewish  state  for  its  persbtent  wrong  courses 

15 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  vn.  HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  UY :  EZSKtEL. 


towards  its  covenanted  Lord.  We  read  them  and  see  how,  "  to  the  sprouting  of 
power  which  can,  corresponds  the  blossoming  of  pride  which  trtY//'  be  a  terror  and 
destruction.  We  are  furnished  with  a  representation  in  outline  of  the  methods  by 
which  struying  souls  are  recompensed  according  to  their  ways  and  abominations. 

I  Their  destiny  is  not  a  fortuitous  event.  It  is  a  growth — ^a  product  of,  it 
may  be,  hidden  and  manifold  causes.  Generally,  we  cannot  tell  how  we  had 
become  liable  to  a  cold,  a  fever,  a  face-ache  or  heart-palpitation  ;  but  our  inability 
to  trace  the  movements  which  culminated  in  the  attack  does  not  make  us  hesitate 
to  say  that  we  had  come  under  influences  sufficient  to  produce  the  indisposition. 
It  was  not  a  random  blow.  We  have  reason  to  take  the  same  position  in  reference  to 
all  personal,  to  all  national  fears,  losses,  defeats.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  accident^ 
chance  in  human  affairs.  If  we  have  to  pass  through  fire  and  through  water,  they 
were  in  our  way.  If  men  ride  over  our  heads,  they  were  mounted  on  horses  spurred 
to  do  so. 

n.  Destiny  is  not  firom  the  mere  flat  of  Gk>d.  He  works  by  law.  He  begins  to 
act  because  of  righteousness  and  truth.  He  continues  to  act  for  righteousness  and 
truth.  The  nature  of  things  moves  towards  the  punishing  of  evil  by  operations 
which  may  be  said  to  be  outside  of  God,  that  is,  by  using  forces  which  the  Almighty 
One  has  called  into  existence.  Every  decree  of  His  is  therefore  adapted  to  antece- 
dent conditions.  Violence  rises  up  into  a  rod  by  no  arbitrary  will  The  moral 
government  of  God  may  tend  to  an  inevitable  fate,  but  it  is  a  reasonable  one. 

UL  Destiny  is  accomplished  by  fitting  instruments.  I  said,  in  agreement 
with  the  phraseology  of  the  prophet,  that  destiny  is  a  growth.  Each  kind  of  tree  in 
growing  appropriates  those  elements  in  the  atmosphere  and  soil  which  are  suited 
to  its  nature.  The  bread-fruit  tree  prepares  to  support  the  life  of  man,  and  the 
npjis-tree  to  poison  him.  And  in  the  moral  realm  the  elaboration  of  good  things 
to  save  man  and  of  evil  things  to  destroy  him  is  always  proceeding.  When  the 
time  is  ripe  they  arrive  at  their  suitableness  for  use,  and  are  capable  of  carrying 
out  the  destined  event.  But  ''  the  rod  of  the  wicked  shall  not  rest  upon  the  lot  of 
the  righteou&"  Pride  will  smite  pride,  violent  dealing  will  be  crushed  by  violence. 
Wlien  men  sin  they  set  briers  and  thorns  against  the  Lord  who  is  in  conflict  with 
them ;  but  it  is  only  to  see  that  He  goes  through  them,  that  He  burns  them  up 
together.  He  never  stands  perplexed  because  He  has  no  instrument  at  hand  to 
execute  His  holy  law. 

IV.  Destiny  is  the  smnming  np  of  previous  actions.  We  say  that  violets 
are  gathered  for  their  sweet  perfume  and  wheat  for  its  nutritious  qualities,  and  we 
mean  that  the  different  lots  which  befall  them  is  due  to  those  antecedent  chemical 
operations  which  form  their  properties.  We  should  say  the  same  of  every  indivi- 
dual and  every  nation  on  whom  scares,  and  pains,  and  loss,  and  ruin  spread  their 
blight.  They  took  a  course  in  which  they  gathered  up  certain  materials.  Whether 
those  materials  were  drawn  from  the  external  or  the  internal  world,  both  sorts 
became  the  means  of  bruising,  tearing,  killing  those  who  had  gathered  them. 
**  Hast  thou  not  procured  this  unto  thyself  f .  .  .  Thine  own  wickedness  shall  correct 
thee  and  thy  backslidings  shall  reprove  thee"  (Jer.  ii.  17,  19).  It  is  foolish  to 
speak  of  an  evil  destiny  except  as  a  conseqaence  of  foregoing  faults. 

1.  PunUkmentfor  sin  comes  slowly.  It  is  not  the  result  of  a  force  which  appears 
suddenly  on  the  stage  of  life,  it  is  no  hasty  stroke  for  which  there  was  not  suffi- 
cient justification,  and  the  incidence  of  which  might  cause  valid  regrets.  It  is  a 
growth.  The  evil-doers  may  escape  for  a  season,  but  in  due  season,  sooner  or  later, 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  sin,  they  shall  receive  the  just  award  on  their  deeds. 
Let  not  your  hearts  be  set  towards  evil  because  the  sentence  against  it  is  not  exe- 
cuted speedily.     Use  the  space  given  for  repentance. 

2.  Punishment  for  sin  covms  turtly.  Human  strength,  wisdom,  sympathy  cannot 
stay  the  reproductive  powers  of  nature,  and  they  cannot  annihilate  the  accumulat- 
ing energies  of  moral  evil.     The  cotton  which  will  form  the  shroud  for  some  of  yov 

76 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  BZBKIEL.  Oiiap.  VIl 


who  are  enjoying  good  health  is  to  be  plucked  off  sun -lit  fields.  The  weather  which 
will  bring  fEtmine  to  you,  prodigals,  has  begun  its  action  upon  the  scenery  begirding 
you.  The  disease  which  will  render  uffeusive  the  debauchee  is  finding  nourishment 
in  him  for  its  germs.  The  death  which  will  destroy  those  who  are  ungodly  is  on 
their  foot-tracks,  and  will  not  miss  its  aim.  Inevitable  is  the  woe  which  will  fall 
upon  the  head  of  the  wicked.  Nothing  can  interfere  ;  nothing  can  save — nothing 
except  a  change  of  mind ;  nothing  except  submission  to  the  love  and  power  of  Gk)d 
manifested  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  I 

Weak  Points  in  Human  Lifb  (vers.  11-18). 

Nature  in  its  various  forms — in  himself  and  in  what  is  external  to  himself — occu- 
pies man's  interest  and  efi'orts.  He  is  disposed  to  rest  in  its  use.  He  does  not 
"  look  through  nature  up  to  nature's  God."  But  nature  is  from  God,  and  man 
must  be  taught  that  in  every  one  of  its  characteristics  it  is  subjected  to  the  autho- 
rity of  God's  laws.  If  used  according  to  His  will,  it  is  glorified  :  if  contrary  to  His 
will,  it  must  be  made  to  appear  weak  as  a  prop  for  life  on  earth.  Observe  this 
weakness — 

I.  In  the  common  fiftte  of  men.  There  is  no  abiding.  We  must  needs  die. 
The  place  that  knows  us  now  shall  soon  know  us  no  more.  Our  beauty  will  con- 
sume away.  Where  is  **  populous  No  "?  What  has  become  of  the  Israelites  of  all 
generations )  Whatever  be  the  power  of  the  forces  which  hold  the  activities  of  a 
single  life,  or  whatever  be  the  forces  which  go  to  constitute  the  life  of  a  puissant 
nation,  in  either  case  the  power  is  helpless  to  safeguard  its  subjects  when  they  do 
wickedly.  Iniquity,  that  is  the  poison  which  destroys  strength,  that  the  traitor 
which  opens  to  the  rod  which  brings  death.  The  nature  of  man  succumbs  before 
the  righteous  fiat  of  God. 

n.  In  the  precarionsness  of  property.  Men  make  gold  their  hope,  which  is 
digged  out  of  nature's  reservoirs.  They  pride  themselves  when  their  goods  are 
increased.  They  call  their  lands  by  their  own  names.  Many  are  willing  to  sacri- 
fice truth,  honesty,  peace,  so  as  to  get  unrighteous  gain  in  buying  and  selling.  But 
no  products  of  nature,  however  largely  estimated  and  depended  on  as  a  security, 
can  be  retained  in  use.  A  time  comes  when  they  may  be  counted  a  burden  and 
sorrow,  and  buyers  and  sellers  be  equally  conscious  that  the  possession  of  them  is 
untenable,  that  they  are  too  evanescent  to  give  help  in  danger,  and  must  take  rank 
with  the  weak  things  of  the  world. 

m  In  the  failure  of  conrage.  Human  nature  can  furnish  proofs  of  courage 
which  dignify  it,  but  fears  of  injury  or  death  can  cause  the  stoutest  to  lose  their 
presence  of  mind,  and  panics  fall  upon  individuals  and  bodies  of  men.  Appeals  to 
honour  and  patriotism  and  care  for  property  are  vain.  The  stirring  notes  of  the 
trumpet  are  altogether  powerless  to  incite  to  conflict.  ^  None  goeth  to  the  battle." 
Before  the  wrath  of  God  the  multitude  has  no  spirit  left  in  it. 

IV.  In  the  insecurity  of  a  retreat.  The  fugitive  Israelites  who  had  escaped 
sought  a  safe  hiding-place,  and  that  brought  experiences  which  were  almost  worse 
than  death.  Our  bodily  nature  cannot  be  hardened  or  protected  against  increasing 
troubles,  nor  does  one  kind  of  calamity  guarantee  us  freedom  from  every  other  kind. 
Life  may  be  preserved  from  extinction  by  sword  or  famine  or  pestilence,  but  the 
circumstances  into  which  it  is  thrown  may  be  full  of  fear  and  grief  and  torment 
Ah  1  if  men  could  only  get  away  from  all  tribulation  by  fleeing  from  one  form  of 
it,  how  different  would  our  natural  life  appear  1  But  the  pains  which  follow  sin 
are  not  voided  by  any  temporary  punishment.  Our  wrongdoing  may  be  seen  and 
regretted;  that  does  not  avert  sure  penalty.  Touth  spent  in  sensual  pleasures 
may  be  deeply  and  sincerely  lamented,  but  the  "  wild  oats  "  then  sown  leave  seeds 
on  the  heart's  soil  which  are  not  eradicated  even  after  many  a  ploughing  and  harrow- 
ing.    A  ticket-of-leave  convict  finds  his  crime,  however  he  may  stand  clear  from 

77 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  Tn. 


BOM  I  LET IC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKTBL. 


it  DOW,  will  prevent  any  confidential  employment.  And  when  Qod  rises  np  to 
punish,  *'  moarning,  sackcloth,  horror,  shame,"  go  to  show  that  tbe  stripes  needed, 
therefore  just  and  suitable,  will  be  inflicted  '^  to  the  utmost  lash.**  None  can  hide 
so  as  that  Qod  will  be  deceived. 

What  repentings  should  be  kindled  when  we  see  the  helpless  character  of  the 
things  we  are  so  prone  to  trust  1  What  fear  lest  God  should  be  neglected  and  dis- 
obeyed ! 

It  may  be  doubted  whether  the  next  verse  should  be  connected  with  the  pre- 
ceding or  the  following  verses.  Though  the  casting  away  of  all  valuables  would 
be  a  natural  act  in  those  who  were  fleeing  for  their  lives,  yet  it  is  as  natural  in 
those  who  were  exposed  to  death  by  famine  in  the  siege.  However,  as  reference  is 
made  hereafter  to  utlier  precious  things  which  had  been  employed  as  instruments 
of  evil,  it  is  preferable  to  consider  that  a  change  occurs  here  in  the  line  of  the 
prophet's  thought.  If  the  change  seems  abrupt,  that  is  far  from  being  out  of  har- 
mony with  the  features  of  thb  chapter. 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver. 
19.  Valuable  things  will  be  rejected. 
''They  shall  cast  their  silver  in  the 
streets.''  Retaining  it  in  their  houses 
would  present  inducements  to  the  greed 
and  cruelty  of  the  foemen,  and  expose 
their  persons  to  outrage  :  it  will  be  put 
away:  ''and  their  gold  shall  be  dis- 
carded, treated  as  an  uncleanness  and 
not  to  be  touched — ^more  precious  than 
silver,  it  will  be  more  vilely  Ciist  away. 
It  is  probable  that  their  idols  are  included 
in  this  rejection  if  we  take  an  illustration 
from  Isaiah :  '^  Te  shall  defile  also  the 
covering  of  thy  graven  images  of  silver, 
and  the  ornament  of  thy  molten  images 
of  gold  ;  thou  shalt  cast  them  away  as  a 
menstruous  cloth;  thon  shalt  say  unto 
it.  Get  thee  hence"  (xxx.  22).  This 
utter  repudiation  of  things  so  highly 
prized  is  grounded  on  the  fact  that  no 
amount  or  form  of  the  precious  metals 
will  help  to  safety,  or  protect  from  pain, 
fears,  destruction:  ''their  silver  and 
their  gold  shall  not  be  able  to  deliver 
them  in  the  day  of  the  wrath  of  the 
Lord ;  they  shall  not  satisfy  their  souls, 
neither  flU  their  bowels."  Neither 
mental  ease  nor  sufficient  food  would  be 
attainable  in  those  closing  days  of  tribn- 
lation—"  becanse  it  is  the  stumbling- 
block  of  their  inignity.''  They  so  ap- 
plied the  substantial  wealth  entrusted  to 
them  as  to  gratify  their  lusts ;  they  made 
it  into  a  means  of  sin,  and  fell  over  it 
into  fearful  woes. 

It  is  questionable  whether  the  words 
"silver  and  gold,**  when  associated  in 
this  manner,  are  ever  applied  in  the 
78 


Old  Testament  to  money  only.  We 
must  not  read  into  its  usage  a  modern 
idea.  It  refers  them  to  money,  and 
also  to  plate,  ornaments,  idol-images. 
And  this  is  an  indication  that  Elzekiel 
must  refer  to  some  other  object  than 
the  precious  metals  in  the  followmg 
verse. 

Ver.  20.  Another  feature  of  their 
guilt  comes  into  view,  "Ab  for  the 
beanty  of  his  ornament,  he  set  it  for 
prida"  We  do  not  see  iu  these  expres- 
sions anything  but  the  signs  of  wealth 
made  into  a  matter  for  boasting.  That 
people  boast  themselves  in  the  multitude 
of  riches  is  true ;  but  if  the  Jews  had 
some  special  glory,  it  is  far  more  likely 
that  they  would  pride  themselves  in  that. 
And  they  had.  If  Canaan  was  'Hhe 
glory  of  all  lands,"  assuredly  the  Temple 
at  Jerusalem  was  the  summit  of  that 
glory.  Ezekiel  himself  might  be  quoted 
to  establish  this  application  of  the  words, 
"I  will  profane  my  sanctuary,  the  ex- 
cellency of  your  strength  "  (xxiv.  21). 
The  thing  which  was  the  must  glorious 
feature  in  Israel  had  been  made  into  a 
thing  for  mere  brag !  "  and  the  images 
of  their  abominations,  of  their  detest- 
able things  they  made  therein."  Ex- 
amples of  this  degradation  and  abjuration 
of  their  most  eminent  privilege  are  found 
in  the  next  chapter,  "  therefore  I  give 
it  to  them  as  an  nndean  thing,"  the 
glory  of  their  ornament  is  changed  into 
that  which  is  repulsive  and  unfit  for 
the  Lord. 

Ver.  21.  "And  I  give  it  into  the 
hands  of  the  strangers  for  a  prey,  <fec., 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SZSKIBL. 


OHAF.  Tn. 


•ndtheyshiallparofiEUieit.''  The  heathen 
shall  take  possession  of  the  city,  the 
outward  tokens  of  Qod's  special  dwelling 
with  IsTHel  be  desecrated,  and  its  glory 
be  obliterated. 

Yer.  22.  <* And  I  txun  away  my  fjEice 
from  them  " — from  the  people  of  Jeru- 
salem probably,  though  reference  may 
be  to  the  foreigners,  for  whose  doings 
He  would  seem  not  to  care, — '^and 
tliey  profiane  my  secret."  It  is  unneces- 
sary to  supply  place  to  the  last  word, 
whose  meaning  must  be  that  which  had 
been  guarded  by  the  Lord  as  His  and 
fenced  against  all  intruders.  Hengsten- 
berg  understands  it  of  their  treasures, 
*'  the  means  of  Israel,  which  are,  as  it 
were,  the  treasure  of  the  Lord ; "  but  it 
is,  surely,  more  appropriately  to  be 
nnderstood  of  the  Temple  with  its  Holy 
of  Holies  :  ''and"  this  shall  be  brought 
aboat  when  ''the  lobbers/'  lit.  tluM 
making  breaches,  "enter  into  it" — ^the 
city — '*  and  profiane  it"  The  repeated 
references  to  the  profanation  of  what 
had  been  holy  to  the  Lord  signify  how 
completely  Isrsvel  had  been  estranged 
from  Him,  and  how  all  places,  even  the 
holiest,  would  be  open  to  the  unhallowed 
presence  of  the  ungodly  nations. 

Yer.  23.  Ezekiel  is  addressed.  The 
Lord,  as  it  were,  "indignant  at  the 
profanation,  commands  him  to  put  an 
end  to  the  doings  of  the  enemy  by 
the  deportation  of  those  who  were  left 
behind  "  (Haev.)  "  Make  the  chain," 
that  which  was  the  badge  of  subjuga- 
tion and  with  which  the  exiled  Jews 
were  fettered.  Jeremiah  records  how 
he  was  let  go  by  Nebuzar-adan  from 
"  being  bound  in  chains  among  all  that 
were  carried  away  captive  from  Jerusalem 
and  Judah  "  (xl  1).  City  and  land  had 
brought  the  evil  upon  themselves,  "for 
the  land  is  ftdl  of  deeds  of  blood,"  not 
applied  to  acts  of  murder  only,  but  to 
all  acts  which  were  counted  as  mortal 
sins,  "  and  the  city  is  fall  of  violence." 
The  prophet  Micah  had  declared  that 
Zion  should  be  ploughed  as  afield  because 
the  Lord  withdrew  His  presence,  and 
among  the  causes  of  that  desolation  he 
puts,  "  They  build  up  Zion  with  blood 
and  Jerosalem  with  iniquity  "  (iii.  10). 

Yo;  24    "And  I  wiU  caose  the 


evil  ones  of  the  nations  to  come,"  the 

worst  of  the  heathen,  those  who  were 
most  notorious  among  surrounding 
peoples  for  their  evil  tempers  and  way  a 
The  expression  is  similar  to  that  in 
ver.  21,  ''the  mcked  of  the  earth/*  and 
gives  an  indication  of  the  stronir  and 
bitter  feelings  engendered  anion>,^>t  the 
Hebrews  towards  the  Chaldeans,  in- 
stances of  which  are  found  in  other 
prophetical  books  also.  Ewald  regards 
such  expressions  as  signifying  that  at 
this  time  the  Babylonian  Empire  con- 
tained in  it  an  element  of  rude,  rough, 
and  uncultivated  warriors,  while,  at  the 
same  time,  there  must  have  been  a 
highly  civilised  population  long  settled 
in  Nineveh  or  Babylon  ;  '*  and  they 
shall  possess  their  honses,"  a  justifica- 
tion of  the  counsels  given  in  vers.  12  and 
13 ;  "  and  I  make  the  pride  of  the 
strong  to  cease."  If  it  is  felt  that  it 
would  hardly  do  to  regard  the  Jews  as 
meriting  this  description  "  the  strong," 
the  reading  of  the  Septuagint,  which 
finds  a  confirmation  in  chap.  xxxiiL  28, 
suggests  an  explanation,  ^  pride  of 
their  strength.  This  is  neither  to  be 
transmuted  into  gtrong  pride  nor  into 
proud  splendour,  but  to  be  taken  as 
intimating  that  there  was  that  belong- 
ing to  them  which  they  esteemed  their 
special  strength  as  a  people.  That  that 
was  their  relation  to  the  Lord  Qod  is 
confirmed  by  such  phrases  as  these: 
"  Thou  art  the  glory  of  their  strength ; " 
"  The  Lord  shall  send  the  rod  of  thy 
strength  ont  of  Zion."  That  men  may 
take  pride  in  Him  whom  they  do  not 
obey  is  testified  by  the  vrords  of  Jesus, 
"  Why  call  ye  me  Lord,  Lord,  and  do 
not  the  things  which  I  say ) "  Their 
pride  in  that  would  fail,  "  and  their  holy 
places  shall  be  profaned ; "  their,  as  if  He 
would  not  acknowledge  them  as  His 
even  nominally. 

"  In  these  verses  a  threefold  example 
is  given  of  the  divine  lex  ialionis,  •  •  • 
The  people  have  abused  their  wealth  by 
making  idols  of  gold  and  silver,  and  all 
manner  of  ornaments  for  vainglorious 
display,  so  that  it  has  become  "  the 
stumbling-block  of  their  iniquity ;"  now 
it  was  to  be  seized  as  a  spoil  by  the 
enemy,  and,  in  respect  to  their  deliver- 

79 


Digitized  by 


Google 


00 AP.  Vtl. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKISl. 


ance,  should  be  found  worthless  as  the 
mire  of  the  streets.  They  have  carried 
their  abominations  into  Qod's  sanctuary 
and  defiled  the  secret  pkce  of  the  Most 
High  'y  now  the  whole  is  to  be  laid  open 
to  the  unhallowed  feet  of  the  stranger, 
and  robbers  are  to  be  sent  to  walk  at 
liberty  where  saints  only  should  have 
been  permitted  to  enter.  They,  by  their 
daring  wickedness,  have  made  the  land 
full  of  violence  and  blood,  therefore 
shall  they  themselves  be  bound  with  a 
chain  by  the  ungodly  heathen,  and  their 
best  possessions  be  turned  into  the  prey 
of  the  lawless  and  the  profane.  '  Their 
holy  places  shall  be  defiled,'  as  they 
have  already  defiled  mine.'* — Fatrbaim, 

Ver.  25.  On  the  existence  of  the 
Temple  depended  that  of  the  Levitical 
priesthood,  and  when  the  former  was 
desecrated,  the  means  of  expiation, 
which  by  that  was  connected  with  the 
priesthood,  were  withdrawn  from  Israel 
So  we  read  *' destraction  comes,"  lit. 
a  cutting  off  comet.  We  might  trans- 
late, with  Fairbaim,  a  dose  comes,  or 
with  Hengstenberg,  who  says,  "  properly 
contraction,  in  contrast  with  the  expan- 
sion that  is  connected  with  all  joyful 
prosperity — the  state  of  restriction  and 
diminution:"  ''and  they  sliall  seek 
peace,  and  it  is  not."  Peace — hardly 
with  NebucbadnejBzar,  but  that  which 
could  be  attained  by  the  methods  re- 
ferred to  in  the  next  verses. 

Ver.  26.  The  condition  will  be  one 
of  constant  uncertainty  and  disappoint- 
ment ''Mischief  shall  come  npon 
mischief,  and  rumour  shall  be  upon 
rumour."  "Stroke  upon  stroke  does 
the  ruin  come,  and  it  is  intensified 
by  reports,  alarming  accounts,  which 
crowd  together  and  increase  the  terror  " 
(Keil) ;  "  and  they  shall  seek  a  vision 
from  the  prophet"  They  are  at  their 
wits*  end;  they  do  not  wait  on  the 
Lord,  but  endeavour  to  make  solace 
or  encouragement  come  from  prophets 
such  as  had  spoken  to  them  visions  out 


of  their  own  heart;  but  the  prophets 
are  either  dumb,  or,  if  they  were  told 
"Speak  unto  us  smooth  things,  pro- 
phesy deceits,"  they  failed  to  present 
the  visions  that  were  sought  for :  '*  and 
the  law  shall  perish  f^om  the  priest" 
The  prophet  Malachi  makes  it  appear 
as  an  understood  thing  that  the  people 
"should  seek  the  law  at  the  priest's 
mouth."  It  is  an  inadequate  interpre- 
tation which  would  confine  "  the  law  " 
which  was  sought  from  the  priest  simply 
to  his  reading  out  of  that  of  Moses.  He 
was  to  have  reference  made  to  him  for 
his  judgments  on  the  rules  which  were 
.  given  to  be  guides  to  right  conduct  and 
worship.  Thus  Deut  xviL  10,  **  Thou 
shalt  do  according  to  the  sentence 
which  they  shall  declare  unto  thee  from 
that  place  which  the  Lord  shall  choose.* 
The  priests  gave  decisions,  by  oracle  or 
otherwise,  in  the  sanctuary  as  to  what 
was  intended  by  the  law.  However, 
that  function  of  the  priesthood  would 
altogether  pass  from  it :  "  and  counsel 
from  the  elders  "  shall  also  perish  ;  wis- 
dom and  experience  would  not  avail  for 
giving  suitable  advice. 

Ver.  27.  All  the  population  in  its 
three  classes  would  be  dealt  with  in 
judgment  "The  king  shall  mourn,  and 
the  prince  " — ^the  chiefs  of  the  tribes  and 
heads  of  families — "shall  be  clothed 
with  desolation,  and  the  hands  of  the 
people  of  the  land,"  ie.,  the  common- 
alty as  distinguished  from  the  rulers, 
"  shall  be  troubled.  Iidlldo  to  them 
after  their  way,"  lit  from  their  toay, 
%,€,,  the  Lord  will  take  the  cue  for  what 
He  will  do  from  what  they  have  done ; 
"and  with  their  judgments  I  will 
Judge  them,  and  they  shall  know  that 
I  am  the  Lord.''  By  sufferings  which 
flow  from  their  own  decisions  they  will 
be  forced  to  acknowledge  Him  as  Lord. 
"  With  these  words,  recurring  in  Ecekiel 
like  a  refrain,  the  fitst  cycle  of  his 
prophecies  doses." — HengMtinberg. 


HOMILETICS. 
The  Withdrawal  of  the  Lord's  PRSSENcai 

To  walk  with  Qod  is  man's  highest  privilege,  to  be  forsaken  by  God  is  nuin^i 
deepest  woe ;  his  history  furnishes  abundant  evidence  that  he  has  been  the  subject 
80 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SZEKIEL,  ohap.  to. 

of  both  contingencies.  Tet  a  people  professing  to  aenre  the  living  Qod  should  not 
allow  it  to  be  doubtful  what  kind  of  answer  must  be  returned  to  the  questions^ 
Is  the  Lord  among  us  or  not  f  Are  we  conducting  ourselves  so  that  He  lifts  up 
the  light  of  His  countenance  upon  us,  or  so  that  He  hides  His  hjG%  from  us  t  For 
the  response  does  not  relate  merely  to  our  comfort  or  the  reverse  ;  it  relates  to  the 
feelings  of  Qod  and  the  rights  due  to  God  from  every  faculty  and  condition  of  men. 
A  help  to  indicate  the  position  at  which  a  true  answer  may  be  received  is  sug- 
gested by  these  closing  sentences  of  Ezekiel's  dirge  upon  downfallen  IsraeL 

L  We  learn  what  provokes  the  withdrawal  of  Qod's  presenoei. 

\.  It  is  not  any  arbitraiiness  on  His  part.  Deep  experiences  in  spiritual 
things — experiences  which  it  is  ti>  be  feared  are  not  so  common  now  as  then — led 
former  generations  of  God's  servants  to  coin  thb  phrase,  "  The  sovreign  withdrawal 
of  God's  countenance."  It  has  been  handed  on  to  us  among  the  traditions  received 
from  our  fathers,  but  it  is  a  phrase  we  should  be  very  loath  to  employ.  They 
indeed  explained  it  with  provisos  which  sometimes  shaded  its  objectionable 
features,  but  they  left  enough  of  it  in  view  to  make  us  feel  that  it  cannot  depict 
a  true  idea  of  God's  action.  To  say  that  there  are  occasions  when  we  cannot 
surmise  the  reasons  why  He  should  make  us  walk  in  darkness  and  have  no  light,  is 
a  very  different  statement  from  that  which  intimates  that  there  is  no  call  in  our 
proceedings  for  His  righteousness  and  love  to  rise  up  against  us.  "  Thou  art  clear 
when  thou  judgest."  In  ourselves,  in  the  conditions  of  His  kingdom,  will  always 
be  the  latent  if  not  obvious  causes  for  the  hiding  of  His  face — never  in  any  divine 
waywardness. 

%  Itis  incited  by  unholy  demeanour.  There  were  iniquities  among  the  Israelites 
of  Ezekiers  time  of  no  insignificant  character.  We  might  be  disposed  to  ask, 
How  could  they  fancy  that,  while  doing  such  things,  they  would  still  be  in  the 
light  of  Godf  The  answer  comes  to  us  from  the  true  Judge  of  human  ways, 
"  They  come  not  to  the  light  lest  their  deeds  should  be  reproved."  But  we  do  not 
need  to  inquire  of  Ezekiel's  people  respecting  this  inconsistency.  Similar  facts  are 
manifest  among  our  own  people.  (1. )  There  is  excessive  appreciation  of  wealth.  Before 
it  the  truth  and  purity  of  many  promising  young  persons  go  down  into  darkness. 
The  honourableness  and  the  attachment  to  Christian  causes  of  maturer  age  have 
been  discarded.  Reports  of  proceedings  in  law-courts,  less  public  reports  of 
dealings  in  offices,  warehouses,  shops,  go  to  prove  that  silver  and  gold,  in  some  of 
their  forms  of  value,  lead  into  not  a  few  "  pernicious  ways."  When  Mammon  is 
h)ved  and  held  to,  what  must  be  done  with  God  I  (2.)  There  is  immorality.  Sins 
which  are  liable  to  capital  punishment,  sins  which  seduce  others,  sins  which  stir  up 
wearied  hearts  to  cry  to  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaotb,  *'  Do  me  justice  on  my  adver- 
sary," are  narrated  day  by  day  in  our  newspapers.  How  many  more  never  find  a 
record  in  earthly  pages  !  When  deeds  of  violence  are  rife  they  prove  that  the 
whole  condition  of  a  people  is  demoralised.  When  they  may  not  be  rife,  but  when 
the  guiltless  do  not  condemn  unequivocally  such  as  do  take  place,  do  not  wage 
continual  war  against  them,  lest  they  should  get  themselves  into  trouble  or  soil  their 
hands  by  the  pitch  of  wickedness,  then  too  is  the  condition  unwholesome  and  the 
words  com^  true,  "  Your  iniquities  have  separated  between  you  and  your  God,  and 
your  sins  have  hid  His  face  from  you  "    (Isa.  lix.  2).    . 

3.  It  is  bi'ougkt  about  by  trifling  with  religious  belief.  (1.)  For  people  to  set  it 
as  a  matter  for  pride  is  to  trifle  with  it.  They  treat  it  as  a  thing  which  adds  to 
their  importance  or  self-conceit ;  they  do  not  humble  themselves  to  it  as  to  their 
master ;  they  drive  it  from  its  rightful  position,  however  beautiful  they  esteem  it 
to  be  as  an  ornament.  Hear  the  numbers  who  boast  that  they  are  Christian  and 
not  heathen,  Roman  Catholics  and  not  Protestants,  Church  of  England  and  not 
Nonconformists,  Church-goers  and  not  Sunday  excursionists,  and  their  boast  carries 
with  it  this  undertone,  '*  We  do  not  understand  the  rights  of  God."  The  lonely 
glory  of  His  service — presenting  aspects  which  make  it  excel  all  other  objects  of 

w  81 


Digitized  by 


Google 


€&kF.  TU.  EOMILBTIO  00MMENTAR7:  BZBKIBL. 


thoaght — is  veiled  and  made  comparatively  trivial  when  regarded  as  a  matter 
for  8elf-glorificati(»n.  (2.)  To  adopt  unauthorised  ohservanees  is  to  trifle  with  it. 
The  Israelites  did  not  turn  the  Lord  out  of  His  Temple.  They  did  abandon 
acknowledgment  of  Him  as  their  God  above  all.  **  They  served  the  Lord  and  BaaL* 
Tbey  made  images  of  abominations  and  detestable  things  in  the  Lord's  house.  Such 
a  course  betokened  that  they  could  not  seriously  accept  that  which  was  their  dis- 
tinguishing knowledge,  that  the  Lord  was  the  only  Qod.  They  ignored  the  truth, 
that  to  pay  the  semblance  of  worship  to  idols  was  rebellion  against  His  claims  which 
He  could  not  condone  by  His  presence  remaining  among  them.  Isaiah  represents 
His  decision  thus,  ''When  ye  spread  forth  your  hands  I  will  hide  mine  eyes  from 
you  ;  yea,  when  ye  make  many  prayers  I  will  not  hear"  (i.  15).  He  did  not  want 
"  vain  oblations  "  then,  and  He  does  not  want  them  now.  If  we  use  prayers,  sacrar 
ments,  special  rites  and  services  which  private  or  churchly  judgments  institute  as 
an  indispensable  addition  to  the  faith  on  which  we  act  for  acceptance  with  Qod, 
we  may  not  erect  an  idol-shrine  in  church  or  chamber,  but  we  ascribe  to  the  created 
a  seat  of  honour  along  with  the  Creator,  we  show  that  we  do  not  desire  really,  to 
know  what  is  His  due,  and  our  wilfulness  becomes  an  offence  which  impels  His  with- 
drawal. In  our  days,  as  in  former  years,  His  Spirit  is  grieved,  vexed,  quenched 
by  the  provoking  of  those  sons  and  daughters,  **  who  have  a  name  to  live  and  they 
are  dead,"  who  have  *'  a  form  of  godliness  and  deny  the  power  thereof."  Truly 
they  are  triflers  with  what  is  most  sacred  and  walk  in  darkness. 

IL  We  leam  what  follows  the  withdrawal  of  God's  presence.  Ezekiel 
depicts  the  consequences  as  developed  in  body,  temple,  minds.  Tbey  cannot  be 
literally  applied  to  other  and  Christian  people,  but  they  hint  sufficiently  at  results 
which  are  likely  to  happen. 

1.  Temporal  distress.  Because  God  has  turned  away  His  face,  money  may  be 
felt  as  a  burden,  honses  be  lost,  prostration  of  physical  health  or  courage  unman 
us.  He  is  the  Lord  of  the  body ;  He  is  the  ruler  of  weather,  germs,  gases,  trade, 
and  certainly  amongst  us,  as  amongst  men  of  old,  temporal  sufferings  are  made  a 
means  of  showing  that  we  have  offended  Him.  Not  that  all  such  troubles  are 
signs  that  He  has  withdrawn  from  us — Paul's  thorn  in  the  flesh  is  a  proof  of  some- 
thing else — but  a  painful  experience  of  the  first  Church  in  Corinth  had  its  source 
in  trifling  with  God's  presence.  **  For  this  cause  many  among  you  are  weak  and 
sickly,  and  not  a  few  sleep."  "  Thou  didst  hide  Thy  face  and  I  was  troubled." 
What  the  weight  and  the  extension  of  the  distress  may  be  time  only  will  manifest; 
but  the  fact  that  Israel  was  shaken  by  panics,  obliterated  as  a  nation,  the  survivors 
bound  with  chains  and  taken  into  a  strange  land,  is  a  solemn  warning  as  to  the 
dire  consequences  which  come  from  a  withdrawal  of  Gk)d's  gracious  presence. 

%  Reliyvms  degradations.  (1.)  The  worshippers  wUl  be  counted  unworthy  to  come 
before  the  Lord.  The  sense  of  His  presence  being  deadened,  their  hearts  must 
become  disqualified  for  His  holy  service.  They  may  still  give  thanks  at  meals, 
they  may  still  enter  into  a  place  for  worship,  they  may  still  name  themselves  by 
the  name  of  Christ,  but  they  have  lost  faith,  love,  joy,  peace,  if  ever  they  had  one 
or  other.  The  duty  which  might  have  been  pervaded  with  the  holiness  of  God  is 
nothing  but  an  engagement  carried  out  really  for  the  doers  alone — theirs  now,  if 
formerly  His.  And  what  can  be  a  man's  religion  when  God  is  left  out  of  itt  What 
but  ''a  delusion  and  a  snare  to  men — what  but  a  grief  and  offence  to  Himt  Peace, 
they  may  say,  but  there  is  none.  Woe  be  to  us  when  our  sanctuaries  are  nothing 
but  our  sanctuaries  1 "  (2.)  Corrupting  and  destructive  influences  will  dominate  them. 
**  The  wicked  of  the  earth,  the  robbers  enter  in  and  profane  "  the  place  where  His 
honour  dwelt.  '<  The  profanation  by  the  enemy  is,  alas  I  always  preceded  by  the 
profanation  on  the  part  of  the  friends."  And  so  has  it  happened  in  the  Christian 
centuries.  Churches  abounded  in  Western  Asia — enemies  possess  their  heritage. 
Old  creeds  for  whose  truth  men  were  once  content  to  suffer  and  die  are  sneered  at 
and  neglected.  ''An  unknown  God"  is  not  dignified  with  an  altar,  bnt  oooUj 
82 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTAAT:  BZEKJEL.  ohat.  th. 

relegated  to  an  uDapproachable  cloudland.  Men  who  wear  the  uniform  of  Christ's 
service  decline  to  place  themselves  on  the  hill  where  His  standard  waves,  and  even 
supply  ammunition  to  the  opposing  host.  Thus  do  ''  those  who  make  breaches  " 
pa.s8  into  the  domain  where  Qod  liad  professedly  reigned.  His  ostensible  religion 
is  diiicredited  and  covered  with  shame.  Holy  things  are  profaned  because  He  is 
displeased  and  hides  His  face. 

3.  Collapse  of  social  helpfulness.  Secular  and  spiritual  persons  will  be  useless  to 
one  another.  We  naturally  betake  ourselves  to  those  persons  whom  we  consider 
superior  when  we  are  in  perplexity,  sorrow,  pain,  accumulating  difficulties.  Such 
resort  will  be  in  vain  if  "  the  glory  of  Gk)d  in  the  face  of  Jesus "  is  not  beheld. 
Then  religious  intuition  will  fail  to  grasp  any  inspiration ;  theologians  be  unable  to 
communicate  real  instruction,  and  men  of  experience  suffer  a  stagnation  of  thought. 
Preachers,  teachers,  and  tried  believers  are  weak  in  themselves  and  powerless  upon 
others  so  far  as  relates  to  the  growth  of  the  divine  kingdom  when  they  do  not 
walk  in  the  light.  So  it  comes  to  pass  that  that  which  ^oold  be  the  r^igion  of 
Qod  is  trodden  under  foot  of  men. 

(1.)  We  should  he  impressed  vfUhfear  of  the  toithdraival  of  the  Lord.  When  Jesus 
is  not  with  His  professed  people  they  are  in  dreary  scenery.  It  is  a  dry  and  thirsty 
land  where  no  water  is.  It  is  the  desert  in  which  rest  may  be  sought  for  but  can- 
not be  found  by  those  who  have  had  deliverance  from  some  unclean  spirit,  and  out 
of  which  place  they  come  to  take  up  with  seven  other  evil  spirits,  and  so  the  last 
state  becometh  worse  than  the  first.     There  is  cause  for  fear. 

(2.)  We  should  become  very  watdifuL  If  we  perceive  little  or  nothing  of  the 
anguish  of  our  Shepherd  as  He  prays  for  the  lost  sheep ;  if  we  are  so  cold  or  luke- 
warm in  our  affections  as  hardly  ever-  sacrificing  for  Christ  an  earthly  pleasure,  or 
an  hour  of  business,  or  a  sum  of  money,  then  it  is  time  for  us  to  listen  to  the 
tender  and  poignant  rebuke,  '^  What,  could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hoar  f  Watoh 
and  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation." 

Wealth  Unserviceable  (ver.  19). 

L  The  creatxures  which  promise  the  most  help  and  ndise  ezpeetationB  hifl^iest, 
in  times  of  trouble  can  do  little  or  nothing  for  ns.  Judas's  thirty  pieces  of  silver 
could  not  still  one  throb  of  his  conscience.  Herod's  royal  robes,  sceptre,  crown, 
greatness  could  not  protect  him  from  the  teeth  of  a  few  feeble  worms.  Not  all 
your  wealth  can  keep  the  plague  out  of  the  city,  or  secure  your  lives  when  it 
is  come. 

IL  Men  tainted  with  coretonsness  lay  up  for  they  kn(»w  not  whom — for 
their  enemies.  The  Jews  had  vexed  their  heads,  hearts,  and  hands  to  get  houses 
and  vineyards,  silver  and  gold,  and  now  strangers,  men  their  souls  hated,  must 
possess  their  treasures.  This  misery  is  upon  all  accumulators,  that  they  may  spend 
twenty  or  thirty  years  in  gathering  that  which  a  Babylonian,  a  bitter  enemy  to 
Qod  and  His  people,  may  possess  in  an  hour. 

m  Abuse  of  onr  estates  defiles  them  and  brings  the  wrath  of  Ch>d  upon  them. 
When  silver  and  gold  maintain  pride,  lusts,  and  other  ends  than  Qod  hath  appointed 
them,  they  are  wronged  and  imbondaged,  and  are  as  an  unclean  thing.  Therefore 
is  the  curse  brought  upon  alL — GreenhilL 

Incbsabe  of  Evil  Sealised  (ver.  26). 

L  When  a  people  is  nnder  divine  displeasure  there  is  a  succession  of  erils 
for  them.  Saul  and  Pharaoh  were  so  treated,  and  the  misery  of  the  wicked  is 
that  they  shall  perish  rather  a  hundred  times  over  than  go  unpunished. 

XL  Ood  proceeds  by  degrees  and  steps  to  severity  of  judgments.  First  come 
drops,  then  soc.e  little  streams,  after  that  the  strength.     '*  He  did  not  stir  up  all 

83 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


CHAP.  TUL  MOMILBTIO  00MMENTAR7:  EZEKIBL. 


HIh  wrath  ;"  but  if  sin  grow  Qod's  auger  growfli  He  begins  with  a  little  finger, 
if  that  do  good  He  will  stop  \  if  not,  you  shall  feel  His  hand,  His  arm,  and  weight 
of  His  loius. 

TTT.  Truths  are  not  confined  to  any  sort  of  men.  Truths  are  not  the  inherit- 
ance of  priests,  proplh  ts,  popes,  councils.  The  Lord  is  not  tied  to  any  rank,  but  is 
free  to  be  where  He  pleases,  to  impart  truth  to  whom  He  pleases,  and  to  as  few  as 
He  pleases.  Ubi  ires  sunt,  ecclesia  est,  said  Tertullian,  and  they  may  have  truth 
among  them  and  more  given  to  them. 

IV.  God  gives  and  takes  away  vision,  law,  oounseL  He  creates  light  and 
darkness.  If  you  spurn  at  any  light,  any  truths  of  Qod,  you  may  lose  them  all. 
He  sends  '*  strong  delusions,"  but  He  says  also,  "  Come  ye,  and  let  us  walk  in  the 
light  of  the  Lord." 

V.  Those  who  will  not  do  what  they  know  shall  not  know  what  to  da 
Adam,  Saitl,  and  others.  Jeremiah  bade  Zedekiah  and  the  rest  go  forth  and  yield 
themselves,  but  they  did  it  not,  and  quickly  after  no  vision,  no  law,  no  counsel, 
and  they  knew  not  which  way  to  turn. 

VL  They  that  will  not  know  Ood  in  the  way  of  His  merdas  shall  know 
Him  tn  the  way  of  His  Judgments. — Greenhill. 

ni.— FURTHER  PROPHETIC  ACTION  IMPOSED  ON  EZEKIEL. 

Chaps.  VIII,— XIX. 

Esekiel  has  recorded  the  circumstances  in  which  he  received  his  call  to  be  a 
prophet,  and  then  the  signs  and  words  by  which  he  was  to  signify  the  doom  that 
awaited  the  whole  of  his  people,  because  of  their  clamant  iniquities.  Fourteen 
months  pass  over  him,  and  no  other  communication  from  the  Lord  is  related.  At 
the  end  of  that  time  the  power  of  Ood  once  more  affects  him,  and  imparts  to  him 
a  succession  of  experiences,  which  are  all  ranged  under  one  date.  As  in  the  pre- 
ceding, so  in  this  cycle  of  bis  prophecies  he  begins  with  a  vision  and  ends  with  a 
dirge.  '*  Here  also  he  strives  against  political  dreams,  represents  the  destruction 
as  inevitable,  and  points  to  repentance  as  the  only  way  of  safety.'' — Hengstenberg. 

1.  Vision  of  the  Sins  and  Judgment  of  Jerusalem  (Chaps.  viii.-jti.) 

Here  we  find  not  only  a  symbolical  representation  of  the  supreme  glory  and 
power  of  the  God  of  Israel,  but  also  of  the  procedure  of  the  peopla  This  is 
accomplished  by  putting  Ezekiel  in  a  kind  of  constraint,  and  that  in  the  presence 
of  onlook<  rs.  Did  this  visit  of  the  elders  cause  an  excitement  in  the  sensitive 
prophet,  and  so  prepare  his  mind  for  impressions  from  the  Divine  t  Their  visit 
is  a  significant  fact  It  shows  that  Ezekiel  was  no  mere  cipher  among  the  units  of 
banished  Jews.  Whatever  had  been  iheir  words  and  their  looks  respecting  him,  he 
became  too  much  of  a  power  amongst  them  to  be  uisulted  only.  He  was  observed, 
and  his  confinement  to  his  house  was  considered  not  as  a  result  of  ailment  merely, 
but  as  a  condition  demanding  general  interest  Whether  the  people  realised  that 
he  was  *'  a  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts,"  and  the  elders  came  sincerely  to 
inquire  '^  what  saith  the  Lord  t "  may  be  doubted  ;  but  that  this  was  the  case  after 
a  few  years  is  certified  (chap,  zxziii.  30). 

The  constraint  imposed  on  Ezekiel  by  the  action  of  the  Lord  was  that  in 
which  the  external  senses  are  apparently  cast  into  an  unsusceptible  state.  He  was 
thus  withdrawn  from  the  relation  to  his  house  and  the  elders  in  which  he  seemed 
to  be,  and  was  rendered  capable  of  receiving  impressions  of  things  far  remote  from 
his  physical  environment  Involuntary  on  his  part  though  his  state  might  be, 
there  was  no  abeyance  in  the  action  of  his  chief  faculties.  He  could  internally  see, 
hear,  speak ;  his  spirit  is  liberated  and  strengthened  instead  of  clogged.  The 
84 


Digitized  by 


Google 


aOMILETW  OOMMBNTARY:  EZEKIBL. 


CHAR  lUL 


OTerrnling  force  directs  his  attention  to  the  Jews  who  had  not  been  deported,  and 
especially  to  the  procedure  of  the  dwellers  in  Jerusalem. 

No  indication  is  given  of  the  length  of  time  passed  in  his  ecstasy.  The  elders 
may  not  have  remained  so  long  as  his  perception  of  external  things  was  in  sua- 
pense ;  but  they  may,  as  visional  events  proceed  more  rapidly  than  external  They 
would  have  seen  a  rigid  and  sudden  prostration  of  the  prophet's  body,  and  heard 
his  ominous  cry  (chaps,  ix.  8,  xi  13),  and  the  phraseology  of  chap.  xL  25,  may 
be  understood  to  mean  that  on  his  return  to  consciousness  he  described  to  tkemy  as 
representing  "  them  of  the  cuptivity,"  all  that  had  been  shown  to  him.  "  The 
supernatural  being  once  recognised  as  having  a  place  in  the  dealing  of  Qod  with 
man,  we  ou^^ht  to  be  open  to  evidence  as  to  facts  in  every  individual  case** 
{Campbell),  and  abide  in  the  light  of  the  messages. 


(1.)  A  SUBVBT  OF  THS  FoUR  ABOMINATIONS  IN  JXBUSALKM  (Chap.  viiL) 

This  experience  of  Ezekiel  could  be  only  an  internal  one,  and  was  intended  to 
make  him  perceptive  of  the  ungodly  ways  of  his  contemporaries  who  were  left  in 
Judea. 

Prelude  to  a  view  of  tfie  abominations  (vers.  1-4). 

EXKQETICAL  NOTES.-Ver.  1. 
<*And  it  came  to  pass  in  the  sixth 
year,  in  the  sixth  month^  in  the  fifth 
day  of  the  month."  Since  his  first 
vision,  Ezekiel's  time  had  been  divided 
into  7  days,  390  days,  and  40  days,  in 
all  437  days.  Beckoning  up  to  the 
date  here  given,  14  months  had  passed, 
and,  as  hinar  months,  they  would  make 
413  days.  Were  we  to  consider  that 
the  prophet  lay  on  his  sides  for  390  +  40 
days  in  external  appearance,  we  should 
be  at  a  loss  to  explain  the  discrepancy 
between  413  and  430,  or  else  we  should 
conclude  that  this  ecstasy  happened  to 
Ezekiel  while  he  lay  upon  his  right  side 
for  Judah ;  ie.,  he  would  be  disturbed  in 
the  process  of  executing  one  commis- 
sion by  the  interruption  of  another.  As 
this  seems  improbable,  we  suppose  that 
he  had  fulfilled  his  appointment  in  some 
form,  but  not  literally.  The  next  ex- 
pression supports  that  opinion.  ''  I  sat 
in  my  honse,"  as  he  had  been  com- 
manded (chap.  iiL  24).  Eeil  says  that 
the  verb  is  ''  used  in  the  more  general 
sense  of  staying  or  living  in  the  house." 
We  keep  to  the  more  restricted  meaning, 
because  the  same  verb  is  employed  in 
reference  to  the  elders.  He  and  they 
were  in  the  same  posture  in  his  house. 
He  was  not  on  his  side ;  and  though  in 
seclusion,  yet  it  was  a  seclusion  which 
did  not  prevent  his  neighbours  from 
observing  him  or  conversing  with  him ; 


<'  and  the  elders  of  Jndah  were  sit- 
ting before  me  f  the  civil  organisation, 
which  existed  from  the  primitive  times 
of  Israel,  was  kept  up  among  the  cap- 
tive Jews.  The  Babylonian  government 
did  not  imperil  its  own  quietness  by 
nullif3ring  the  authority  of  the  elders. 
That  was  allowed — no  doubt  to  the  ad- 
vantage of  captor  and  captive.  Some 
special  motive  must  have  induced  these 
head  men  of  Judah  to  wait  seated  in 
the  prophet's  house.  Its  nature  is  not 
mentioned  ;  but  the  communications  he 
makes  to  them  offer  the  probable  clue ; 
''and  the  hand  of  the  Lord  fell 
there  upon  me:''  a  sudden  and  pal- 
pable change  in  Eieekiel's  aspect  is 
intimated  by  the  word  fell — it  b  not 
used  in  the  other  two  cases  (chap.  L  8, 
iii.  22) — one  of  those  syoiptoms  which 
are  chiefly  observed  in  persons  of  a 
high-strung,  nervous  temperament.  He 
was  rapt  out  of  control  of  himselfl 
Under  this  influence  the  people  of  Jeru- 
salem chiefly  became  the  objects  of  his 
study,  and  he  afterwards  communicated 
his  descriptions  and  denunciations  to 
the  elders  of  the  captives.  It  would 
seem  that  tidings  of  the  prophecies  of 
Ezekiel  had  reached  the  city,  and  pro- 
duced in  the  minds  of  its  inhabitants 
a  despisal  of  those  who  were  in  exile. 
**  They  were  separated  from  the  privi- 
leges of  worship  in  the  Holy  Temple ; 
they  most  bear  their  troubles  and  not 

85 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  Tm. 


HOMILETIC  C0MMBNTAR7:  BZBKIBL. 


look  for  a  return  to  their  confiscated 
jtfoperty ;  they  should  know  that  pos- 
session of  the  land  was  secured  to  the 
people  remaining  in  Jerusalem,  who 
were,  in  their  own  esteem,  the  favoured 
of  the  Lord"  (chap.  xi.  15).  Reports 
of  some  such  words  had  come  to  the 
ears  of  the  captives.  They  felt  aggrieved, 
and  they  presented  themselves  before 
the  prophet  to  learn  what  he  had  to  say 
in  reference  to  that  consequence  of  his 
prophecies,  and  also  the  course  which 
should  be  taken  in  regard  to  this  cyni- 
cal treatment  by  their  brethren.  The 
answer  is  conveyed  in  the  vision  which 
Ezekiel  narrates. 

Yer.  2.  <<And  I  beheld,  and,  lo, 
a  likeness  as  the  appearance  of  fire," 
<&c.  The  Sept.  reads  man  instead  of 
fire.  It  is  a  correction  which  is  un- 
necessary, and  may  be  regarded  as  a 
mistake.  The  earlier  manifestation 
(chap.  i.  26,  27)  showed  indeed  the 
appearance  of  a  man  upon  the  throne. 
That  was  not  visible  now.  What  was 
visible  was  that  part  which  displayed 
the  fire  of  the  lower  members  and  the 
brightness  of  the  upper  glowing  like  ore. 
Thus  Ezekiel  sees  at  first,  "below,  to- 
wards the  earth,  the  person  on  the 
throne  appeared  in  the  glowing  ire  of 
His  function  as  judge  and  avenger, 
above  in  the  pure  splendour  of  His 
calm,  untroubled  heavenly  majesty." — 
Ziillig. 

Yer.  3.  "And  He  put  forth  the 
form  of  a  hand."  He  whose  glory  viras 
present  to  the  prophet  was  not  materi- 
ally acting — His  hand  was  visionary  ; 
"  and  He  took  me  by  the  front  hair  of 
my  head,"  as  if  to  give  an  nn impeded 
view  to  him  by  holding  him  so  as  to 
make  him  look  straight  before  him.  It 
was  not  to  carry  him :  another  agency 
does  that ;  "  and  a  spirit  lifted  me 
up  between  the  earth  and  the  heaven ;" 
or,  a  wind  lifted  me  up,  an  interpreta- 
tion which  may  be  defended  on  the 
ground  that  the  Hebrew  word,  which 
signifies  both  wind  and  spirit,  is  used 
with  a  distinctitm  when  Ezekiel  tells  of 
the  cessation  of  his  ecstasy  (chap.  xL  24). 
Like  Paul,  he  could  not  tell  whether  he 
was  out  of  the  body,  or  in  the  body. 
He  knew  this,  that  the  power  of  the 
86 


Mighty  One  was  investing  him  with 
marvellous  capabilities  which  needed  no 
physical  forces  to  sustain  them.  It  is 
interesting  to  note  that  while  Matthew 
reports  our  Lord  as  saying,  "If  I  by 
the  Spirit  of  Qod  cast  out  devils,  then 
is  the  kingdom  of  Qod  come  upon  you,** 
Luke  reports  Him  as  saying,  "If  I  by 
the  finger  of  Qod  cast  out,"  &c,  thus 
illustrating,  as  here,  the  varying  aspects 
of  spiritual  influence.  That  spiritual 
domination  over  Ezekiel  placed  him 
not  at  his  own  point  of  view  but  at 
that  of  the  Lord.  He  saw  the  evils  of 
his  *  people,  not  by  the  insight  of  his 
own  nature,  but  by  the  revealing  light 
of  Qod,  and  he  condemned  them  as 
from  His  righteous  sentences :  "  and 
brought  me  to  Jerusalem  in  visions  of 
Ch>d ;"  in  this  rapt  condition  he  seemed 
taken  to  the  Temple,  and  ''to  the 
opening  of  the  gate  of  the  inner 
(court)  that  looks  toward  the  north." 
He  was  on  the  northern  face  of  the 
Temple,  and  at  that  opening  which 
made  a  communication  between  the 
outer  court,  that  of  the  people,  and  the 
inner  court,  that  of  the  priests.  That 
entrance  to  the  more  sacred  part  of  the 
building  was  in  the  feice  of  ''  where  is 
the  seat  of  the  image  of  Jealousy  f^ 
this  is  meant  to  define  EzekiePs  stand- 
ing-place,  not  to  define  the  worshipped 
object.  The  reference  to  it  follows  in 
ver.  5.  The  position  at  the  north  side 
is  indicative  of  the  quarter  from  which 
both  the  sin  and  punishment  of  Jeru- 
salem were  chiefly  derived,  "  which  pro- 
voketh  to  Jealousy."  Idols  are  an 
offence  to  "  the  jealous,  energetic  Qod, 
who,  as  such,  gives  not  His  honour  to 
another,  and  calls  forth  His  reaction 
against  the  wrong  done  to  His  honour " 
(Heng,),  He  cannot  renounce  His 
rights,  and  shows  that  He  will  not. 

Yer.  4.  In  the  place  He  is  disho- 
noured He  gives  tokens  of  His  power 
and  glory:  "and,  behold,  there  was 
the  ^ory  of  the  Ch>d  of  Israel,  like 
the  vision  that  I  saw  in  the  valley." 
The  appearance  of  fire  which  Elzekiel 
saw  in  his  house  seems  not  to  have 
Hhown  throne  or  cherubim  or  wheels. 
Now  that  he  is  in  the  Templey  the  com- 
plete glory  becomes  manifest  to  him  as 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL. 


OBAF.  fllL 


he  had  already  seen  it  in  the  valley 
near  Tel-Abib.  Its  presence  is  a  sign 
that  the  God  of  Israel  will  search  into 
all  the  secrets  of  His  people's  worship, 
and  that  whatever  is  inconsisteut  with 
the  glory  of  His  power,  wisdom,  holiness, 
love,  among  those  who  are  left  in  Judea, 
will  be  laid  bare  and  denounced.  It 
cannot  l>e  said  that  the  practices  which 
were  thus  unveiled  must  have  been  con- 
fined ti)  the  precincts  of  the  Temple. 
Those  various  forms  of  unhallowed  wor- 
ship could  hardly  be  going  on  at  the 
same  time  and  within  its  comparatively 
limited  space ;  and  it  may  be  questioned 
if  certain  of  them  were  ever  transacted 
therein.  The  vision  is  symbolical. 
The  mere  eye  of  flesh  did  not  see  what 
was  done,  but  a  spiritual  imagination 


did.  It  recognised  the  Temple  as  the 
centre  of  the  national  life — the  natural 
meeting-place  for  all  Israelitish  religious 
thought,  and  a  focus  for  the  abomini^ 
tions  which  were  committed  in  the  land. 
This  idea  is  supported  by  the  words  of 
Jeremiah  (vii.  10),  "Ye  come  and  stand 
before  me  in  this  house,  which  is  called 
by  my  name,  and  say,  We  are  delivered 
to  do  all  these  abominations."  And  yet 
he  writes  (ver.  17)  as  if  they  com- 
mitted them  elsewhere:  "Seest  thou 
not  what  they  do  in  the  cities  of 
Judah,  and  iu  the  streets  of  Jeru- 
salem t"  Ezekiel's  virion  includes  the 
four  chief  manifestations  of  evil  among 
the  people,  iu  public  and  in  the  dark, 
and  becomes  a  striking  picture  of  the 
apostasy  of  the  house  of  Israel 


First  abomination  (vers.  5  and  6). 


EXEQETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  5. 
The  prophet,  standing  by  the  gate  of 
the  inner  court,  is  commanded,  by  a 
voice  from  the  glorious  appearance,  to 
consider  the  idolatrous  figure  confront- 
ing him.  ''  And  I  lifted  up  my  eyes 
•  .  .  and  behold  northward  of  the 
gate  of  the  altar,''  standing  in  the 
outer  court  so  that  it  was  in  the  way  of 
all  who  came  in  view  of,  or  passed 
through  that  gate  which  was  called  the 
gate  of  the  altar,  probably  because  it 
led  to  the  spot  where  sacrificial  animals 
were  slain,  this  image  of  jealonsy  at 
the  entrance.  Various  conjectures  are 
made  as  to  the  special  object  repre- 
sented by  this  image  —  Ba^il,  Moloch, 
Astarte.  It  is  preferable  to  regard  it 
as  a  figure  which  embodied  in  its  shape 
the  ever-working  tendency  to  associate 
the  worship  of  idols  with  that  of  the 


Lord  Qod,  and  ihos  to  idealise  the 
opposition  which  was  perceived  by  Him 
among  those  who  trod  His  courts. 

Ver.  6.  *<8ee8t  thou  ...  the  great 
abominations  which  the  house  of 
Israel  are  committing  here,*'  they  seem 
to  pay  divine  homage  to  images  as  often 
as  they  pay  it  to  me.  They  may  not 
purpose  the  certain  result  of  such  pro- 
cedure, but  it  cannot  fail  to  happen, 
and  that  is  <'in  orderto  be  far  oif  firom 
my  sanctuary."  Who  is  meant — the 
people  or  the  Lord  %  Not  the  former, 
but,  what  is  unspeakably  more  terrific, 
the  latter,  as  was  illustrated  at  the  close 
of  this  manifestation  (chap.  xi.  23). 
**  My  glory  I  will  not  give  to  another ;" 
therefore  He  writes  *'  Ichabod  "  on  His 
Temple  in  Jerusalem :  ''  and  turn  again, 
thou  Shalt  see  great  abominationa'' 


SOMILETICS. 
God's  Wats  made  Known  (vers.  1-4). 

The  methods  by  which  the  Father  of  spirits  communicates  with  human  hearts 
are  wrapt  in  symbol  and  mystery.  We  do  not  know  how  the  life  in  plants  concurs 
in  their  growth ;  we  know  that  it  does  by  the  effects  on  them.  And  a  man  may 
not  be  able  to  explain  how  he  has  obtained  a  consciousness  of  Qod,  yet  unhesitat- 
ingly premise  that  he  has  the  witness  iu  himself  that  Qod  has  come  to  him  and 
given  him  power. 

I.  Bo  receives  this  power  amid  the  ordinary  conditions  of  life ;  within  the 

«7 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  Tin.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIBL. 


walls  of  his  own  house,  a  sufferer  under  ailments,  with  a  few  companions,  he 
realises  that  the  Lord  has  visited  him.  ^  He  besets  ua  behind  and  before,  and 
lays  His  hand  upon  us  **  wheresoever  He  wilL  The  idea  that  He  may  affect  us  is 
sometimes  a  source  of  fear  and  repulsion.  This  is  to  discredit  God.  Why  should 
not  the  possibility  of  His  power  manifesting  itself  to  us,  anywhere  and  at  any  time, 
be  esteemed  as  one  of  the  highest  privileges  of  our  life  t     His  visits  may  be  made : 

1.  In  seasons  of  trouble.  The  elders  and  exiles,  flouted  by  their  unbanished 
brethren,  received  good  from  the  Lord  by  means  of  His  word  to  EzekieL  They 
learned  that  though  far  from  their  sacred  Temple  they  were  not  forgotten  by  its 
Lord ;  that  though  despised  as  outcasts,  they  knew  that  His  prophet  was  among 
them  ;  that  their  iniquities  had  not  taken  away  His  truth  and  mercy  from  them. 
The  needy  cried  to  Him,  and  He  sent  from  above  to  alleviate  their  need  just  where 
they  felt  it. 

2.  In  personal  assoeiations.  The  power  thai  came  to  Esekiel  and  the  elders 
came  in  private.  It  seems  to  be  the  usual  course.  Prophets  and  apostles  were 
specially  influenced  by  the  Lord  when  they  were  away  from  ordinary  stated 
worship.  This  was  not  meant  to  disparage  assemblies  for  public  religious  services  ; 
it  was  rather  to  signify  that,  if  we  are  to  learn  effectively  that  Christ  is  the  power 
of  Qod  and  the  wisdom  of  Qod,  we  must  be  alone,  or  with  two  or  three  gatiiered 
in  His  name.  Qod  honours  not  the  service  but  the  servants,  and  while  public 
means  have  their  own  place  among  the  ordinances  of  Hb  kingdom,  they  must  not 
be  supposed  to  secure  for  us  ''  power  from  on  high."  From  the  Lord  we  must 
expect  "  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need  " — not  from  any  mere  means  even  though 
called  sacred.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  heareth  me,  watching  daily  at  my  gate%  wait- 
ing at  the  posts  of  my  doors." 

n.  The  Divine  Spiiit  produces  new  experiences. 

1.  There  are  fresh  impulses.  The  common  routine  of  thought  is  broken 
through.  The  feeling  of  a  new  presence  touching  our  inner  man  becomes  definite^ 
A  prophet  sees  the  brightness  of  a  radiating  glory ;  apostles  behold  ''  the  glory  as 
of  the  Only-begotten  of  the  Father/'  any  man  who  calls  Jesus  Lord  has  a  reve- 
lation within  of  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  His  glory.  All  of  them  feel  and 
know  that  they  are  brought  into  contact  with  a  strength  that  is  made  perfect  in 
weakness — ^the  impelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit 

2.  There  is  an  exaltation  of  heart  Ezekiel  felt  lifted  above  the  ground  by  a 
spirit.  "  Between  earth  and  heaven  "  he  sees  wider  views.  He  moves  amidst  rays 
from  Qod.  When  we  have  a  plainer  and  ampler  sight  given  to  us  of  the  gospel  of 
the  glory  of  the  blessed  God,  how  differently  we  look  upon  our  own  needs  and  the 
needs  of  other  men.  We  may  sigh,  we  may  lift  up  longing  eyes,  we  may  bend 
our  heads  and  knees,  but  we  do  so  because  our  hearts  testify  that  they  have  *'  the 
Presence  infinite  "  which  makes  its  creatures  blessed.  Self  and  the  world  keep  our 
spiritual  life  down ;  but  the  uplifting  of  the  Holy  Spirit  enables  us  to  '^  mount  up 
with  wings  as  eagles,  to  run  and  not  be  weary,  to  walk  and  not  faint"  Evermore 
give  us  this  power. 

3.  Tliere  is  a  dearer  understanding  of  the  religious  condition  of  a  people.  The 
prophet  saw  the  abominations  which  the  house  of  Israel  committed,  by  the  pene- 
trating power  of  the  glory  of  Qod  in  the  Temple.  Nothing  like  a  display  of  the 
character  of  Qod  to  make  sin  appear,  and  to  make  it  appear  ''  exceeding  sinful." 
Even  if  we  be  not  addicted  to  the  same  iniquities  as  other  men  may  be,  our  stand- 
ing in  the  light  of  Qod's  countenance  will  enable  us  to  discover  their  sins,  and  so 
to  speak  of  them  that  they  shall  be  convicted  in  their  own  consciences  that  we 
speijc  the  truth,  that  the  evils  which  we  portray  are  their  evils.  So  a  motive 
may  be  given  for  repentance  towards  God.     We  learn  to  cherish : 

1.  A  certitude  that  God  will  teach  His  ways.     Faithfulness  in  little  opens  a  way 
for  the  reception  of  much  which  will  demand  faithfulness.     Obedience  to  many 
commandments  of  Christ  prepares  for  learning  commandments  that  are  yet  unreoog- 
88 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTARY:  EZEKISL.  ohat.  viil 

niaed.  They  who  grow  in  grace  grow  in  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  The  rariety 
of  forms  which  His  teaching  takes  does  not  weaken  bat  strengthens  the  conviction 
that  He  will  teiich.  So  it  comes  to  pass  that  mnltitudes  of  persons  can  avow  that 
He  who  was  once  an  unknown  God  is  now  honoured  as  a  Father;  that  the  Christ 
who  was  once  admired  is  now  adored  as  a  Saviour  and  King ;  that  the  persons 
with  wliom  thej  nre  brought  into  association  are  regarded  with  a  heightened  and 
distinctive  sympathy.  They  have  learned  from  Him  who  gives  rest  to  their  soul, 
and  they  trust  to  Him  to  teach  them  still.  Whereas  they  were  blind  now  they 
see,  and  they  are  sure  that  He  who  has  opened  their  eyes  will  point  out  their  way 
and  inform  them  of  all  its  dangers  and  its  provisions. 

2.  A  hope  of  special  teaching.  Unlooked-for  changes,  perplexities,  difficulties 
appear.  Does  one  revelation,  does  a  series  of  instructions  for  one's  common  way 
of  life,  exhaust  His  supplies  1  No ;  ''  all  things  work  together  for  good."  Let  aU 
things  be  against  us,  that  does  not  show  that  Ood  is  unable  to  take  ua  through 
them  all.  It  only  shows  that  we  must  not  lose  heart  and  hope ;  that  we  must 
wait  for  Him  when  He  is  not  in  view  ;  that  we  must  trust  that  the  aH-suffidency 
of  heavenly  power  and  love  is  acting  with  steady  force,  though  impalpable  for  a 
time,  '*  Now  we  see  in  a  mirror  darkly,"  but  enough  to  satisfy  us  that  all  needed 
light  will  be  shed,  that  human  sins  will  not  prevail  against  the  mle  of  Qod. 

Vain  Wobbhip  (vers.  6  and  6). 

The  spirit  and  truth  which  are  needful  in  serving  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  are 
often  absent  from  those  who  profess  to  worship  Him.  Individual  worship  and 
common  worship  are  equally  faulty  as  to  this,  and  call  forth  the  stem  api)eal  from 
the  great  King,  '*  Bring  no  more  vain  oblations ;  ineenee  is  an  abomination  to  me.* 
He  thus  repels  the  worship  because — 

L  It  is  divided.  The  worshippers  set  up  an  image  in  His  courts.  They 
acknowledged  Him,  but  He  was  not  the  only  one  regarded.  They  mingled  up  in 
what  they  did  for  Him  a  reference  to  some  custom  of  other  people,  or  some  misap- 
prehension of  their  own  mind.  They  did  not  submit  themselves  to  the  inalienable 
rights  of  God.  The  rite  or  ceremony  may  be  very  attractive  to  the  eye  or  ear, 
generation  after  generation  may  have  found  it  agreeable,  but  the  oondemnation 
stamped  on  it  is  "  Qod  alone  is  not  here  1 "  Many  prayers  which  seem  earnest  are 
not  answered  because  they  supplicate  for  gratification  to  some  lust  of  the  flesh  or 
mind.  Many  a  religious  meeting  dissolves  as  a  vapour  wherein  no  appearance  of 
Ood  is  traceable,  because  they  have  not  come  to  the  Father  only  by  Christ;  G(et 
a  single  eye,  purify  hearts  by  faith,  search  out  all  doublemindedness  in  private  or 
public  means  of  worship,  lest  Ood  go  far  off,  refusing  to  accept  and  hear.  *^  Beside 
Him  there  is  no  Gk>d,''  and  a  divided  worship  is  worthlesa 

n.  It  belies  His  character.  He  %$  nipreme.  It  is  impossible  for  any  created 
thing  to  share  His  sovereign  authority,  and  any  kind  of  worship  which  reverences 
an  idol,  or  a  form,  or  an  idea  of  man's  heart,  must^  by  its  veiy  nature,  be  repu- 
diated as  an  abomination.  Who  dare  presume  to  ascend  the  throne  of  the 
Almighty  !  He  is  righteous.  Jealousy  amongst  men  is  tainted  to  a  greater  or  less 
degree  by  selfish  elements.  We  cannot  bear  a  thing  because  it  somehow  shadows 
our  contracted  range  of  view,  does  not  let  us  step  easily  on  to  our  own  comfort. 
In  Ood's  jeah)usy  there  is  no  element  but  what  is  true,  and  holy,  and  kind.  He 
cannot  give  up  such  principles  if  He  is  to  continue  to  govern  the  world.  He  main- 
tains **  the  integrity  and  dignity  of  His  own  position  in  the  face  of  every  free  being." 
It  is  the  rights  of  God  and  with  them  the  rights  of  every  moral  being  which  vibrate 
in  the  words,  *'  The  Lord  shall  be  jealous  for  His  great  name  f  and  that  He  should 
be  provoked  by  honour  given  to  another  is  to  be  true  to  the  claims  which  human 
nature  makes  upon  Him  who  formed  it  to  be  good«  He  is  accessible.  The  image 
of  jealoui^  stood  in  the  very  face  of  the  Lord's  altar,  as  if  He  were  to  be  served 

89 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  YflL  BOMtLETlC  COMMENT AR  Y :  EZEKIBL. 


only  after  an  idol  bad  been  acknowledged  ;  as  if  tbe  first  step  towards  Him  mnst  be 
tttken  by  tbe  belp  of  that  wbicb  is  not  Qod.  In  Christian  service  we  too  fre- 
quently fancy  that  if  we  first  pray,  or  read  the  Sciiptnres,  or  fast,  we  shall  find  the 
Lord  easier  of  access.  Alas  for  us  !  if  we  do  not  learn  that  He  is  nigh  to  all  that 
call  upon  Him,  that  between  the  High-priestly  Son  and  them  nothing  should  inter- 
yene,  that  to  use  any  other  mediator  is  to  make  a  movement  which  tends  to  put 
Him  far  off.  Not  that  He  does  not  see,  does  not  cure  for  the  worshippers  He  may 
forsake;  but  tliat  they  may  learn  that  they  have  treated  Him  as  if  He  were  a 
retired  or  an  absent  God.  Forms  of  worship  thus  become  a  mere  ceremonial 
Darkness  and  deadness  cover  the  heart,  and  He  caimot  but  count  vain  that  which 
by  act  takes  from  His  character  its  authority,  justice,  and  immediate  presence. 

in  It  is  made  obvious  to  Ch>d-feariiig  men.  "  Son  of  man,  seest  thou  what 
they  do  t "  Dare  he  consider  the  abominations  f  Yes ;  if  in  obedience  to  the  Lord. 
Ezekiel  lifted  up  his  eyes  to  see  the  abominations,  not  because  he  wanted  to  look 
on  evil,  or  because  he  thought  his  soul  strong  enough  to  venture  without  harm 
"among  serpents ; "  but  because  the  Lord  told  him  to  do  so.  We  may  look  upon 
things  which  offend  God — bad  books,  besotted  men  and  women,  unscriptural 
practices  in  worship — but  we  need  to  beware  of  the  danger  in  such  procedure. 
Many  a  youth  has  committed  evil  because  he  wanted  to  see  what  it  was  like. 
Many  a  worshipper  has  gone  to  look  at  forms  of  worship  with  which  he  was  not 
familiar,  and  lost  his  power  to  distinguish  between  that  mode  of  service  which 
leads  to  Christ  and  that  which  draws  away  from  Him — between  a  fruitful  worship 
and  a  vain.  And  if  at  times  there  does  not  appear  sufficient  ground  for  judging 
whether  or  not  a  certain  worship  veils  the  glory  of  Christy  the  true  way  in  which 
it  can  be  made  clear  is  to  give  honest  answer  to  the  question,  Shall  I  be  obe3ring 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  attending  on  this  thing  f  The  weak  conscience  is  defiled, 
the  strong  in  the  Lord  is  made  able  to  stand.  One  goes  into  the  lion's  den  and 
is  safe,  for  (lod  sends  him ;  many  go  and  are  torn  in  pieces,  for  their  own  will 
moves  them.  We  touch  a  great  principle  for  our  guidance  in  worship  when  we  say 
that  wrong  against  God  is  plain  to  those  wlio  fear  His  great  name.  Yes ;  if  lie 
is  to  be  fU  to  act  as  a  watchman,  Ezekiel  looked  at  the  image  of  jealousy,  but  it 
was  that  he  miglit  say,  ''  God  will  withdraw  if  that  is  honoured."  Jesus  ate  with 
publicans  and  sinners,  but  it  was  that  He  might  call  them  to  repentance.  And  if 
we  be  disposed  to  observe  any  unholy  thing,  it  must  be  with  the  desire  so  to  know 
it  that  we  shall  see  its  offensiveness  to  God,  and  shall  warn  the  men  who  sanction 
it  that  they  are  sinning  against  the  only  true  Gk>d. 

God's  Disclosurb  of  Sin  (vers,  6,  18,  16), 

The  disclosure  shows — 

L  There  are  degrees  of  wickedness — "  greater  abominations.''  The  longer  we 
look  the  more  we  see.  There  is  a  sin  of  ignorance  like  Paul's — "  I  did  it  igno- 
rantly  in  unbelief  " — and  sins  of  knowledge  like  those  who  ''  sin  wilfully  after  that 
we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the  truth."  Some  sins  withhold  the  honour 
which  is  due  the  Lord  in  worship ;  other  sins  act  against  His  laws  of  conduct, 
and  prostitute  the  powers  of  manhood  and  womanhood  in  brutal  license. 

n.  Knowledge  of  the  degrees  of  wickedness  is  not  acquired  all  at  once. 
''  Thou  shalt  see  greater."  The  first  conscious  sin  is  no  evidence  of  other  sins  which 
will  be  committed  by  an  individual.  He  begins  to  court  the  will  to  be  rich,  and 
then  comes  the  will  to  lie,  cheat,  steal ;  or  the  desire  for  power,  and  then  come 
deeds  of  injustice,  oppression,  murder;  or  neglected  worship,  and  then  ''they 
crucify  to  themselves  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  Him  to  an  open  shame.'^ 
The  evils  in  churches  are  gradually  recognised.  They  may  be  indulged  in  by 
many,  and  who  discovers  at  once  that  the  stream  is  tending  to  the  wrong  quarter  1 
They  may  ^e  kept  from  honest  probing,  and  how  can  we  test  their  danger  f  They 
90 


n 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILSTIC  COMMENTARY:  SZBKIEL, 


orap.  vm. 


may  be  undetected  because  we  have  been  accustomed  always  to  see  them,  and 
where  is  the  power  to  show  their  offensiveness  to  tl)e  Lord  %  Once  brought  to  see 
one  allowed  course  in  its  siiifulneHS,  we  may  be  brought  to  see  others  also.  We 
need  to  have  eyes  opened  that  we  may  see,  and  we  shall  find  that  '^  in  the  lowest 
deep  there  is  a  lower  deep  still  threatening  to  devour." 

in  The  light  of  God  alone  nnveils  the  amonnt  of  wickedness.  He  has  a 
time  and  ways  of  discovering  what  is  in  our  hearts,  what  in  our  societies.  We 
must  look  by  it,  walk  in  it  if  we  are  to  remember  whence  we  are  fallen  and  not 
have  our  candlestick  moved  out  of  its  place.  Let  us  wait  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
that  in  His  light  we  may  see  the  light  for  our  own  state  and  the  state  of  others. 
'*  It  is  time  for  Thee  to  work,  for  men  have  made  void  Thy  law.** 


Second  abominatum  (vers.  7-12). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  7. 
The  prophet  having  turned,  he  says, 
''  He  brought  me  to  the  opening  of  the 
conrt;"  his  position  being  changed,  he 
must  have  been  taken  to  some  other 
door  than  that  mentioned  in  ver.  3, 
most  probably  to  the  opening  which  led 
from  the  outer  court  into  unwalled 
space;  the  worshippers  would  thus  be 
less  exposed  to  observation  than  if  they 
had  to  cross  the  court  to  the  inner  gate. 
'*  and  I  saw  and,  behold,  a  hole  in  the 
wall,''  but  too  small  for  him  to  pass 
through,  and  a  mode  of  ingress  must 
be  made. 

Ver.  8.  At  the  command  of  the  Lord 
he  dug  out  part  of  the  wall,  as  Eastern 
robbers  do,  and,  entering  by  the  breach, 
<* behold  an  opening"  which  the  wall 
concealed,  and  so  was  known  to  the  ini- 
tiated alone.  The  seer  has  the  key 
which  opens  it — the  word  of  the  Lord. 

Ver.  9.  ''  Oome  and  see  the  wicked 
abominations  which  they  are  doing 
here.**  Ezekiel  was  moving  in  the 
region  of  symbols.  The  hole  ;  the  door 
walled  in ;  a  secret  worship  by  elders ;  a 
large  room,  within  the  Temple-precincts, 
having  its  walls  covered  with  the  figures 
of  various  animals  representing  the  visi- 
ble powers  of  nature,  are  all  tokens 
that  it  was  not  a  real  sight  he  was  look- 
ing on — ^that  it  was  a  representation  of 
the  masked  and  wide-spread  guilt  of 
the  mass  of  the  people. 

Yer.  10.  "And  I  came  and  saw; 
and,  behold,  every  form  of  reptiles 
and  cattle,  abomination,  and,''  besides 
those  animal  figures,  there  were  repre- 
sentatives '*  of  all  the  reftise  idols  of 
the  house  of  Israel  portrayed  npon 


the  wall  ronnd  about."  Ancient  writers, 
and  tombs  opened  in  recent  times,  show 
how  common  was  the  practice  in  Egypt 
of  decorating  their  walls  with  painted 
figures,  while  the  worship  of  animals  in 
that  country  was  long  the  popular  form 
of  worship.  It  seems  as  if  this  promi- 
nence given  to  Egyptian  habits  had 
reference  to  the  leanings  towards  that 
government  of  many  among  the  leading 
men  of  Jerusalem,  and  to  their  efforts  to 
bring  about  an  alliance  offensive  and 
defensive.  Allusions,  in  the  larger  pro- 
phetical books  especially,  prove  that 
there  was  a  political  party  among  the 
Jews  whose  cry  was,  "  Let  us  go  down 
to  Egypt  for  help  I"  Now  that  the 
Babylonian  power  was  in  the  ascendancy, 
that  party  was  obliged  to  resort  to  un- 
derhand schemes,  to  secret  meetings  and 
proceedings,  with  the  hope,  no  doubt, 
that  they  might  contrive,  with  the  aid 
of  Egypt,  to  get  rid  of  the  Chaldean 
yoke.  The  Jewish  people  were  not  con- 
tented with  their  compromises  with 
Egypt,  they  also  adopted  other  varieties 
of  idol-worship.  The  new  forms  did  not 
prevail  so  as  to  extirpate  the  old,  and 
overwhelming  superstition  spread  over 
the  covenanted  land.  Thus  did  created 
things  become  an  abomination.  Oood 
in  themselves,  they  were  placed  by  the 
people  alongsiiie  of  the  Lord  Qod,  \£  not 
above  Him,  and  became  objects  of  His 
loathing. 

Ver.  11.  <<  And  seventy  men  of  the 
elders  of  the  house  of  Israel"  The 
number  is  historical  (Exod.  xxiv.  1 ; 
Num.  xi  16).  It  is  not  to  be  under- 
stood here  of  a  standing  council  of  the 
people,  but  of  an  ideal  representation 

91 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Map.  nu. 


ffOMlLSTIO  COMMSNTART:  BZSKISL. 


of  them  as  a  whole.  The  contr<ast  be- 
tween the  present  proYocation  of  the 
Lord  and  the  honour  paid  to  Him  for- 
merly by  the  seyenty  is  also  to  be  con- 
sidered. "To  render  the  contrast  still 
more  ))alpable  between  what  was  and 
what  should  have  been,"  it  is  added, 
*'  and  Jaazaniah  the  son  of  Shaphan 
standing  in  their  midst ;"  why  he  was 
so  conspicuous  is  unknown.  He  was 
one  of  a  family  of  Jewish  statesmen. 
His  father  was  the  patriotic  and  Qod- 
fearing  scribe — chancellor  —  of  King 
Josiah  during  his  reforming  reign 
(2  Kings  xxii.  3,  ff.).  Another  son 
was  Ahikani,  who,  as  also  hU  son  Ge- 
daliah,  nobly  stood  for  Jeremiah  (Jer. 
zxvi.  24,  zxxix.  14).  Jaazaniah  had 
apparently  deserted  the  purer  traditions 
of  his  family  and  become  prominent 
among  the  idolatrous  and  Egyptian 
party.  It  is  a  sad  but  not  an  isolated 
spectacle.  Bighteousness  does  not  run 
by  a  law  of  heredity.  "  were  standing 
before  them,'  ue.y  before  the  figures 
drawn  on  the  walls,  "and  each  man 
with  his  censer  in  his  hand,"  thus 
assuming  a  prerogative  of  priesthood, 
and  in  the  posture  of  performing  an  act 
of  worship  of  the  highest  kind.  '*  and 
a  prayer  of  the  dond  of  incense  was 
going  up."  The  A.  V.  has  "a  thick 
cloud."  The  only  other  place  where 
the  Hebrew  word  is  found  gives  in  its 
translation  "  suppliants  "  (Zeeb.  iil  10). 
In  biblical  language,  the  ascending  in- 
cense is  symbolic  of  prayer — "the 
twenty-four  elders  having  each  one 
golden  bowl  full  of  incense  which  are 
the  prayers  of  the  saints"  (Rev.  v.  8). 
On  these  grounds  we  prefer  to  read  here 
**j»rayer." 

Ver.  12.  The  interpretation  comes, 
"  Hast  thon  seen,  son  of  man,  what 
the  elders  of  the  house  of  Israel  are 
doing  in  the  dark :"  that  this  abomina- 
tion was  to   be  sought   for  in  snoh  a 


secrecy,  while  the  others  were  seen  In 
the  open  daylight,  supports  the  idea 
that  the  former  was  maintained  for  the 
furtherance  of  occult  political  aspira- 
tions— aspirations  which  the  Providence 
of  God  would  not  sanction  : ''  each  man 
in  the  chambers  of  his  imageryl" — 
rooms  in  which  images  were  delineated. 
Each  of  the  seventy  had  such  a  chamber 
for  himself — a  place  in  which  he  in- 
stalled his  own  special  favourite  objects 
of  worship.  It  is  indicative  of  the  ad» 
diction  in  private  houses  to  the  unhal- 
lowed ceremonies  which  the  prophet 
beheld  in  the  light  of  Ood.  Proceed- 
ings like  these  gave  practical  expression 
to  the  thought,  "  the  Lord  does  not  sea 
ns ;  the  Lord  has  forsaken  the  land.** 
They  did  not  deny  the  Lord's  existence^ 
they  used  His  name ;  but  their  conduct 
was  tantamount  to  reducing  Him  to  a 
nonentity  in  the  world,  for  it  denied 
His  knowledge  and  mercy.  To  put  a 
fact  into  the  terms  of  a  popular  saying 
is  one  of  the  features  of  Ezekiel's  style, 
and  is  a  mode  of  intimating  that  the 
thoughts  so  embodied  in  speech  were 
not  mere  hasty  and  transient  impres- 
sions, but  were  the  outcome  of  habitual 
choosing  their  own  ways  and  forsaking 
those  of  the  Lord.  When  such  notions 
about  Him  were  cherished,  apostasy 
from  Him  was,  not  probable  only,  but 
certain.  Men  might  live  as  they  liked, 
they  might  despise  God,  they  might 
tempt  and  deceive  their  fellowmen,  no 
account  would  be  demanded.  Ood  saw 
not  They  may  degrade  the  worship  of 
a  people,  they  may  corrupt  the  moral  at- 
mosphere of  a  city,  they  may  strive  to 
promote  political  ends,  both  at  home  and 
abroad,  which  shall  be  unworthy  of  a 
high-minded  people.  They  allow  no 
scrupulous  afterthoughts  to  hold  them 
back.  Gk)d  has  forsaken  the  land — a 
nation  has  no  Ood,  no  eternally  righ- 
teous law  to  obey  1 


HOMILETICS. 

COBRUPTION  OF  TrU«  WoBSHIF. 

Account  for  it  as  philosophers  may,  the  fact  is  patent  that  most  men  will 
worship.     They  are  in  the  abyss  of  Ravagery,  or  they  plnme  themsdfes  on  th« 
92 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIO  COMMBNTART:  BZEKIBL.  OHap.  vm. 


■ninmit  of  the  highest  civilisation  of  oentaries,  and  at  not  one  stage,  from  the  . 
lowest  to  the  highest  point  of  the  long  slope,  is  there  a  belt  of  which  it  can  be  said, 
*'  Worship  \N  as  never  made  within  its  limits."  The  object  of  such  worship  as  is 
rendered  may  be  a  fetish,  or  a  Spirit  infinite,  eternal,  and  unchangeable ;  but  in 
each  variation  there  is  understood  to  be  the  existence  of  something  in  which  power 
resides.  The  tendency  thus  universally  observed,  like  all  human  tendencies,  is 
susceptible  to  change  of  direction.  As  certain  elements  in  nutritions  food  are 
adapted  to  build  up  a  healthy  body,  so  there  are  certain  elements  required  in  wor- 
ship to  meet  the  wants  of  a  human  being  as  he  stands  related  to  the  Power  which 
made  him  and  fashioned  hiuL  As  food  may  be  used  lavishly  or  sparingly  and  pro- 
duce diseases  incident  to  over-indulgence  or  insufficiency ;  or  as  good  food  may 
be  refused  and  hurtful  taken  instead,  so  worship  may  be  carried  out  to  strengthen 
or  weaken,  to  elevate  or  degrade  the  soul ;  or  that  worship  which  is  right  and  true 
be  forsaken  for  that  which  is  false  and  destructive.  The  features  of  the  latter  deli- 
neated here  are; — 

I  It  takes  a  place  among  purer  forma  The  Jewish  elders,  burning  incense 
before  animal  figures  and  other  objects,  stood  within  the  area  of  the  Temple  dedi- 
cated to  the  honour  of  the  only  living  and  true  Gk>d.  They  practised  their  dark 
rites  under  the  shadow  of  a  holy  fane.  The  craving  for  worship  seeks  its  appease- 
ment not  only  in  the  pure  and  true,  and  a  past  enlightenment  does  not  guarantee  it 
against  a  present  error.  In  all  the  ages  during  which  men  have  walked  among  the 
revelations  of  God,  some  amongst  them  "have  forsaken  the  fountain  of  living 
waters  and  hewn  out  for  themselves  broken  cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water."  The 
churches,  taught  by  men  who  had  been  with  Jesus  and  had  seen  '*  the  power  of 
His  resurrection,"  included  {>er8on8  who  held  the  teaching  of  Balaam,  ate  things 
sacrificed  to  idols,  and  committed  fornication.  The  present  Church  of  Bome  boasts 
of  its  unbroken  succession  from  the  simple  primitive  Church,  yet  the  walls  of  its 
buildings  are  often  covered  with  pictures,  lights  are  bunied  at  the  shrines  of  saints, 
Mary  is  worshipped  more  than  Jesus,  and  a  frail  man  is  revered  as  infallible  1 
Where,  too,  there  has  been  a  practical  protest  against  Papal  departures  from  purer 
worship,  who  dare  to  say  that  no  heed  is  paid  to  seducing  spirits,  no  '^  deps^ure 
from  the  faith"  has  occurred)  Called  Christians,  counted  among  those  who 
profess  belief  in  Jesus,  how  many  have  only  a  name  to  live  1  How  many  use  their 
position  to  do  that  which  is  not  seemly  1  And  spiritual  worship  is  made  to  pro- 
vide a  room  for  that  which  is  earthly  and  sensuaL 

n.  It  needs  a  dose  search  to  perceive  its  oblignity.  The  hole  in  the  wall 
could  excite  only  suspicion,  but  an  investigation  made  by  the  breaking  through 
could  expose  the  corruption  which  was  festering.  It  is  a  suggestive  omen  for 
those  who  would  discern  the  times,  and  learn  the  judgment  of  truth  respecting 
them.  We  must  wait  and  watch  in  the  light  which  Jesus  sheds,  follow  up  the 
questions  which  the  Holy  Spirit  may  prompt  in  regard  to  the  meaning  of  our 
forms  of  worship.  There  are  ''  depths  of  Satan  '^  into  which  no  sounding-line  will 
be  let  down  without  some  impulse ;  there  is  a  hating  of  the  light  of  which  no 
estimate  can  be  made  till  the  Divine  word  measures  it.  The  external  worship  of  a 
church  may  be  associated  with  for  years,  and  not  a  fear  startle  the  soul  lest  there 
should  not  be  spirit  and  truth  in  its  observance.  The*  forms  may  be  appropriate ; 
but  beneath  them  there  may  be  no  loyalty  to  the  Christ,  only  a  care  for  personal 
satisfaction  and  comfort  The  pens  may  be  filled,  and  filled  with  anything  but 
sheep  1  Only  He  who  holds  the  seven  stars  in  His  right  hand  knows  and  can 
reveal  the  lurking  sins  which  offend  Him  and  hinder  the  Qospel  of  His  Son.  What 
right-hearted  man  will  not  pray,  often  and  expectingly,  "  Lead  me  to  where  I  can 
see,  open  mine  eyes  that  I  may  see  that  which  impinges  against  Thy  truth  and 
holiness  and  love,  no  matter  by  whom  or  by  what  numbers  Uie  evil  thing  is  com- 
mitted "  % 

UL  It  manifests  a  Toracious  appetite.    Several  animals  do  not  satisfy,  idols 

93 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  vin.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL 


of  other  kinds  are  accepted  as  objects  for  worship.  As  in  Jerusalem,  so  it  was  in 
the  days  of  imperial  Rome — a  niche  was  provided  for  the  gods  of  all  nations. 
Corruption  spreads  by  its  own  nature.  One  step  is  not  much  out  of  the  narrow 
way,  but  the  line  which  that  step  begins  to  trace  will  take  to  far-off  regions.  The 
mystery  of  lawlessness,  with  its  power  and  signs  and  lying  wonders,  and  with  all 
deceit  of  unrighteousness,  started  on  its  career  from  the  bosom  of  apostolic  churches ; 
and  the  warning-note,  needed  by  all  seekers  for  Qod's  will,  is,  '*  Be  not  moved  away 
from  the  true  worship,  lest  you  go  from  bad  to  worse,  and  weary  the  Lord." 

IV.  It  exercises  varied  influences.  Over  the  higher  ranks  of  society.  Their 
position  and  their  intelligence  do  not  act  as  a  safeguard  against  a  deteriorated 
religiousness.  They  are  most  under  the  claims  of  worldly  fashion,  and  a  fashion 
in  worship  b  most  likely  to  be  potent  amongst  them.  At  any  rate,  church  history 
may  be  adduced  to  show  that  it  is  not  the  common  people  but  the  aristocracy  of  a 
country  from  whom  a  change  from  a  simple  to  a  complex  and  sensuous  ritual  finds 
its  chief  support.  Over  the  aged.  The  elders  of  the  house  of  Israel  corrupted  the 
statutes  of  the  Lord.  The  lapse  of  years  brings  trial  and  failures.  Men  get 
weary  of  the  God  whose  command  is,  "  Be  ye  holy  for  I  am  holy,"  who  allows  no 
illegitimate  indulgence  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  mind,  and  they  go  into  self- 
pleasing  causes  after  a  lifetime  of  hearing  a  voice  behind  them  continually  say, 
"This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it"  ** There  is  no  fool  like  an  old  fool!"  Oter 
family  associations.  The  chief  among  the  abettors  of  corrupted  worship  was  a  man 
of  whom  it  would  have  been  said,  *'  The  influences  of  his  family  will  prevent  him 
from  going  amongst  the  secret  worshippers  of  idols."  But  this  saying  is  superficial 
and  inconsistent  with  fact>s.  Our  generation  has  seen  not  a  few  out  of  the  families 
of  evangelical  Protestants  become  enthusiastic  Roman  Catholics  or  Bitualists — 
ready  to  stand  among  them  as  leaders.  They  who  should  have  been  barriers 
against  turning  out  of  the  way  of  the  Lord  go  at  the  head  of  those  who  turn  from 
it  They  whose  experience  should  have  confirmed  the  younger  in  truth,  encourage 
them  to  believe  in  lies.  And  this  lesson  is  written  clear  to  view,  that  subjects  of 
the  most  religious  instruction  and  the  most  patriotic  procedure  will  not  always 
he  found  to  obey  the  will  of  God.  Thus  influential  is  the  corruption  of  true 
worship. 

V.  It  becomes  paramount  with  its  adherents.  They  overcome  all  scrupulosity 
in  regard  to  the  Lord's  Temple,  and  prostitute  it  to  their  debasing  ceremonies.  They 
expend  money  and  time  in  maintaining  them.  They  at  length  treat  the  living  and 
holy  God  as  if  He  paid  no  concern  to  what  they  did,  and,  having  forsaken  Him, 
speak  as  if  He  had  forsaken  them.  They  impute  to  Him  an  ignorance  and  a 
heartlessness  which,  if  they  did  exist,  would  utterly  disqualify  Him  from  being  God* 
So  they  are  subjected  to  their  own  devices  ;  they  are  filled  with  their  own  ways. 

How  strange  it  seems  to  leave  the  right  way  for  the  wrong  !  How  unreason- 
able and  unlikely  it  looks  I  But  yet  how  familiar  the  case  is !  And  it  is  so 
because  men  ''  did  not  like  to  retain  Gk>d  in  their  knowledge."  **  They  have  gone 
away  backward."  No  eyes  but  God's  can  detect  the  many  forms  of  this  apostasy, 
and  point  out  the  hole  in  the  wall  of  religious  profession  which  leads  to  abomina- 
tions within  hearts  and  within  churches.  His  ears  alone  can  catch  the  meaning  of 
those  who  serve  divers  lusts  and  pleasures,  who  say  virtually,  ^*  The  Lord  seeth 
us  not."     "  I  say  unto  you.  Fear  Him." 

Chambers  of  Imagbbt. 

'^  Then  said  He  unto  me,  Son  of  man,  hast  thou  teen  what  the  ancients  of  lirad 
do  in  the  dark,  every  man  in  the  chambers  of  his  imagery  f  For  they  say,  The  Lord 
^^h  us  not ;  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  the  earth  "  (chap,  viil  12). 

A  hall  of  imagery  !     No  phrase  could  better  describe  the  mind  of  man,  and 
memory  the  painter.     In  colours  bright  or  dark,  in  the  very  lineaments  of  joy  or 
94 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL.  oOap.  vm. 

shame  or  grie^  she  paints  eTery  straggle  of  the  soul ;  our  yery  wishes  and 
purposes,  though  uuacted,  are  all  there.  We  behold  all  the  scenes  of  the  past 
fixed  immoYably  on  the  walls  and  silently  smiling  or  frowning  upon  us. 

What  is  upon  the  walls  1  Some  spaces  are  blank,  condemning  our  profitless 
days.  Some,  like  the  dark  catacombs  of  Rome,  have  scenes  of  decay  and  death 
portrayed.  Here  the  innocence  of  childhood  is  slowly  dying;  there  honesty  is 
bartered  away  for  gain,  or  virtue  for  pleasure.  It  may  be  there  are  chambers  in 
which  are  beheld  a  virtuous  youth,  a  devout  age,  a  divine  faith  triumphing  over 
the  powers  of  the  world.  But  at  the  best  there  is  only  a  mingled  series  of  pictures 
Each  soul  is  a  temple,  each  heart  an  altar,  and  often  the  unhallowed  rites  of  another 
worship  than  that  of  the  Lord  of  heaven  are  practised  thera 

We  are  apt  to  feel  as  if  what  was  done  in  those  chambers  was  unmarked.  Dark- 
ness and  thick  walls  gave  concealment  to  the  ancients  of  the  house  of  Judah :  ''The 
Lord  seeth  us  not"  Yet  the  angels  were  looking  in  ;  and  to  the  prophet,  his  eyes 
touched  with  spiritual  light,  all  became  visible. 

In  our  chambers  of  imagery  there  may  be  other  witnesses  than  we  think. 
Surely  it  is  not  a  vain  or  unreasonable  thought,  that  round  us  are  spiritual  beings 
to  whose  spiritual  eyes  the  mind  lies  open  as  the  scenes  of  the  world  lie  open  to  the 
bodily  eye.  Happy  if  we  suffer  to  abide  in  our  mind  only  those  thoughts  and 
purposes  which  these  spiritual  beings  may  gladly  look  upon ! 

But  if  there  be  no  other,  there  is  one  eye  that  looks  through  ail  the  veils  of  time 
and  sense.  In  the  sight  of  God  the  mind  is  the  seat  and  source  of  all  good  and 
evil.  The  purpose  clothes  the  act  with  its  own  goodness  or  guilt.  The  same  act 
may  be  disinterested  or  selfish ;  the  same  forms  of  worship  a  mockery  or  r  devo- 
tion, according  to  the  purpose.  In  those  chambers  is  the  real  life  of  man,  and  the 
imaginations  we  indulge  in  take  shape,  and  the  hopes  we  cherish  are  audible 
prayers  before  the  Lord  who  seeth^  and  who  has  not  forsaken  the  earth. 

We  may  enter  those  chambers  of  imagery  for  correction  and  improvement. 
The  time  comes  when  we  must  enter  them  for  judgment.  In  that  dreaid  hour  Ihe 
memory  must  take  a  conspicuous  part.  In  the  midst  of  the  awful  congregation  of 
the  risen  dead  again  must  we  pass  through  the  halls  of  imagery.  The  silent  walls 
shall  need  no  voice — memory  and  conscience  shall  affirm  the  righteous  judgment 
of  God.  For  that  day,  when  the  strong  shall  bow  and  the  most  devout  tremble, 
may  we  in  mercy  be  prepared  1 

Our  life  is  founded  on  what  is  past,  and  every  year  we  live  the  past  becomes 
more  important  in  its  steady  influence ;  we  live  in  the  midst  of  its  memorials.  It 
is  the  home  which  we  build  around  us  day  by  day,  and  according  to  what  we  make 
it  will  there  be  liberty  or  imprisonment  Each  day  let  your  deeds  and  your  pur- 
poses be  such  that  a  new  picture  shall  take  a  place  on  the  walls  that  you  will  be 
glad  to  see.  The  past  is  fixed  on  the  walls,  we  cannot  take  it  down,  but  we  may 
correct  and  alter.  The  picture  of  the  prodigal's  departure  has  added  to  it  the 
picture  of  his  return  and  the  fiither^s  enduring  love.  Over  scenes  of  guilt  there 
may  be  arched  the  rainbow  of  the  Divine  mercy.  Repentance  may  not  efface  the 
past,  but  it  trans6gures  it  While  bygone  sins  remind  us  of  our  weakness,  they 
brinir  us  nearer  to  Him  whose  strength  saves  and  whose  mercy  forgives. — Peahody 
{ahridgei^ 

Third  and  fourth  abominaium  (vers.  13-18). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  13,  to  the  inner  court  as  in  the  former  ease, 

14.     The  seer  is  led  from  the  secret  "  and,  behold,  the  women  weeping  for 

chamber  back  to  the  point  at  which  he  Tanunuz  were  sitting  there."  Whether 

had  first  approached  to  the  precincts  of  they  were  without  or  within  the  Temple 

the  Temple  (ver.  3}.^    He  stands  now  at  walls  is  not  stated,  but  they  were  in  the 

its  nojrthem  entrance,  not  at  the  entrance  attitude  of  mourners.     Jeremiah  bears 

95 


Digitized  by 


Google 


obap.  vm. 


BOMJIETIG  COMMENTARY:  JBZJBKIBL. 


witness  (Jer.  yii  11,  xliv.  17)  to  the 
activity  of  women  at  this  period  in  the 
service  of  idolatry,  though  he  does  not 
mention  their  devotion  to  Taramuc 
N'or  is  it  mentioned  anywhere  else,  and 
no  satisfactory  explanation  has  been 
given  of  it.  Conjectures  are  abundant 
^-often  wide  of  the  mark.  They  have 
too  readily  accepted  this  weeping  and 
that  of  the  Syrians,  Qreeks,  dec,  for 
Adonis,  or  the  Egyptians  for  Osiris,  as 
standing  on  the  same  ground.  It 
might  be  no  forceful  objection  against 
such  comparison  to  say  that  the  rites  in 
those  countries  involved  rejoicings  as 
well  as  lamentations,  and  that  they  were 
accompanied  with  **  unbridled  license 
and  excesa''  But  surely  we  may  be- 
lieve that  if  the  women  of  Jerusalem 
indulged  in  the  gross  orgies  com- 
mon to  Adoniao  worship,  Jeremiah  was 
not  the  man  to  have  shunned  all  refer- 
ence to  their  wickedness.  Whether  the 
"  Babylonian  legend,"  deciphered  from 
an  ancient  tablet,  and  which  tells  of  "  a 
goddess,  widow  of  Dud,  the  'Son  of 
life/  descending  through  the  seven 
circles  *  of  the  land  of  inyisibility/  and 
reascending  after  yarious  vicissitudes," 
indicates  the  quarter  from  which  the 
weeping  for  Tammuz  was  derived,  is  of 
no  consequence  as  yet  **  The  Speaker's 
Commentary,"  while  mentioning  the 
legend,  acknowledges  that  its  purport 
and  its  influence  are  utterly  obscure. 
The  habit  of  the  Jewish  women,  some- 
how or  another,  must  have  demoralised 
themselves  and  those  related  to  them, 
and  so  was  regarded  as  an  '*  abomina- 
tioa" 

Ver.  1^.  The  seer  had  to  observe 
great  abominations  (ver.  6),  then  great 
abominations  they  were  doing  (ver.  13), 
and  now  greater  abominations  than 
these  he  had  already  seen.  His  view 
had  gone  from  general  idol-worship  to 
secret  worship  among  the  magnates  of 
Jerusalem,  afterwards  from  open  de- 
basement of  the  women  to  utter  defi- 
ance of  Ood  in  the  priestly  portion  of 
the  Temple.  The  climax  of  evil  in  war- 
fare is  reached  when  the  soldiers  become 
rebels,  when  works  of  darkness  are  sub- 
stituted for  the  whole  attire  of  light 

Ver.  16.   Again  Ezekiel  is  taken  fur- 
96 


ther,  to  a  point  from  which  he  can 
inspect  the  spot  "between  the  poreh 
and  the  altar/'  a  sacred  place  in  the 
inner  court  where  the  priests  gathered 
together  apparently  only  in  seasons  of 
extraordinary  interest,  such  as  a  national 
fast  (Joel  ii.  17).  On  that  hallowed 
ground  he  saw  *'  as  it  were  twenty-flva 
men."  Fairbaim  calls  them  meu  "of 
priestly  rank,  the  princes  of  the  sanc- 
tuary," and  considers  the  number  was 
made  up  of  the  High  Priest  and  the 
twenty-four  heads  of  the  courses  of  the 
priests  which  had  been  arranged  by 
David.  He  takes  them  as  representing 
"the  whole  priesthood."  Is  it  not 
better  to  regard  the  number,  as  the 
Seventy  was,  as  a  historical  number, 
and  intended  to  show  nothing  more 
than  that  the  priesthood  eyen  was  not 
wholly  loyal  to  Qod  t  Consecrated  for 
His  worship  in  the  place  where  He  had 
chosen  to  put  His  name,  they  were  seen 
"  with  their  backs  towards  the  tem- 
ple of  the  Lord,  and  their  faces  to  the 
east,  and  they  worshipped  the  mm 
toward  the  east."  The  worship  of 
the  sun,  so  common  in  many  countrieSi 
had  already  been  practised  in  Judea^ 
and  was  put  down  in  Josiah's  reforming 
reign  (2  Kings  xxiii.  5,  11).  It  was 
too  deeply  rooted  and  too  attractive  to 
be  overturned  by  a  transient  revival  of 
purer  worship ;  and  here  it  is  seen  to 
haye  seduced  the  guardians  of  that  wor^ 
ship. 

Ver.  17.  The  soenes  which  had  been 
unfolded  in  the  seer's  yision  were  in 
palpable  contrariety  to  the  worship  of 
the  Lord,  but  the  forms  of  apostasy  he 
had  observed  were  of  little  account,  "  a 
lil^t  thing  to  the  honse  of  Jndah :'' 
they  would  disregard  Qod  if  they  dis- 
regarded the  rights  of  their  brethren, 
"  for  they  flUed  the  land  with  vio- 
lence, and  returned,"  «.«.,  gone  back 
again  and  again  to  their  evil  doings, 
"to  provoke  me  to  uger,  and,"  some- 
thing especially  offensive  is  singled  out 
for  mention,  "  lo,  they  put  the  branch 
to  their  nose."  The  explanations  of 
this  obscure  phrase,  which  refer  it  to  a 
rite  of  heathen  worship  in  which  a  branch 
was  carried  in  the  hand,  or  raised  to  the 
mouth,  do  not  agree  with   the  words: 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  00MMBNTAR7:  EZEKIBL,  chap,  yul 

Moreoyer,  the  context  has  left  the  sphere  feelings  of  fancied  security  and  insolent 

of  religion  for  that  of  morals,  and  would  scorn."    So  he  surmises  that   it  must 

suggest  some  action  not  directly  religious  have  reference  to  some  insulting  kind  of 

)  any  rate,  some  yery  gratuitous  evil  proceedings.      The  result  would   be  a 


deed.    But  there  is  no  tolerable  account-  correspondence  between   their  conduct 

ing  for  the  words,  and  the  conclusion  to  and  the  position  which    the  Lord  was 

which  Fairbairn  comes  seems  reasonable :  driven  to  take — urgent  prayers  but  no 

"  One  would  expect  the  clause  to  denote  reply  (ver.  18).     "  I  will  show  them  the 

something    that  rendered   their  sinful  back,  and  not  the  face,  in  the  day  of 

ways  peculiarly  obnoxious  to  Qod,  and  their  calamity  **  (Jer.  xviiL  17). 
nothing  would  more  readily  do  this  than 

HOMILETICS. 
Emotional  Worship  (ver.  14). 

This  abomination  in  worship  is  not  described  by  Ezekiel,  as  it  has  been  by  many 
interpreters,  as  gross  and  licentious.  And  though,  probably,  it  deserved  such 
epithets,  yet  the  one  term  which  he  employs,  '^  weeping,^  suggests  a  course  that 
leads  far  from  holiness  and  love.  We  see  the  dominance  of  the  emotions  in  woiv 
ship — 

L  III  semnums  iirocedure.  Weeping  at  one  time,  shouting  at  another,  pro- 
cessions and  extravagant  gestures,  are  specimens  of  the  actions  to  which  the 
indulged  emotions  pronipt.  That  those  manifestations  might  appear  when  any 
feeling  is  casually  and  strongly  moved  need  not  surprise ;  but  that  they  should  be 
made  a  regular  part  of  the  service  throws  doubt  on  their  genuineness,  and  brands 
them  as  unworthy  of  the  Qod  who  is  Spirit  and  Truth.  If  the  spirit  of  the  pro- 
phets is  subject  to  the  prophets,  why  should  not  the  emotions  also  be  t 

H  In  the  persons  chiefly  affected.  More  readily  than  men,  women  are  stirred 
on  the  emotional  side  of  their  nature.  Let  that  side  be  controlled  so  as  to  stand 
in  due  proportion  to  the  other  sides,  and  it  will  help  to  fill  worship  with  the  tone 
befitting  One  who  is  loved  for  His  love.  But  when  it  is  unduly  fostered,  when 
It  is  fascinated  to  extravagant  assertion  of  itself,  a  deteriorating  effect  must  follow. 
For  then  the  influence  of  womanly  emotion,  which  should  keep  clear  our  family 
life  and  purify  it  when  muddied,  not  only  loses  its  efiicacy,  but  tends  to  render  it 
turbid  and  malarious.  Women  stand  in  a  perilous  position  when  they  allow  free 
scope  to  their  emotions  in  worship.  They  make  it  an  offence  to  God,  however 
devoted  and  continuous  it  may  be. 

m.  In  a  wrong  estimate  of  the  objectB.  Legends  which  have  no  truth,  or 
so  scanty  an  item  of  it  that  prehistoric  studies  and  mythological  suggestions  are 
needed  to  find  it ;  imaginary  evils ;  a  morbid  craving  for  some  excitement  to  break 
into  the  idleness  of  life,  or  into  the  trials  which  seek  for  the  relief  of  change,  these 
**  beguile  women  of  her  tears,"  and  draw  into  sentimental  and  fantastic  expressions 
of  devotion.  True,  the  gross  aspects  of  emotional  worship  may  be  little  manifested 
in  modern  Christendom  ;  but  emotions  still  count  for  something  in  worship ;  and 
we  do  well  to  remind  ourselves  that  however  deeply  we  feel  awe  in  what  are  called 
sacred  or  holy  places,  however  moved  by  a  dim  religious  light  or  music,  by  prayer 
or  pathetic  preaching,  that  the  worship  engendered  from  such  feelings  does  no 
more  in  the  perfect  will  of  Qod  than  idol  images  or  clouds  of  incense.  We  need 
truth  to  originate  and  regulate  emotions. 

"  Let  Christian  women,  instead  of  wasting  in  sickly  and  carnal  sentimentality 
the  tender  and  susceptible  natures  which  Qod  has  given  them,  weep  with  them 
that  weep,  heal  the  bruises  of  the  suffering  members  of  the  Church,  and  minister 
to  those  who  need  temporal  or  spiritual  help.  Let  them,  instead  of  weeping  over 
fictitious  tales  of  morbid  love  and  carnal  sorrows,  consecrate  their  fine  sensibilities 

o  ^1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.TOi.  HOMILETIC  00MMENTAR7:  EZEKIEL, 


to  the  active  promotion  of  the  glory  of  Him  who  is  altogether  lovely,  and  whose 
bitter  sutTeriiigs  for  us  should  call  forth  our  tears  of  gratitude  and  glowing  love. 
Let  them  try  to  resemble  Mary,  who,  in  her  devotion,  when  all  others  were  gone, 
stood  at  the  sepulchre  of  her  crucified  Lord  weeping,  and  so  had  her  tears  dried  up 
by  the  risen  Saviour  Himself." — Fausset, 

Wilful  Worship  (ver.  16). 

All  forms  of  worship  are  not  equally  dishonouring  to  the  only  Lord.  However 
foolish,  corrupted,  or  exaggerated  some  of  them  may  be,  the  climax  in  evil  is 
assigned  to  that  which  springs  from  the  determination  of  men  to  turn  their  backs 
upon  Him  who  has  revealed  Himself  to  them.     Their  worship  is— 

L  Against  knowledge.  The  spot  at  which  the  twenty-five  men  carried  on 
tbeir  worship  indicated  a  priestly  office.  Of  that  office  it  was  said,  **  The  priest's 
lips  should  keep  knowledge,  and  they  should  seek  the  law  at  his  mouth,  for  he  is 
the  messenger  of  the  Lord  of  hosts."  But  here  were  men  disowning  their  highest 
functions,  uoiug  despite  to  the  law  they  were  appointed  to  observe,  who  'Moved 
darkness  rather  than  the  light,"  and  fell  under  the  condemnation  passed  upon  those 
who  forsake  their  own  mercies.  It  is  hard  on  a  father  that  he  should  be  disobeyed 
by  his  child,  and  the  hardest  point  of  such  disobedience  is  when  it  is  done  not- 
withstanding clear  knowledge  of  his  commands. 

n.  In  desecration  of  the  templa  Sun-worship  would  have  been  sinful  any- 
where ;  thid  had  its  aggravation  in  that  it  was  conducted  in  the  place  where  God's 
honour  dwelt  They  provoked  Him  to  His  face.  They  deliberately  polluted  with 
their  abominations  that  which  He  ordained  to  be  holy.  And  though  there  be  no 
such  siicred  place  now,  yet  may  we  learn  that  if  we- take  our  self-pleasings  in  where 
we  and  others  worship,  we  erect  barriers  between  us  and  our  Lord.  We  sin  against 
Him  and  sin  against  our  brethren. 

in  In  preference  of  the  creature  to  the  Creator.  The  altar  was  the  spot 
on  which  Qod  received  the  signs  of  homage  due  to  Him.  They  turned  their  backs 
on  it  and  insulted  Him  by  rendering  homage  to  the  sun.  The  east  was  more  to 
them  than  the  threat  or  the  promise  of  the  God  of  their  fathers ;  the  seen  more 
reverenced  than  the  unseen  ;  a  dead  object  chosen  rather  than  ike  living  Qod. 
Thus  they  were  guilty  of  treason,  and  under  the  awful  ban  of  those  who  are  with- 
out excuse  !  Alas  !  a  similar  procedure  may  be  found  still  under  the  shadow  of 
the  Cross.  '*  If  we  sin  wilfully  after  that  we  have  received  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  " — how  could  professing  Christians  regard  these  words  as  true  if  it  were  not 
for  sad  examples  to  illustrate  them )  How  many  preach  for  self  or  the  world  1 
How  many  enter  into  places  of  worship  rather  to  be  considered  respectable,  to 
please  a  patron,  to  acknowledge  an  unknown  Gk)d,  than  to  '*  rejoice  in  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  the  Lord  ! "  Surely  we  all  need  to  try  our  ways  in  worship,  to  realise 
the  Light  which  is  ever  searching  our  services,  not  that  it  may  find  fault^  but  that 
it  may  show  our  faults,  so  that  we  shall  repent  of  our  errors  and  form  a  pure  and 
steadfast  regard  to  the  Lord  alone.  Then,  when  we  cease  from  the  creature,  we 
shall  worship  the  Lord  in  the  beauty  of  holiness,  seeking  not  our  own  glory,  but  the 
glory  of  Him  who  is  greatly  to  be  feared  and  had  in  reverence. 

Rbligion  and  Morality  (ver.  17). 

The  "  abominations  *'  were  meant  to  make  a  deep  impression  upon  the  seer  as 
to  the  religious  condition  of  his  people  in  their  own  metropolis.  But  more  was  to 
be  observed.  The  evils  which  were  seen  in  the  Temple  were  surpassed  throughout 
the  land ;  and  he  is  asked  to  institute  a  comparison  between  worship  and  conduct, 
religion  and  morality.  Among  the  elements  which  bring  religion  and  morality  into 
comparison  are  these — 
98 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap,  vm 


I.  They  are  difitingnished  from  each  other.  Religion  has  reference  to  visible 
and  invisible  objects  in  which  some  kind  of  force  is  supposed  to  reside,  aud  which 
are  rarely  men.  When  they  are  human  beings,  real  or  imaginary,  they  have 
ascribed  to  them  certain  attributes  which  separate  them  from  ordinary  men. 
Morality  has  reference  to  the  men  whom  we  think  of,  speak  to,  act  with  or  on« 
This  dibtinction,  however,  does  not  imply  separation  of  the  two  spheres. 

H  They  are  intixnately  associated.  Religion  and  morality  may  be  separated 
in  thought ;  they  cannot  be  in  practice.  This  is  not  to  be  understood  to  say  that 
a  religious  man  cannot  exist  without  some  kind  of  moral  conduct,  or  a  moral  man 
without  some  friendly  or  unfriendly  attitude  towards  religion.  It  is  to  say  that 
a  man's  religious  sentiments  have  always  some  inflnence  upon  his  social  actions, 
even  if  image  or  sun  wor:5hip  could  be  shown  never  to  have  let  their  rill  of  religious 
thought  flow  into  the  stream  of  moral  requirements.  It  may  be  that  a  man  who 
worships  an  idol,  or  says  there  is  no  Clod,  is  irreproachable  in  his  morals.  Allowing 
that  there  might  be  no  question  as  to  the  reality  of  individual  cases,  yet  are  they 
rare.  They  are  exceptions  to  the  general  rule  that  a  high  morality  depends  upon 
a  true  religion.  This  is  manifest  where  the  Gk>d  of  Israel,  the  only  true  God,  is 
served  or  disobeyed.  His  religion  is  inextricably  mingled  up  with  morality.  Who- 
soever gives  due  honour  to  the  Lord  Qod  accepts  every  moral  obligation.  The 
love  of  Qod  aud  the  righteousness  of  God  produce  love  and  rectitude  in  all  rela- 
tions. And  should  it  be  said  that  His  professed  worship^iers  are  often  unfaithful, 
dishonourable,  impure,  self-seeking  in  regard  to -man,  it  can  be  replied  that  such 
persons  do  not  possess  the  religion  pure  and  undefiled  before  God  and  the  Father. 
If  they  went  out  from  it,  they  were  not  of  it.  They  never  knew  Jesus  the  Holy 
One  or  His  Father.  They  swell  the  instances  which  show  that  an  irreligious  class 
or  nation  must  be,  on  the  whole,  immoral — a  moral  class  or  nation,  on  the  who!e, 
religious. 

m.  They  are  unfairly  estimated.  The  bearing  of  the  question  put  to  the 
prophet  defines  not  only  a  set  of  opinions  which  held  that  it  was  not  an  evil  thing 
to  resort  to  idol-worship,  but  also  that  it  was  even  a  lighter  evil  to  commit  flagrant 
injustice  towards  each  other.  Both  religion  and  morality  were  under-estimated ;  and 
such  a  course  implied  that  if  a  man  kept  up  forms  of  worship,  he  might  be  a  tyrant, 
a  cheat,  or  seducer,  and  be  at  ease  1  Against  the  notion  that  morality  is  of  less  con- 
sequence than  religion,  this  appeal  to  Ezekiel  takes  an  unfaltering  stand.  It 
signifies  that  men  who  supposed  that  acts  of  worship  allowed  them  liberty  to  set  at 
nought  the  rights  of  the  poor  and  needy  provoked  the  Lord  deeply.  It  signifies 
that  by  the  former  course  they  had  put  God  far  away,  had  removed  the  great 
restraint  against  wrong-doings,  and  in  the  latter  sent  violent  dealings  into  every 
circle  of  social  life  in  which  they  could  press  their  selfish  interest  It  signifies  that 
men  who  were  more  careful  to  pay  their  idolatrous  worship  than  to  do  justly  and 
love  mercy  were  preparing  for  themselves  a  fearful  doom.  Whether  religion  is  to 
be  more  highly  valued  than  morality  is  a  vain  question.  The  doctrine  of  God 
our  Saviour  insists  on  their  interfusion  as  parts  of  doing  His  will.  When  sects, 
churches,  societies,  speak  lightly  of  a  man's  bad  conduct  because  he  is  a  recognised 
member;  when  it  is  judged  more  expedient  to  bend  the  head  or  knees,  to  wave 
incense,  to  weep  over  fancies  or  pictures,  to  say  the  words  of  a  creed,  to  make  reve- 
rence towards  the  east,  to  have  a  form  of  godliness,  than  it  is  to  keep  evil  thoughts 
down,  or  to  do  fairly  to  every  man,  or  to  live  unspotted  from  the  world ;  when 
there  is  an  attempt  to  |>alliate  covetousness,  misrepresentations,  unkindness,  on  the 
ground  that  they  belong  to  the  reign  of  *'mere  morality" — then  the  standard  of  God 
must  be  lifted  up,  "  Neither  fornicators,  nor  idolaters,  nor  adulterers,  nor  effemi- 
nate, nor  thieves,  nor  covetous,  nor  drunkards,  nor  railers,  nor  extortioners  shall 
inherit  the  kingdom  of  God."  On  the  other  hand,  when  it  is  maintained  that 
religion  is  of  no  force  to  form  a  moral  life  ;  when  palliation  is  made  for  worldly 
and  unrighteous  conduct  on  the  ground  that  the  doers  make  no  profession  of  faith 

99 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBIP.  IZ. 


BOMlLBTia  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL. 


Ill  the  Christian's  Qod,  then  we  mnst  affirm  that  the  religion  of  Christ  is  a  religion 
of  righteousness,  and  that  they  who  make  light  of  Him  will  go  on  in  darkness,  and 
■o  will  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways. 


(2.)  Ths  Judombnt  upon  thb  Inhabitants  of  Jbbusalbm 
(Chap,  ix.) 

1.  The  guardi  of  the  city  and  their  work  (yers.  1-7). 


EXEGETTCAL    NOTES.— This 

chapter  is  closely  connected  with  the 
preceding,  and  carries  expressly  the 
threatening  of  yer.  18  into  immediate 
action.  Ministers  of  the  Lord,  waiting 
on  Him,  are  summoned  to  execute  His 
purposes. 

Yen  1.  The  prophet  is  made  a  hearer 
of  the  summons.  ''  And  He  called  in 
mine  ears  with  a  loud  yoice;"  the 
mode  of  speaking  is  a  copy  of  that  in 
yiiL  18.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  God 
treats  men  as  they  treat  Him:  '^As  I 
cried  and  they  would  not  hear,  so  they 
ched  and  I  would  not  hear."  Moreover, 
the  minute  details  as  to  the  ears  and 
pitch  of  voice  are  significant  of  the  real- 
istic character  of  the  vision.  It  was  not 
h  marvellous  but  shadowy  experience 
through  which  Ezekiel  was  passing.  He 
accents  the  fact  that  the  smallest  as  the 
greatest  items  were  weU  defined ;  while 
Uie  loudness  of  the  voice  is  a  token 
both  of  the  strong  emotion  of  the  Lord 
and  the  importance  to  be  attached  to 
the  events  about  to  happen.  "  Saying, 
Oome  near,  ye  that  have  charge  of  the 
city."  The  phrase,  ye  that  have  charge, 
is  a  translation  of  a  Hebrew  word  ren- 
dered elsewhere  office,  visitation,  over- 
tight,  and  those  holding  office,  officers 
(Isa.  Ix.  17).  Accepting  this  last  ren- 
dering as  applicable  here,  we  have  to 
think  of  overseers,  watchers,  guards 
(Dan.  iv.  13,  x.  20),  who  attend  to  the 
execution  of  the  sentences  of  God. 
They  were  armed,  "  each  man  with  his 
instrument  of  destruction  in  his  hand." 
'*No  common  earthly  weapon  is  suitable 
to  the  hands  of  such  an  host." — Haev, 

Yer.  2.  At  the  summons,  "six  men 
came"  from  the  same  quarter  as  the 
glory  (chap.  i.  4),  and  from  which  the 
earthly  armies  were  to  proceed  as  instru- 
ments of  the  heavenly  powers.  The 
weapon  of  each  is  nam«id  differently 
100 


from  the  name  in  ver.  1 ;  here  it  is  **  an 
instmment  of  demolition."  Interpre- 
tation of  the  number  six — ^parts  of  the 
city,  military  Chaldean  divisions,  <&c. — 
is  superfluous.  It  is  immediately  shown 
that  the  number  of  watchers  was  the 
sacred,  perfect  number.  ''  And  one 
man  in  their  midst  clothed  with  linen." 
He  was  not  one  of  the  six,  but  a  seventh 
man  and  superior  to  the  others.  They 
go  after  him;  he  marks  before  they 
strike  (ver.  5).  The  material  which 
clothes  him  is  like  that  of  the  various 
parts  of  the  high  priest's  dress  (Lev. 
xvL  4),  and  is  supposed  by  many  to 
signify  that  this  seventh  man  had  a 
high-priestly  function.  This  is  doubt- 
ful, and  all  that  we  need  ascribe  to  the 
texture  of  his  garments  is  that  it  repre- 
sented a  heavenly  messenger  of  the  Lord 
specially  commissioned.  So  it  is  set  forth 
in  Daniel  (x.  6  and  xiL  6),  and  it  may 
be  that  the  idea  symbolised  by  linen  had 
by  this  time  attributed  to  it  a  wider 
application,  preparing  for  that  universal 
application  which  the  New  Testament 
ratifies.  ''  The  armies  which  are  in 
heaven  followed,  clothed  in  fine  linen, 
white  and  pure."  "  It  was  given  unto 
her  that  she  should  array  herself  in  fine 
linen,  bright  and  pure."  The  seventh 
had  not  a  destroying  weapon  :  he  is  to 
carry  out  another  procedure  besides  that 
of  slaughter;  so  he  had  <'an  Inkhom 
npon  his  loins."  *'It  is  still  customary 
in  the  East  to  wear  the  inkhorn  in  the 
girdle.  Scribes  wear  them  constantly  in 
their  girdles,  and  ministers  of  state  wear 
them  in  the  same  manner,  as  symbols 
of  their  office," — Kitto.  The  purport  of 
these  writing  materials  is,  in  accordance 
with  the  custom  of  registering  the  names 
of  the  Israelites  in  public  rolls,  tliat  he 
may  write  certain  names  in  the  book  of 
life — the  names  of  those  on  whom  he  is 
to  place  :x  mark     Who  is  this  distin* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MOMILBTIO  OOMMBmART:  BZRKIML. 


OHAF.  IX. 


goished  watcher  t  **In  Dan.  x.  5  we 
have  the  appearance  of  a  man  clothed 
in  linen^  who  is  manifestly  the  same  as 
He  whom  John  describes  as  the  San  of 
man  clotlieJ  with  a  garment  ctoum  to  his 
feet  (Rev.  i.  13).  This  One  maUy  then, 
was  the  angel  of  the  covenant^  the  great 
High  Priest,  superior  to  those  by  whom 
He  was  surrounded,  receiving  direct 
communication  from  the  Lord,  taking 
the  coals  of  vengeance  from  between  the 
chernbim  (x.  2),  but  coming  with  mercy 
to  the  contrite'  as  well  as  with  vengeance 
to  the  impenitent ;  who  took  upon  Him 
the  form  of  a  man  .  .  .  who  came  to  send 
fire  upon  the  earthy  but  aUo  to  call  sin- 
nen  to  repentance ;  who  shall  lou  none 
of  those  whom  the  Father  hath  given 
Him/* -^Speaker* s  Com,  "  And  they 
came  and  stood  beside  the  brazen 
altar ; "  they  were  waiting  in  reverence 
and  readiness  in  the  very  spot  where  sin 
had  reached  its  worst  form  (viiL  16),  to 
fulfil  that  which  would  be  commanded. 

It  is  by  no  means  to  be  understood 
**  that  there  is  a  band  of  seven  angels 
whose  special  Tocation  it  is  to  be  the 
watchmen  and  guardians  of  Jerusalem. 
For  the  number  seven  is  here,  as  else- 
where in  the  Old  Testament,  the  sign 
that  a  divine  operation  is  being  com- 
pleted— in  this  passage  the  divine  judg- 
ment, now  advancing  to  its  close — and 
there  is  no  necessity  for  having  recourse 
to  the  seven  planet  gods  of  the  Baby- 
lonians, &a  •  .  .  The  seventh  angel,  of 
special  dignity,  corresponds  to  the 
horseman  who,  in  the  vision  of  Zech.  i. 
8,  stands  among  the  myrtle  trees  which 
symbolise  the  covenant  people,  and  is 
evidently  the  chief  over  those  who  run 
to  and  fro  through  the  earth.  It  is  very 
remarkable  that,  as  Baumgarten  very 
justly  observes,  this  angel,  in  whom  is 
the  name  of  Jehovah,  withdraws  from 
the  history  of  revelation  so  long  as  Israel 
is  under  a  visible  ruler  of  the  house  of 
David ;  but  now,  when  this  visible  rule 
is  abrogated,  an  invisible  Ruler  again 
appears,  and  attains  a  more  concrete 
form,  combined  with  personal  agency, 
though  at  the  same  time  hypostatically 
distinguished  from  God." — Oehler, 

Ver.  3.  An  ominojs  symbol  appears. 
« And  the  glory  of  the  God  of  Israel 


rose  np  f^om  the  cbemb  upon  which 
it  was."  The  cherub,  corresponding  to 
living  creature  (chap,  i  20),  is  used  for 
cherubim.  These  forms  over  the  mercy- 
seat  constituted  the  throne  of  the  glory, 
the  place  where  His  honour  dwelt ;  but 
the  Temple  having  been  made  a  scene 
on  which  His  glory  was  given  to  idols. 
He  retires  ^' to  the  threshold.''  He 
rises  up  to  scatter  His  enemies,  and  at 
the  place  of  egress  from  the  Temple  to 
open  ground,  He  issues  His  commands 
for  the  seven  guards  in  reference  to  His 
sentences  on  the  people. 

Yer.  4.  A  command  is  given  to  the 
leader,  so  that  mercy  should  precede 
judgment.  ''And  the  Lord  said  to 
him,  Go  through  the  midst  of  the  city 
. . .  and  mark  a  mark.^  Such  a  mark- 
ing, as  a  religious  and  separating  sign, 
has  been  customary  in  various  countries, 
and  is  especially  conspicuous  upon  the 
foreheads  of  the  Hindus.  The  mark 
may  be  an  honour  or  a  dishonour,  accord- 
ing as  it  separates  for  the  living  Gk>d  or 
from  Qod.  Here  it  is  a  token  of  the 
former.  The  word  translated  "  mark  " 
is  the  name-word  of  the  last  letter  of  the 
Hebrew  alphabet,  tau.  The  oldest  form 
of  this  letter  is  said  to  be  that  of  a 
cross,  1";  and  from  this  statement  sun- 
dry of  the  fathers  and  others  have  drawn, 
very  unnecessarily,  recondite  meanings 
and  pious  conclusions.  That  the  mark 
would  be  a  definite  one  is  obvious — how 
else  could  the  six  smiters  know  whom 
to  pass  by) — but  what  its  shape  was 
who  can  specify  t  It  was  **  not  a  mark 
to  be  actually  imprinted  and  seen  upon 
their  persons,  but  was  an  indication  of 
the  place  they  held  in  the  watchful  over- 
sight and  directing  agency  of  God.'* — 
Fairbairn.  ''upon  the  foreheads  of  the 
men  ; "  there  it  would  be  distinctly  seen 
and  betoken  the  character  before  Qod. 
It  separated  from  the  mass  of  the 
people.  In  Egypt  a  mark  of  blood  was 
made  on  the  doorposts  of  the  Israelites 
—their  deliverance  was  that  of  families; 
here  the  mark  was  on  the  forehead — the 
salvation  is  that  of  individuals.  The 
difference  is  one  of  the  i>r()ofs,  which 
Ezekiel  elsewhere  incidentally  presents, 
that  a  new  principle  of  God's  dealings 
was  on  the  way  to  eAtabli&hment.     The 

101 


Digitized  by 


Google 


cBAF.  a. 


HOMILBTIO  00MMBNTAB7:  BZBKIBL. 


individual  and  not  the  nation  was  to  be 
the  point  of  His  operations  in  the  latter 
days.  In  relation  to  this  *'  mark,"  the 
"  Speaker's  Commentary  "  says,  **  The 
sign  of  the  cross  in  baptism  is  an  out- 
ward sign  of  the  designation  of  God's 
elect,  who  at  the  last  day  shall  be  ex- 
empted from  the  destruction  of  the  un- 
godly (Matt.  xxiv.  22,  31)."  Patristic 
legends  are  apparently  not  yet  extinct ! 
How  different  from  this  inept  comment 
is  that  which  Keil  gives,  though  he 
translates  tau  by  cross  : ''  There  is  some- 
thing remarkable  in  this  coincidence  to 
the  thoughtful  observer  of  the  ways  of 
God,  whose  counsel  has  carefully  consi- 
dered all  beforehand,  especially  when 
we  bear  in  mind  that,  in  the  counterpart 
to  this  passage  (Rev.  vii.  3),  the  seal 
of  the  living  God  is  stamped  upon  the 
foreheads  of  the  servants  of  God  who 
are  to  be  exempted  ,f rom  the  judgment, 
and  that  according  to  R  v.  xiv.  1,  they 
had  the  name  of  God  written  upon  their 
foreheads."  Very  different  indeed  from 
"the  sign  of  the  cross!"  "that  sigh 
and  that  cry  for  all  the  abominations 
that  are  done  in  the  midst  thereof" 
This  is  the  criterion  by  which  the  writer 
will  know  those  whom  he  has  to  mark. 
In  secret  and  in  public  they  grieve  over 
the  evils  which  are  rife  in  tlie  land. 

Vera  5,  6.  A  command  is  given  to 
the  six,  "  Go  in  the  city  after  him  and 
smite,"  so  as  to  make  an  utter  end, 
sparing  neither  age  nor  sex.  One  spe* 
cial  exception  is  made.  No  other  class 
is  recognised  but  two.  In  a  testing  time 
like  this  there  is  no  possibility  of  hold* 
ing  the  place  of  neutrals ;  ''  and  every 
man  upon  whom  is  the  mark  tondi 
not ; "  their  tears,  and  words  of  prayer 
and  reproof  because  of  sin,  show  that 
they  are  on  the  Lord's  side.  He  is 
pledged  to  preserve  His  own ;  "  He  that 
toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  His 
eye."  There  is  here  no  guanintee 
against  all  kinds  of  sorrow  and  suffer- 
ings. Lot  is  rescued  from  Sodom,  but 
he  has  to  incur  loss  and  the  pain  of  dis- 
severed family  tieSb  Jeremiah  had  to 
pass  through  deep  waters  of  affliction 
102 


during  the  period  in  which  the  six 
watchers  were  cutting  down  the  un- 
worthy. The  exemption  of  the  marked 
ones  must  be  considered  as  referring 
only  to  direct  strokes  of  punishment 
''  llie  marking  secures  not  against  any 
share  in  the  divine  judgments;  this 
would  not  correspond  with  the  nature 
of  the  divine  righteousness,  as  even  tlie 
elect  are  in  many  ways  affected  with  the 
prevailing  corruption  (comp.  Isa.  vL  5) : 
it  secures  only  against  being  swept 
away  with  the  wicked,  against  an  evil 
death,  and  all  that  would  stand  in  con- 
tradiction with  the  rule,  *  that  all  things 
work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God.'  ^'^Hengstenherg.  "  and  begin  at 
my  sanctuary,"  in  it  the  abominations 
had  found  their  normal  expression.  The 
head  and  front  of  the  offence  against 
the  holy  God  was  exhibited  there.  It 
had  lost  the  reality  and  must  be  de- 
prived of  the  semblance  of  holiness. 
The  watchers  inflict  their  first  strokes 
in  it  and  beat  down  the  men  who  stood 
with  backs  to  the  altar  while  worship- 
ping the  creature;  "they  began  with 
the  men,  the  elders  who  were  before 
the  house ; "  they  were  not  called  elders 
(chap.  viii.  16),  but  their  representative 
position  may  suggest  that  they  were  so ; 
and  **  before  the  house  **  will  refer  not 
to  the  whole  Temple,  but  to  that  portion 
which  constituted  its  germ,  as  seems 
intimated  in  what  follows. 

Yer.  7.  *'And  He  said  onto  them, 
Defile  the  house,"  by  the  bodies  of  the 
slain.  If  to  touch  a  corpse  and  to  wor- 
ship without  being  sprinkled  with  the 
water  of  separation  was  to  defile  the 
tabernacle  of  the  Lord  (Num.  xix.  13), 
much  more  would  blood  and  corpses  do 
so.  But  the  execution  of  judgment  was 
to  extend  beyond  the  inner  place  where 
the  altar  stood :  "  and  fill  the  courts 
with  slain."  Scarcely  is  the  edict  issued 
when  it  is  obeyed,  and  the  further  order 
is  added,  ''go  forth."  '* The  expression 
has  the  air  of  militaiy  abruptness,"  and 
despatches  at  once  fh>m  the  desecrated 
temple:  ''and  they  went  forth  and 
slew  in  the  dty." 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTART:  EZEKlEIu  ohap.  n. 

HOMILETICS. 
Fbaturks  op  DiviKB  Disciplinary  Goyerkmsnt. 

Over  all  the  conditions  in  which  persons  or  peoples  act  their  parts  God  la 
King  and  Judge.  Whether  they  worship  Him  or  pay  adoration  to  created  things, 
whether  they  act  in  brotherliness  or  selfishness,  He  tests  their  character  and 
passes  sentences  from  which  they  may  learn  to  do  righteousness  and  hate  iniquity. 
That  they  do  not  always  learn  is  no  more  a  proof  against  the  discipline  of  God, 
than  the  belief  of  numberless  men  thnt  the  sun  moves  round  the  earth  is  a  proof 
against  the  science  of  the  works  of  God.  And  just  as  in  the  case  of  astronomy, 
He  "  waited  six  thousand  years  for  an  observer,**  and,  eyen  since  Kepler  lived, 
myriads  have  not  known  the  real  position  of  the  sun ;  so  in  the  case  of  moral  dis- 
cipline, He  has  been  giving  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,  and  still  His  moral 
government  is  unrecognised  by  multitudes  who  are  subjected  to  it.  He  is  in  no 
hurry  on  this  account.  He  waits  with  patience,  teaching  as  He  waits  and  giving 
indications  of  the  modes  in  which  He  deals  with  moral  beingSi  as  in  this  manifes- 
tation before  EzekieL 

L  Divine  moral  discipline  inyolyes  the  action  of  latent  forces.  Stick  forces 
exisL  Tiie  seer  is  not  aware  of  the  contiguousness  of  the  guards  of  the  city. 
They  are  not  within  the  field  of  his  sight  before  the  call  to  them  is  uttered.  What 
they  are,  where  they  are,  how  they  will  act  when  they  appear,  are  questions  which 
can  be  answered  only  by  the  event.  There  are  forces  suitable  for  disciplinary  ends 
in  air,  or  earth,  or  sea,  or  the  regions  beyond,  and  the  Lord  can  make  them  attend 
to  His  word.  Storms,  earthquakes,  epidemics,  armies  may  be  poured  forth,  as 
soldiers  from  a  fortress,  to  ravage  a  land  and  its  people,  and  they  will  come  from 
any  quarter  in  which  their  germs  have  been  stored,  and  will  spread  under  the 
direction  of  spiritual  p«jwers  wlio  obey  the  God  of  glory.  At  the  due  moment  He 
will  summon  them  though  He  may  have  long  time  holden  His  peace. 

Tfici/  are  multifold.  At  one  time  fiery  flying  serpents  destroy  the  wandering 
Israelites  and  the  plague  at  another.  David  is  required  to  make  choice  of  one  out 
of  three  punishments  for  his  sin  in  numbering  the  people.  Ezekiel  sees  six  men 
preparing  to  visit  the  city,  and  a  seventh  in  their  mid^t  having  another  duly  than 
theirs  to  fulfil  in  it.  One  angel  may  minister  to  the  suffering  Jesus,  but  He  could 
have  twelve  legions  of  them  for  the  asking.  We  are  open  at  every  pore  to  the 
action  of  the  Lord  who  has  made  us,  and  He  has  a  messenger  in  some  occult 
garrison  who  is  fitted  to  enter  into  the  pore  He  would  affect  us  by.  Almightiness 
calls  just  the  kind  and  number  needed  to  execute  His  will  There  b  never  one 
too  few  or  one  too  many. 

They  wait  at  command.  The  seven  watchers  of  the  city  appeared  from  out 
their  concealment  and  stood  beside  the  brazen  altar.  They  are  ready  to  receive 
and  to  execute  the  orders  of  Him  to  whose  honour  the  sacrifices  offered  on  the 
altar  were  to  be  consecrated.  And  when  such  divine  forces  operate,  no  interven 
tion  can  prevent  the  mark  of  approbation  which  the  Lord  would  give  to  His 
faithful  friends  from  being  inipressed  on  them,  as  no  shield  is  broad  enough  and 
strong  enough  to  ward  off  the  penalty  which  a  course  of  rebellion  ensures  to 
those  who  forget  God.  Ton  are  secure  if  you  have  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ 
Jesus ;  you  are  exposed  to  incalculable  anguish  if  you  make  light  of  Him  and  go 
your  way. 

They  are  varied  in  capability.  The  weapons  and  the  inkhorn  are  emblems  of 
the  differing  influences  which  condemn  and  praise  human  thoughts  and  conduct. 
There  are  numberless  producers  of  suffering  to  mankind.  Onlookers  cannot  tell 
whether  the  trouble  causing  sin  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  sufferers  or  their  parents ; 
but  no  believer  in  a  righteous  Father  can  doubt  that  every  suffering  is  due.     It  ii 

103 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBAP.  u.  HOMILETIO  00MMENTAR7:  BZSKIBL. 

a  jast  measure,  in  view  of  what  men  need,  that  they  may  learn  there  is  a  holy  GocL 
InfluenceB,  moreoyer,  proceed  from  appeals  to  the  mind.  Bouks  and  letters,  ser- 
mons and  conversations,  have  induced  many  souls  to  grieve  over  sin  and  to  long 
for  the  grace  of  Qod — have  brought  many  into  shame  and  also  into  peace.  Who 
can  imagine  the  various  features  of  Qod's  action  npon  men  )  Who  can  tell  from 
whence  that  action  will  proceed  ?  It  is  our  comfort  to  know  that  He  has  sovereign  ^ 
authority  everywhere ;  that  no  influence  acts  casually,  but  each  one  in  due  subor- 
dination to  Him  -  that  the  npshot  of  all  the  summonses  He  sends  forth  will  be  tn 
prove  that  He  is  holy,  and  just,  and  good  ;  and  that  men  have  be«n  treated  with 
the  end  of  saving  them  from  sin  and  making  them  partakers  of  His  holiness. 

n.  It  gronnds  its  procednre  upon  marked  differences  in  human  character. 
In  Ood's  moral  discipline  precedence  is  given  to  His  saving  wilL  The  man  clothed 
in  linen  first  made  the  mark  of  deliverance  from  death,  and  then  the  other  six 
followed  with  the  blows  of  their  fatal  weapons.  The  righteous  are  not  treated  as 
the  wicked.     Mercy  is  honoured  before  judgment  is  executed. 

Sqfety  w  appcrtioned  to  those  who  are  of  one  heart  with  God.  They  are  seen  to 
be  loyal  to  His  rule.  They  hate  what  He  hates.  They  deplore  the  abominations 
which  cast  a  slur  upon  the  Holy  One  of  IsraeL  Tbey  are  seen  to  have  sympathy 
for  men.  Tbey  do  not  neglect,  despise,  denounce  the  unworthy  lives  of  their 
fellow-citizens :  they  grieve  deeply  because  of  them,  knowing  their  own  natural 
feebleness  in  the  assaults  of  temptations ;  they  dare  not  assume  the  airs  of  them 
that  are  at  ease  and  the  contempt  of  those  that  are  proud.  At  the  same  time  tbey 
profess  no  maudlin  charity,  and  so  excuse  the  sins  which  are  openly  committed  or 
secretly  practised  in  chambers  of  imagery.  It  may  be  that  they  are  comparatively 
few — six  men  to  punish  and  one  only  to  seal  with  the  mark  of  safety — but  they 
are  not  ruled  by  the  popular  fashions.  They  are  to  serve  God  and  not  men.  Their 
love  to  God  teaches  them  to  love  their  brother  also,  and  they  are  conformed  to  the 
image  of  Him  who,  on  a  later  day,  wept  over  Jerusalem.  This  was  the  chai*acter 
which  secured  the  sealing  on  the  forehead — this  the  kind  of  character  which  has 
the  sealing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise.  For  the  mark  is  not  what  they  see,  but 
rather  what  others  see  on  them.  It  is  not  some  suggestion  which  they  suppose  is 
made  to  themselves,  however  vivid  that  suggestion  may  seem  to  he.  That  is  iio 
,  valid  assurance  of  our  being  sons  of  God.  Our  assurance  must  come,  not  from  an 
inward  suggestion,  but  from  proof,  evidence,  witness,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  a 
work  of  the  Spirit  on  the  souL  What  more  effectual,  as  such  a  testimony,  than  a 
character  which  exhibits  h)yalty  to  God  and  sympathy  for  sinners  1  which  is  like 
that  of  Christ  Jesus)  '^This  is  the  highest  sort  of  witness  which  it  is  possible  the 
soul  should  be  the  subject  of :  if  there  were  any  such  thing  ;is  a  witness  of  the 
Spirit  by  immediate  suggestion  or  revelation,  this  would  be  vastly  more  noble  and 
excellent,  and  as  much  above  that  as  the  heaven  is  above  the  earth.'* — EdioanU, 
We  who  hear  the  Gospel  may  truly  understand  that  the  sealer  to  our  safety  is  the 
Son,  to  whom  all  judgment  is  conmiitted ;  whom  the  armies  of  heaven  follow ; 
who  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  He  knows  His  sheep  by  name.  His 
care  for  them  is  the  care  of  prayer  and  self-sacrifice.  He  does  not  go  into  churches 
and  mark  crowds  by  water  of  baptism.  He  does  not  pass  over  one  house  and  into 
another  so  that  He  may  mark  a  household  on  their  foroheails.  He  acts  upou 
individuals  and  on  their  hearts.  He  washes  away  their  sins  by  His  own  blood. 
He  renews  their  wills.  He  induces  them  to  follow  His  example.  And  because 
they  are  quickened  by  His  Spirit  and  walk  in  newness  of  life.  He  secures  them,  and 
they  shall  never  perish.  Christ  does  not  guarantee  His  followers  against  all  to'ibu- 
lation,  but  He  does  their  safety  from  destruction  by  calamity.  The  Chaldeans 
might  cause  distress  to,  but  could  nut  slay,  the  sorrowing  citizens.  The  enticements 
of  sinful  lusts  may  harass  you  again  and  again;  disease  may  keep  you  bodily  and 
•piritually  low ;  you  may  be  bereaved  of  friends  whom  you  greatly  miss ;  you  may 
oe  injured  by  the  conduct  of  those  with  whom  you  come  into  association:  your 
104 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL.  ohap.  n. 


■ighsand  tears  may  be  apparently  fruitless;  you  may  see  the  evils  still  in  full  force 
around  you  as  if  you  never  had  prayed,  never  had  stood  up  for  God  against  the 
workers  of  iniquity  ;  yet  the  niiglity  power  of  God  preserves  yon,  and  the  time  will 
come  wheu  you  will  be  removed  from  the  furnace  pu rifted  like  gold,  and  you  will 
receive  the  crown  of  righteousness  which  fadeth  not  away.  "  The  divine  faithful- 
ness still  abides  sure  to  the  true  chiliiren  of  the  covenant.  .  .  .  Let  such,  there- 
fore, trust  in  the  Lord  at  all  times,  and  fear  not  that  it  shall  be  well  with  the 
righ  teous. " — Fairhainu 

Deaih  U  appoxrUed  to  tliose  wJio  continue  in  trespasses.  The  Lord  has  no  plea- 
sure in  the  death  of  the  sinner,  but  rather  that  he  turn  from  his  wicked  way. 
Only,  if  he  will  not  turn,  what  remains)  He  is  dead  in  sins,  and  a  worse  fate  there 
cannot  be.  The  guilt  of  it  should  produce  unbounded  fear,  and  be  a  signal  to  arise 
from  the  dead  that  Christ  may  give  light.  Let  all  attempts  directed  by  a  merciful 
God  have  failed  to  rouse,  then  the  heavy  judgment  must  fall  on  the  head  of  every 
one  thus  guilty  of  hardening  their  hearts  against  the  Lord.  No  place  is  so  sacred 
as  to  prevent  the  execution  of  the  sentence.  Let  it  be  temple  or  church,  called 
holy  or  sjicred,  sin  is  damnation  anywhere.  The  waters  of  wrath  shall  sweep  into 
all  hiding-places.  The  very  place  in  which  sin  is  committed  may  be  the  place 
for  punishing  sin.  No  leader  is  so  great  as  to  have  immunity  from  the  sentence. 
^  The  more  aged  and  venerable  portion  of  the  worshippers,  and  those  who  might 
naturally  be  regarded  as  occupying  the  foremost  rank  among  the  people  at  large,'* 
were  slain  with  impartial  seventy.  They  whose  Godward  privileges  are  greatest, 
when  they  defile  His  worship,  incur  the  penalty  of  those  who  are  cliief  in  wicked- 
ness. *'  So  far  is  the  possession  of  means  of  grace  from  saving  men  from  wrath, 
that  He  abhors  sin  most  in  those  from  whom,  by  reason  of  their  spiritual  oppor- 
tunities, most  good  was  to  have  been  expected." — FaxisseL  As  formerly,  so  now, 
the  appeal  is  to  be  seriously  listened  to,  "Beware,  therefore,  lest  that  come  upon  you, 
which  is  spoken  in  the  prophets ;  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder  and  perish*'' 
God  roles  in  righteousness. 

MouRNiNa  FOR  Other  Men's  Sins  (ver.  4). 


Lamenting  the  sins  of  the  times  and  places  wherein  we  live 

L  A  duty  incumbent  on  us.  Our  affections  of  grief  and  anger  cannot  be 
better  employed  than  for  the  interest,  nor  better  bestowed  than  for  the  serviccyof 
Him  who  implanted  those  passions  in  u&  Our  natural  motions  should  be  ordered 
for  the  God  of  nature,  and  spiritual  ordered  for  the  God  of  grace.  (1.)  This  was 
the  practice  of  believers  in  all  ages.  (2.)  It  was  our  Saviour's  practice.  (3.) 
Angels,  as  far  as  they  are  capable,  have  their  grief  for  the  sins  of  men. 

EL  It  is  an  acceptable  dnty  to  GKkL  (1.)  It  is  a  fulfilling  of  the  whole  law 
consisting  of  love  to  God  and  love  to  our  neighbours.  (2.)  It  is  an  imitating 
return  for  God's  affection.  (3.)  This  temper  justifies  God  and  His  justice.  (4.)  It 
is  a  sign  of  such  a  temper  God  hath  evidenced  Himself  in  Scripture  much  aiOfected 
with.     It  is  both  our  duty  and  God's  pleasure. 

m.  It  is  a  means  of  preservation  f^om  public  judgments.  (1.)  Sincerity 
escapes  best  in  common  judgments,  and  this  mourning  for  public  sins  is  its  greatest 
note.  (2.)  This  frame  clears  us  from  the  guilt  of  common  sins.  (3.)  It  is  an 
endeavour  to  repair  the  honour  God  has  lost  (4.)  Mourners  in  Zion  are  humble, 
and  humility  is  preventive  of  judgments.  (5.)  They  keep  covenant  with  God ;  and 
(6.)  fear  His  judgments,  which  is  a  means  of  preventing  them. 

1.  We  may  be  reproved  if  we  make  sport  of  sin  ;  if  we  use  mere  invectives 
against  it ;  if  we  look  on  it  rather  as  a  hurt  to  ourselves  than  as  injury  to  God  ; 
if  we  do  not  truly  mourn  for  our  own  sins. 

2.  We  may  be  comforted,  God  doth  not  strike  at  random,  and  they  who  are 
stamped  with  Christ's  mark  have  Uis  wisdom  to  guard  them  against  folly,  His 

105 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBir.  II.  HOMILBTW  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  EZEKIEL, 


power  against  weakness,  the  Everlasting  Father  against  man,  whose  breath  is  in  hit 
nostrils. 

The  Lord  seems  to  be  upon  the  threshold  of  the  temple,  come  down  already 
firom  the  cherubim,  and  is  it  not  time  to  bewail  our  own  sins  and  the  common 
abominations  that  have  so  polluted  the  phice  of  His  habitation  %  Doth  not  tlie 
Holy  Spirit  grieve  for  the  sins  of  those  who  play  the  wantons  with  the  grace  of 
Qod  (Eph.  iv.  30)  1  Shall  we  refuse  mourning  for  that  which  goes  to  the  heart  of 
the  Holy  Qhost )  Let  us  sorrow  for  the  sins  of  the  time  and  place  in  which  we 
live, — Chamock 

The  Mabk  of  Dbuvbrancb  (vers.  4-6). 

When  God  visits  the  world,  or  any  part  of  it,  with  His  desolating  judgments. 
He  usually  sets  a  mark  of  deliverance  on  such  as  are  suitably  affected  with  the  sins 
of  their  fellow-creatures. 

L  What  is  implied  in  being  suitably  affected  with  the  sins  of  our 
fellow-creatares  ?  If  our  fellow-creatures  infringe  none  of  our  real  or  supposed 
rights,  and  abstain  from  such  gross  vices  as  evidently  disturb  the  peace  of  society, 
we  u.sually  feel  little  concern  respecting  their  sins  against  God.  Our  n*  arest 
neighbours  may  be  of  a  character  remote  from  that  of  a  Christian,  and  we  show  no 
uneasiness  respecting  their  dangerous  condition.  There  may  indeed  be  a  kind  of 
pleasure  when  we  contrast  their  vices  and  our  virtues,  and  we  are  encouraged  to 
hope  for  impunity  in  sin.  Nor  is  this  surprising.  We  naturally  think  little  of  our 
own  souls  or  of  our  own  sins,  and  he  who  takes  no  care  to  save  himself  is  not  likely 
to  feel  concern  for  the  salvation  of  others.  Evidently  a  great  change  must  take 
place  in  our  views  and  feelings  if  the  conduct  of  the  persons  mentioned  in  our  text 
is  suitable  for  us.  Though  they  lived  in  an  evil  day,  when  the  judgments  of  Ood 
were  falling  heavily  upon  their  nation,  they  appear  to  have  felt  more  poignant 
grief  for  preyailing  sins  than  for  the  desolating  judgments  which  they  occasioned. 
To  be  rightly  affected — 

Firsts  We  mu6t  fear  sin  more  than  the  punishment  of  sin ;  be  more  grieved  to 
see  Qod  dishonoured,  His  Son  neglected,  and  immortal  souls  ruined,  than  to  see 
our  commerce  interrupted,  <mr  fellow-citizens  divided,  and  our  country  invaded. 

Second,  We  must  use  diligent  exertions,  by  every  means  in  our  power,  to 
reform  the  sinuera  There  are  many  who  will  readily  allow  that  sins  prevail 
among  us,  and  confess  it  is  a  very  melancholy  thing,  but  still  they  use  no  means  to 
counteract  or  repress  the  evils  which  they  profess  to  lament  Ah  it  is  not  sufficient 
to  confess  our  own  sins  without  renouncing  them,  so  it  is  not  sufficient  to  mourn  for 
the  sins  of  others  without  attempting  their  reformation.  This  attempt  must  be 
made — 

1.  By  example.  As  the  force  of  example  is  inconceivably  great,  every  person 
is  sacredly  bound,  in  times  of  prevailing  degeneracy,  to  act  an  oi^n,  firm,  and 
decided  part  in  favour  of  virtue  and  religion — avoiding  the  very  appearance  of 
those  evils  which  are  prevalent  around  him. 

2.  By  exertions  to  suppress  vice  ami  impiety.  When  the  interests  of  virtue  and 
religion  are  fenced  round  by  wholesome  laws,  every  individual  is  bound  to  see  them 
faithfully  executed.  By  conniving  at  the  sins  of  others  we  make  them  our  own. 
"  To  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin.''  A  righteous 
God  will  not  hold  us  guiltless  if  we  do  not  prevent  evil  which  we  could  have  pre- 
vented. **  If  thou  forbear  to  deliver,"  &c.  Tliose  who  neither  fear  God  nor 
regard  man  must  be  taught  by  their  npprebensinns  not  to  stalk  their  vicious  pro- 
pensities in  open  day.  The  task  may  be  disagreeable.  Many  will  mourn  in  their 
closets,  but  use  no  exertion  in  public,  pretending  tliat  others  may  more  properly 
engage  in  it.  We  are  willing  that  God  should  take  care  of  our  honour  and 
interests,  but  too  often  we  suffer  His  laws  to  be  violated  with   impunity.     We 

106 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL.  chap,  n. 


can  thus  liave  no  claim  to  the  character  mentioned  in  our  text  God  will  set  no 
mark  on  us  unless  we  appear  openly  and  decidedly  against  the  {>rev.-ilence  of  sin. 

3.  By  prayers.  A  regard  to  order  or  some  similar  principle  induces  to  the 
suppression  of  yice;  but  this  is  presumptuous  and  tempting  QoA  if  we  neglect 
prayer  for  divine  influence. 

Thirds  We  must  be  deeply  affected  with  our  own  sins.  We  shall  acknowledge 
that  our  sins  have  assisted  in  forming  the  mass  of  national  guilt.  If  not  guilty  of 
the  same  vice  as  others,  it  is  because  of  the  restraints  of  grace,  and  we  shall  temper 
all  exertions  with  pity  for  the  offender  while  abhorring  the  offence.  He  who  is 
most  affected  by  the  sins  of  others  will  mourn  most  sincerely  for  his  own.  Thus 
have  all  the  good  men  mentioned  in  the  Bible  done. 

n.  That  on  sndi  as  are  thus  affected  God  will  set  a  mark  of  deliyerance 
when  those  aroond  them  are  destroyed  by  His  desolating  jndgments.  This  is 
inferred — 

1.  From  the  justice  of  God,  They  do  not  share  in  the  national  sins ;  they 
mourn  for  and  oppose  them,  and  justice  requires  a  mark  of  separation  for  them. 
True,  such  persons  have  violated  the  law  of  Qod  as  individuals ;  but  they  have 
not  done  the  wickedness  which  is  chargeable  on  the  community,  and  they  are 
spared. 

2.  From  God's  holiness.  Such  characters  love  God.  It  is  their  love  to  Qod 
which  causes  them  to  mourn  over  and  oppose  iniquity.  His  cause,  His  honour, 
they  consider  as  their  owa     While  God  loves  holiness  He  cannot  but  love  them. 

3.  From  His  faithfulness.  None  more  highly  honour  Him  than  those  who  appear 
openly  on  His  side  in  opposition  to  sin,  and  He  will  honour  them  by  placing  some 
mark  of  distinction  on  them.  Like  their  Father  and  their  Redeemer  they  are 
jgrieved  with  the  sins  of  man,  and  a  strong  refuge  is  provided  by  Hint. 

4.  From  the  facts  of  Scripture,  Noah,  Job,  Elijah,  Jeremiah,  <kc  Will  it  be 
said  that  facts  do  not  always- justify  the  statement  of  deliverance  f  We  allow  that 
they  do  not.  But  may  the  professed  mourners  not  partake  in  common  sin,  or  be 
entangled  in  policy  so  as  not  to  bear  a  testimony  against  the  prevailing  evil  t  And 
if  many  righteous  have  been  put  to  death,  the  mark  of  God  was  on  them.  Stephen, 
Paul,  and  Silas,  martyrs.  However  this  may  be,  the  Son  of  God,  clothed  in  the 
linen  garments  of  His  priestly  office,  has  sprinkled  them  with  His  blood,  sealed 
them  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  written  their  names  in  the  book  of  life,  and  they  will 
have  His  Father's  name  written  in  their  forehe€Ld. 

If  God  should  send  a  messenger  to  set  a  mark  on  all  who  are  suitably  affected, 
would  it  appear  on  thee  ^^^Payson  {abridged). 


2.  The  Prophet  Interceding  m  Vain  (vera  8-11)l 

EXEGETICAL    NOTES.— Ver.    8.  mouth  in  the  dust  he  burst  forth  into 

Esekiel  recovers   from   a    passing  sur-  an  appeal  for  forbearance — speaking  not 

prise  while  the  slaughter  in  the  city  was  in  name  of  the  exiles,  but  in  name  of 

proceeding,  and  then  realises  his  soli-  the   inhabitants  of  Jndea,  "and  said, 

tarinens.    <<  And  remained  V'  ^^^  ^^^  ^^  •  "^^  ^^  destroyest  Thon  all 

quenters  of  the  Temple  all  dead,  the  the  remnant  of  Israel,"  as  would  be 

only  one  spared  alive  there,  his  perturbed  done,   **in  the  pouring  out  Thy  ftuy 

mind  was  found  in  a  temporary  oblivion  npon  Jerusalem  ?  "    The   captive    sin 

of  what  he  had  heard  in  reference  to  such  Assyria  and    Babylon    are   undergoing 

as  were  to  be  marked,  and  then  loomed  their  punishment :  all   that   is   left   of 

before  him  the  obliteration  even  of  the  Israel  as  a  nation  is  here,  and  therefore 

promised   remnant     In    intense    sym-  Ezekiel's  cry  is  to  the  Lord  God  for  the 

pathy  for  the  people  ;  in  fear  and  sor-  latter. 

row,  **  I  fell  upon  my  flEice ; "  with  his  Ver,  9.  The  answer  to  his  appeal  is 

107 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  n. 


HOMILETIC  C0MMBNTAR7:  BZBKIBL. 


decisive.  ''And  He  said  nnto  me, 
The  iniavity  of  the  house  of  Israel 
and  Jndah  is  great  exceedingly.''    The 

crimiiialitj  was  uot  all  of  the  same 
character :  ^in  the  landward  parts,  crimes 
of  ''blood-shedding''  were  most  com- 
mon; in  the  city,  crimes  of  "  pervert- 
ing rights."  Religious  declension  and 
rebelliousness  are  not  mentioned  here, 
but  moral  corruption  is,  as  constituting 
the  evil  which  is  to  be  severely  punished. 
And  the  terms  in  which  the  people  form 
an  excuse  for  their  sins  correspond  with 
the  predominance  of  the  moral  element : 
"for  they  say,  The  Lord  hath  for- 
saken the  earth,  and  the  Lord  seeth 
not."  The  difference  between  this  »nd 
that  in  chap.  viii.  12,  where  the  reli- 
gious aspect  was  prominent,  lies  here : 
the  latter  verse  puts  "seeth  us  not" 
first — religion  is  primarily  a  matter  be- 
tween God  and  man.  The  verse  now 
before  us  puts  '*  hath  forsaken  the  earth  ** 
first — as  if  the  Lord  had  gone  away 
from  all  regard  of  the  conduct  of  men 
to  men.  They  imagine  they  have  free 
scope  to  act  as  they  choose  towards  each 
other,  no  one  is  taking  oversight  of 
them.  "  The  source  of  all  transgression 
is  denial  of  the  providence  of  God." 
Yer.  10.  The  people  had  taken  the 


position  that  they  only  had  rights,  and 
yet  that  position  is  comraHuded  by 
another.  "And  I  also,  my  eye  shall 
not  spare  .  .  .  their  way  I  put  {give) 
npon  their  head."  Tlie  path  of  life 
which  they  are  walking  on  turns  up 
to  smite  their  head  with  punishment 
Ezekiel's  appealing  question  is  not  di- 
rectly answered.  The  Lord  "merely  vin- 
dicates His  justice  by  showing  that, 
whatever  amount  of  vengeance  He 
might  inflict,  it  did  not  exceed  their 
sin.  He  would  have  us  humbly  acqui- 
esce in  His  judgments,  and  wait  and 
trust "  {Fausset),  The  prophet  sees 
that  a  people  laden  with  iniquity  go  to 
meet  their  doom,  and  he  makes  no 
further  cry  for  consideration  of  their 
case. 

Ver.  11.  Scarcely  had  the  answer  of 
the  Lord  been  received  when  "behold 
the  man  clothed  in  linen,"  the  chief 
of  the  guardians  of  the  city,  appearing 
by  himself  seemingly,  "  bronght  word, 
saying,  I  have  done  as  Thou  hast  com- 
manded me."  The  marks  have  been 
affixed  on  as  many  as  and  in  the  manner 
in  which  he  had  been  commissioned. 
Probably  the  other  six  were  still  carry- 
ing on  their  work  (chap,  xl  13).  "  The 
counsel  of  the  Lord,  it  shall  stand." 


HOMILETICS. 
Unsatisfibd  Praters  (vers.  8-11). 

When  God  spares  His  servants  at  a  time  during  which  calamity  overtakes  others, 
or  saves  them  when  many  go  on  in  the  broad  way  to  destruction,  they  deeply 
grieve  and  earnestly  pray  for  those  who  are  thus  overtaken.  What  they  ask  for 
seems  not  to  be  assured.  They  have  prayed  and  wept  in  vain,  they  suppose,  and 
a  sore  heart-trouble  is  produced.  They  wonder  if  the  Lord  has  shut  up  His  com- 
passions ;  if  prayer  is  nothing  but  a  cry.  They  doubt  if  they  have  prayed  aright ; 
if  they  have  misconceived  the  ways  of  the  Lord.  To  such  questions  Ezekiers  case 
here  may  suggest  direction  and  solace  about  unsatisfied  prayers. 

L  Snch  prayers  may  come  from  tme  sympathy  with  misery.  Men,  who 
have  learned  to  love  their  fellowmen  because  of  love  to  their  Father,  do  not  take 
precautions  merely  for  their  own  safety  in  the  face  of  impending  suffering.  If  they 
are  secure  themselves  they  cannot  be  at  ease  while  their  neighbours  are  in  danger 
of  being  swept  away  as  with  a  flood.  The  sins,  sorrows,  deaths  of  others  cast  a 
heavy  burden  upon  their  souls,  and  they  bow  down  in  utter  self-abandonment 
before  God  to  beseech  Him  to  take  pity  on  the  impenitent  and  doomed.  They 
place  themselves  between  the  living  One  and  the  condemned  to  death,  and  put 
forth  the  energies  which  love  can  command  into  their  supplications.  They  weep 
with  them  that  need  to  be  wept  for. 

n.  Snch  prayers  may  nse  the  most  effective  grounds  of  appeal  The^  appeal 
108 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILRTIO  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  SZEKIEL.  chap.  vt. 

to  God  0$  Ood.  **  Ah,  Lord  Gk)d  I "  They  have  no  cure  in  such  need.  They  can 
help  only  by  prayers,  and  they  present  them  to  Him  who  hears  prayer  as  to  Him 
who  alone  is  able  to  do  what  they  long  U^r.  In  weakness  and  in  conscious  self- 
UBWorthiness  they  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  and  plead,  **Wilt  Thou 
act  in  such  severity,  Thou  who  hast  made  us  and  fashioned  ns,  and  who  knowest 
our  frame!  Wilt  Thou  forget  the  work  of  Thine  own  liaiids  and  let  it  perish? 
Wilt  Thou  not  show  thyself  to  be  the  Lord  mighty  to  save  ] "  TJt^  a/^peal.  to  HtB 
promises.  **  Israel," — that  waa  a  name  to  touch  the  he.irt  of  God.  For  He  had 
chosen  the  people,  had  nourished  and  brought  them  up  as  children,  and  in  tliem 
meant  to  bless  all  the  families  of  the  earth.  Were,  then,  all  to  be  cut  off — men 
women,  and  children  t  The  remnant,  to  which  so  mucli  has  been  pledged,  would 
it  too  be  discarded?  Would  He  thus  suffer  His  faithfulness  and  truth  to  faiU 
T/iey  afypeal  to  His  interests.  "Jerusalem," — ^tliose  who  have  stood  in  the  area  of 
His  manifested  glory,  who  have  been  hearers  of  His  word,  who  are  the  chief  repre- 
sentatives of  His  people  in  covenant,  who  seem  best  adapted  to  maintain  His  way 
upon  earth, — if  they  are  sent  down  to  darkness  and  death,  where  will  He  find  a 
people  to  show  forth  His  praise  and  saving  health  ?  His  nature,  His  truth.  His 
kingdom  are  grounds  of  prayer  in  which  man's  selfish  pleas  have  no  part.  '*  Do  . 
not  disgrace  the  throne  of  Thy  glory  I " 

in  Such  prayers  maybe  presentdd  in  snbmissiyeness.  ^'I  fell  upon  my 
face."  God's  ways  are  beyond  even  a  prophet's  comprehension.  They  trend  too 
high  and  also,  too  deep  for  us.  We  are  disposed  to  count  that  to  be  confused 
which  is  only  farther  off  than  we  can  define,  or  to  charge  that  with  hardness  which 
is  only  covered  with  a  thin  crust.  Thus  when  deprecating  the  sufferings  which 
befall  our  persons,  our  churches,  the  nations,  we  may  take  to  questionhig  God,  if 
not  dictating  to  Him,  Wilt  Thou  not  take  other  steps  ?  Wilt  Thou  not  hav§  regard 
to  the  prayers  of  the  destitute!  Wilt  Thou  not  have  respect  to  Thy  great  name 
whose  glory  is  dearer  to  Thee  than  it  can  be  to  us  t  We  are  but  of  ^  yesterday  and 
know  nothing.*' 

IV.  And  sadi  prayers  may  be  based  on  misconceptions  of  God.  As  to  His 
wurcy.  Sympathising  friends  think  they  would  show  pity,  they  would  spare,  when 
God  does  not,  and  their  tendency  is  to  count  Him  severe.  This  conclusion  is  un- 
reasonable. When  once  we  grasp  the  idea  that  He  has  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of 
the  wicked,  we  learn  that  they  do  not  take  in  all  the  elements  involved  in  divine 
mercy  who  surmise  that  the  mercy  of  God  is  limited  to  the  surveys  of  sense.  We 
mnst  rise  beyond  the  range  of  the  earthly  for  an  ampler  view  of  His  rule.  For 
Him,  as  righteous  ruler,  to  spare  those  who  reject  His  authority,  who  will  not  turn 
to  Him  in  spite  of  all  His  endeavours,  would  be  to  connive  at  His  own  eternal 
dishonour.  They  would  go  on  adding  sin  to  sin.  They  would  produce  influences 
which  would  shake  the  loyalty  of  those  who  had  been  faithful  to  Him.  There 
could  be  no  mercy  in  a  course  which  would  cause  such  results. 

As  to  His  patience.  We  would  have  Him  check  the  process  of  degeneracy  in 
individuals,  in  churches,  in  states,  at  the  very  outset.  We  would  have  Him  strike 
down  the  man  who  was  leading  others  into  evil  as  soon  as  he  acquired  a  bad  pre- 
eminence. We  would  not  have  Him  wait  till  sin  is  excessive.  Therefore  do  we  fancy 
He  has  been  too  patient,  and  yet,  with  strange  inconsistency,  when  He  is  punishing, 
we  fall  down  and  urgently  ask  if  He  will  not  stay  His  hand  I  We  cannot  measure 
out  His  patience  thus.  Both  the  deferring  of  punishment  and  the  execution  of 
punishment  are  ordered  in  wisdom  and  love.  They  must  be,  for  the  Lord  reigneth, 
and  we  should  stay  on  Him,  let  the  darkness  about  Him  be  what  it  may. 

As  to  means  of  carrying  out  His  tailL  We  acknowledge  that  the  law  which 
binds  penalty  to  guilt  is  just  and  good,  and  can  be  nothing  if  it  is  not  irrefragable. 
We  grant  that  the  doom  should  somehow  be  in  correspondence  with  the  sin.  But 
what  will  bo  the  wisest  and  most  impressive  way  of  manifesting  the  connection 
which  thus  subsists?    We  are  utterly  unable  to  tell,  and  our  prayers  might  be 

109 


Digitized  by 


Google 


oba?.  n.  HOMILBTW  COMMENT AR  Y .  EZBKlBL. 


offered  against  the  yery  method  which  we  would  assent  to  as  right  and  best,  if  we 
knew  alL  But  assuming  that  there  are  two  chief  classes  of  sins  to  provide  against 
^inhumanity  and  denial  of  Qod*s  interference  witli  the  doings  of  men — we  should 
look  for  a  wonderful  variety  of  treatment  according  to  men's  circumstances  and 
place  in  the  world's  development.  It  is  for  us  not  only  to  pray  for  the  mercy  we 
wish  for  troubled  souls,  but  also  to  wait  on  the  Lord  so  as  to  see  His  goings. 
^  Those  who  take  heed  to  the  signs  of  the  times  can  hardly  but  observe  the  ten- 
dency of  our  age  to  ignore  the  God  of  special  providence,  saying,  '  Where  is  the 
prombe  of  His  coming!'"  Nor  can  we  fail  to  mark  a  prevalence  of  dishonesty, 
brutality,  self-pleasing,  which  indicate  sad  disregard  of  love  to  man.  What  may 
follow  we  leave  with  Qod  while  we  cry  for  His  grace.  Only  we  do  well  to  remem- 
ber that  judgment  will  begin  at  the  house  of  Qod,  and  that  the  sufferings  of 
unfaithful  Christians  will  be  more  awful  than  those  of  rebellious  Jews.  *'  What 
manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all  holy  living  and  godliness  ! " 

V.  Yet  such  prayers  are  answered,  but  otherwise  than  directly.  We  are 
too  disclosed  to  conclude  that  many  of  our  pmyers  are  not  granted — prayers  in 
which  we  had  not  regard  to  iniquity  but  to  Christ  It  may  be,  it  is  true  that 
often  they  are  not  granted  in  accordance  \\\i\\  the  express  form  which  we  had 
hoped  for,  and  we  become  like  thoughtless  children  who  complain  that  their  wishes 
for  good  are  not  attended  to  because  their  father  does  not  give  them  the  very  thing 
they  want  and  at  the  time  they  ask  it.  We  ought  to  haye  more  confidence  in 
our  Heavenly  Father  than  that  complaint  implies.  He  who  says,  <'  Call  upon  me 
and  I  will  answer  thee,"  '^  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  my  name  that  will  I  do,"  is 
true  and  faithful.  What  He  has  said  He  will  do,  only  it  lies  with  Him  to  settle 
both  the  form  and  the  season  of  the  answer.  He  brought  the  man  who  had  been 
setting  a  mark  upon  the  mourners  in  Zion  in  view  of  Ezekiel,  and  that  appearance 
told  Eiekiel  that  his  prayer  was  really  answered.  He  said  to  Paul,  in  response  to 
his  thrice-told  entreaty,  '*  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee ;  for  my  (K)wer  is  made 
perfect  in  weakness ; "  and  though  that  was  not  what  the  Apostle  besought  for — 
the  removal  of  the  thorn  in  the  flesh — it  was  tantamount  to  that,  as  the  promise 
secured  him  against  being  overcome  by  his  infliction.  Were  we  able  to  see  better, 
we  might  come  to  say  of  many  of  our  apparently  unsatisfied  prayers,  "  Verily  Qod 
hath  heard  me ;  He  hath  attended  to  the  voice  of  my  prayer." 

Wait  for  the  unfolding  of  the  sealed  book,  and  then  will  many  rejoice  to  learn 
that  they  had  not  pmyed  in  vain  when  they  besought  that  God  would  glorify 
Himself  by  saving  men.  They  died  in  the  sorrow  of  hopes  disappointed ;  they 
live  in  the  joy  of  better  things  than  they  could  conceive.  Let  us  learn  to  trust 
Qod  as  revealed  in  Jesus  Christ,  His  Son,  and  endeavour  to  observe  more  closely 
how  He  responds  to  our  prayers. 

Faithfulness  in  Stewardship  (ver.  11). 

In  fulfilling  any  work  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Lord's  will — 
I  There  &ould  be  re^gard  to  the  Lord  who  appoints  it.  A  position  in  His 
service  is  wished  for  sometimes  because  it  is  counted  honourable  and  respectable, 
or  because  it  is  profitable,  or  because  it  is  best  to  take  it  even  if  we  have  no  interest 
in  its  duties.  All  such  motives  are  condemned.  The  only  one  which  can  stand 
in  the  light  is  that  which  prompts  us  to  act  because  we  have  been  directed  by 
considerations  of  His  will,  and  are  desirous  to  please  Him  to  the  utmost  ''  He  that 
regardeth  the  day  regardeth  it  unto  the  Lord."  This  is  capable  of  being  an  ever» 
presrnt  motive  iofaithjnlness.  It  may  influence  us  everywhere,  whether  weeat  or  drink, 
buy  or  sell,  worship  alone  or  with  others.  He  b  always  at  our  right  hand  where 
we  are  and  where  we  are  called  to  serve,  and  we  can  do  whatever  we  do  as  before 
Him.  An  elastic  motive.  When  we  need  much  power  we  are  moved  towards  the 
treasures  of  Al mightiness ;  when  we  need  little,  we  come  to  the  same  Mighty  One 
who  is  wise  to  measure  out  the  adequate  supply.  He  will  furnish  us  for  a  gentle 
110 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL  chap,  jl 


or  a  stern  service,  for  presenting  a  reward  or  a  threat,  for  expressing  a  sentence  of 
mercy  or  of  condemnation.  We  serve  not  ourselves  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord, 
—that  will  regulate  us  in  our  "  daily  round,"  and  in  dying  for  Him  if  need  be. 

IL  Regard  to  the  maimer  of  obeying.  '^  As  Thou  hiist  commanded.''  Faith- 
fulness is  shown  not  in  doing  the  appointed  service  with  slovenliness,  as  if  any 
way  of  fulfilling  it  would  be  sufficient ;  not  in  self-regard,  as  if  the  way  we  would 
like  to  do  it  would  be  satisfactory ;  not  with  deference  to  the  opinions  and  habits 
of  any  men,  as  if  they  had  authority  to  curtail  or  enlarge  the  commands  of  Qod ; 
not  with  limitations,  as  if  we  could  stop  at  any  point  but  the  point  which  the  Holy 
One  has  defined.  No ;  the  work  of  the  watcher  is  not  done  till  he  has  reached, 
taught^  comforted,  saved  all  whom  the  Lord  has  characterised.  "  He  will  have  all 
men  to  be  saved  and  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth." 

m  Begard  to  the  account  to  be  rendered.  No  faithful  servant  need  go  in 
fear  to  the  tribunal  of  the  Great  King.  They  who  obtain  mercy  to  be  faithful  have 
boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment,  are  not  ashamed  before  Christ  at  His  coming, 
give  in  their  account  with  joy,  and  are  enabled  to  say,  in  reference  to  tiie  charge 
which  had  been  committed  to  them,  '^  Lord,  it  is  done  as  Thou  hast  commanded." 
He  is  the  pattern  of  perfect  faithfulness  who  did  always  that  which  was  pleas- 
ing to  the  Father ;  who  could  say  at  the  close  of  the  day  in  which  he  did  His  work, 
'*  I  have  glorified  Thee  on  the  earth,  I  have  finished  the  work  Thou  gavest  me  to 
do/'  and  who  will  meet  the  consummation  of  all  things  with  the  words,  ^'  Of  all 
that  Thou  hast  given  nie  I  have  lost  nothing."  Let  us  imitate  Christ  Jesus  in 
doing  the  will  of  our  Father,  not  negligently,  or  equivocally,  or  incompletely,  but 
so  as  '*  to  be  counted  worthy  of  that  world,  and  to  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man." 
Let  us,  in  all  we  do,  for  the  glory  of  Christ's  name,  follow  His  example,  and  report 
every  matter  to  our  God  in  prayer  and  supplication. 

(3.)  Thb  Sitting  Fire  to  Jerusalem,  with  the  Withdrawal  from 
THE  Temple  (Chap,  x.) 

EXKGETIOAL  NOTES.— Vers.  1-  to  the  presentation  in  the  plain  of  Che- 

8.     The   sealing  of   the    remnant  hao  bar,  yet  shows  a  few  differences  in  form 

proved   the   faithfulness  of    the   Lord  and  procedure.    '*  And,  to  make  it  more 

to    His    covenant;     the    conflagration  manifest  that  the  judgment  is  in  vindi 

of    the    city   will    prove    His    justice  cation  of  His  injured  holiness  and  on 

by   the   punishment   of    the    violators  account  of  the  sins  which  had  been  com- 

of    His    covenant.      But    before    the  mitted  against  His  covenant,  the  scene 

sentence   is  executed   the   prophet    is  of  the  judicial   action   is  laid   in  the 

again  made  specially  cogtiisant  of  the  Temple  itself"  (Fair,)     Reading  vers, 

truth  that  the  heavens  do  rule — that  1-3,  6,  7,  13,  15a,  18,  19,  we  get  the 

not  only  was  he  commissioned  by  the  account  of   what   took   place;   the   re- 

Qod  of  Israel,  but  also  that  he  must  be  maining  verses  give  elucidations  of  the 

imbued  with   the  profound  conviction  scene. 

that  every  calamity  which  befalls  the  Ver.  1.  When  the  watcher  ceased  to 

guilty  city  proceeds  from  the  agencies  speak,  Ezekiel's  attention  was  directed 

which  nuderlie  the  sappliire  throne  of  to   the   change   of    scenery.     ''  And  I 

the  everlasting  King.     '*  Four  potencies  saw,  and,  behold,  upon  the  firmament 

are  engaged  in  the  destruction  of  the  which  was  over  the  head  of  the  che* 

city — Ue  who  sits  on   the  throne,  the  rubim,"  though  the    prophet   had    not 

man  clothed  in  linen,  the  fire,  and  the  recognised  this  special  organisation  till 

cherub  who  hands  it  to  the  angel.     The  later  on  (ver.  20),  yet  he  keeps  to  the 

former  two  are  absolutely  ruling,  the  designation  throughout   this   vision  a<« 

latter     two     absolutely     ministering"  he  did  to  that  of  "living   creatures" 

(Heng,)    The  divine  glory  is  manifested  throughout  his  first  vision,  the  reason 

in  changing  aspects,  and,  while  similar  for  the  change  of  words  probably  beii>g 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  1. 


HOMILETIC  C0MMSNTAR7:  EZEKIEL. 


the  presence  of  cherubic  representation 
ill  the  Temple ;  *'  as  it  were  a  sapphire 
stone,  as  tiie  appearance  of  the  like- 
ness of  a  throne ; "  no  rainbow  appears 
now.  Mercy,  in  a  sense,  is  [tast — tbe 
marking  of  the  spared  ones  is  com- 
pleted, and  there  is  scope  for  woe  only. 
Besides,  the  appearance  of  tbe  likeness 
of  a  man  is  not  noticed  here,  but  it  is 
indicated  by  the  issuing  of  a  voice. 
Tbe  King  was  on  tbe  tbroue,  though 
invisible  to  Uis  servant. 

Yer.  2.  '^  And  he  said  unto  the  man 
clothed  with  linen,  Qto  between  the 
wheels,  to  below  the  cherab ;"  to  tiie 
space  where,  not  material  fire,  but  the 
symbol  of  destruction,  whicb  was  in  its 
consequences  to  make  Jerusalem  like 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  had  been  seen 
(chap.  L  13)  ;  and  he  bad  a  direct  act 
to  do  there,  **fill  thy  hands  with  coals 
of  fire,"  putting  his  two  hands  together 
so  as  to  make  a  boUow  space,  "and 
scatter  over  the  city;"  the  fiery  coals 
were  to  destroy  Jerusalem,  as  is  illus- 
trated by  tbe  words  of  Isaiah  (xxxiiL  12, 
14),  '^  And  the  people  sliall  be  as  tlie 
burnings  of  lime ;  as  thorns  cut  up 
shall  they  be  burned  in  the  fire  .  .  . 
The  sinners  in  Zion  are  afraid ;  fearful- 
uess  hath  surprised  the  hypocrites.  Who 
among  us  shall  dwell  with  tbe  devouring 
fire  %  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with 
everlasting  burnings  ? "  '*  And  he  came 
before  my  eyes."  It  is  noteworthy  that 
the  man  who  had  put  the  saving  mark 
on  the  foreheads  is  now  commissioned  to 
be  the  agent  by  whom  the  desolation 
of  Jerusalem  is  accomplished.  **  Qod 
has  no  class  of  servants  too  holy  or 
sacred  to  act,  if  need  be,  in  the  execution 
of  righteous  judgmenta**  Quilt  and 
fiery  doom  must  be  proclaimed  as  well 
}is  forgiveness  and  blessedness :  yet 
punishment  will  pave  the  way  for  sal- 
vation. When  the  Lord  washes  away 
the  defilement  of  the  daughter  of  Zion, 
and  purges  the  blood  from  Jerusalem 
by  the  spirit  of  judgment  and  the  spirit 
of  burning,  then  shall  be  a  place  of 
refuge,  and  a  covert  from  storm  and 
rain  (Isa.  iv.) 

Yer.  3.  The  man's  commission  is  not 
performed  until  the  position  which  is 
taken  by  the  divine  glory  and  its  accom- 
112 


panying  phenomena  is  defined.  Ese- 
kiel  observes  that  ^'  the  cherubim  were 
standing  at  the  right  of  the  house 
when  the  man  came, '  i.e.,  they  were 
on  the  south  side,  ready  for  moving 
away  from  the  Temple.  The  avengers 
had  come  from  the  north  ;  they  began 
to  slay  at  the  Kanctuary  ;  the  city,  which 
was  about  to  be  laid  in  ashes,  was  built 
southwards  of  the  temple,  and  at  that 
quarter  the  glory  was  impelled  to  depart 
from  its  chosen  place ;  *'  and  the  cloud 
filled  the  inner  court ; "  as  in  the  Reve- 
lation (chap.  XV.  8),  **  The  Temple  was 
filled  with  smoke  from  the  glory  of  God 
and  from  His  [)Ower,'^  and  wrath  was 
going  forth  from  the  sacred  place. 

Yer.  4.  "  And  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
rose,  from  over  the  cherub,  over  the 
threshold  of  thehouse" — asimilarmove- 
ment  to  that  in  chap.  ix.  3,  but  with  the 
signification  here  that  its  departure  was 
now  taking  place.  He  leaves  a  shadow 
behind  and  casts  a  light  before  Him: 
''and  the  house  was  filled  with  the 
cloud  ** — with  tbe  vehicle  for  the  divine 
gh)ry,  which,  as  the  pillar  of  the  cloud  to 
the  Egyptians,  had  a  dark  aspect  in  the 
house  J  so  we  conclude  from  the  con- 
text, ''  and  the  court  was  filled  with 
the  brightness  of  the  glory  of  the 
Lord."  Conjectural  assertions  as  to 
what  the  cloud  portended,  and  what  the 
brightness,  do  not  seem  to  be  fruitful 
as  explanations  All  that  appears  clear 
is  that  the  protection  and  guidance, 
which  were  associated  with  the  presence 
of  the  glory,  would  no  longer  be  granted 
to  Jerusalem. 

Yer.  6.  The  movement  of  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  was  accompanied  by  the  move- 
ment of  the  cherubim.  "  And  the  sound 
of  the  wings  of  the  cherubim  was  heard 
to  the  outer  court,"  into  which  we  must 
suppose  Ezekiel  bad  gone  from  the  inner, 
and  from  which  he  could  see  what  took 
place.  It  was  a  thunderous  sound  (Ps. 
xxix.  3),  as  in  the  former  vision,  expres- 
sive of  the  force  with  which  the  strokes 
of  the  wings  were  propelled,  but  con- 
veying more  than  Hengstenberg  suggests. 
*'  If  the  cherub  is  the  concentration  of 
all  created  life  on  earth,  then  its  sound  is 
the  concentration  of  all  sound  on  earth." 

Yer.   6.  Now  Ezekiel  returns  to  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILSTIO  COMMBKTARY:  BZBKIML.  our.  X. 

point  he  had  reached  at  yer.  2.  The  interrene.  The  latter  seems  most  pro- 
command  to  the  man  is  again  rehearsed,  bable.  The  burning  lies  beyond  the 
and  it  is  added,  "  he  came  and  stood  next  chapter,  where  the  glory  gr>e8  away, 
l>e8ide  the  wheel  **  (Sing,)  j  not  some  and  Ezekiel  ceases  to  see  the  vision  of 
specially-appointed  wheel,  bat  that  one  Jerusalem.  An  explanatory  remark  is 
which  happened  to  be  nearest  as  he  made  as  to  the  instrument  of  action  in 
went  for  the  fire.  the  cherubim  :  ''  the  likeness  of  the 
Vers.  7  and  8.  "  And  the  cherub,"  hand  of  a  man  under  their  wings :  ^ 
the  one  next  to  the  wheel  beside  which  the  symbol  of  human  agency  and  acti- 
the  man  was,  "  stretched  forth  his  vity  is  associated  with  that  part  of  their 
hand  from  between  the  cherubim  unto  bodies  l>y  which  they  could  be  swift  in 
the  fire  thatwas  between  the  cherubim^  fulfilling  their  prescribed  work,  and 
and  lifted  and  gave  into  the  hands  of  whose  movements  were  heard  far  off. 
the  man  clothed  in  linen,  and  he  took  The  hand  *'  may  be  naturally  regarded 
and  went  out  ''  towards  the  doomed  as  indicating  that  human  agents  should 
city,  not  now  as  the  mediator  of  salva-  not  be  wanting,  at  the  proper  time,  to 
tion,  but  as  an  executor  of  judgment  carry  into  effect  the  judgment  written  ** 
It  is  not  stated  that  he  scattered  the  fire  {Fair,)  "  Those  who  burned  the  city 
then.  Either  Ezekiel's  vision  was  filled  were  immediately  the  Chaldeans,  who 
with  some  other  sight,  so  that  he  did  not  are  included  under  the  cherubim  ;  but 
observe  the  incidence  of  the  destruction,  behind  them  stood  another"  (Heng,) 
or  else  a  space  of  time  was  allowed  to 

HOMILETICS. 

UnSSTIM ATSD    InFLUENCBS   ON    HUK AN    Lm. 

A  new  departure  in  the  development  of  God's  people  was  taking  effect  Their 
exile  and  slaughter,  with  the  desecration  of  the  most  holy  place,  were  events  which 
did  not  result  merely  from  Chaldean  forces  or  natural  elements,  but  really  from 
Him  who  directs  all  living  and  inanimate  things.  To  bring  the  Israelites  out  of 
the  notion  that  they  were  secured  against  evil  because  of  past  favours  received  on 
past  obedience  rendered ;  to  impress  on  them  the  latent  truth  that  the  Lord  did 
not  rule  His  procedure  by  the  external  words  or  acts  of  men,  but  by  the  spirit 
which  breathed  in  them  \  to  give  indications  of  a  time  when  He  would  be  to  all 
people  that  which  He  had  been  to  one,  these  seem  to  be  the  grounds  for  the  mani- 
festations of  this  section.     In  reference  to  them  there  is  signified — 

L  An  invisible  gOTemor.  The  spirit  of  Ezekiel  sees  tints  of  the  Eternal 
Majesty,  and  becomes  aware  of  words  spoken  by  Him  whom  he  does  not  name. 
In  his  state  is  a  representation  of  that  which  has  been  experienced  by  multitudes. 
They  know  that  God  is  within  range  of  their  susceptibilities,  that  He  coins  im- 
pressions from  which  thought  and  feeling  proceed.  They  are  sure  that,  whatever 
be  the  persons  or  things  by  which  they  are  affected.  He  is  King  over  each  and  all. 
If  any  wonder  or  even  mock  at  the  confidence  they  profess  to  have  in  an  unseen 
Buler,  they  reply,  '*  I  know  whom  I  have  believed ; "  for  beneath  all  that  is  pal- 
pable they  believe  in  God  who  is  a  Spirit,  and  who  is  King  for  ever  and  ever. 
"  They  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight*' 

IL  Manifold  agenta  In  their  divertity.  A  half-unconscious  tendency  dis- 
poses us  to  refer  every  good  thing  to  the  action  of  God,  every  hard,  ruinous  thing 
to  the  action  of  some  law.  It  is  a  trick  of  our  minds.  If  painful  and  disastrous 
things  come  out  of  broken  laws,  pleasant  and  helpful  things  come  out  of  obeyed 
law&  And  the  truth  symbolised  in  man,  in  cherubim,  and  in  fire,  is,  that  all  effects, 
brought  about  by  multitudinous  agencies,  are  but  the  phenomenal  forms  of  the 
purposes  of  the  perfect  will.  The  Son  of  God,  the  angels  of  God,  men  who  hurt, 
who  ttuifer,  coals  of  fire,  hailstones  and  frost,  execute  a  coomiiBsion  given  by 

H  113 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHIP.  X.  HOMILBTIC  aOMMBNTAMT:  EZBKISL. 


the  Creator  of  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Whatever  the  variety  of  influencaB  whieh 
affect  us,  we  are  still  Mrith  Gk)d. 

In  tlieir  versatility.  The  fire  that  comforts  can  destroy  :  living  heings  may 
fulfil  their  ends  by  ninning,  flying,  standing,  making  sounds,  or  carrying  from  place 
to  place  :  the  Lord  Jesus  says,  '*  I  will  draw  all  men  unto  me,''  and  He  also  says, 
**  Depart  from  me  ;  I  never  knew  you."  All  changed  conditions,  in  the  action  of 
natural  and  spiritual  agencies,  depend  upon  changes  in  the  objects  acted  upon. 
The  ministry  of  wrath  follows  the  movements  of  wrong.  They  shall  dwell  with 
the  devouring  6re  who  sin  and  do  not  repent  of  their  ungodliness.  They  **  shall 
be  salted  with  fire  "  who  walk  righteously  and  speak  uprightly. 

In  their  concurrence*  In  the  order  of  nature  forces  are  correlated,  and  in  the 
moral  order  joy  and  ease  may  be  transmuted  into  sorrow  and  pains,  privileges  into 
penalties,  the  honour  of  Qod's  dwelling-place  into. the  uncleanness  of  foul  orgies. 
Pray,  wait,  obey,  and  you  will  become  an  organ  of  the  Lord  where  He  will  and 
how  He  will ;  do  evil,  and  His  face  will  be  set  against  you — the  light  which  is  in 
you  will  become  darkness. 

in.  Bepeated  warnings  of  danger.  The  glory  moving  to  the  threshold  told 
of  the  rupture  of  the  ties  which  had  bound  Qod  to  His  people,  while  the  sound  of 
the  wings  and  the  taking  of  6re  intimated  that  the  doom  of  Jerusalem  was  on  the 
point  of  being  inflicted.  Penalty  is  preceded  by  witness-bearing  and  sentences. 
If  men  neglect  the  immutable  principles  of  right,  if  they  find  in  their  own  ways  the 
pleasure  and  service  which  they  ought  to  find  in  His,  He  does  not  go  on  at  once  to 
destroy  them.  He  has  given  them  faculties  by  which  they  may  discern  the  signs 
of  the  sky  that  portend  a  storm,  so  has  He  qualifled  them  to  notice  coming  evils 
in  appearances  which  are  passing  before  their  eyes.  He  lingers  that  He  may  correct 
them  with  the  words  of  His  mouth  and  the  events  of  their  lives.  Thus  does  He 
warn  them,  and  from  the  manner  in  which  the  Bible,  prayer,  sanctuaries  are 
regarded,  a  Christian  people  can  conclude  whether  the  glory  has  gone  from  their 
midst,  and  the  light  and  truth  are  about  to  consume  all  despisers.  He  does  not 
always  force  those  coming  tribulations  upon  our  notice.  ''  The  works  of  Grod  are 
done  by  hidden  and  secret  means,  by  ways  unthought  of,  by  hands  under  wings. 
Invisible  virtue  hath  done  more  than  all  visible  instruments."  Yet,  latent  as  they 
are,  it  is  demanded  from  us  that  we  watch  and  be  sober  under  influences  which 
seem  to  threaten  our  welfare,  that  so  we  may  escape  all  those  thiugs  that  shall  come 
to  pass,  and  stand  before  the  Son  of  Man. 

EXEQETICAL  NOTES.— Vers,  associate  Himself  with  the  temple-wor- 
9-22.  The  description  of  the  cherubim  ship  as  in  days  of  old.  All  the  energies 
and  of  their  movements  is  similar  to,  but  of  creation  fitted  to  carry  out  the  deter- 
independent  of,  that  given  in  chap.  i.  minate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of 
Ezekiel  is  not  prostrated  as  at  first,  and  G<»d  were  ready  to  be  put  in  operation, 
seems  to  see  the  subordinate  details  of  Vers.  9—12.  These  four  wheels  were 
the  vision  more  distinctly.  On  this  so  arranged  as  that  one  should  be  beside 
occiision  the  appearances  were  to  be  each  cherub,  *'and  the  appearance  of 
closely  observed^  being  of  great  signi-  the  wheels  was  as  the  colour  of  Tar- 
ficance  to  the  whole  house  of  Israel,  shish  stone."  Ver.  11.  'When  they 
He  has  to  connect  that  which  he  saw  went  they  went  toward  their  fonr 
in  the  land  of  exile  with  this  in  the  sides" — to  that  one  of  the  four  quarters 
temple.  He  has  thus  a  proof  that  he  towards  which  each  wheel  was  severally 
is  no  self-constituted  messenger  of  the  placed — ''  for  to  the  place  to  which  the 
Lord  to  His  people,  that  the  divine  head  turned,  after  it  they  went,''  this 
glory  shed  its  lights  and  shadows  over  was  noticeable  that,  though  they  might 
the  captives  as  well  as  in  Jerusalem,  that  go  in  any  direction,  yet  they  always 
a  change  in  the  procedure  of  God  was  moved  forward.  They  did  so  in  accord- 
taking  effect^  and  He  would  never  again  ance  with  the  movement,  not  of  a  special 
114 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  ART:  EZERIEL 


CHAP.  X. 


wheel  which  was  chief  over  the  other 
three,  but  of  that  one  of  the  wheels 
which  happened  to  face  the  direction 
ill  which  idl  were  to  roll,  and  ever  in 
harmony  with  the  cherubim.  Ver.  12. 
''And  all  their  flesh,  and  their  backs, 
and  their  hands,  and  their  wings,  and 
their  wheels  were  ftiU  of  eyes  ronnd 
about ; "  obviously  the  cherubim  are 
included  in  this  feature  as  well  as  tbe 
wheels,  and  correspond  to  the  aspect  of 
the  living  creatures  as  seen  hy  John 
(Rev.  iv.  6).  This  interruption  of  the 
description  of  the  wheels,  by  a  reference 
to  the  cherubim,  may  have  been  made 
to  show  how  all  forces  were  gifted  with 
certain  similar  capabilities,  and  because 
the  cherubim — the  vital  forces — were  the 
more  important :  ''  to  the  four  of  them 
their  wheels ''  is  the  literal  rendering. 
If  the  Hebrew  text  is  not  corrupt,  the 
phrase  can  only  mean  that  to  cherubim 
and  wheels  eyes  were  furnished  all  over. 

Ver.  13.  Any  perplexity  found  in  this 
verse  may  be  dissipated  by  regarding  it 
as  an  address  to  the  wheels  to  get  into 
motion.  '<  To  the  wheels — ^to  them 
was  cried  in  my  ears.  Whirl,''  or  Hie 
wlUrling,  There  are  two  Hebrew  words 
used  which  are  both  rendered  in  A.  V. 
by  wheel.  The  distinction  between  them 
can  only  be  maintained  by  some  such 
translation  as  is  given  here.  It  is 
something  like  the  distinction  between 
"wheels"  and  "the  entire  machinery 
of  wheel-work,  wheel  within  wheel,  as 
visible  to  Ezekiel  and  capable  of  quick, 
whirlwind-like  movements.''  The  cry 
which  the  prophet  heard,  which  was  to 
impress  on  him  the  truth  that  the  Lord 
was  controlling  all  actions  affecting  Israel, 
signified  that  the  wheels  were  to  verify 
their  nature  by  revolving.  The  result  of 
this  call  to  them  is  noted  in  ver.  15. 

Ver.  14.  The  jispect  of  the  cherubim 
is  defined  preparatory  to  their  rising  up. 
"And  four  flEUses  were  to  every  one." 
Ezekiel  goes  on  to  mention,  not  each  of 
the  four  faces,  but  that  face  of  each 
which  confronted  him  :  "  the  face  of 
the  first  was  the  flEbce  of  the  ehemb." 
This  defines  nothing',,  though  the  suc- 
ceeding clauses  do  define  the  face  of  a 
man,  of  a  lion,  of  an  eagle.  Some 
commentators    hold  that  the   Hebrew 


word  should  be  altered  into  that  for 
"ox."  This  is  not  to  be  thought  of. 
It  would  be  understood  to  be  that  by 
reference  to  the  former  vision  (chap.  L 
10).  The  definite  article  prefixed  does 
not  mean  that  the  face  of  this  cherub 
was  the  only  cherubic  face,  but  rather, 
as  Fairbaim  suggests,  that  Ezekiel  saw 
the  whole  features  of  the  cherub  which 
happened  to  be  nearest  to  him  and  had 
given  tiie  fire  to  the  watcher,  while  in 
the  cases  uf  the  other  three  he  saw  one 
fece  only. 

Vers.  15-17.  The  command  t(»  w'.irl 
is  obeyed  by  the  cherubim  ascfi  c'in^, 
and  by  the  revolution  of  the  wheels  in 
harmony  with  their  movements.  *^  And 
when  tiie  chembim  went,  the  wheels 
went  beside  them  .  .  .  when  these 
stood  they  stood,  and  when  these 
rose  up  they  rose  up  with  them." 
They  move  together  if  they  move  at 
all,  and  in  perfect  unison.  All  created 
energies,  whether  apparently  quiescent 
or  active,  are  imbued  with  Uie  spirit  of 
life. 

Vera.  18,  19.  Another  movement  of 
deepest  significance  was  observed.  "  And 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  went  forth  firom 
above  the  threshold,"  to  which  it  had 
gone  a  short  time  previously  (ver.  4), 
"  and  stood  above  the  chembim  f  this 
return  is  a  stage  towards  the  entire  de- 
parture of  the  Lord  from  His  temple, 
and  indicates  that  the  people  might 
observe  it,  if  they  would  not  close  their 
eyes.  Having  received  the  glory,  ''  the 
ehemhim  lifted  up  their  wings,  and 
rose  up  firom  the  earth  before  my  eyes 
in  their  going  forth,  and  the  wheels 
beside  them,  and  it,''  the  whole  appear- 
ance— the  glory,  the  cherubim,  and  the 
wheels — ''  stood  at  the  opening  of  the 
gate  of  the  Lord's  house,  the  eastern ; " 
by  this  entrance  the  covenanted  God 
would,  in  symbol,  leave  the  temple,  and 
by  it,  at  a  future  period.  He  would 
come  again  (chap,  xliii.  2-4). 

Vers.  20-22.  Now  that  the  impending 
departure  is  on  the  verge  of  becoming 
an  accomplished  fact,  that  becomes  de- 
finite to  the  prophet  which  he  had  stated 
already  (ver.  15)  in  a  parenthetical  way. 
He  has  a  fuller  revelation  than  before, 
and  realises  the  import  of  th^  former 

115 


Digitized  by 


Google 


0BAP.  X.  EOMILSTW  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  EZEKIBL. 


Tision  which  had  been  granted  to  him  between  wbom  the  Lord  dwelleth,  and 

at  the  Chebar.     ''This  was  the  living  they  expressly  appeared  to  him  in  the 

creature  which  I  saw  nnder  the  God  land  of  exile.   Thus  is  Ezekiel  assured  by 

of  Israel,  and  I  knew  that  they  were  the  Qod  of  Israel  that,  if  He  abandons 

cherubim."    We  may  be  hardly  justified  His  chosen  seat,  lie  does  not  abandon 

to  say  th.'it  he  bad  doubted  whether  they  His  people — that  He  is  with  them  in 

were  the  clierubim  which  he  had  seen,  their  captivity  to  show  His  ways  and 

but,  at  any  rate,  he  is  certain  now  of  teach   His   paths.      This   assurance   of 

the    identity    of    appearances   in   both  likeness   is  reiterated:    ''they  are  the 

visions.    The  Glory  which  has  enthroned  same  faces  which  I  saw  by  the  river 

itself   over  the  living  four  and  hovers  Ohebar — ^their  appearances  and  them- 

at  the  gate  of  the  temple,  if  not  in  all  selves."      Not    merely    their    external 

points  tbe  same  in  form  as  the  cherubim  aspect,   but   their  substance   had    one 

over  the  mercy-seat^  are  the  cherubim  common  resemblance, 

HOMILETICS. 
God  in  Human  Aonvmr  (ver.  10). 

In  this  vision,  the  wings  and  hands,  the  wheels  and  eyes,  are  parts  of  a 
mystery  dark  with  excess  of  light.  Just  as  to  one  who  knows  not  the  plan  of 
a  battle,  the  noise,  the  clouds  of  smoke,  and  the  movements  of  armies  confuse 
and  confound.  Yet  the  clause  which  tells  of  a  wheel  within  a  wheel,  the  activity 
of  a  hidden  [)ower,  may  bring  a  lesson  to  our  bosom  and  business.  The  thought 
suggested  here  is  this,  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent  thrusts  forth  silently  and  success- 
fully His  hand  into  the  being  and  working  of  every  man.  Reason  and  the  king- 
dom of  God  will  prevail,  and  not  the  devil  and  those  who  do  devilish  work.  The 
wrath  of  man  shall  praise  God.  He,  like  the  engineer  with  hand  on  lever,  holds 
the  forces  of  the  world. 

By  a  wheel  within  a  wheel  God  governs  and  makes  all  things  work  together  for 
good  to  those  who  love  Him  :  all  pleasant  and  all  painful  things ;  all  that  is  mean, 
contemptible,  slanderous,  all  that  vexes  and  annoys.  So  we  may  put  on  gladness, 
knowing  that  He  overrules  each  event  of  life,  and  while  we  work  He  worketh  in 
us  according  t*)  His  good  pleasure. 

I  The  Scriptures  affirm  this  truth.  They  are  as  full  of  the  evidences  of  it  as 
the  daily  [>ress  is  full  of  the  records  of  man's  working  in  individual  and  national 
life.  Take  the  wings  of  the  morning  and  dwell  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth,  God  is  there  ;  or  descend  into  hell,  and  He  is  there.  The  devil  is  wheeled 
about  by  Him  there. 

The  broad  wheel  of  an  evil  destiny  seemed  once  to  crush  Joseph,  but  he 
devoutly  and  magnanimously  said  to  his  brothers,  ''  Ye  thought  evil,  Qod  meant 
it  for  good."  Tliere  was  also  a  wheel  at  work  in  the  life  of  Jacob,  to  whom  in  a 
dark  hour  celestial  comfort  came — ^angels  on  the  ladder  ;  in  the  peril  of  Daniel  in 
the  den,  whose  heroic  fidelity  led  a  pagiin  king  to  say,  "  There  is  no  God  like  the 
God  of  Daniel;"  in  the  case  of  David  who,  in  his  loss  of  Absalom,  found  it  good 
to  be  afflicted ;  in  the  alarm  of  the  servant  at  Dothan,  and  in  the  weeping  of  Peter. 
Eyes  see  clearer  washed  with  tears.  Paul  could  glory  in  his  infirmities,  for  he  saw 
even  in  them  that  the  power  of  Christ  was  made  glorious.  In  all  the  pains  and 
penalties,  the  joys  and  griefs,  the  thoughts  and  imaginations  of  life,  Gk>d  is  busy, 
out  of  evil  still  educing  good. 

n.  History  proves  this.  Never  did  men  meet  behind  closed  doors  as  in 
Masonic  secrecy  without  God  seeing  them.  Every  plot  and  conspiracy  is  known 
to  Him.  The  Gunpowder  Plot,  the  Spanish  Armada,  the  American  Rebellion, 
were  carefully  planned,  but  Qod  overthrew  them  alL  There  was  a  wheel  within  a 
wheeL  The  Jews  were  persecuted  and  peeled,  they  were  ever  an  easy  prey  to  the 
116 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIO  COMMBNTART :  BZEKIBL.  OBiiP.  x. 

spoiler,  now  they  are  the  bankers  and  the  traders  of  the  world,  and  hold  seats  of  power 
among  the  nations.  The  Puritans  were  ^»ersecuted,  and  you  know  the  result.  The 
thing  you  intend  to  accomplish  carries  with  it  a  score  of  things  you  did  not  intend 
to  do.  Luther  and  Columbus  accompIi>hed  more  tiian  ever  they  dreamed  of  doing, 
because  Qod  was  in  their  movements.  A  poor  man  said  to  me,  *'  I've  failed,  I 
never  was  in  such  a  strange,  unique  position."  Ah  !  what  is  failure  1  Was  ever 
there  such  a  failure,  apparently,  as  that  which  Christ  made  %  All  men  forsook 
Him  and  fled.  What  is  failure  %  I  think  of  God's  slaughtered  saints  '^  on  Alpine 
summits  cold;"  of  the  thousands  who  have  perished  in  the  Inquisition  ;  of  Jonah 
hurled  into  the  sea  to  save  the  ship  ;  of  many  who  fall  in  battle,  while  victory 
crowns  the  survivors,  and  I  ask  what  is  failure  ?  Qod's  word  says  that,  ''  though 
hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished,"  Even  ''  the  stars  in  their 
courses  fought  against  Sisera."     Tes — 

in.  The  laws  of  nature  illustrate  this.  Say  to  the  righteons  it  shall  be  well 
with  them,  and  to  the  wicked  that  the  wheel  of  God  is  working  against  them.  The 
thunderstorm  is  His  scavenger,  driving  off  malaria  and  noxious  vapour.  The 
biting  frost,  that  bent  low  my  flowers,  drove  the  plague  from  one  of  our  cities.  The 
earthquake  is  a  safety-valve  by  which  imprisoned  gnses  are  set  free.  Weedfly  thistles, 
insects  are  made  to  work  out  some  good.     As  Siiakespeare  saya-^ 

**  There  is  some  sort  of  goodness  in  things  evil| 
Would  men  obeervingly  distil  it  out." 

Remark : 

1.  We  cannot  get  along  without  Ood,  If  we  choose  to  rebel  against  His  working, 
He  will  curse  and  overthrow  us.  If  we  lead  selfish,  prayerless,  cruel  lives,  He  will 
thwart  and  destroy.  God  has  punished  nations  who  forgot  Him.  Go  to  their 
graves  to-day.  0  Judea,  whose  poets,  prophets,  and  priests  were  the  adminition  of 
thy  nation,  why  art  thou  peeled  and  conquered  ?  '^  We  rejected  the  Holy  One  and 
would  not  obey  Him."  O  fair  Greece,  the  home  of  orators  and  philosophers  I  and 
thou,  O  stately  Rome  on  thy  seven  hills  1  why  is  Ichabod  written  on  thy  temples, 
and  thy  palaces  in  dust,  with  men  digging  among  thy  ruins  %  ^*  We  forgot  justice, 
oppressed  the  poor,  and  listened  not  to  the  truth.''  It  may  be  said  to  this  land  in 
time  to  come,  O  great  country,  why  hast  thou  fallen  ?  "  We  hasted  to  be  rich 
and  turned  away  from  God,  our  lips  being  filled  with  lying  and  our  lives  with 
injtistice.'^  Men  and  nations  in  prosperity  often  forget  God,  and,  proud  of  their 
might,  go  forth  as  Samson  did  to  shake  himself  when  "  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord 
had  departed  from  him."  We  live  and  move  in  God,  and  it  is  true  that  He  lives  ' 
and  moves  in  us.     Our  prayer  should  be,  "  Guide  me,  0  Thou  great  Jehovah  ! " 

2.  Nothing  happens  which  does  not  help  him  who  loves  Ood,  Losses,  crosses, 
abuse,  injury,  lead  to  the  growth  of  patience,  watchfulness,  and  the  silent  bearing 
of  sorrow.  Burn  your  own  smoke  and  go  on.  It  is  often  darkest  before  dawn. 
Our  trials  help  to  build  up  character. 

3.  The  love  of  Ood  is  emphasised  hy  the  truth  before  us.  All  the  verses  of  the 
Bil»le  end  here— in  the  love  of  God.  He  reigns — not  sin,  not  sorrow,  not  death. 
He  wipes  away  every  tear.  He  destroys  the  last  enemy.  His  Hand  guides  the 
course  of  nationa  Not  Victoria,  not  Kaiser  William,  not  the  president  of  a  republic 
is  at  the  helm.  God  is  Governor  among  the  people.  Trust  in  Him.  Rejoice  in 
Him.     He  will  lead  ua,  and  will  lead  the  world  even  to  the  end. — OaUaher. 

The  Perfect  Ordeb  (ver.  13). 

We  see  a  subordination  of  causes,  one  to  another,  and  all  under  one  Supreme. 

L  The  snpreme  cause.  He  has  the  appearance  as  of  a  man.  He  speaks  as 
with  man's  voice.  There  is  a  prefiguration  of  the  incarnation,  of  the  Mediator 
ruling  His  providential  kingdom.     Infinite  power  and  wisdom  are  His.     If  He 

117 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  X.  EOMILETia  OOMMENTARY :  BZEKIBL. 


will  pull  down,  who  can  hold  opt  If  He  will  suspend  His  action,  who  can  impel 
tbe  curbed  forcaa  to  move  %  His  ways  are  high  above,  out  of  our  sigbt.  We  may 
see  tbe  hand  outside,  we  cannot  see  the  liring  Spirit  within.  We  are  in  a  world 
of  changes,  in  which  nothing  happens  by  chance,  but  each  change  is  subordinated 
to  the  will  of  Christ 

n.  The  subordinate  causes.  Wheels  are  all  things  that  are  moved.  Tbey 
are  absolutely  acted  on  by  the  word  of  the  Lord.  He  alone  can  make  tbem  exe- 
cute the  objects  for  which  they  are  created,  and  at  the  seasons  which  He  knows  to 
be  most  fitted  for  the  good  and  the  true  amongst  men.  They  rise  up  to  the 
highest,  they  descend  to  the  inferior  influences  which  operate  in  human  societies 
They  go  straight  on  to  tbe  points  to  which  they  are  directed,  and  turn  not  from  tbe 
execution  of  their  commission. 

He  reigns  over  all  tbings  and  persons.  His  voice  fixes  the  destinies  of  earth. 
He  will  guide  us  by  His  counsel  So  all  impatience  with  the  dealings  of  God  is 
groundless  ;  all  murmuring  is  sinful,  and  we  should  learn  to  listen  to  His  voice,  to 
be  diligent  and  persevering  in  doing  His  work,  to  long  that  one  duty  or  trial  should 
fit  us  for  the  next  duty  or  trial — M. 

FiBT  AND  Wings. 

**  Whm  tkef  skfodf  these  stood  ;  and  when  they  were  lifted  up,  iheee  lifted 
up  tkenuelves  aUo  "  (x.  17).     [Refer  to  chap.  L  24.] 

Flying  creatures  have  wings  for  the  air  and  feet  for  the  ground.  This  touch 
of  nature  is  put  on  Qod's  cherubim.  The  prophet  intends  no  special  religious 
lesson  here,  but  the  fact  he  cites  may  be  used  to  convey  such. 

I  The  suldect  of  Ohriatiaii  experience,  what  it  is  and  how  to  be  maiii- 
tained.  We  have  faculties  of  locomotion,  feeding,  sense,  perception,  &c.,  by 
which  we  act  our  parts  on  foot  as  it  were.  We  have  attributes  of  &ith-perception, 
love-appropriation,  spiritual  imagination,  in  which  we  become  aerial  creatures, 
resting  suspensively  in  tbings  above  the  world.  This  uplifting  produces  the  tran* 
scendent  mystery  of  experience  in  Christian  conversion.  We  rise  by  trust  in  Qod^ 
admitting  tbe  full  revelation  of  His  truth  and  friendship.  When  we  rest  ourselves, 
our  life  and  life-character  on  Qod,  we  prove  Him,  and  have  the  sense  of  Him 
revealed  to  our  immediate  knowledge.  This  faith  is  not  in  something  about  God. 
It  is  tbe  man's  new,  self-committing  act,  by  which  he  puts  himself  out  on  trust 
and  begins  to  live  on  God.  It  is  a  sublime  act  of  migration  upward  into  the  range 
of  spirit,  and  all  things  are  new. 

Can  the  soul  thus  lifted  stay  in  that  serene  element  %  It  has  gravitations  which 
pull  it  all  the  while  downward,  and  settle  it  on  its  feet,  as  the  flying  creatures  fold 
their  wings  when  they  settle.  Let  us  trace  some  of  the  instances  and  ways  in 
which  it  ceases  to  live  by  faith. 

When  a  man  of  enterprise  thinks  of  independence,  how  easily,  how  insensibly 
he  ceases  to  hang  on  Providence  as  he  did.  His  prayers  lose  thmr  fervour.  God 
is  far  less  dear  and  less  consciously  present ;  and  how  long  wUl  he  have  the  con- 
sciousness of  His  presence  at  all  f 

When  there  is  overdoing  the  sesrch  after  evidences  of  faith.  What  is  the 
evidence  of  faith  but  faith  itself,  as  we  get  evidence  of  warmth  by  heat  which  we 
cannot  find  through  any  inspection  t  And  if  evidence  to  a  man  is  made  up,  he  has 
made  good  his  proofs.     He  is  down  on  his  feet. 

When  the  disciple  who  is  on  the  ground  thinks  to  recover  himself  by  his  will 
instead  of  going  back  to  faith.  God  is  forgotten,  and  the  harder  throes  he  makes 
the  deeper  he  sinks. 

When  disciples  subside  into  a  mere  routine  practice,  or  observance  of  timea 
It  is  no  longer  a  service  of  impulse  and  liberty.  They  hope  there  may  be  some 
118 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  EZBKIEL.  chap.  X. 

good  in  it^  only  of  a  duller  sort  than  it  should  be.  How  much  better  if  their 
faith  bad  bat  a  one- wing  power ;  it  would  lift  them  a  few  feet  upward  now 
aud  then. 

When  a  disciple  shortens  the  distance  between  himself  and  the  world  that  be 
may  shorten  the  distance  between  the  world  and  himself.  There  is  the  possibility 
of  an  over-austere  practice  ;  but  the  study  of  conformities  is  one  in  which  none  but 
a  man  of  inflexible  tenacity  should  ever  dare  to  indulge,  and  only  he  when  he  is 
high  enough  lifted  by  his  faith  in  God  to  suffer  no  bent  downward.  Cultivating 
the  conformities  is  a  plausible  way  of  being  mixed  in  them.  Whoever  undertakes  to 
grade  and  gauge  a  ground-surface  road  will  not  be  ascending  into  faith  at  all. 

When  a  disciple  thinks  to  fortify  faith  by  practised  investigation  and  deeper 
studies  in  matters  of  opinion.  Bene^ts  may  thus  be  gained ;  but  he  is  likely  to  seek 
his  light  in  questions  of  the  understanding  and  not  by  faith  ;  then  he  is  down  upon 
the  levels  of  mere  nature.  We  think  we  touch  bottom.  We  are  going  to  be 
floated  no  more.  But  onr  solidity  turns  out  to  be  a  living  on  deductions,  not  on 
the  uplifting  grace  of  Qod's  inspirations.  We  thus  settle  out  of  grace  into  formu- 
lations  of  grace,  when,  of  course,  our  wings  are  down. 

Our  conclusion  is,  that  the  moment  any  disciple  touches  ground  with  but  the 
tip  of  his  foot,  and  begins  to  rest  on  earthly  props,  a  mortal  weakness  takes  him, 
and  he  goes  down.  Only  a  calm  and  loving  return  to  his  trust  will  recover  him, 
and  Qod  is  faithful  enough  to  be  trusted  at  all  times.  Let  there  be  this  rest  by 
faith,  and  he  will  Ciirry  himself  more  steadily  in  studies,  toils,  or  engagements. 
Sometimes  obscurations  may  occur,  but  he  has  only  to  believe  the  more  strongly 
and  wait  till  they  be  cleared. 

IL  Many  persons  miss  ever  going  above  a  service  on  foot,  by  not  conceiv- 
ing at  all  the  more  ethereal  range  of  experience,  into  which  tme  faith  wonld  lift 
thenL  Sometimes  they  become  reformers  or  pliilauthvopists.  They  mean  business 
in  their  religion,  caring  little  for  the  fervours  that  are  not  fervours  of  work.  The 
combining  and  rolling  up  of  great  masses  of  opinion  are  the  means  by  which  they 
expect  to  carry  their  projects.  Censure  and  storm  and  fiery  denunciation  are  close 
at  hand.  They,  many  times,  do  not  conceive  that  they  are  disciples  because  of 
their  repentances,  or  their  prayers,  or  sensing  of  Qod  by  their  faith,  or  any  other 
grace  that  separates  them  from  the  world.  They  have  much  to  say  of  love,  but 
they  visibly  hate  more  strongly  than  they  love.  They  never  go  above  to  descend 
upon  the  reform  by  inspirations  there  kindled ;  they  keep  on  their  feet,  and  war 
with  the  evils  on  the  same  level  with  them. 

Sometimes  they  attempt  self-culture  in  the  name  of  religion.  They  could 
mend  defects,  chasten  faults,  put  themselves  in  the  charities  they  have  learned 
from  Christ,  perhaps,  to  admire ;  but  the  work  is  a  far  more  hopeless  one  than  they 
imagine,  if  there  is  no  uplifting  help  from  gracious  inspirations.  Besides,  the  work 
keeps  to  a  continual  self- contemplation  which  is  selfish.  Old  faults  will  come  back, 
and  they  will  have  to  fight  all  over  again.  Vexed,  soured,  discouraged,  the  whole 
undertaking  may  be  given  up.  Oh,  if  they  would  go  up  to  Christ,  or  to  God  in  a 
true  faith-culture,  faults  would  fall  ofif,  as  blasted  flowers  from  a  tree,  by  the  life- 
piinciple  therein.  No  man  finishes  a  character  who  does  not  go  above  himself, 
aud  take  the  culture  of  Qod's  own  Spirit. 

Sometimes  they  settle  down  to  ritualism.  We  all  begin,  almost  unwittingly, 
to  have  a  religion  that  is  manipulated  by  our  senses  and  sensuous  tastes.  We  are 
caught  by  the  forms.  All  the  better  that  they  are  so  nearly  level  with  our  natural 
faculties,  and  just  as  easy  to  be  used  without  faith  as  with  !  How  convenient  to 
have  a  religion  that  lets  the  faiths  and  the  fervours  take  care  of  themselves! 
Saying  prayers,  too— how  much  easier  than  to  pray  and  find  how  to  be  heard. 
Thus  a  suflicient  religion  is  got  below  ;  but  the  sad  thing  is,  that  instead  of  giving 
the  disciple  free  wing,  it  keeps  him  down ;  so  that  if  he  becomes  more  earnest  in 
ik  it  is  turned  into  a  superstition. 

119 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL. 


Sometimes  they  suppose  thej  are  religious  because  of  a  certain  patronage  they 
give  to  the  Church  and  the  word.  Not  being  in  the  gift  of  spiritual  discernment, 
their  tastes  will  be  the  better;  and  as  there  are  always  a  great  many  reasons  why 
a  thing  should  not  be  done  to  any  single  reason  "why  it  should,  they  assume  to 
be  specially  qualified  critics.  They  contribute  these  critical  powers,  while  others, 
less  gifted,  may  contribute  their  prayers  I  Such  negatives  do  not  belong  to  the 
range  of  the  Spirit,  but  to  the  nether  world  of  fashion,  or  opinion,  or  custom. 
The  critics  have  feet  but  no  wings.  If  they  could  give  themselyes  over  in  tni:»t 
to  the  Saviour,  instead  of  giving  their  opinions  and  tastes,  their  contributions 
would  be  of  worthier  significance. 

Sometimes  they  distrust  experiences  in  religion,  divine  monitions,  answers  to 
prayer,  calls  to  particular  duties  and  works.  They  like  the  level  of  nature.  All 
supennitural  upliftings  and  fervours  are  fantasies  that  had  best  be  avoided.  Inspira- 
tions are  nothing ;  judgments  everything.  What  shall  we  say  of  that  story  which 
the  Apo.stle  Paul  tells  the  Corinthians  %  It  was  his  way  to  be  going  up  into  high 
regions,  so  that  he  was  not  sure,  at  times,  whether  he  had  a  thing  by  revelation 
or  not  People  called  him  **  mad,"  because  he  did  not  stay  on  foot,  in  their  level 
of  sanity.  But  was  there  ever  a  soul  more  massive  and  sublimely  steady  in  its 
equilibrium  than  hist 

What  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter)  That  the  Christian  idea  of 
religion  is  not  any  mere  playing  out  of  nature  as  its  own  level ;  but  is  the  lifting 
up  of  the  man  above  himself  in  a  transformation  that  makes  him  new.  In  so  far 
as  he  is  a  Christij'n,  he  becomes  the  citizen  of  another  kingdom.  Whatever  dis- 
respect he  may  encounter,  he  will  have  evidences  in  himself  that  ask  no  certificj^ 
tion.  He  will  have  learned  that  the  only  safe  way  of  living  is  the  highest.  Here 
his  internal  jars  and  discords  are  laid  and  a  glorious  serenity  is  esublished.  The 
earth  is  not  his  mother ;  if  he  descends  to  the  ground  his  strength  vanishes. 

If  we  are  to  make  an  ascent  into  this  higher  plane  of  experience,  the  ties  which 
hold  our  feet  must  be  effectually  cut  by  habitual  self-renunciations.  Selfishness 
and  self-indulgence  are  no  more  for  us.  We  must  lift  up  everything  we  do  in 
the  world  and  hope  from  it,  into  that  pure  life  of  sacrifice  and  trust  in  which  we 
abide  with  the  Master.  We  must  be  as  Noah  when  the  Lord  shut  him  in  the 
arky  and  be  severed  from  every  natural  trust.  Our  expectation  must  be  rested 
on  God,  not  on  pillars  of  any  kmd  below — pillars  are  not  wanted  under  wings.^ 
JSuahnellf  abridged. 

(4.)  Thb  Calamity  Threatened  to  Jerusalem  (Chap,  xi  1-13). 

EXEGETICAL NOTES. —Themove-  power  at  the  gate  of  the  temple-court, 

ments  of  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  are  inter-  under  the  Glory,  ''and,  beholc^  in  the 

mitted  for  a  time.    During  that  interval  opening  of  the  gate  twenty-flTe  men." 

a  new  condition  is  entered  into  by  Eze-  Tnis   number  makes   us   think  of  the 

kieL    Hitherto,  notwithstanding  the  un-  twenty-five  men  mentioned  in  chap.  viiL 

folding  of  so  many  abominations  before  16;  but  we  cannot  suppose  them,  as 

his  eyes,  and  by  which  his  heart  must  some  do,  to  be  the  same.     T/iey  were 

have   been  greatly  distressed,  his  lips  worshipping   the   sun,  and  we   sliould 

have  been  sealed  in  regard  to  any  de-  conclude  that  they  were  slain  by  the 

nunciation  of  them.     Now,  when   the  watchers  with  the  weapon  of  destruc- 

cherubic   throne   is   hovering  over  the  tion.      Besides,   the    standing-place    of 

east  gate,  he  is  led  to  that  spot  and  is  the  twenty- five  of  chap.  viii.  indicated 

empowered  to   utter  a   severe    rebuke  that  they   were   priests.     That   is   not 

against  the  representatives  of  Jerusalem,  iudiciited  here,  and  we  are  rather  led 

and  also  to   declare    promises   to  the  to   believe,    from   the   position   of   the 

elders  who  represented  the  exiled.  present    twenty-five,    and    from    their 

Yer*  1.  Ezekiel  is  placed  by  the  spirit-  characterisation  (ver.  3),  that  they  re- 
130 


Digitized  by 


Google 


noMtLETW  COMMENTARY:  EZElLlEL 


CHAP.  XI. 


present  civil  autborities  wlio  were  con- 
sulting with  one  another  on  matters 
of  state ;  ^'aiid  I  saw  in  their  midst 
Jaazaniah  the  son  of  Aznr/'  therefore 
not  the  elders  of  Israel  he  had  previously 
seen  (chap.  viii.  11),  *' and  Pelatiah  the 
ion  of  Benaiah,  indbices  of  the  people.'' 
It  is  most  likely  that  the  two  princes 
named  were  living  in  Jerusalem  at  that 
time,  and  noted  as  being  leaders  among 
the  dominant  party.  Or  they  may  have 
been  singled  out  in  order  to  point  to  the 
inconsistency  between  their  names  and 
the  course  they  advocated.  The  Lord 
who  hears  (Jaaasaniah)  and  who  helps 
(Azur):  the  Lord  who  delivers  (Pela- 
tiah)  and  builds  up  (Benaiah) ;  and  they 
were  departing  from  the  Lord  1 

Vers.  2, 3.  *'  These  are  the  men  that 
devise  mischief  and  give  evil  counsel 
in  this  city ; "  they  set  up  an  opposition 
to  God's  messages,  and  provoke  His 
wrath.  The  gist  of  their  opposition  is 
stated;  but  the  Hebrew  construction  does 
not  favour  the  translation  of  the  A.  V. 
The  curtness  of  the  phraseology  renders 
the  meaning  obscure.  "Who  say,  Not 
in  nearness  [is]  the  building  of  houses, 
it  [is]  the  caldron  and  we  [are]  the 
fle^"  Any  interpretation  muEt  take 
account  of  this  as  the  evil  counsel,  and 
that  it  was  held  to  be  audaciously 
iniquitous.  It  obviously  refers  to  some 
circumstances  of  that  period,  and  we 
may  find  them  indicated  in  that  pro- 
phecy of  Jeremiah  in  which  he  instructed 
the  captive  Jews  to  build  houses,  &c. 
(chap,  zxiz.  5).  These  princes  scoffed 
at  that  message  thus,  *' Those  who  are 
far  off,  in  a  land  of  exile,  may  take,  if 
they  please,  the  prophet's  advice  and 
bui'd  houses  for  themselves  there.  That 
does  not  concern  us  here — it  is  too 
remote  a  district  from  ours.  Let  Jeru- 
salem be  a  pot,  which  Jeremiah  (chap, 
i.  13)  declares  is  to  smoke  and  boil  by 
the  fury  of  a  hostile  invasion  from  the 
north,  then  we  shall  be  the  flesh  within 
it ;  its  strong  fortifications  and  sure 
defences  shall  preserve  us  against  any 
flame  of  war  Uiat  may  kindle  uround 
QS.  We  have  no  occasion  to  be  terrified 
or  succumb  to  warnings."  So  they  re- 
jected the  ways  of  the  Lord  and  trusted 
(0  their  own  devices;  and  would  such  a 


defiant  spirit,  on  the  part  of  those  who 
were  called  to  honour  Him,  be  met  by 
the  Lord  1 

Ver.  5.  The  impelling  might  of  the 
Spirit  moves  Ezekiel  to  an  utterance, 
'*  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  So  ye  say,  0 
house  of  Israel,  and  what  riseth  up  in 
your  spirit,  I  know  it"  Not  only  is 
He  cognisant  of  tiieir  overt  worls  and 
several  plottings,  but  also  of  the  real 
aims  and  wishes  which  underlie  their 
proceedings,  and  holds  them  responsible 
(ver.  6)  for  the  consequences  resulting 
therefrom, 

Yer.  7.  '*  Therefore  thus  saith  the 
Lord  Jehovah,  Your  slain,  whom  ye 
have  placed  in  the  midst  of  it,  they 
are  the  flesh  and  it  is  the  caldron." 
Tour  slain  are  those  who  had  been 
cut  down  through  the  outrages  of  the 
princes  themselves  (see  chap,  xziv.),  and 
also  those  who  perished  because  of  the 
wicked  counsels  whose  effect  had  been 
to  bring  the  Chaldean  army  against 
Jerusalem.  *'  Ezekiel  gives  them  back 
their  own  words,  as  containing  an  un- 
doubted truth,  but  in  a  different  sense 
from  that  in  which  they  had  used  them." 
There  will  be  flesh  protected  in  the 
caldron  from  the  fire,  but  it  will  repre- 
sent those  who  are  slain.  A  grim  satire  : 
The  dead  are  tlie  safe  !  ''And  one 
shall  bring  you  forth  from  its  midst ; " 
the  princes  and  their  abettors  should 
not  be  defended  in  the  city.  They 
should  be  taken  out  of  it  to  answer  for 
their  crimes. 

Ver.  9.  "  A  sword  ye  have  feared, 
and  a  sword  will  I  make  to  come 
upon  you,  saith  the  Lord  Jehovah." 
They  were  in  apprehension  of  the 
war  which  had  been  presseil  on  by 
the  king  of  Babylon,  and,  contrary  to 
the  urgent  representations  of  Jeremiah, 
made  a  coalition  with  Egypt ;  yet,  not- 
withstanciinij;  their  schemings,  "  the 
hand  of  strangers,"  the  Chaldean 
forces,  would  perpetrate  violent  deeds 
under  the  impact  of  divine  impulses. 

Vers.  11,  12.  The  supposed  security 
would  be  invaded  :  the  city  would  not 
be  a  caldron  for  tliem ;  taken  away  from 
it,  "on  the  frontier  of  Israel  wUl  I 
Jlldge  you;"  they  would  be  captives, 
and  taken  to  the  extremity  of  tlieir  laud 

121 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.XL 


HOMILSTIO  COMMSNTARY:  BZBKIEL 


to  andergo  punishment.  Jeremiah  nar- 
rates ^chap.  xzziz.  4,  S)  how  this  threat 
was  fulfilled  in  the  bloody  scenes  at 
Ribla  in  Haraath  on  the  northern 
border  of  Israel,  and  where,  as  an 
Assyrian  tablet  in  the  British  Museum 
tells,  the  headquarters  of  Nebuchad- 
nezsar  were  on  this  expedition.  Like 
all  other  tribulations,  this  had  for  its 
ulterior  end  to  work  the  conviction  that 
the  Lord  was  their  only  real  king,  *'  in 
whose  statutes  ye  walked  no^  and 
whose  Judgments  ye  did  not ;.  but  ye 
did  according  to  the  Judgments  of  the 
nations  round  about  yon:"  a  differ- 
ence from  what  was  stated  in  chap.  y. 
Ty  as  to  surrounding  nations ;  but  evi- 
dently referring  here  to  such  corrupt 
practices  of  their  neighbours  as  they 
copied.  The  materials,  out  of  which 
proceeded  the  destruction  of  the  then 
existing  Jewish  government,  are  thus  set 
forth,  and,  that  destruction  being  so 
distinctly  predicted,  the  people  should 
learn  that  it  was  with  the  most  perfect 
reason  that  Gk>d  claimed  for  Himself 
the  honour  of  supreme  ruler.  ''It  is 
lamentable  if  we  must  gain  the  know- 


ledge  of  God  by  our  own  destruction, — 
if  He,  ill  whom  we  live  and  move  and 
are,  is  first  recognised  by  the  strokes 
which  break  our  own  head  **  (ffeng.) 

Ver.  13.  A  portentous  event  im- 
presses the  prophetic  words.  **  And 
it  came  to  pass  that  as  I  was  pro- 
phesying Pelatiah,  the  son  of  Benaiah, 
died."  Though  this  incident  is  still 
part  of  Ezekiel's  ecstasy,  it  is  probable 
that  one  of  the  chief  advisers  of  Jeru- 
salem died  about  the  time  in  some  such 
awfully  sudden  manner  and  when  sur- 
rounded by  his  fellows  in  the  temple. 
The  effect  on  the  sensitive  Seer  is  great, 
and  suggests  bitter  and  painful  thoughts 
as  to  the  slaughter  of  his  people  as  hap- 
pened previously  (chap.  ix.  8) :  "  and 
I  fell  on  my  face,  and  cried  with  a 
loud  voice,  and  said,  Ah  Lord  Je< 
hovah,  dost  Thou  make  an  utter  end 
of  the  remnant  of  Israel  1 "  He  speaks 
as  if  he  had  forgotten  all  grounds  of 
hope,  and  as  if  the  people  in  the  capital 
were  the  real  representatives  of  Israel 
in  whose  mournful  fate  all  Israel  would 
be  overwhelmed  and  lost.  He  will  learn 
that  it  \s  otherwise. 


ffOMILBTICS. 
BEFuaEs  OF  Lies  broken  up. 

Under  the  boastings  of  its  leading  men  the  people  of  Jerusalem  were  living  in 
fancied  security.  They  had  heard  from  Jeremiah  the  prophet  announcements  of 
coming  woes ;  but  they  put  far  from  themselves  the  evil  day,  and  buoyed  them- 
selves up  with  the  expectation  that,  even  if  it  did  come,  they  would  escape  its 
troubles.  Theirs  is  a  common  state  of  mind  in  respect  to  the  truths  of  God  which 
are  wished  not  to  be  true,  and  we  need  to  stand  in  His  light  that  we  may  be 
disabused  of  our  hurtful  errors.  He  aims  to  help  us  thereto  by  a  procedure  such 
as  is  disclosed  in  this  paragraph.     He  shows  that  self-constituted  refuges — 

L  Are  based  on  miscalculations.  Men  calculate  that  there  is  no  necessity 
immediately  to  renounce  past  courses  :  the  judge  is  not  standing  before  the  door ; 
the  call  to  watch  for  the  Master's  coming  can  be  trifled  with  for  a  while.  Thus 
many  vaguely  feel,  if  they  do  not  positively  present  excuses  as  to  the  incidence  of 
a  season  of  searching  and  decisive  trial.  They  may  walk  on  in  darkness  till  that 
day  overtakes  them  as  a  thief.  For,  as  all  events  are  uncertain,  to  risk  the  present 
space  given  for  repentance  is,  it  may  be,  to  risk  the  building  of  a  house  without 
means  to  finish  it,  the  being  overwhelmed  by  ruin  from  which  there  will  be  no 
opportunity  to  escape.     We  can  use  **  now  "but  not  "  then  "  to  flee. 

IL  They  are  abortive  before  God.  He  knows  all  that  comes  into  the  heart, 
the  mouth,  the  hands,  and  so  is  able  to  test  the  real  character  of  each.  The  stand 
made  by  men  in  self-defence  is  untenable.  Fancies  will  not  shut  out  aflictions, 
spring  up  when  they  may.  No  causes,  no  secret  purposes  can  be  so  encrusted 
that  they  will  elude  the  penetration  of  the  eyes  that  are  as  a  flame  of  fire.  To 
128 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL.  obaf.SL 


cheriAh  hopes,  apart  from  Christ,  that  we  sball  be  preserved  from  future  evils,  is 
to  eberish  hopes  on  a  quicksand  over  which  the  tid:il  wave  is  beginning  to  rise. 
Sins  make  culprits,  and  the  righteous  Lord  will  not  let  one  elude  His  sentence, 
whatever  the  rank,  the  numbers,  the  religious  privileges  be.  Search  lest  thy 
refuge  lie  open  to  the  flood  of  divine  condemnation. 

m  They  are  open  to  disloeatioiis.  One  is  from  tite  word  of  the  Lord.  It 
came  by  prophets.  It  has  come,  in  these  last  days,  by  a  Son.  We  read,  we  hear 
what  He  hath  spoken,  and  learn  that  the  entire  bearing  of  that  word  of  the  living 
€rod  is  to  convict  of  sin  and  to  bring  to  immediate  faith  in  the  Saviour  from  sin. 
Again  and  again  were  men  urged  to  **  Hear  the  Word  of  the  Lord ;"  again  and 
again  are  we  urged  now,  '^  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit 
saith  unto  the  churches." 

Another  is  from  the  action  of  human  influences.  The  sword,  captivity,  spoiling 
of  goods  affected  the  contemporaries  of  £zekiel :  an  ailment,  an  emigration,  a 
pecuniary  loss  operate  upon  us.  We  shall  miss  the  true  reasons  for  such  shakings 
of  our  usual  affairs,  if  we  do  not  trace  in  them  the  will  of  the  righteous  and  loving 
Lord,  who  would  show  to  us  that  we  have  been  trusting  in  that  which  is  of  the 
flesh,  who  would  draw  us  to  plant  our  feet  upon  the  Rock  of  ages.  "I  will 
search  Jerusalem  with  lamps,  and  punish  the  men  that  are  settled  on  their  lees  : 
that  say  in  their  hearts.  The  Lord  will  not  do  good,  neither  will  He  do  evil  ^ 
(Zeph.  L  12). 

Thus  are  records  made  that  the  Lord  sets  His  face  against  oar  doings  that  are 
not  good,  and  that,  whether  they  are  to  be  classed  under  unfaithfulness  to  Him  or 
nnbrotherliness  to  men.  He  will  expose  them  to  utter  collapse.  No  schemes,  no 
confidences  will  be  capable  of  resisting  Him.  **  The  Lord  is  known  by  the  judg- 
ment that  He  executeth.'' 

Who  will  accept  the  decisions  of  the  Holy  One  as  to  their  hopes  of  safety  in 
coming  storms Y  Who  will  forsake  all  and  follow  Christ?  "If  you  would  not  be 
broken  by  His  judgment,  do  not  break  His  statutes ;  if  you  would  secure  your 
lives,  walk  in  His  laws." 

A  Vision  of  Suddbn  Death  (ver.  IS). 

Painful  associations  were  linked  in  with  the  sudden  end  of  Pelatiah's  counsel 
and  boastings.  While  the  consensus  of  human  testimony  proves  that  such  an 
immediate  cessation  of  the  activities  of  life  is  not  considered  as  always  stamped 
with  the  brand  of  punishment,  it  is  always  regarded  as  more  or  less  of  a  calamity. 
Even  they  who  know  that  the  hand  of  the  Good  Shepherd  is  leading  them  into 
the  unseen  world,  yet  shrink  from  this  manner  of  exit  from  the  present  world. 
*  The  feeling  is  to  be  accounted  for  because  of — 

L  The  general  mysterionanesa.  There  are  no  precise  premonitions,  no 
apparently  gradual  preparations.  For  though  such  a  death  must  have  been  pre- 
ceded by  causes  adequate  to  produce  it,  those  causes,  whether  physical  or  mental, 
have  not  been  credited  with  the  deadly  force  which  they  exert.  The  death  appears 
to  be  the  bursting  forth  of  a  new  and  poignant  energy,  and  our  hearts  are  awed 
by  the  sad  and  startling  memento  which  marks  its  route.  Besides,  the  selection 
is  utterly  incomprehensible.  Two  men  are  given  equal  prominence  in  the  course 
taken  by  Jerusalem,  yet  one  expires  in  a  moment,  and  the  other  still  breathes  the 
vital  air.  One  of  a  family  goes  in  an  instant  down  to  the  grave,  but  all  the  other 
members  go  more  or  less  slowly.  We  may  be  surprised  at  the  falling  of  the  lot, 
but  we  have  no  light  as  to  its  movements.  Only  this  can  we  be  sure  of,  that  He 
who  gave  life  takes  it  away  in  a  method  that  is  at  once  wise  and  good.  '*  Blessed 
be  the  name  of  the  Lord  1  ** 

n.  The  ntter  helplessness.  No  nursing,  no  skill  can  be  made  the  least  use 
ol     We  may  cry  for  a  parting  word,  a  pre&^ure,  a  look;  but  we  cry  with  no 

123 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ottAF.  St  BOMILBTIC  COMMBNTART:EZEKtEL 

result.  We  see  the  living  now,  in  a  moment  we  see  they  are  not,  and  we  can  do 
nothing  for  tliem,  we  can  only  look.  They  pass  altogether  beyond  our  aid.  They 
seem  still  beside  us,  but  they  have  gone — where  % 

in.  An  indescribable  contiguity  of  solemn  spiritual  conditions.  Pelatiah 
is  hearing  the  word  of  the  Lord  hy  Esekiel,  and  in  the  very  sound  thereof  hears 
the  command  of  the  King  of  terrors.  Mercy  and  judgment  stand  hand  in  hand. 
The  hearer  becomes  at  once  a  dweller  in  '*  the  silent  land."  What  will  be  learned 
there  %  The  judgment  of  the  All  Holy,  unaffected  by  any  ignorance,  misconcep- 
tion,  shrinking  I  What  if  he  be  impenitent  1  What  if  bis  tongue  be  still  vibrating 
with  words  in  which  he  gave  counsel  against  good  1  What  if  he  has  not  cleansed 
his  hands  from  the  filth  of  dishonest  gain  or  the  blood  of  those  he  has  injured  % 
He  is  struck  powerless.  He  b  in  face  of  iniquity  at  this  step,  he  is  confronted 
with  its  penalty  at  the  next. 

IV.  A  shock  to  natural  feelings.  Fear  for  oneself  and  pity  for  another 
cannot  be  restrained.  Surprise  and  awe  might  have  affected  Pelatiah's  fellow- 
counsellors  for  a  time.  The  effect  was  transient  They  persisted  in  their  wicked 
devices  in  the  city ;  they  acted  in  fatal  correspondence  thereto.  Their  seasonable 
impressions,  like  the  morning  cloud  and  early  dew,  soon  vanished  away.  On  the 
other  hand  men,  with  the  love  to  QoA  and  man  which  stirred  Ezekiel,  pray  that 
such  a  sudden  stroke  may  not  cut  down  those  who  are  still  in  their  trespasses ; 
they  ask  for  sparing  mercy  that  such  persons  may  be  moved  to  work  the  works  of 
God  before  the  night  cometh  in  which  no  man  can  work.  How  vain  is  prayer 
when  the  sinners  prayed  for  will  go  on  in  evil  ways !  ^'  How  sad  it  is  that  the 
godly  should  be  concerned  for  the  coming  doom  of  transgressors,  and  yet  the 
transgressors  themselves  remain  unmoved.  Let  believers  imitate  Ezekiel,  and 
when  judgments  descend  on  some,  '  lift  up  their  prayer  for  the  remnant  that  is 
left'"  (i^auM<rt). 

Wert  thou  this  moment  to  go  through  the  gates  of  death,  wouldst  thou  go  as 
one  who  had  walked  or  had  not  walked  thereto  in  the  footprints  of  Jesus  t  '*  Watch, 
for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  in  which  the  Son  of  Man  cometh." 

(6.)  Merot  Promised  to  the  Exiles,  and  Conclusion  of  the  Vision 

(vers.  14-25). 

EXEGETIOAL  NOTES.— Vers.  14-  Men  look  at  its  externalities.     Those 

21.     Ezekiel  receives,  for  answer  to  his  who  have  antiquity  and  ritual  on  their 

urgent  appeal,  an  intimation  that  the  side  are   counted   the   chosen  to  good, 

doom  of  Jerusalem  is  irrevocable,  but  while  they  who  suffer  and  are  decried 

that  the  Lord's  people  will  not  be  for-  are  regarded  as  of  no  account     Yet  in  ' 

saken.      Amongst  the   exiles*,  who  are  the  latter  are  the  germs  of  mercy  from 

contemptuously  treated  by  dwellers  in  God  laid  :  ''  thy  brethren,  thy  breth- 

the  capital,   are   found  tokens   of    the  ren,"  the  twice-told  designation  empha- 

broken,  contrite   heart  which  He  does  tically  indicating  that  Ezekiel  is  to  find 

not  despise.      He   will  put  an   end  to  his  true  relations  in  those  with  whom 

their  captivity,  and  settle  them   again  he  is  connected  as  an  exile,  however 

in  the  land  of  their  fathers.  unfavourable  their  condition  :  ''men  of 

Yer.  15.  The  utterance  of  the  Lord  thy  kindred " — a  translation  which  ap- 

must  have  been  unexpected.     The  pro-  purently  causes  a  tautology,  for  brethren 

phet  supposed  that  they  who  remained  are   kindred ;   but  is  grounded  on  the 

in  Jerusalem  were  the  real  representa-  fact  that  the  Hebrew  word  refers  to  the 

tives  of  Lsrael,  and  his  yearning  for  their  duties  of  the  ^oe^, — the  blood-relation 

deliverance  was  thus  intensified.     His  who   took  up  the  responsibilities,  po- 

mistake  springs  from  a  conunon   ten-  verty,  injuries  of  his  kindred  (Lev.  xxv. 

dency  in  regard  to  the  kingdom  of  Gk>d.  25,  48).     Some  propose  to  employ  the 
124 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMTLFsTtC  COMMENTAHY:  EZEKIEL 


CrTAT*.  XL 


primary  meaningy  and  translate  tbe 
phrase,  men  of  thy  redemption^  those 
whom  thuu  art  boand  to  ransom,  or 
intercede  for  to  deliver  from  evil.  The 
ascription  of  the  duties  of  goel  to 
Ezekiei  seems  far-fetched  and  forced ; 
but  is  defended  for  the  reason  that  it 
conveys  '*a  peculiar  reproach  to  the 
proud  Jews  who  have  been  so  ready  to 
cast  off  the  claims  of  blood-relationship, 
and  at  the  same  time  a  hope  of  restora* 
tion  to  those  who  have  been  unduly 
thrown  aside  *'  (Speaker'i  Com,)  The 
reading  of  the  LXX  is,  the  men  of  thy 
captivity^  obviously  translating  the  same 
Hebrew  word  that  is  found  in  ver.  24, 
and  which  differs  from  that  read  here 
by  a  single  letter:  ''and  all  the  honse 
of  Israel,  all  of  it,''  including  in  this 
title  all  Israel  wheresoever  tliey  were 
scattered  abroad,  and  who  by  the  phrase 
seem  counted  by  Qod  as  those  who 
constituted  the  whole  house  of  Israel, 
''to  whom  the  inhabitants  of  Jeru- 
salem say,  Remove  ixt  off  from  the 
land ;  to  ns  the  land  is  given  for  a 
possession."  Captivity,  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Jerusalem ites,  was  a  cutting  off 
from  the  covenants  and  promises ;  but 
their  residence  in  the  city  was  a  par- 
ticipation in  them.  They  concluded 
that  Israel  was  to  be  known  by  external 
signs.  "  Thereby  they  show  how  in- 
experienced they  are  in  the  ways  of 
God,  how  far  they  are  from  having  the 
heart  of  true  Israelites,  how  little  they 
deserve  that  the  prophet  should  take  an 
interest  in  them  '*  (Heng.) 

Ver.  16.  "Therefore,"  seeing  that 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  treat  the 
captives  as  thrust  out  from  the  Xjord, 
He  causes  His  prophet  to  refer  to  this 
despisal  and  say,  '*  Though  I  have  re- 
moved them  fax  off  among  the  na- 
tions, and  though  I  have  scattered 
them  in  the  lands,"  that  which  their 
depredators  say  is  so  far  true ;  hut  the 
exile  is  not  comfortless  and  irreversible, 
"yet  I  will  be  to  them  a  sanctuary 
for  a  little  while : "  they  are  deprived 
of  that  which  was  onoe  My  sanctuary, 
where  I  manifested  My  presence,  but 
they  shall  have  one  notwithstanding. 
I  Myself  will  be  with  them  for  a  season. 
The  A.  v.,  by  its  translation  a  litUe  eanc- 


tuary,  makes  it  seem  as  if  the  Lord 
would  give  to  the  captives,  in  some  minor 
degree,  what  He  had  given  in  the  tem- 
ple. No  doubt  this  was  the  case.  But 
there  is  more  involved.  The  exiles 
would  be  comforted  with  the  promise 
of  a  far  greater  boon  than  that  of  enter- 
ing within  the  walls  of  an  earthly  tem- 
ple, and  also  with  the  assurance  that 
the  duration  of  their  banishment  from 
the  temple  would  be  limited.  "  Canaan 
was  still  the  land  of  the  covenant ;  and 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  among  His 
people,  at  a  distance  from  that  land, 
could  be  only  a  temporary  thing."  But 
by  this  dealing  with  them  the  captives 
were  prepared  to  give  weight  to  the 
eternal  truth  that  God  dwells  not  in 
temples  made  with  hands,  that  they 
could  worship  Him  acceptably  any- 
where, and  so  new  advances  were  taken 
towards  the  coming  of  Him  in  whose 
resurrection-body  was  seen  the  temple 
not  made  with  hands,  and  through 
whom  all  men  may  come  to  the  Father. 

"  In  what  way  did  the  Lord  prove 
Himself  to  be  the  sanctuary  of  the  peo- 
ple in  their  captivity  1  First  of  all  by 
sending  the  prophet  himself,  ...  a 
preacher  of  repentance  and  salvation, 
and  one  so  richly  endowed.  .  •  .  That 
which  made  the  temple  itself  into  a 
temple,  the  presence  of  Qod,  dwelt  in 
him.  Again,  He  proved  this  by  the 
outward  protection  which  He  afforded 
them,  ...  by  inward  consolations,  Ac. 
Every  event  that  transpired, — the  ele- 
vation of  Daniel,  the  fall  of  the  Baby- 
lonian and  rise  of  the  Persian  power, — 
pointed  to  this  end.  How  different  was 
the  Babylonian  exile  from  that  of  the 
present  day !  In  the  latter  there  are 
no  signs  of  the  presence  of  God.  The 
nation  can  do  nothing  but  celebrate 
memorial  feasts  and  dream  of  the 
future  "  (Heng,) 

"The  dispersion,  besides  being  a 
just  chastisement  on  account  of  sin,  and 
a  salutary  discipline  to  lead  the  heart  of 
the  people  back  to  God,  had  an  impor- 
tant end  to  accomplish  as  a  preparatory 
movement  in  providence  for  opening 
the  way  for  Messiah's  kingdom.  It  wtis 
very  far  irom  being  an  unmixed  eviL 
It  wan  of  great    service   in  diffusing 

125 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XL 


HOMILSTJO  COMMENTARY:  SZERIBL 


the  knowledge  of  Gk>d,  and  providing 
material  for  the  first  foundations  of  the 
Christian  Chnrch.  But  it  was  still  more 
important  and  necessary  in  tpiritnalising 
the  views  of  the  Jews,  and  training  to 
the  knowledge  and  service  of  God 
without  the  help  of  a  material  temple. 
The  devout  worshipper  at  Babylon, 
Alexandria,  Bome,  found  himself  a  par- 
taker of  God's  presence  and  blessing. 
What  a  mighty  advance  did  the  king- 
dom of  God  thus  make  toward  the  pos- 
session of  the  world  I  And  the  Lord 
manifested  His  power  to  oTerrule  a 
present  evil  for  the  accomplishment  of 
an  ultimate  good "  (Fairhaiirn)^ 

Vers.  17,  18.  A  reply  to  the  asf^er- 
tion  of  men  of  Jerusalem  that  the  land 
was  their  exclusive  possession.  '*  There- 
fore say,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  JehoTah, 
and,''  besides  being  a  sanctuary,  **I 
will  gather  you  and  give  to  yon  the 
territory  of  Israel ;  but  the  restoration 
will  not  be  to  the  state  of  things  which 
existed  prior  to  the  exile ;  "  and  they,** 
whom  the  Lord  thus  favours,  ''come 
thither  and  take  away  all  its  detest- 
able things  and  all  its  abominations 
therefirom ; "  first  of  all  tbey  cease  to 
do  the  evil  things  which  had  provoked 
their  Almighty  King;  they  no  longer 
halt  between  the  Lord  and  Baalim. 
But  *^  that  they  have  eschewed  idolatry 
ever  since  their  return  from  Babylon,'* 
is  a  statement  to  be  qualified  by  the 
remarks  of  Hengstenberg.  ^  That  Satan 
should  drive  out  Satan,  or  a  refined 
system  of  idolatry  (even  Jehovah  can 
become  an  idol)  make  war  upon  one  of 
a  grosser  kind,  is  a  matter  of  no  reli- 
^ous  importance.  It  is  also  evident 
that  the  outward  removal  of  idols,  in 
the  period  immediately  following  the 
restoration  and  in  the  time  of  the  Mac- 
cabees, is  included  in  the  prophecy  only 
BO  far  as  God  Himself  was  the  princi- 
plum  movens  on  those  occasions  But 
this  can  be  regarded  as  only  a  very 
small  beginning.  If  the  idols  had  all 
been  banished  from  the  country  along 
with  the  idolatrous  images,  the  people 
would  have  had  some  ground  for  charg- 
ing God  with  unfaithfulness  in  not 
performing  His  promises.  The  external 
cemoval  of  the  things,  by  which  the 
126 


land  of  the  Lord  had  been  defiled,  was 
thought  of  by  the  prophet  only  so  far 
as  it  was  the  result  of  the  unconditional 
surrender  of  the  heart  to  the  Lord." 

Vers.  19,  20.  "  And  I  give  them  one 
heart,*'  a  heart  in  which  will,  thought, 
feeling  are  in  unison,  and  which  finds 
itself  in  harmony  with  other  hearts. 
The  method  by  which  this  grace  will  be 
brought  about  is  the  Lord's ;  '*  and  a 
new  spirit  will  I  pnt  within  yon," 
''the  same  for  substance,  but  altered 
in  the  frame,  renewed  in  the  qualities 
thereof"  {Trapp) ;  "and  I  wiU  take 
away  the  heart  of  stone  from  their 
flesh,  and  give  them  an  heart  of 
flesh."  "  There  is  generally  more  said 
than  onght  to  be  said  according  to  God's 
word,  that  'in  its  natural  state  man's 
heart '  u  '  hard  as  a  stone.'  It  becomes 
the  heart  of  stone  only  by  hardening.  By 
nature  it  is  rather  *  an  heart  of  flesh,' 
which  grace  confronts  with  spirit  of 
Spirit  (John  iiu  6).  With  the  fleshy  state 
of  the  heart  manifold  gifts  of  God  are  con- 
ceivable, as  was  the  case  of  Israel  from 
their  fathers  (hereditary  blessings).  The 
New  Testament  interpretation  must  not, 
as  a  matter  of  course,  be  put  upon  vers. 
19,and  20.  In  comparison  with  the  stony 
heart  which  Gk)d's  judgments  broke  in 
pieces,  this  was  to  be  an  heart  of  flesh  ; 
but  yet  it  was  merely  an  heart  of  flesh. 
The  heart  of  stone  stands  in  relation  to 
the  idols,  so  the  heart  of  flesh,  the  new 
spirit,  the  one  heart,  stands  in  relation 
to  the  only  true  God.  The  keeping 
apart  of  flesh  and  stone  is  as  important 
as  that  of  flesh  and  spirit"  (Langt)* 
Israel  had  gone  into  a  position  that  was 
unnatural  to  it,  but  was  to  return,  by 
divine  working,  into  that  which  was 
natural,  "  that  they  may  walk  in  My 
statutes,  and  keep  My  judgments,  and 
do  them,"  <fec. 

Ver.  21.  The  promise  is  accompanied 
with  a  dark  shadow.  Whosoever  there 
be  *'  whose  heart  goes  after  the  heart 
of  their  detestable  things  and  their 
abominations, **  who  continue  a  devotion 
full  of  interest  in  the  idols  which  their 
evil  hearts  attach  themselves  to,  they 
shall  reap  the  fruit  of  their  own  ways. 
If  the  idols  represent  merely  illusions, 
yet  they  exercise  a  mastering  sway  over 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMlLETia  OOMUSNTART:  BZEKIEL.  ohaF.  TL 


indiyidualsy  while  the  fnll  natare  of  sin  what  actnallj   was,   we  find  that  the 

is  manifested  by  their  worship.    *'  What  word  received  bnt  a  partial  fulfilment, 

power  has  Mammon  now,  as  a  national  and  Canaan  as  occupied  by  the  restored 

god,  over  Jewish  minds,  although  he  is  remnant  was  not  a  region  of  holiness. 

in   himself  a  mere   shadow  ! "  {Heng,)  Still  the  promise  did  not  fail ;  the  Lord 

^  The  moral  bearings  of  the  Lord's  state-  did    provide   for    Himself   a    spiritual 

ment  fasten  on  every  man  bis  own  re-  offspring  from  the  captivity,  and  plant 

sponsibility  for  his  own  conduct    Mercy  tbeni  anew  as  a  seed  of  blessing  in  the 

to  a  people  does  not  shut  off  personid  land  of  their  fathers — enough  to  furnish 

agency."     **  The  promise  of  a  return  to  a  pledge  that  the  sum  of  all  promise, 

Canaan  was  not  given  to  the  exiles  as  the   work  of   reconciliation   in   Christ, 

an   absolute    and   unconditional  good.  would,  in  due  time,  be  brought  to  com- 

And   comparing  the  promise   of  what  pletion "  (^atr^tm). 
ahoold  have  been,  with  the  record  of 


HOMILETICS. 
Thb  Appeal  of  Bbugiok  to  thb  Feeukgb. 

There  had  been  a  general  deterioration  in  the  life  of  the  Jewish  people. 
Religion  was  corrupted  into  superstition,  and  all  that  was  purifying  and  rightening 
in  it  got  rid  of.  Then,  as  a  matter  of  course,  their  morals  became  depraved,  and 
then  came  political  degradation  and  national  ruin.  In  their  hopeless  plight  as 
exiles,  what  was  it  that  they  really  needed  t 

The  answer  cannot  be  far  to  seek.  The  spirit  of  revolt  had  been  stirred  up 
against  the  power  which  dominated  them.  Of  what  use  had  that  been  f  If  GK>d 
should  intervene  by  some  wonderful  "  providence/'  and  with  a  strong  arm  bring 
them  out  of  Chaldea  and  restore  them  to  their  own  land,  of  what  avail  could  even 
that  be  f  If  the  same  people,  animated  by  the  same  spirit,  had  been  all  reinstated 
in  their  properties  posseted  before,  what  would  have  been  gained!  The  one 
essential  thing  of  all  was  for  the  men  and  women,  the  young  men  and  maidens,  to 
love  and  choose  right  and  good — be  obedient  to  Ood,  and  righteous  and  loving 
toward  one  another ;  for,  if  the  inmost  character  of  the  people  remained 
unchanged,  the  same  wretched  consequences  would  once  more  follow.  To  try 
this  experiment  over  again  would  simply  have  been  waste  of  time  and  waste  of 
everything.  A  corrupt  and  btid  nation  can  never  be  for  long  a  prosperous  nation. 
Evil  still  clings  to  it,  and  will  produce  its  own  fruits  of  course.  So  it  would  have 
been  utterly  vain  to  have  shown  a  false  compassion  to  them  and  brought  them 
back  from  captivity  just  as  they  were. 

The  promise  of  renewed  prosperity  is  here  made  dependent  on  renewed  rights 
ness.  The  religious  promise  is  the  grand  and  basal  one  (ver.  20).  The  people 
must  become  a  right  [leople,  must  have  a  right  heart  and  a  new  spirit,  or  pros- 
perity is  out  of  the  question.  The  national  character  is  the  main  thing  to  be 
looked  to  if  a  people  would  enjoy  national  welfare.  **  Righteousness  ezalteth  a 
nation.**  If  the  love  of  righteousness  he  general  and  strong,  that  will  purge  the 
eyesiglit  of  a  people,  and  tiiey  will  see  what  they  ought  to  do.  All  those 
members  of  a  nation  who  sap  the  robust  rigliteousness  of  the  people ;  all  those 
who  countenance  and  promote  the  neglect  of  religion,  who  weaken  the  faith  of 
others  in  Gknl,  who  lessen  reverence  and  piety,  by  word  or  deed  or  by  the  power 
of  example,  are  helping  to  undennine  the  national  well-being.  While  all  who 
help  righteousness,  truth,  goodness,  the  fear  of  Qod,  and  the  love  of  men,  are  doing 
best  for  their  country's  stability  and  progress.  In  order  to  the  accomplishment 
of  such  a  result,  there  must  be  a  heart  renovated  by  religion.  And  so  we  learn 
(hal  the  very  core  of  this  true  religion  is  a  power  oyer  the  heart.     As  the  heart 

127 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OBAP.  XL  BOMlLSTia  OOMMJSmART:  XZMKIEL. 


stands  principally  for  the  feelings,  we  may  say  that  religion  is  chiefly  haying  th« 
feelings  rightw 

Religion  is  made  by  many  a  quite  outward  affair,  one  of  rites  and  ceremonies 
and  observances.  With  otliers  a  correct  religious  creo«l  is  everything,  and  not  a 
few  weed  their  creed  of  all  positive  statements  and  reduce  it  to  negatives — to 
denying  this,  and  contradicting  that,  and  arguing  against  the  other.  These  are  in 
great  danger  of  making  religion  consist  in  notions,  ».«.,  chiefly  a  matter  of  intellects 

The  intellect  and  the  feelings  are  often  put  in  opposition  ;  but  it  ought  not  to 
be  so.  The  use  of  the  intellect  in  religion  is  to  help  the  heart  We  want  both 
brought  into  the  highest  condition  of  health  and  vigour.  It  is  ever  bad  to  divorce 
them,  and  undesirable  to  cultivate  one  at  the  expense  of  the  other.  But  if  we 
were  obliged  to  confine  ourselves,  then  there  is  no  question  the  heart,  the  feeling, 
must  have  the  vast  pre-eminence.  The  understanding  is  addressed  in  Scripture  as 
the  way  to  the  conscience  and  the  heart.  Right  knowledge  is  good  even  for  its 
own  sake  ;  but  if  it  be  alone,  a  man  may  be  a  devil  Intellect  without  love  la  one 
definition  of  the  devil. 

Why  are  the  fe«'liiigs  of  this  importance  in  religion  t 

I.  Because  they  goyem  the  man.  A  man  may  love  to  flatter  himself  that  he 
is  governed  by  his  intellect,  by  pure  reason.  In  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a 
hundred  he  is  governed  by  his  feelings,  by  his  inclinations,  by  his  likings,  and 
then  he  calls  in  reason  I  He  employs  his  intellect  to  find  him  useful  arguments 
bj  which  h«  may  vindicate  himself  to  himself  and  to  others  1 

**  The  afterthoughts 
Which  reason  ooins  to  justify  ezcass 
And  passion's  disappointment." 

It  was  the  feelings  which  impelled  John  and  Peter,  Martha  and  Mary,  to  Christ ; 
which  made  Annas  and  Caiaphas  seek  His  death ;  it  was  a  certain  class  of  feel- 
ings which  urged  Judas  to  betray  Him.  So  now.  Some  men  love  the  llevealer 
and  believe  in  Him ;  they  find  the  evidences  which  they  ask  for  satisfactory,  and 
may  be  able  to  give  a  reason  to  others.  Some  do  not  love  that  Life  which  claims 
to  be  divine,  it  rebukes  their  life  too  much ;  they  scan  the  evidences  and  find 
them  insufiScient,  and  are  glad  to  be  able  to  say  so.  The  feelings  are  seen  to  be 
supreme  as  the  active  power  in  human  life.  Hence  God  seeks  to  enlist  them  on 
the  side  of  righteousness,  and  has  so  put  Truth — embodied  it  in  a  person — as  to 
make  right  aflections  possible  and  easy.  Therefore,  '^  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy 
God,**  Ac.     "  Lovest  thou  Mf  f  " 

II  Because  the  feelings  form  a  ground  common  to  all  men  on  which  religion 
can  act.  With  many  the  intellect  is  very  feeble,  and  only  the  fewest  can  have  a 
well- furnished  and  well-disciplined  intellect.  But  all  can  have  strong  feelings, 
strong  likings  and  dislikings.  Ought  not  religion  to  be  an  affair  of  that  on  which 
all  classes  can  stand  on  pretty  equal  terms?  The  feelings  enlisted,  what  is  too 
hard  in  any  rank  of  life  f 

in.  Because  the  feelings  decide  the  character.  A  man  is  what  his  chief 
love  or  liking  is,  what  his  allowed  and  cherished  feelings  are.  As  he  thinketh  in 
his  heart,  so  is  he.  And  Christ  is  the  supreme  test  For  there  is,  in  happiest 
proportions,  all  goodness  embodied  in  His  life  which  has  special  claims  on  men. 
If  the  feelings  towards  Him  are  those  of  indifference,  unconcern,  to  say  nothing 
of  opposition,  then  is  the  heart  a  heart  of  stone  indeed ;  and  the  one  first  and 
great  need  for  such  a  man  is  to  get  rid  of  his  heart  of  stone  and  acquire  a  heatt 
of  flesh. 

We  see  how  wisely  God  has  made  religion  to  be  primarily  an  affair  of  the  heart 

and  not  of  the  intellect.     We  recognise  the  pains  He  hath  taken  to  win  the  heart 

for  the  right,  to  awaken  and  stimulate  and  direct  the  feelings.      This  is  to  a  great 

trtent  the  rationale  of  the  Gospel,  the  logic  of  Christianity.     We  are  interested  to 

128 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL.  chap.  XL 


see  how  the  promise  uf  uue  heart  was  fulfilled  to  the  captives  as  represented  in  the 
books  of  Ezra  and  Nebeminb.  Important  also  to  see  how  tbe  matter  bears  on  us 
(2  C(»r.  vi.  17,  vii.  1). 

Counsel  and  promise  meet  here.  We  are  to  get  the  heart  of  flesh  of  ourselves ; 
God  will  give  it  to  us.  Both  needed.  He  will  give ;  we  must  concur.  If  we 
prize  tbe  promise,  we  sball  do  all  we  can  to  get  rid  of  one  kind  of  heart  and  to 
obtain  tbe  other.  How  many  means  are  found  to  be  provided ;  bow  many  things, 
habits,  kc^  to  be  sedulously  avoided,  and  others  to  be  sedulously  observed.  If 
you  will  try  honestly  to  make  you  a  heart  of  flesh,  Qod  will  command  successi  will 
secure  the  result — H.  H.  2>. 


God  the  Sanotuaey  of  the  Afflioted  (ver.  16), 

There  is  a  tendency  in  nature  and  providence  to  keep  things  in  a  kind  of 
equality.  There  are  compensations.  In  what  condition  can  we  be  found  that 
possesses  no  advantages  1     Let  us  consider  from  this  verse — 

L  The  calamity.     ^*  I  have  cast  them  off,"  <fec.    The  event  serves  to  display — 

1.  The  agency  of  OocL  He  asserts  His  dominion  and  influence  over  all  the 
•ufferings  of  nations,  families,  and  individuals.  An  irreligious  mind  is  detained 
from  God  by  the  persons  or  events  which  injure  Him.  A  pious  man  can  say,  ''It 
is  the  Lord."  He  acts  by  the  intervention  of  means.  He  did  not  carry  away  the 
Jews  by  miracle,  but  by  the  effect  of  war ;  and  we  are  not  to  conclude  that  God 
has  nothing  to  do  in  any  work  because  of  tbe  vileness  of  those  who  are  engaged 
in  it.     He  makes  the  very  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him. 

2.  Displays  the  truth  of  God,  The  evil  had  been  foretold  and  threatened  by 
successive  prophets,  and  the  calamity  was  identified  with  tbe  Divine  veracity — 
*'  Hath  He  spoken,  and  shall  He  not  make  it  good  t " 

3.  Displays  the  holiness  of  GocL  The  offences  of  this  people  were  aggravated  by 
their  privileges.  Sin  is  not  to  be  judged  of  by  its  grossness,  but  by  its  guilt.  No 
wonder  that  He  punished  the  Jews. 

4.  Displays  the  vdsdom  of  God.  By  their  dispersion  they  were  in  '*  the  midst 
of  many  people  as  a  dew  from  the  Lord.'' 

5.  Displays  His  goodness.  He  punished  not  to  destroy,  but  reform.  Their 
captivity  was  limited  in  duration,  and  He  did  not  leave  them  comfortless  in  the 
meantime. 

n.  The  alleviation.  "  Yet  will  I  be  to  them,"  ^  He  engages  to  be  to  them 
a  temple,  so  that  He  should  be  found  of  them,  and  they  would  see  His  power  and 
glory.  He  compensates  them  for  the  want  of  those  very  things  which  seem  essen- 
tial to  their  welfare. 

1.  In  the  loss  of  outtoard  comforts.  He  does  not  require  us  to  be  indifferent  to 
substance,  health,  friends ;  but  as  He  is  the  unchangeable  and  all-sufficient,  we 
have  a  security  independent  of  the  world,  diseases,  associates.  At  first  we  may 
murmur  when  affliction  comes,  but  it  is  to  wean  us  from  creatures  and  draw  to 
trust  in  the  living  God.  How  many  can  bear  witness  that  He  has  made  that 
condition  comfortable  which  they  once  deemed  insupportable,  and  that  the  joy  of 
salvation  and  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  effectual  substitutes  for  every 
deficiency  in  creature  good  I 

2.  In  the  want  of  gracious  ordinances.  God  will  never  countenance  the  neglect 
of  the  means  of  grace  ;  but  He  will  make  up  for  the  want  of  them.  When  we 
cannot  follow  Him,  He  can  follow  us.  The  superstitious  should  remember  this  as 
well  as  the  afflicted.  He  can  meet  with  His  people  in  any  place,  and  wherever  He 
holds  communion  with  them  the  place  becomes  sacred. 

What  a  place,  then,  is  heaven  I  What  a  natural  world  must  that  be  where  there 
is  needed  no  light  of  t tie  sun  !     What  a  moral  world,  where  we  can  dispense  with 

I  lid 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  XI. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  LZEKIEIk 


Sabbaths,  with  preaching,  with  temples  I    Even  religion  will  cease  therei  and  onljr 
the  diBpositions  it  formed  and  the  state  to  which  it  led  remain. 

What  a  being,  then,  is  Qod  !  He  enables  us  to  live  a  life  of  dependence  apon 
Him  and  communion  with  Him.  No  want  but  He  can  relieve,  no  hope  but  He 
can  accomplish.  He  is  accessible  by  Christ.  Let  us  come  to  Him,  and  say,  '*  I 
am  continually  with  Thee/'  kc — {Jay^  abridged.) 


EXEGETIOAL  N0TES.-Ver8. 
22,  23.  With  the  promise  of  good 
to  the  exiled  Jews  the  vision  imme- 
diately draws  to  its  close.  The  cheru- 
bim and  their  associated  wheels  (chap, 
z.  16, 17)  underneath  the  divine  glory 
prepare  to  move  away.  '^And  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  rose  up  from  the 
midst  of  the  city:"  it  had  been  rest- 
ing at  the  gate  opening  to  the  city 
(chap.  X.  4)— considered  to  be  its 
central  point — now  it  will  leave  en- 
tirely the  temple  and  its  precincts,  as 
also  the  city,  ''and  make  a  stand 
over  the  mount,  which  is  to  the  east 
of  the  dty" — the  Mount  of  Olives, 
commanding  an  outlook  over  all  Jeru- 
salem. There  it  waited,  betokening 
that  the  city  was  no  longer  defended 
by  the  Lord— a  defence  was  no  more 
upon  all  the  glory — and  when  Ezekiel 
had  traced  thus  far  its  movements, 
he  felt  himself  withdrawn  from  any 
further  sight  of  it  "The  rabbis, 
commenting  on  this  passage,  said  that 
the  Shechinah  retired  eastward  to  the 
Mount  of  Olives,  and  there  for  three 
years  called  in  vain  to  the  people  with 
human  voice  that  they  should  repent** 
{Speaker's  Com.)  On  this  mount  Jesus 
wept,  and  predicted  the  second  over- 
throw of  Jerusalem  (see  zix.  21 ; 
Matt  xxiv.  8) ;  from  it  He  went  up 
into  heaven  (see  xxiv.  5 ;  Acts  i.  12) ; 
and  Zechariah  propiiesied  (chap.  xiv.  4) 
that  on  it  the  Lord  shall  stand  to  fig! it 
against  hostile  nations,  and  bring  bless- 
ings to  His  own.  What  Ezekiel  saw 
"  was  a  withdrawal  of  the  divine  glory, 
and  yet  a  continuance  of  it  in  the 
neighbourhood."  Jehovah's  external 
protection  and  blessing  may  have  been 
withdrawn,  but  still  the  invisible  power 
of  the  Spirit  will  remain  near  them, 
and  probably  manifest  itself  the  more 
gloriously  on  that  account  It  is 
Eiekiel  who  has  discerned,  set  forth, 
and  described  in  the  most  touching 
130 


manner  the  quickening  and  awaken- 
ing power  of  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  on 
the  whole  people  (see  xxxvii.)  In  a 
similar  way  Jesus,  in  whom  the  divine 
glory  resides  bodily,  withdraws  Him- 
self from  the  Jews  (John  viii.  21); 
but  His  standing  on  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  on  the  east  side  of  Jerusalem, 
is  a  sign  that,  though  invisible.  He  is 
still  near  to  bless  them  (Acts  iii  26). 
— Baumgarten, 

Vers.  24  and  25.  The  same  force 
which  had  rapt  the  seer  away  brings 
him  back  to  a  consciousness  of  the 
presence  of  the  elders  in  his  house  in 
Chaldea.  *' And  I  spake  to  the  exiles 
all  the  words  of  the  Lord  which  He 
had  made  me  see."  The  elders  did 
not  see  the  visionary  journey  on  which 
Ezekiel  had  been  t^^en ;  but  probably 
they  had  observed  an  *' astonished " 
appearance,  as  if  he  were  absent  in 
mind,  and  so  they  were  the  more  sus- 
ceptible to  the  report  he  gave  of  the 
revelation  in  a  vision,  not  of  his  own 
heart,  but  in  a  striking  degree  from 
Him  with  whom  all  words  are  acts. 
Ezekiel  had  been  called  to  be  a  prophet 
to  the  exiles  (chap.  ii.  5^,  urged  to  be 
an  instructor  as  to  rignt  and  wrong 
(iiu  17),  and  under  poignant  feelings 
had  taken  the  place  of  a  mediator 
(xi.  15).  These  several  positions  had 
been  defined  by  visions  of  a  glory  in- 
finitely surpassing  all  Levitical  sym- 
bols, and  which  assured  him  that  the 
Lord  was  not  confined  to  the  locality 
of  the  temple,  or  worshipped  only  by 
its  forms.  Thus,  though  he  could  not 
serve  as  priest  in  the  ritual  of  the 
temple  at  Jerusalem,  he  could  do  that 
which  was  more  than  an  equivalent ; 
he  could  be  the  medium  of  declaring 
to  the  banished  Jews  that  the  Holiest 
would  be  present  with  them ;  maintain 
intercourse  with  them  without  the  in- 
stituted sacrifices  and  offerings,  not- 
withstanding that  they  were  in  ^*the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMESTART:  EZMKIEL.  chap.  XL 

wOdemess  of  the  nations,"  and  were  as  to  accomplish  the  original  and  pro- 

sometimes  proud  and  reyiling,  some-  spective  vocation  of  Israel.   The  exiles, 

times  cast  down  and  despairing ;  and  however,  needed  much  teaching  before 

prepare  them  for  the  future  constitu-  they  could  be  fit  for  their  destiny,  and 

tion  of  their  life  as  a  community  in  in  that  teaching  the  fut-ther  prophesy- 

the  land  promised  to  their  fathers,  so  ing  of  Esekiel  will  hold  no  little  share. 

HOMILETICS. 
A  Depaeting  God  (vers.  22,  23). 

The  movement  of  the  appearance  which  Ezekiel  had  the  eyes  of  his  under- 
standing opened  to  see  signifies — 

L  nat  God  is  not  bound  to  any  place  or  form  of  worship,  ne  would 
remove  froui  the  sacred  city  to  the  idolatrous  Ghaldea;  from  the  prescribed 
forms  of  Levitical  service  to  the  free  forms  of  hearts  prompted  by  need.  Tliere 
is  no  land,  no  denomination,  no  single  church,  which  has  a  monopoly  of  His 
power  and  ^race.  He  may  have  dwelt  amongst  them  so  that  they  beheld  His 
glory ;  but  if  they  forsake  His  laws  they  forfeit  His  presence.  They  may  retain 
the  name  of  Christian,  keep  up  cathedrals  and  chapels,  use  prayer-book  and 
hymn-book,  acknowledge  articles,  confessions,  declarations,  and  the  glory  and 
power  have  gone  from  them  all ;  and,  alas  1  many  of  the  people  never  suspect 
that  so  it  is. 

U  That  He  does  not  remove  all  at  once.  He  may  go  with  His  power  and 
glory  to  another  land,  denomination,  church,  regarded  as  poor  and  despised,  but 
in  which  souls  humble  themselves  under  His  mighty  hanc^  and  spread  His  great 
goodness.  Yet  He  does  not  hastily  leave  the  scene  where  once  He  had  mani- 
fested Himself.  He  goes  to  the  threshold  before  going  out,  and  when  He  goes 
out.  He  does  not  go  out  of  sight  He  waits  near,  within  reach  of  a  cry,  if  so 
be  that  before  the  night  ialls,  which  results  from  His  departure,  men  may  call 
and  He  will  answer  them. 

When  Glod  has  departed,  formality,  temptation  to  go  into  deeper  darkness, 
reproach  to  His  name,  all  follow;  and  what  shall  the  end  of  these  things  be? 
^  Let  us  see  that  we  do  not,  by  a  careless  and  inconsistent  walk,  provoke  Him 
to  withdraw  His  invisible  and  spiritual  presence  from  us."  In  fear  of  such  a 
state  let  us  say— 

''Take  anything  Thou  wilt  away. 
But  go  not  Thoa  away  I " 

Setubniko  from  the  Presencb  (vers.  24,  25). 

^The  vision  that  I  had  seen  went  up  from  ma"  ^  Jacob  seeth  a  ladder 
reaching  up  to  heaven,  angels  ascending  and  descending,  and  the  Lord  at  the 
top  of  the  ladder,  but  this  was  only  for  a  night ;  Moses  saw  the  Lord  in  the 
burning  bush,  but  the  sight  lasted  not ;  Peter,  James,  and  John  saw  the  trans- 
figuration of  Christ,  but  the  vision  went  up  from  them."  They  who  strive  faith- 
fully to  follow  Jesus  come  into  seasons  of  a  clear  shining  of  His  face.  They 
may  not  have  gone  back  from  His  footprints,  they  may  not  have  lost  a  sense  of 
their  dependence  on  Him,  and  have  not  failed  to  recognise  His  abiding  near- 
ness; but  seasons  arrive  in  which  the  vapour  and  dust  hanging  over  their  daily 
pathway  thin  exceedingly.  More  vivid  is  their  consciousness  of  the  grace  and 
glory  and  truth  manifested  in  (Jod  in  Christ.  Fresh  hope,  joy,  peace,  vigour, 
enter;  they  realise  that  there  are  possibilities  of  insight  for  their  spiritual  life 
transcending  all  they  ask  or  think.  They  would  not  care  to  say,  "  My  willing 
soul  would  stay  in  such  a  frame  as  this,"  &a  They  do  wish  to  understand  the 
lessons  of  such  upliftings. 

131 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XI.  UOMILETIO  COMMBNTARY:  EZEKIEU 


I.  They  find  them  TariaUe.  The  visions  are  diverse.  Always  pervaded  hy 
Christ,  sometimes  one  of  His  aspecta,  sometimes  another,  is  most  impresdve,  yet 
His  glory  illuminates  one  and  alL 

They  are  transitory.  They  are  drinks  fiom  the  brook  in  the  way.  The 
sparkle  and  coolness  go,  transmuted  into  recruited  strength  and  hope.  We  may 
often  regret  that  such  experiences  pass  away.  Perhaps  we  charge  ourselvea 
with  a  fault  as  having  occasioned  their  disappearance.  But  that  may  be  an 
error.  For  our  hearts  are  not  framed  so  as  to  sustain  a  prolonged  unchanging 
feeling.  That  would  be  insanity.  We  must  calculate  on  "  frames  and  feelings  " 
reviving  and  decaying,  on  our  turning  from  communion  with  the  Father  and  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ  to  communing,  it  may  be,  with  elders  or  juniors,  with  fellow- 
sufferers  in  the  conflicts  of  life,  and  still,  through  all  our  moods,  have  our  feet 
set  upon  a  rock  and  our  goings  established. 

n.  They  find  they  have  furthered  insight.  ^'lu  Thy  light  we  see  light." 
The  sense  of  God  deepened  the  sense  of  sin.  The  chief  who,  in  days  before  Christy 
exclaimed,  '*  I  have  heard  of  Tliee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye 
seeth  Thee,  wherefore  I  abhor  myself; "  the  apostle  who,  in  the  presence  of  Christ, 
cried,  "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord ; "  the  seer  who,  in  days 
after  Christ,  fell  as  one  dead  at  the  feet  of  the  manifested  living  Lord,  are 
examples  of  the  effect  of  the  realised  presence  of  the  All  Holy  upon  the  heart 
of  mankind.  We  hear  then  what  we  had  not  expected  to  hear  about  evil  We 
see  then  the  irrefragable  penalty  inflicted  on  persistent  unrighteousness. 

The  sense  of  God  inspires  hope.  His  Word  declares  that  He  is  full  of  compas- 
sion and  gracious,  that  He  looks  to  the  man  who  is  of  a  poor  and  contrite  spirit 
and  trembles  at  His  word,  that  a  Deliverer  comes  from  Him  to  turn  from 
ungodliness,  and  that  after  we  have  suffered  for  a  while  we  shall  be  established, 
strengthened,  settled.  A  nearer  fellowship  with  the  Unseen  thus  affecting  us, 
we  come  away  lowlier  than  before,  but  more  confident  that  God  has  prepared 
things  unspeidcable  for  them  that  love  Him. 

in.  They  find  themselves  emboldened  to  act  for  CK>d.  Men  lifted  by  the 
Spirit  of  Qod  see  and  believe  in  His  thoughts  and  way&  Then,  when  their 
souls  are  irradiated  and  strent^thened,  they  are  enabled  to  tell  the  things  of 
death  and  life  without  fear  and  without  reserving  one  needed  truth.  Such  men 
will  never  be  feeble  servants  to  their  fellow-men.  The  kind  of  saplessness 
manifested  by  certain  professed  Christians,  and  which  has  given  force  to  the 
somewhat  cynical  term  ''  goodiness,"  rises  out  of  faulty  ways  of  hearing  the 
voice  of  the  Son  of  God.  Let  us  be  bold  for  the  truth  and  love  of  Jesus,  and 
we  shall  be  known  as  having  been  *'  with  Jesus."  If  truth  and  love  impel  us 
to  shatter  the  hopes  of  a  life,  to  fling  the  solemn  accusation,  *'  Thou  art  the  man," 
to  affirm,  when  the  storms  of  trial  are  beating  down  and  washing  over  the 
sailors  on  life's  heaving  sea,  that  there  is  nothing  to  fear,  noihing  really  evil 
where  Christ  manifests  Himself  to  be  with  us,  then  we  must  seek  grace  for  each 
diverse  duty  from  a  clearer  sight  of  the  glory  and  grace  of  the  Christ  of  GU>d. 
He  will  enable  us  for  whatever  ministry  He  calls  us  to,  we  shall  declare  all  that 
He  shows  to  us  for  others,  adding  nought,  subtracting  nought,  and  be  qualified 
by  His  presence  in  a  way  which  no  rules  and  no  resolutions  are  capable  of 
accomplishing. 

Let  Christians  be  ready  for  every  approach  of  the  Spirit  to  carry  them  to  a 
more  conscious  apprehension  of  ''  the  glory  of  Grod  in  the  face  of  Jesus ;  ^  then 
they  will  make,  and  only  then,  good  and  faithful  servants.  They  will  retnni 
from  His  presence  ''atrengthenea  with  all  might  in  the  inner  man," 


132 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OHAF.  ZIL 


2.  Fuller  Dbtails  relating  to  the  Sins  of  thb  People  and  thob 
Punishment  (Chaps,  xii-xix). 

Intercourse  with  their  countrymen  in  Jerusalem  deeply  affected  the  views 
and  hopes  of  the  exiled  Jews,  as  the  feelings  and  expectations  in  British 
colonies  are  affected  by  the  discussions  and  decisions  in  the  mother-country. 
The  kingdom  of  Judah  still  maintained  its  existence,  notwithstanding  the  pro- 
phetic threatcnings  of  Jeremiah.  That  gave  apparent  denial  to  his  dismal 
prediction,  and  a  bold,  defiant  attitude  was  assumed  respecting  them.  The 
captivity  took  the  cue  from  this,  and  the  vision  of  the  Holy  City,  its  abomina- 
tions and  departed  glory,  by  which  Ezekiel  had  intimated  to  his  hearers  the 
utter  ruin  of  the  Jewish  state,  found  no  belief  among  them.  The  training 
through  which  God  was  taking  them  required  that  this  state  of  mind  should 
be  mastered.  A  true  view  of  their  guilt  and  their  dependence  on  the  Law 
could  not  be  arrived  at  except  as  illusions  were  dissipated.  Ezekiel  is  therefore 
entrusted  with  further  messages,  both  for  Judah  and  the  captivity,  exposing 
the  fatuity  of  all  suppositions  that  the  calamity  denounced  could  be  averted. 
*'  The  prophet  is  inexhaustible  in  the  announcement  oF  this,  as  the  false  patriotism 
was  inexhaustible  in  its  announcements  of  salvation." — Eeng. 

(1.)  Symbol  and  Interpretation  of  thb  King's  Fuqht 
(Chap,  xii  1-16). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers. 
1-3.  Ezekiel  has  to  do  that  which 
must  excite  public  attention  at  Tel- 
Abib,  but  the  primary  application  of 
his  action  is  to  Jerusalem,  and  so 
secondarily  to  the  captives.  He  is  not 
to  scruple  to  carry  out  palpable  and 
strange  movements  or  to  refrain  from 
prophesying  as  he  has  done  before,  be- 
cause he  has  to  speak  to  a  people  who, 
■with  capacities  for  learning,  are  too  per- 
verse to  learn  (ver.  3).  **  Ajid  thou,  son 
of  man,  make  thee  utensils  of  capti- 
vity," a  phrase  found  in  Jer.  xlvi.  19 
(marginal  rendering),  and  there  and 
here  signifying  such  few  things  as  could 
be  taken  into  the  unfriendly  and  hard 
conditions  of  exile.  ''And  remove 
[as  a  captive]  by  day  before  their 
eyes.''  In  broad  daylight  he  was  to 
gather  his  articles  and  carry  them  out 
of  his  house,  thus  making  secure  of 
the  observation  of  his  neighbours. 
"And  thou  shalt  remove  [as  a  cap- 
tive] from  thy  place  to  another  place 
before  their  eyes,  perhaps  they  will 
see,"  but  it  is  not  likely:  their  dis- 
position evokes  the  refrain,  *'for  they 
are  an  house  of  rebelliousness." 

Vers.  4-6.  Though  the  articles  were 
brought  out,  they  were  left  while  day- 
light lasted.    At  its  departure,   but 


before  total  darkness  came  on,  Ezekiel 
was  to  act  again;  "and  thou  shalt 
go  forth  in  the  evening  before  their 
eyes;"  in  some  way  which  would 
clearly  appear  to  be  that  of  a  captive, 
'*as  the  goings  forth  of  a  captivity." 
He  was  to  proceed  furtively,  white 
they  were  looking  on.  "  Before  their 
eyes  dig  through  the  wall,  and  go 
forth  by  it" — by  the  opening  thus 
made  (ver.  6).  In  full  view  of  the 
people,  "upon  thy  shoulder  shalt 
thou  lift;"  but  by  the  time  he  had 
digged  through  night  had  fallen,  such 
as  fell  over  Abram  (G^en.  xv.  17,  ct  12), 
and  so  <'in  the  darkness  thou  shalt 
go  forth ;  thy  face  thou  shalt  cover," 
as  one  who  does  not  wish  to  be  recog- 
nised, "  and  not  see  the  earth."  These 
proceedings  were  intended  to  repre- 
sent very  ominous  incidents,  "for  a 
wonder-sign  I  give  thee  to  the  house  of 
Israel."  There  was  nothing  in  Ezekiel's 
own  surroundings  which  required  this 
course  of  action,  but  it  was  typical  of 
the  fate  of  King  Zedekiah.  As  yet  pros- 
perousy  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
rashly  assumed  that  his  kingdom  would 
continue;  but  events  were  preparing 
which  would  prove  the  utter  futility 
of  trusting  such  a  shaken  reed. 

Vers.   7-16.      Ezekiel   fulfilled  his 
133 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xn. 


EOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


inBtractions  to  the  letter,  and  on  the 
following  morning  received,  in  plain 
terms,  an  explanation  of  what  he  had 
been  doing.  He  was  thus  put  in  a 
position  to  answer  the  curiosity  of  the 
people  as  to  what  was  meant,  and  with 
painful  distinctness  describes  the  dis- 
asters which  were  to  befall  the  realm 
(ver.  10).  "  Say  thon  nnto  them,  The 
prince  is  this  lifting  up  in  Jemsalem," 
i«.,  this  taking  up  on  my  shoulder  is 
a  lesson,  the  prophetic  burden  which 
refers  to  him  who  occupies  the  throne 
in  Jerusalem — he  must  remove  as  a 
captive.  It  refers  also  "to  all  the 
honae  of  Israel  that  are  among  them ; " 
both  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  and 
the  members  of  tiie  ten  tribes  who 
have  joined  themselves  to  their  breth- 
ren the  Jews  will  be  involved  in 
the  same  calamity.  By  this  sign  also 
the  exiled  were  informed  that  if  they 
were  envious  of  the  lot  of  those  who 
still  remained  in  Judea  that  was  a 
groundless  feeling,  because  the  latter 
also  would  suffer  exile  (ver.  13). 
Further  details  than  those  found  in 
the  symbolic  action  are  given.  "And 
I  spread  my  net  over  him ;  ^  the  Lord 
will,  by  means  of  the  Chaldean  army, 
catch  the  prince  in  meshes,  and  his 
escape  will  be  prevented ;  "  And  I 
-will  bring  him  to  Babylon,  to  the 
land  of  the  Ohaldeans;"  yet,  in  a 
manner  which  the  event  alone  can 
explain,  "he  shall  not  see  it  though 
he  shall  die  there ''  (2  Rings  xxr.  1-7, 
and  Jer.  lil  1-11).  Ver.  14.  All  his 
friends,  all  his  forces,  "I  will  scatter 
toward  every  wind  of  heaven,  and  a 
sword  I  draw  out  after  them."  They 
would  not  all  perish ;  "  I  leave  over  of 
them  men  of  number,"  men  who  can 
be  easily  counted ;  and  it  is  done  to 
this  end,  "that  they  may  declare  all 
their  abominations  among  the  heathen 
among  whom  they  come;"  their  recitals 


would  explain  that  it  was  not  weak- 
ness on  the  part  of  the  God  of  Israel 
which  had  occasioned  the  distress  and 
subjection  of  His  people,  but  their 
offences  against  His  holy  laws.  His 
unfaltering  purpose  is  that  "they 
know  that  I  am  the  Lord.''  Human 
foresight  might  have  si^ified  that 
the  king  and  people  of  Jerusalem 
would  be  mastered  by  the  Chaldeans, 
but  that  the  king  should  flee  from  the 
city  by  night,  be  caught  in' his  attempt, 
be  taken  to  Babylon  after  his  eyes 
had  been  put  out,  could  not  have  been 
forecast  by  any  mere  human  intelli- 
gence, except  as  the  intelligence  was 
enlightened  by  the  God  who  seeth  all 
events  that  are  to  come. 

Joseph  us  {Antiq,  x.  7)  reports  that 
an  account  of  this  prophetic  action  and 
its  explanation  was  sent  to  Zcdekiah, 
but  that  he,  on  comparing  it  with  the 
danger  which  Jeremiah  had  warned 
him  of,  found  that  the  latter  said  that 
he  should  be  carried  to  Babylon,  while 
Ezekiel  said  that  he  should  not  see  it. 
The  discrepancy  was  so  glaring  in  the 
king's  view  that  he  concluded,  not 
that  one  was  right  and  the  other  wrong, 
but  that  both  were  false !  "  In  this 
he  but  showed  the  captious  disposition 
of  superficial  inquirers  and  shallow 
unbelievers  of  all  ages,  who  no  sooner 
discover  some  obvious  diflSculties  on 
the  surface  of  Revelation  than  they 
conclude  the  whole  to  be  a  cunningly 
devised  fable,  or  treat  it  as  unworthy 
of  their  serious  consideration.  Would 
they  but  search  a  little  deeper,  and 
survey,  in  a  spirit  of  impartiality,  the 
entire  field  of  Revelation,  they  would 
find  that  the  things  which  at  first 
stagger  their  belief  disappear  on  closer 
inspection,  or  remain  only  as  difficul- 
ties inseparable  from  communications 
which  bear  respect  to  the  character 
and  purposes  of  Godhead.* — Fakhairn. 


HOMILETICS. 

Some  Abpbots  ukdeb  which  Ood  Ck^MiciXNicATEs  with  Men 

(vers.  1-16). 

Taking  for  granted — that  which  both  human  history  and  experience  bear 
witness  to— not  only  that  God  is  able  to  communicate  with  man,  but  also  that 
184 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  CBkT,  XH. 

man  is  capable  of  receiving  His  commonications^  we  are  presented  here  with 
certain  features  of  that  process. 

L  It  is  carried  on  with  a  dear  view  of  all  hninaa  tonditions.  It  could 
not  be  otherwise,  because  He  is  God  and  not  man.  He  has  respect  (1.)  to  ail 
with  whom  He  may  enter  into  communication.  The  king  is  not  too  exalted  for  His 
message ;  nor  are  the  princes.  Soldiers  are  open  to  Him  and  every  member 
of  a  quiet  habitation.  It  can  be  sai<l,  "  I  am  poor  and  needy,  yet  the  Lord 
thinketh  upon  me."  (2.)  To  their  preparedness  for  His  eommunioations.  They 
have  faculties  to  apprehend  all  truth  that  He  may  impart.  Ejes  have  tiiey  to 
see,  and  ears  have  they  to  hear,  and  He  wants  to  bring  the  faculties  for  seeing 
and  hearing  into  use.  He  well  knows  that  eyes  may  be  used  for  selfish  interests, 
and  not  for  the  things  that  are  unseen  and  eternal ,  that  ears  hear  the  entice- 
ments of  the  flesh  and  lies  of  deceiving  prophets,  but  do  not  listen  to  the  just 
and  holy  and  good  commandment,  giving  knowledge  of  sin  and  need  of  the 
righteousness  of  Qod  by  faith  in  Ciirist  Jesus.  Thus  He  estimates  the  power 
of  all  forces  that  are  favourable  or  opposed  to  His  aims.  ^3.)  To  the  possibility 
of  mastering  men^s  indisposition.  Whatever  may  be  the  blindness  or  deafness 
exhibited  in  regard  to  the  wisdom  and  truth  and  love  of  God's  words,  Ho 
still  acts  in  hope  of  a  change.  "  It  may  be  they  will  consider  though  they  be 
a  rebellious  house."  His  graciousness  is  a  perennial  spring  for  parched  and 
hardened  hearts.  In  New  Testament  as  in  Old  Testament  times,  with  us  as 
with  the  Jews,  He  is  "long  suffering,  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  but  that 
all  should  come  to  repentance."  The  Israelites  of  Ezekiel's  day  are  illustrations 
of  what  the  Word  of  the  Lord  encounters  in  most  of  tiiose  to  whom  it  is  sent ; 
they  are  its  hearers  but  not  its  doers,  and  punishment  is  impending  over  thenu 
The  Lord's  treatment  of  them  is  a  type  of  His  riches  of  mercy,  which  leaves  no 
means  untried,  and  would  hope  against  hope.  "The  mirror  of  human  per- 
versity is  at  the  same  time  the  mirror  of  divine  grace." 

XL  It  proceeds  by  stages.  (1.)  They  are  vaned  in  appearance.  Actions  are 
alone  at  one  time;  at  another  they  are  fallowed  by  words.  Common  and 
uncommon  things  are  summoned  in  order  to  impress  His  thoughts  and  ways. 
It  would  be  quite  unfair  to  argue  from  these  grotesque  proceedings  of  Ezckiel, 
that  any  methods,  however  outlandish,  may  be  pursued  in  order  to  secure 
men's  attention  to  spiritual  facts.  The  method  should  be  such  as  will  impress  a 
truth,  not  such  as  may  excite  little  else  but  wonder  or  amusement  or  sympathy. 
Under  such  a  restriction  and  by  the  pressure  of  divine  leading,  symbolical 
actions  may  first  be  used,  and  instruction  follow  after  them ;  but  it  ought  ever 
to  be  realised  that  no  action,  even  though  it  may  be  apparently  impressive,  is 
of  any  worth  in  God's  judgment  unless  it  end  in  making  men  know  that  He  is 
Lord.  (2:)  Constant  in  progress.  So  it  seems  to  us,  and  so  it  is,  only  we  some- 
times conclude  that  God  is  in  a  hurry  when  He  is  not.  The  8ufl<ering  which 
looks  as  if  it  had  burst  suddenly  upon  a  people  or  an  individual  is  the  result 
of  preceding  events  which  may  have  been  occurring  through  some,  it  may 
be  many,  years.  The  destruction  of  the  plain  of  Sodom  in  a  morning  was 
phy«ically  the  outcome  of  material  forces  which  had  been  long  in  gathering 
and  pent  up,  and  was,  morally,  the  final  consequence  of  lengthened  and  high- 
handed wickedness.  This  incident  in  Ezekiel's  history  shows  how  God  lets 
the  minds  of  prophet  and  people  simmer  till  morning  over  the  odd  conduct 
of  the  prophet  on  the  tlay  and  night  before.  Then  He  explained  what  was 
in  prospect;  but  the  event,  which  the  action  refened  to,  was  not  brought  to 
pass  till  about  six  years  had  gone  away.  Gk>d  gives  line  upon  line,  precept 
upon  precept,  before  the  guilty  fall  backward  and  are  broken  and  are  snared 
and  taken.  The  apostle  who  "  ceased  not  to  warn  every  one  night  and  day 
with  tears  "  was  a  pupil  of  God,  who  is  full  of  compassion.  Does  His  goodness 
and  forbearance  lead  us  to  repentance!     Have  we  the  love  which  suffers  long 

135 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XII.  HOMILETIO  OOMMENTA  R  Y :  EZEKIEL. 


and  is  kind  1  (2.^  Cvlminating  m  aebwwledgmeni  of  Him,  As  Ruler  over  all  He 
makes  the  end  of  His  revelations  of  Himself  to  be  that  ''  all  should  know  the 
Lord,  from  the  least  to  the  greatest."  He  has  the  right  to  supreme  homage,  and 
He  will  arrange  to  spare  some  of  those  who  have  felt  the  consequences  of  with- 
holding that  homage,  so  that  they  shall  speak  of  what  He  has  done.  Tliey  will 
make  known  His  deeds  among  the  people,  and  the  heathen  shall  fear  His  great 
and  terrible  name.  Thus  shall  His  way  be  known  upon  earth ;  His  saving 
health  among  all  nations. 

The  Time  of  GtOd's  Cobimunioation  is  Worthy  to  be  Noted 

(ver.  8). 

L  Because  the  coming  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord  to  us  is  an  important  orent 
in  our  history.  (1.)  Sometimes  it  produces  terror  and  conviction  of  evil.  Moses  on 
Sinai,  Job  under  the  whirlwind,  Saul  near  to  Damascus.  We  are  to  be  brought 
to  see  our  need.  (2.^  Sometimes  U  is  attractive  and  tender.  As  to  Samuel  when 
a  youth,  and  to  Lydia  when  Paul  preached.  (3.)  Sometimes  it  is  for  consolation,. 
Ajb  the  still  small  voice  to  Elijah  when  he  was  cast  down,  with  its,  ^*  What  doest 
thou  here,  Elijah  1"  And  as  Christ  came  to  the  disciples  on  the  lake  with 
His,  *'  It  is  I."  ^4.)  Sometimes  to  unfold  and  urge  to  duty.  As  to  Ezekiel  here, 
and  as  to  Paul  when  he  was  praying  in  the  temple  in  a  trance. 

n.  Because  it  cornea  at  a  noticeable  season.  *<In  the  morning."  God 
regards  the  time  we  hav  Wen  under  His  teachings,  what  our  attitude  to  Him 
has  been,  and  how  we  have  profited,  or  the  reverse.  "  Have  I  been  so  long 
time  wiih  you,  and  yet  hast  thou  not  known  me?"  (1.)  The  woi'd  may  come  in 
the  morning,  literally.  Give  God  your  first  thoughts,  meditate  early  on  His 
ways ;  "  My  voice  shalt  thou  hear  in  the  morning,  0  Lord,"  and  let  us  say,  "I 
will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak.**  (2.)  In  tJte  period  of  youth.  Samuel, 
Josiah,  Timothy.  Gh>od  to  begin  well,  in  hope  of  ending  well  "  Wilt  Thou  not 
cry  unto  me,  My  Father,  Thou  art  the  guide  of  my  youth  ? "  (3.)  After  a  period 
of  anxiety  and  suffering.  **  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometu  in 
the  morning."  Martha  said  to  Mary,  "The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth  for 
thee."  '*  Pay  thy  vows.*'  **  Arise,  go  to  Bethel,  and  make  there  an  altar  unto 
God,  that  appeared  to  thee  when  thou  fleddest  from  the  face  of  Esau  thy 
brother." 

Let  us  look  for  the  day  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of 
GU>d  and  come  forth  from  their  graves. 


(2.)  The  Symbol  from  Brbaj)  and  Water  (vers.  17-20). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  pro-  tants  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  country  of 

phet  is  commanded  to  take  his  ordi-  Israel ; ''  a  message  is  to  be  forwarded 

nary   meals   as   a   man    under    great  to  the  people  who  liad  not  been  carried 

apprehensions.     It  is  not,  as  in  chap,  into  captivity,  to   declare   that   they 

iv.    16,  that   he   is   thus   to   indicate  should   be  affected  with  anxiety  and 

a  dreadful  scarcity   approaching,   but  surprise, ''because  its  land,"  i«.,  feru- 

rather  the  felt  pressure  of  that  cala-  salenis,  ''becomes  desolate  ftfm  its 

mity,  as  if  the  evil  threatened  would  ftdness ;  **   where  once  were  life  and 

take  away  all  relish  for  sustenance  to  plenty,     the    supply    of    population, 

the  body  (ver.  18).     Ezekiel  speaks  in  animals,  grain,   &c,  would  be  griev- 

the  Word  of  the  Lord  *'  of  the  inhabi-  oosly  and  surprisingly  diminished. 
136 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMlLSTW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.  chap.  xn. 


HOMILETiaS. 
(Vers.  17-20.) 

When  ihe  evil  consequences  of  sins  have  to  be  encountered  then  there  may 
be  trouble. 

I.  On  men.  1.  An  apparently  foolish  course  may  be  appointed  by  the  Lord, 
but  ''the  foolishness  of  God  is  wiser  than  men."  2.  Hard  service  may  have  to 
be  undertaken  for  the  gracious  Master,  but  '*  most  gladly  will  I  glory  in  infir- 
mities if  the  power  of  Christ  rest  upon  me." 

U  On  the  necessaries  of  life.  Supplies  for  the  body  may  become  not  sources 
of  comfort  but  of  suffering.  Food  and  drink  shall  cause  a  strain  and  pain.  The 
bread  be  bread  of  affliction. 

nL  On  population,  agriculture,  commerce.  Depression  and  decrease  ensue. 
A  nation  no  more  than  an  individual  can  escape  from  the  due  reward  of  its 
deeds. 

(3.)  The  Foolish  Proverb  (vers.  21-28). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  utterly  dislodge  the  former,  "Por  I, 
hearts  of  the  Jerusalem  people  would  the  Lord,  will  speak  whatever  word 
evade  any  fair  application  of  the  omin-  I  will  speak,  and  it  shall  come  to 
ous  action  of  Ezekiel,  and  he  is  in-  pass,"  not  in  some  far-off  future,  but 
cited  to  aim  a  blow  at  the  evasion,  "in  your  days,  0  house  of  rebellion.'' 
which  took  form  in  a  proverbial  say-  On  the  generation  of  his  contempo- 
ing,  ver.  22,  *'  The  days  are  prolonged,  raries  would  come  both  the  earlier 
and  every  vision  perisheth,"  time  is  and  the  later  effects  which  had  been 
going  by,  and  not  one  forecast  of  good  declared  certain, 
or  evil  has  come  to  pass ;  it  has  been  Vers.  26-28.  An  emphatic  assertion 
a  deluding  of  u&  Ver.  23.  Against  of  the  impending  accomplishment  of 
this  sentiment  the  communication  from  Ezekiel's  own  prophetic  utterances  is 
the  Lord  is,  ''The  days  are  near,  and  made  against  the  temporising  of  '^the 
the  word  of  every  vision,''  the  passing  house  of  Israel,  who  say  the  vision 
days  are  inevitably  bringing  on  the  that  he  seeth  is  for  many  dajrs,  and 
speedy  fulfilment  of  every  word  folded  for  far  off  times  he  prophesieth." 
in  the  imagery  which  has  been  per-  They  believed  his  words  would  come 
ceived  by  the  spiritual  vision  of  the  true,  but  not  in  their  experience  at 
prophets.  Ver.  25.  Over  against  the  any  rate.  To  meet  that  idea  of  post- 
merely  human  prophecies,  which  had  ponement  the  Lord  said,  "  None  of  my 
largely  contributed  to  the  formation  words  shall  he  delayed  any  more; 
of  the  condemned  proverb,  the  divine  whatever  word  I  shall  speak,  it  shall 
truthfulness  would  be  manifested,  and  come  to  pass." 

HOMILETICa. 

Men's  Evasion  of  the  Divine  Interference  ik  EvENra 

Qod  does  not  only  begin.  He  goes  along  with  the  whole  development  of  the 
world's  history.  He  can  foretell  any  portion  of  that  history.  By  special  com- 
munication or  general  providence  He  proves  that  all  its  "  <;overnment  is  upon 
His  shoulders ;  **  that  "He  sitteth  on  the  throne  judging  right,*'  and  working  so 
that  men  should  cease  to  do  evil  and  learn  to  do  well  There  is  that  in  human 
nature  which  reaches  a  point  at  which  it  resiles  from  the  idea  of  this  imman- 
ence, where  it  finds  the  absolute  rights  of  Ood  unwelcome  to  itself.  In  this 
state  we  observe — 

187 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  Zfl.  UOMILL TIC  COMMENT AR  Y .  EZEKIEL, 

l  The  power  exerted  by  what  is  visible.  ''Prophets  and  preachers  are 
men  like  yourselves.  Why  should  you  yield  up  your  souls  that  they  may  ride 
over  them  with  what  they  assert  are  messai^es  from  an  invisible  mighty  Being? 
What  palpable  proofs  can  they  give  that  He  communicates  with  them,  though 
He  never  does  with  you  1  You  might  accept  their  statements  did  you  see  any 
clear  fulfilment  of  the  threats  of  punishment  which  they  plentifully  cast  forth ; 
but  in  failure  of  such  evidence  you  have  reason  to  make  light  of  the  claims 
which  they  advance  for  the  recognition  of  the  truth  of  what  they  say."  How 
shall  these  diflSculties  be  overcome?  "Let  what  is  righteous  and  true  and  holy 
and  good  get  an  honest  hearing  in  your  consciences.  Let  the  operation  of  prin- 
ciples, which  is  so  much  more  slow  to  become  obvious  than  the  operation  of  the 
physical  forces,  have  due  time  accorded ;  }  ou  will  be  brought  to  see  that  your 
craving  for  what  is  sensible  is  a  depreciation  of  that  nobler  part  of  your  nature 
which  feels  after  higher  things  than  it  sees.  You  may  be  convinced  if  what  is 
spiritual  commends  itself  by  its  close  adherence  to  rectitude,  you  are  wrong  in 
ignoring  or  postponing  its  indications."  How  many  hearers  of  the  Word  of  God 
will  not  accept  tiesus  Christ  as  Lord,  because  they  expect  some  more  palpable 
influences  to  be  brought  into  action  !  Do  not  portions  of  modem  society  indi- 
cate doubt  and  even  aversion  to  the  demands  of  the  Bible,  because  they  do  not 
place  themselves  in  the  light  of  what  is  sinless  and  just  and  unbending  to 
worldly  pleasures?  Thus  space  given  for  repentance  is  too  often  turned  into 
space  for  hardening  the  heart  against  the  Unseen  and  Eternal. 

n.  Doubts  of  the  efficiency  of  Ck)d.  They  may  acknowledge  Him  as  Maker 
of  the  undeveloped  world,  but  decline  to  acknowledge  the  signs  that  He  is  act- 
ing in  it  now.  They  see  force  of  one  kind  or  other,  and  as  these  forces  always 
act  in  uniform  lines,  what  place  is  there  for  a  holy  will  behind  and  before  and 
upon  men  in  every  event  ?  So  the  thought  is,  There  is  no  God  in  the  common 
acceptation  of  the  term.  There  may  be  a  power  that  is  unique,  but  it  does  not 
interfere  in  human  affairs  as  prophets  and  preachers  maintain.  There  is  no 
reality  expressed  by  the  words,  The  God  of  Abraham  and  of  Israel,  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  Church.  Is  it  forgotten  by  such  thinkers  that  the  nature  of 
God  must  be  expressed  in  words  and  acts  corresponding  to  itself;  that  He  must 
abide  and  must  operate  age  after  age ;  that  whatever  be  the  superficial  sameness 
of  society  and  slumbering  of  retributions,  He  has  not  forgotten  the  work  of  His 
hands?    "I  say  the  word  and  will  perform  it." 

HL  Discredit  cast  upon  personal  application  of  divine  messages.  In  this 
class  it  is  not  said.  There  is  no  prospect  of  the  evil  threatened  ever  coming  near ; 
but  rather,  There  is  no  likelihood  of  it  touching  us.  **  When  the  ovei^owing 
scourge  shall  pass  through,  it  shall  not  come  nigh  unto  us."  Men  who  have 
committed  iniquity  for  years  do  so  with  impunity,  nations  which  have  been 
selfish  and  oppressive,  have  not  been  subjected  to  penalties,  notwithstanding 
what  men  speaking  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  say.  We  may  believe  that  not  in 
our  days  are  their  words  to  be  practically  illustrated.  Thus  is  produced  a  feeling 
of  security,  if  not  of  unbelief.  The  heart  is  set  towards  putting  far  off  the  evil 
day.  It  is  a  token  of  deepest  immersion  in  spiritual  darkness  when  men  take 
the  apparent  absence  of  a  frowning  face  as  proof  that  God's  servants  are  not 
justified  in  saying  that  it  is  there.  It  would  be  seen  if  darkness  did  not  blind  the 
eyes.  The  feeling  is  toidespread.  The  darkness  covered  the  mass  of  Israel.  It 
affects  and  will  affect  multitudes  in  these  later  days.  "  When  the  Son  of  Man 
Cometh,  shall  He  find  faith  on  the  earth?"  What  need  to  question  all  our 
spiritual  security  to  see  whether  it  results  from  trust  in  God,  or  from  a  vague 
idea  that  we  shall  escape  portending  ill,  that  if  others  are  to  bo  sufferers  for  sin 
we  shall  not  be ! 

1,  Common  sayings  are  not  always  true  sayings.  They  may  pass  current 
in  houses,  shops,  meetings,  but  when  they  have  to  stand  a  cross-examination 
13S 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTART:  SZEKTEL. 


CHAP.  xin. 


how  many  utterly  break  down  and  show  themselves  to  be  bubbles — baseless  and 
boUow. 

2.  Gkd's  sayings  are  certain.  He  has  spoken  them  in  the  constitution  of 
man  and  that  of  the  world,  as  well  as  also  by  holy  men  commissioned  to  declare 
His  will.  However  prolonged  the  working  out  of  His  institutes  be,  they  must 
develop  fully  and  finally.  He  has  eternity  to  act  in.  See  that  faith  is  placed 
in  Christ  Jesus,  who  gives  insight  of  the  thoughts  and  ways — ^the  love  and  the 
wrath  of  God  the  Holy  and  True.  We  receive  "a  kingdom  that  cannot  be 
moved,  and  serve  God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly  fear." 

8.  The  preference  of  man's  sayings  may  hasten  the  manifestation  of  the  truth 
of  God's  sayings.  The  boldness  and  mockery  of  deniers  of  God's  claims  may 
make  Him  to  become  a  swift  witness  for  His  veracity  and  against  men's  despisal 
of  it.  Men  who  taunt  Him  to  *'  make  speed,  hasten  His  word  that  we  may  see 
it,"  may  find,  in  the  midst  of  sorrows,  that  tliey  have  brought  upon  themselves 
swift  destruction.  Bepentance  may  prevent  judgment ;  hardening  of  heart  aggra- 
vates and  expedites  it.  In  the  Lord  alone  is  there  sufficient  to  assure  us  that  He 
will  not  forget,  delay,  change. 


(4.)  Of  False  Pbophets  and  Prophetesses  (Chap.  ziiL) 
Cmdemnation  of  the  Prophets  (vers.  1-16). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  de- 
claration in  zii.  34  was  that  unsub- 
stantiated and  delusive  prophecy 
should  cease  by  the  fulfilment  of  the 
true,  and  in  this  chapter  a  description 
and  denunciation  of  the  former  are 
given.  The  men  and  women  who  had 
taken  upon  themselves  to  announce 
"salvation  without  repentance,  grace 
without  judgment,"  were  found  both 
in  Judea  and  among  the  captive  Jews. 
The  utterance  of  Ezekiel  is  akin  to 
that  of  Jeremiah  (chap.  xxiiL).  Both 
indicate  that  the  wishes  of  the  people 
framed  a  mould  for  conclusions  as  to 
the  will  of  the  Lord.  They  made  the 
prophets  they  believed  in. 

Vers.  1-7  describe  the  characteristics 
of  the  unauthorised  prophets.  Ver.  2. 
Ezekiel  is  enjoined  to  prophecy  "to 
the  prophets  of  Israel;"  they  had 
popular  sympathy  and  acceptance. 
The  spirit  of  the  age  approved  of 
them,  although  they  were  '' prophets 
out  of  their  own  hearts.''  They 
might  sincerely  hold  what  they  said 
as  true,  but  their  words  were  nothing 
except  the  products  of  their  imagina- 
tions; anything  but  the  communica- 
tions of  G^.  "  Hear  the  word  of  the 
Lord."  That  which  they  had  not 
within  they  shall  obtain  from  with- 
'  out,   and   to  their  shame.      If  false 


representations  of  Gted  are  powerful 
He  will  raise  up  a  standard  against 
them. 

Ver.  3.  They  are  threatened.  "  Woe 
to  the  prophets,  fools,"  not  merely  in 
going  where  they  were  not  sent,  but 
actually  godless  men  (Ps.  xiv.  1),  and 
consequently  ''who  walk  after  their 
own  spirit,  and  that  which  they  have 
not  seen."  Not  by  the  insight  which 
the  Lord  gives  (Rev.  i.  2,  11,  &a)  A 
twofold  aspect  of  a  revelation  of  God 
is  presented.  Its  siartingpoini.  It 
begins  in  an  impression  made  on  a 
man's  spirit,  and  is  not  originated  by 
his  own  thoughts  and  fancies.  Its 
goal.  The  statement  of  truth  accor- 
dant with  God's  justice  and  love. 
The  light  of  the  face  of  God,  not  the 
man's  inner  light,  is  to  satisfy  the  calls 
for  guidance  in  right  thoughts  and 
ways.  Christ,  and  not  humanity,  must 
be  our  test  of  truth. 

Ver.  4.  ''As  foxes  among  ruins  thy 
prophets,  0  Israel,  are."  Deserted 
places  are  a  favourite  resort  of  foxes. 
"Because  of  the  mountain  of  Zion 
which  is  desolate,  the  foxes  walk 
upon  it"  (Lam.  v.  18).  And  those 
who  were  counted  messengers  of  the 
Lord  found  their  sphere  of  profit  in 
the  omens  of  the  desolation  of  Jeru- 


salem. 


139 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  xm. 


irOMlLETlC  COMMESTAKY:  EZEKTBL 


Yer.  6,  Israel  by  sins  had  become 
exposed  to  the  assaults  of  divine 
penalties;  but  its  fayoured  prophets 
nad  acted  like  unpatriotic  cowards  in 
the  crisis  of  danger.  ''Ye  have  not 
gone  up  into  the  breaches,  nor  made 
up  a  wall  about  the  house  of  Israel  to 
stand  in  the  battle  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord."  The  moral  and  spiritual  evils 
of  the  people  were  as  gaps  in  the  wall 
of  Jerusalem;  but  the  prophets  had 
done  nothing  by  reproof  and  personal 
conduct  to  urge  to  repentance  and  re- 
formation. They  had  nothing  of  that 
self-humiliation  and  intercession  for  the 
guilty  which  was  manifested  by  Abra- 
ham (Gen.  xviii.  23-33),  Moses  (Ex. 
xxxii.  11-13),  Paul  (Rom.  ix  3). 

Yer.  6.  All  pseudo-prophets  might 
not  be  deceiving,  but  though  "the 
Lord  had  not  sent  them,"  yet  "they 
hoped  to  establish  the  word,*'  ie.,  they 
tried  to  persuade  the  people  that  the 
unsupported  promises  made  to  them 
would  be  fully  realised,  with  this 
result  alone,  that  the  falsity  would 
be  all  the  more  painfully  brought 
home. 

Yers.  8-16.  Announce  the  conse- 
quences of  prophesying  without  divine 
impulse.  Yer.  8  states  that  the  Lord 
is  against  the  prophets;  and  ver.  9 
intimates  three  calamities  which  shall 
befall  them  in  relation  to  the  new 
theocratic  regime.  They  shall  neither 
be  numbered  "in  the  council  of  my 
people,**  they  will  not  be  members  of 
the  influential  and  ruling  circle;  nor 
"be  written  in  the  re^ster  of  the 
house  of  Israel,"  they  will  not  be 
struck  out  of  that  roll  which  has  given 


them  a  name  and  place  amone  the 
citizens  of  Israel,  but  they  wiU  not 
be  entered  into  the  roll  of  the  Israel 
which  shall  arise  from  the  faithful 
remnant;  and  the  portion  which  is  in 
exile  "shall  not  come  into  the  land 
of  Israel"  (ver.  10).  The  erring  pro- 
phets )iad  brought  condemnation  upon 
themselves,  and  produced  such  a  state 
that  "it,"  the  people,  "built  a  waU, 
and  behold,  they,"  the  prophets,  "coat 
it  with  plaster"  (or  wkUetoash^  Fair., 
who  refei-s  to  Paul's  indip^ant  charge 
on  the  high  priest,  "Thou  whited 
wall!"  Acts  xxiii.  3);  ministering 
to  the  deceptive  hopes  of  the  people 
instead  of  exposing  their  worthlessness. 
The  deluding  of  the  prophets  would 
not  last  (ver.  11).  "It,"  the  wall, 
daubed  "with  whited  plaster,  shall 
fell"  by  means  of  agencies  controlled 
by  God  the  Lord :  the  "rain,"  "hail- 
stones," and  "storm,"  which  should 
be  launched  against  it.  Ver.  14  applies 
the  figure  to  the  reality,  and  threatens 
the  destruction  of  those  who  believed 
a  lie.  "  I  cast  it  to  the  ground,  and  its 
foundation  is  laid  bare  and  it  falls, 
and  ye  are  consumed  in  the  nddst 
of  it,"  i.«.  of  Jerusalem  (coinp.  Matt 
vil  24-27).  Yer.  15.  Both  deceived 
and  deceivers  would  be  overwhelmed : 
"And  I  will  say  unto  you,  The  wall 
is  not,  and  they  who  coated  it  are 
not"  Yer.  16.  Ezekiel  rounds  off  this 
portion  of  his  utterance  with  a  thrust 
at  "the  prophets  of  Israel"  who 
affirmed  that  they  saw  "a  vision  of 
peace  for  her,"  Jerusalem,  "and  there 
is  no  peace." 


ffOMIZETIGS. 
MiSLEADiKO  Hopes  of  Fbxedom  fbom  Futube  Evil& 

The  Jews  entertained  delusive  hopes  regarding  the  future  welfare  of  their 
city  and  land,  and  observation  proves  that,  where  the  Gospel  is  preached  in 
town  or  country,  many  hearers  indulge  in  ungrounded  trust  as  to  their  escape 
from  the  judgment  of  God  against  their  doings.  The  reasons  which  are  at 
work  to  produce  this  mistake  are  similar  in  the  present  age  to  those  which 
operated  in  the  past     They  are — 

I.  Slighting  notions  as  to  the  evil  of  sin.  People  may  neglect  to  follow  a 
prescribed  course  of  obedience,  or  may  openly  take  the  course  which  cuts  across 
it;  but  they  are  not  humbled  for  so  doing.  They  make  up  excuses.  "I  am 
140 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMBNTAnr :  EZEKIEL  chap,  tol 

not  like  this  pablican."  **I  have  a  good  heart"  "I  have  not  done  things 
worthy  to  suffer  destraction,''  At  the  base  of  all  wrong  thoaghts,  at  the  base 
of  all  erroneous  teachings  as  to  man's  position  before  God,  lies  a  misconception 
of  the  guilt  of  secret  or  presumptuous  sins.  All  unrighteousness  is  sin  and  a 
gap  through  which  unknown  penalty  rushes  on  the  guilty. 

n.  Listening  to  one's  own  wishes.  We  do  not  wish  to  count  ourselves 
really  "miserable  sinners/'  or  to  look  at  the  signs  which  show  that  we  are 
moving  down  the  hell  ward  slopes  of  sin ;  so  we  eva<le  the  accusations  which 
the  true  and  faithful  witness  brings  against  us.  His  voice  is  not  heard,  or,  if 
we  cannot  ignore  it,  we  easily  suppose  that  its  warnings  must  be  meant  for 
others,  not  for  us.  How  needful  to  arm  ourselves  with  the  mind  which  will 
ask,  Am  I  regulating  my  convictions  by  what  I  wish  or  by  what  the  Lord 
wishes  f  Are  the  teachings  to  which  I  listen  such  as  I  like  to  have,  or  are  they 
based  upon  the  truth  and  holiness  of  Gbd  f 

in.  Inflnenced  by  misguiding  teachers.  This  influence  is  exerted  hv  self- 
originaUd  doctrines.  They  speak  from  their  own  heart.  They  propound  and 
defend  opinions  grounded  on  their  views  of  things,  and  not  on  the  reality. 
They  can  evolve  worlds,  form  conscience,  do  away  with  all  necessity  of  a  living 
Ood.  They  promise  smooth  things  to  a  people  who  have  a  form  of  goiiliness. 
They  hide  the  present  damnation  of  sin  un<ier  statements  which  excuse  defec- 
tive and  immoral  conduct,  and  its  future  under  explanations  which  impugn 
eternal  justice.  By  plausible  help.  They  covered  over  ugly  and  dangerous 
inlets  of  evil,  and  they  seemed  safe ;  but  the  covering  was  of  too  flimsy  a  kind. 
It  did  not  show  lives  lived  differently  from  those  of  the  transgressors.  It  did 
not  indicate  effectual  prayer  for  the  people.  It  did  not  denounce  sin  and  warn 
of  its  impending  punishment :  or  it  did  so  in  such  general  terms  that  none  are 
convinced  that  they  are  the  evildoers  who  are  doomed  to  the  overwhelming 
wrath  of  Him  before  whom  evil  cannot  stand.  By  their  professed  authomation. 
They  prophesied  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  though  He  knew  them  not.  Thoy 
had  so  far  regard  to  God  as  to  believe  that  they  ought  to  say  only  what  He 
commanded.  They  may  speak  what  they  think ;  sincerely  suppose  that  they 
have  right  on  their  side ;  but  they  are  deceived.  They  see  that  which  might  be 
perceived  to  be  a  lie,  thus  they  buoy  up  their  hearers  with  false  hopes  and  do 
untold  harm  to  bodies  and  souls  by  their  errors. 

^  Some  teach  men  to  expect  safety  from  a  comparative  decency  of  moral 
character ;  some  on  account  of  formed  and  superstitious  observances ;  some 
because  they  belong  to  an  orthodox  part  of  the  Church  and  have  got  somo 
notions  of  certain  important  doctrines ;  some  because  of  their  impressions  and 
enthusiastic  reveries ;  and  others  even  by  a  direct  abuse  of  the  gospel  and 
making  Christ  the  minister  of  sin.  ...  All  are  alike  distant  from  Christ  the 
true  foundation :  they  build  not  on  Him  by  a  penitent  faith  that  worketh  by 
love,  and  produceth  obedience ;  they  either  leave  out  His  merits  and  atonement, 
or  the  work  of  His  new-creating  Spirit,  or  the  snbstantial  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness; and  in  different  ways  endeavour  to  varnish,  paint  and  repair  tlie  old 
building,  instead  of  erecting  a  new  one  on  a  new  foundation,  for  '  an  habitation 
of  God  through  the  Spirit.'"— W.  F. 

1.  Judgment  will  corns  notidthstanding  hopes  of  escaping  it.  Nothing  of  man 
can  avail  to  resist  it.  The  daubed  wall  shall  fall  and  overwhelm  misleaders 
and  misled. 

2.  Beware  lest  thou  flatter  with  a  trust  to  hopes  of  safety  which  are  not  drawn 
from  Ood^s  will  revealed  in  GhrisL  Thou  hast  the  knowledge  given  of  Him.  Be 
true  and  fiuthful  to  Him  only. 


141 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OBAP.  xm. 


nOMllKTlQ  C0H3f£KTAnY:  EZEKIBl. 


Condemnation  of  the  Prophktesses  (vers.  17-23). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— A  dis- 
position  to  prophecy  was  in  the  air; 
60  women  as  well  as  men,  in  Jeru- 
salem and  among  the  exiles,  were  in- 
fluenced by  it.  Naturally  it  tissumed 
different  forms  in  the  one  from  what 
it  did  in  the  other.  Men  daub  walls, 
women  sew,  make  veils,  &a  Both 
are  deceiving,  and  shall  certainly  be 
set  at  nought.  There  seems  no  weight 
to  be  accorded  to  the  suggestion  that 
the  existence  of  these  prophetesses  was 
proof  of  "  a  fresh  instance  of  declen- 
sion into  heathen  usages."  The  gift 
of  true  prophecy  came  to  holy  women 
in  the  earlier  history  of  Israel  before 
Christ  and  also  in  the  later,  and  might 
be  pretended  to. 

Ver.  18.  Ignorance  of  the  practices 
alluded  to  here  stands  in  the  way  of 
clearing  up  the  meaning  of  this  verse. 
We  can  decide  only  by  probabilities. 
"Woe  onto  the  women  who  sew 
coverings  on  every  Joint  of  the 
hands."  Whether  these  coverings  were 
cushions  or  amulets  or  other  objects, 
their  use  seems  to  have  been  to  make 
an  appearance  which  would  impress 
the  people.  So  with  the  following, 
«And  who  make  veils  on  the  head 
of  every  stature;"  under  the  envelop- 
ment of  clothing  on  the  head  adapted 
to  their  varying  size — figure,  age,  con- 
dition— they  fitted  themselves  to  act 
upon  their  hearers,  ''  to  hunt  [as  bird- 
catcher's]  souls/'  and  thus  ensnare 
to  their  ruin.  The  verse  condemns 
sensational  methods  of  divination  re- 
sorted to  by  the  prophetesses,  whether 
the  method  was  by  gesture  or  dress 
or  word.  Hence  the  question  of  sur- 
prise at  the  infatuation  which  would 
use  such  means.  ''The  souls  of  my 
people  will  ye  hunt  and  the  sonls 
of  yourselves  will  ye  keep  alive?" 
Persuading  themselves  of  their  own 


security,  they  entered  on  practices 
intended  to  persuade  the  Israelites  to 
the  same  confidence,  while  destruction 
only  would  result  to  them. 

Ver.  19.  ''And  will  ye  profane  me 
among  my  people,"  by  [iropliesying  in 
my  name,  for  handftds  of  barley  and 
for  pieces  of  bread,  offerings  ^uch  as 
were  brought  when  consulting  a  seer 
(1  Sara.  ix.  7,  8 ;  1  Kings  xiv.  3 ;  cf. 
Mic  iii.  6) ;  and  by  declaring  that  ye 
speak  the  words  of  the  Lord  when 
they  are  not,  tfie  result  of  such  pro- 
faning the  Lord  being  *'to  slay  souls 
which  should  not  die  and  to  keep  alive 
souls  which  should  not  live,  by  your 
lying  to  my  people,  hearers  of  lying. 

Ver.  20.  Punishment  of  the  women. 
''Behold  I  [come]  to  your  coverings 
with  which  ye  hunt  sonls  as  [if  they 
were]  flsring  [birds],  and  I  tear  them 
off  yonr  arms."  Their  snares  shall  he 
spread  in  vain,  ''  I  set  free  the  sonls 
which  ye  hunt,  the  sonls"  which  ye 
deal  with  '-as  flying  [birds]."  Ver. 
21.  ''And  I  tear  yonr  veils  and  deliver 
my  people  from  yonr  hand."  Ye 
seduce  them  by  your  various  artifices, 
so  as  to  destroy  the  people,  and  I 
would  expose  your  pretences  so  as  to 
save  them.  Ver.  22.  Because  the  pro- 
phetesses have  acted  so  that  false 
impressions  of  God  are  produced  on 
the  mind  of  the  righteous  and  wicked, 
disheartening  the  former  in  good  and 
confirming  the  latter  in  evil  ways, 
"Therefore  ye  shall  not  see  vanity 
and  shall  not  divine  divinations  any 
more,  and  I  will  deliver  my  people 
out  of  yonr  hand."  It  is  with  God 
they  are  in  conflict,  and  the  utter 
failure  of  their  prophecies  will  so 
appear  that  "  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
the  Lord : "  knowledge  of  God  is  for 
the  guilty  a  doom,  for  the  righteous  a 
security. 


E0MILET1G8. 

Women  in  Keligious  MovsMENTa 

Serious  events  were  about  to  occur  in  Israel     The  shadow  of  them  was 
cast  over  women  as  well  as  men.     Spiritual  influence  knows  no  sex.     Women 
142 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETJC  COMMESTARY:  EZEKiEL  cuai'.  XiV. 

^  show  piety  at  home,"  in  the  more  retired  waj's  along  which  the  little  ones, 
the  weak,  the  downcast  of  the  world  make  their  journey,  but  the  gronndswell 
of  religious  emotion  rolling  over  a  people  impels  some  of  its  women  into  open 
and  even  audacious  appearances. 

t  The  women  assume  deceptiTe  methods.  By  dresses,  or  gestures,  or  other 
devices  they  pander  to  the  senses  so  as  to  attract  and  impiess  those  who  hear 
them.  If  women  are  naturally  more  disposed  to  such  methods  than  men,  yet 
the  warning  is  of  unrestricted  interest,  that  external  representations  in  religion 
are  of  uncertain  tendency;  strong  to  promote  error,  they  are  poor  allies  in 
advancing  truth. 

n.  Women  are  induced  to  act  ttom  unworthy  motives.  There  is  desire  for 
power.  They  strive  to  move  and  control  souls,  and  thus,  as  in  later  days,  to 
**  glory  in  the  flesh  "  with  their  adherents.  There  is  self  regard.  They  persuade 
themselves  that  things  will  turn  out  so  as  to  bring  security  for  themselves,  to  save 
their  own  souls,  even  though  they  shrink  from  the  narrow  way  of  life  and  endure 
no  hardness.  There  is  greed,  A  very  trifling  present  gets  them  to  say  that  all 
is  well  when  all  is  not  well ;  that  that  is  right  which  is  wrong  before  God. 

ni  They  are  held  responsihle  for  their  procedure.  They  hide  the  threaten- 
ings  of  the  Lord,  or  pare  down  their  awful  meaning.  They  comfort  souls  in 
sin  ;  distress  souls  seeking  God.  The  painful  result  of  their  lies  is  that  they 
hunt  into  peril  those  whom  God  would  rescue ;  seize  and  kill  souls  whom  God 
would  save.  Standing  thus  against  God's  love  and  grace,  they  are  counted  out 
for  condemnation,  as  the  false  prophets  were.     She  who  sins  must  suffer  loss. 

Error  Preached  (ver.  22). 

L  The  painfdl  effects  of  erroneous  teachings.  The  good  are  disheartened 
by  scruples,  perplexities,  fears,  and  weakened  to  pursue  their  journey  in  the 
ways  of  the  Lord :  the  evil  are  emboldened  to  go  on  the  broad  road  by  opiates 
to  conscience  and  confirmation  to  unbelief. 

U  The  contrariety  to  God  in  them.  He  is  the  God  of  all  comfort  to  those 
that  fear  His  name ;  but  this  teaching  breaks  the  inflow  of  His  promises.  He 
would  make  the  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins  to  live  through  faith  in  Christ  the 
Truth ;  but  this  teaching  prevents  faith,  and  He  can  do  no  mighty  work  of 
salvation. 

m  The  Talid  test  for  them.  When  high  pretensions,  dogmatic  operations, 
fascinating  proffers  act  so  as  to  relax  supreme  regard  to  truth,  righteousness, 
purity,  and  a  true  follower  of  Christ  is  depressed  ;  or  when  hopes  are  produced 
in  the  mind  of  those  who  are  not  yielding  themselves  unto  God  that  they  will 
live,  then  each  class  may  know  that  the  words  they  hear  are  opposed  to  those 
of  Him  who  is  the  true  and  living  One,  and  are  condemned  by  Him. 

L  A  people  professing  to  know  the  Lard  are  not  unaffected  by  the  popular  erroneous 
teaching  of  their  day.  2.  They  may  hope  for  His  interference  in  their  behalf  for  He 
lays  their  real  interest  deqply  to  hearL 

Jehovah's  Eefusal  to  allow  Idolaters  to  enquire  of  Him:  the 
certainty  of  the  judgments  denounced  against  th£m  (chap. 
xiv.) 

EXEGETIC  AL    NOTES.— The  They  make  an  appeal  to  God's  mercy, 

visit  of  the  elders  of  the  people  to  the  but  are  silent  concerning  the  greatness 

prophet  was  the  occasion  of  this  word  of  their  sin  or  any  purpose  of  repent- 

of  God.     They  were  alarmed  by  the  ance.     These  elders  were  not  the  re- 

threatenings    which  the   prophet  ut-  presentatives  of  the  majority  of  the 

tered,  but  they  yet  hoped  to  obtain  exiles  who  practised  the   most  open 

from  him  a  more  favourable  answer,  and   the   boldest  forms   of  idolatry ; 

143 


Digitized  by 


Google 


c»AF.  xrr. 


nOMJLETJC  COmfEXTART:  EZEKTBL 


but  rather  of  those  who,  though  they 
outwardly  feare<i  God,  yet  inwardly 
served  the  world  and  the  spirit  of  the 
age.  ''These  men  have  set  up  idols 
in  their  heart  **  ( ver.  3).    The  prophet's 


answer  to  their  inquiry  extends  to  yersa 
11.  The  latter  part  of  tlie  chapter  de- 
clares that  the  coming  judgments  on 
Jerusalem  will  not  be  averted  even  for 
the  sake  of  the  righteous  few  therein. 


Thb  Lord  gives  no  Answer  to  the  Idolaters  (vers.  l-ll). 


Ver.  1.  "The  elders  of  Israel." 
"These  men  were  not  deputies  from 
the  Israelites  in  Palestine,  but  elders 
of  the  exiles  among  whom  Ezekiel  had 
been  labonring  "  (KeU\  Their  o>>ject 
in  this  visit  is  not  aistinctly  stated, 
but  probably  it  was  that  they  might 
know  something  further  concerning 
the  duration  of  the  captivity,  or  the 
fate  of  Jerusalem.  Unlike  the  elders 
in  chap.  xz.  1,  they  had  not  come 
with  the  definite  purpose  of  inquiring 
of  the  Lord. 

Vers.  2  and  3.  ''These  men  have 
set  np  their  idols  in  their  heart." 
They  were  not  given  to  the  grosser 
forms  of  idolatry,  but  they  were 
strangers  to  the  true  worship  of  God. 
They  had  set  up  some  object  of  their  own 
creation,  which  they  put  in  the  place  of 
€k>d.  They  allowed  their  minds  to  be 
deluded  by  phantoms.  In  heart  and 
spirit  they  were  one  with  the  worst 
idolaters  around  them.  '*And  put 
the  stumbling-block  of  their  iniquity 
before  their  face."  They  even  refused 
to  put  away  idols  from  their  presence. 
They  sought  not  to  flee  from  tempta- 
tion by  removing  what  would  be  an 
occasion  and  reminder  of  sin.  "  Should 
I  be  enaoired  of  at  all  by  them  7  " 
This  question  implies  a  strong  negation. 

Yer.  4.  ''I  the  Lord  will  answer 
him  that  cometh  according  to  the 
multitude  of  his  idols."  The  form 
of  the  verb  to  "answer"  gives  the 
meaning,  "I  the  Lord  will  answer 
him  by  myself,"  instead  of  by  the 
prophet.  The  manner  in  which  the 
Lord  will  answer  the  idolatry  is  set 
forth  in  ver.  8.  They  are  to  be  treated 
as  all  idols  should  be  treated. 

Yer.  5.  '*That  I  may  take  the 
hoose  of  Israel  in  their  heart"  The 
Lord  will  reacli  the  very  seat  of  idola- 
try, touch  their  conscience,  and  bring 
down  their  heart  by  judgments. 
144 


Yers.  6-8.  Repetition  of  the  threat 
already  uttered,  and  also  of  the  sum 
mons  to  repentance.  <*  Bepent,  and 
turn  yonrselves  tsarn  yonr  idoLi ;  and 
turn  away  yonr  ta^ea  firom  all  yonr 
abominations."  **  We  have  here  a 
combination  of  the  Kal  and  Hiphil 
conjugations  for  the  sake  of  emphasis. 
Return  unreservedly  from  your  abom- 
inable idolatries.  Be  no  longer  es- 
tranged from  me,  either  in  heart  or 
practice.  They  were  neither  to  han- 
ker after  in  desire,  nor  look  towards 
the  accursed  thing "  (Henderson), 
"Every  one  of  the  honse  of  Israel, 
or  of  the  stranger  that  sojonmeth  in 
Israel"  All  who  hypocritically  ap- 
plied to  the  prophet,  whether  pro- 
selytes or  native  Jews,  were  liable  to 
the  same  judgments.  Strangers  were 
only  permitted  to  dwell  in  the  land  of 
Israel  on  condition  of  forsaking  all 
idolatry  and  all  moral  abominations, 
and  worshipping  Jehovah  alone  (Lev. 
XX.  2,  xviii.  26,  xvii.  10;  Ex.  xii 
19).  "And  will  make  him  a  sign 
and  a  proverb."  **  The  expression  is 
a  pregnant  one ;  I  make  him  desolate, 
so  that  he  becomes  a  sign  and  pro- 
verb "  (KeU),  "  An  exemplary  punish- 
ment" (Heng.) 

Vers.  9-11.  No  prophet  is  to  give 
any  other  answer.  "And  if  the  pro- 
phet be  deceived  when  he  hath 
spoken  a  thing,  I  the  Lord  have 
deceived  that  prophet.''  He  who 
delivers  any  other  message,  though 
he  may  think  that  he  speaks  the  word 
of  the  Lord,  is  not  a  true  prophet. 
When  God  is  represented  as  deceiving 
such  a  prophet,  we  are  to  understand 
something  more  than  merely  a  per- 
missive sense,  as  if  Gk)d  allowed  it 
and  did  not  interfere  to  prevent  tho 
deception.  It  was  Jehovah  who  sent 
the  lying  spirit  into  the  prophets  of 
Ahab,  and  for  this  very  purpose^  that 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COyfMEXTAIiY:  EZEKIEL. 


OBAP.  XTT. 


by  predicting  sno^ss  to  the  king  they 
might  secure  his  fall  (1  Kings  xxii. 
20,  Ac.)  "  This  persuading  of  the  pro- 
phets if}  the  utterance  of  self-willed 
words,  which  have  not  been  inspired 
by  God,  only  takes  place  in  persona 
who  admit  evil  into  themselves,  and  is 
designed  to  tempt  them  and  lead  them 
to  decide  whether  they  will  endeavour 
to  resist  and  conquer  the  sinful  inclina- 
tions of  their  hearts,  or  will  allow  them 
to  shape  themselves  into  outward 
deeds,  in  which  case'  they  will  become 
ripe  for  judgment  It  is  in  this  sense 
that  Ood  persuades  such  a  prophet, 
in  order  that  He  may  then  cut  him 
off  out  of  His  people"  {KM),  "If 
matters  should  turn  out  differently 
from  what  the  pro2>het  expected  and 
foretold,  I  have  so  ordered  them  in 
the  course  of  my  providence  as  to 
issue  in  such  a  result  It  is  the  'pre- 
rogative of  Deity  to  control  the  sinful 
operations  of  created  minds,  without 
interfering  with  free  agency"  (Hen- 
denan).  "The  punishment  of  the 
prophet  shall  be  even  as  the  punish- 
ment of  him  that  seeketh  unto  him." 
The  false  prophets  and  those  who  in- 
quire of  them  are  both  alike  guilty. 


and  come  into  the  same  condemna- 
tion. Neither  in  one  nor  in  the  other 
was  there  any  desire  to  learn  the 
truth,  but  rather  to  seek  excuse  for 
their  sins  and  errors  even  by  the  dar- 
ing impiety  of  demanding  for  them 
the  sanctions  of  religion.  "  That  the 
house  of  Israel  may  no  more  go  astray 
from  me,  neither  be  poUnted  anymore 
with  all  their  transgressions."  "It 
serves  to  purify  the  people  of  God. 
For  the  particular  sinful  generation  it 
flows  from  the  principle  of  retribution ; 
but  for  the  whole  community  of  God 
a  purpose  of  mercy  lies  at  the  ground 
of  the  exercise  of  this  retribution. 
The  prophet  here  clearly  opens  up 
the  view  to  the  light  which  shines 
behind  the  darkness."  (Eeng,)  "It 
was  to  this  end  that,  in  the  last  times 
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  God  allowed 
false  propliecy  to  prevail  so  mightily, 
— namely,  that  it  might  accelerate  the 
process  of  distinguishing  between  the 
righteous  and  the  wicked ;  and  then, 
by  means  of  the  judgment  which  de- 
stroyed the  wicked,  purify  His  nation 
and  lead  it  on  to  the  great  end  of  its 
cMing"  {Keify 


HOMILETiaS. 
Hypogbitical  Inquikbrs  aftsb  Gknx 

These  elders  had  come  as  a  deputation  from  among  the  exiles  in  order  to 
consult  Ezekiel  as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord.  They  had  come  from  a  distance,  and 
are  to  be  distinguished  from  those  mentioned  in  chap.  viiL  1  who  were  already 
with  the  prophet  We  are  not  told  expressly  what  their  purpose  was.  They 
may  have  sought  guidance  concerning  some  question  which  they  felt  to  be  a 
difficulty.  They  may  have  simply  waited  to  hear  what  seasonable  truth  the 
prophet  had  still  to  utter.  But  from  ver.  3  we  learn  that  they  certainly  did 
come  in  the  character  of  inquirers.  And  the  answer  which  the  Lord  gives 
through  theprophet  shows  that  they  were  not  sincere,  but  hypocritical  inquirers. 
We  have  here  the  great  features  of  all  such. 

L  They  closely  imitate  the  condnct  of  real  inqoirers.  Hypocrites  are 
generally  described  as  those  who  deceive  others  by  making  an  outward  show  of 
piety.  But  the  sacred  writers  call  those  hypocrites  not  only  who  deceived  others, 
but  deceived  even  themselves.  These  closely  imitate  the  religious  actions  of 
the  pious,  but  they  are  ignorant  of  those  deep  spiritual  principles  upon  which 
such  conduct  is  founded.  These  have  no  true  knowledge  of  God.  They  only 
know  Him  by  tradition  and  the  customs  of  religious  service  and  worship.  These 
elders  had  some  of  the  qualities  of  real  inquirers  after  the  mind  and  will  of  GU>d. 
1.  They  were  already  stirred  by  the  message  of  theprophet.  They  took  alarm  at  his 
threateninga      They  were  afraid  at  God's  judgments.      2.    They  come  to  the 

K  145 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIV.  HOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 

prophet,  as  an  inspired  messenger  of  God,  for  further  amn^el.  They  were  the  sub- 
jicts  of  religious  awakening,  and  professed  themselves  ready  toleam  all  the  will 
of  God.  Men  may  go  as  far  as  this  without  any  true  and  essential  knowledge 
.of  the  realities  of  religion. 

n.  They  lack  the  proper  characteristics  of  real  inauirers.  1.  They  apply  to 
religious  teachers^  not  to  he  instructed  in  God's  will,  hut  to  he  confirmed  in  their  own 
sup^stitions  and  errors.  They  were  ready  to  hear  and  obey  the  prophet  so  long 
as  he  prophesied  after  their  own  heart.  While  religion  did  not  interfere  with 
their  cherished  convictions  and  prospects  they  were  ready  to  obey  its  precepts 
and  ordinances.  They  did  not  really  believe  that  the  threatened  judgments 
would  come  to  pass,  and  they  desired  a  prophet  who  would  confirm  them  in  their 
false  hopes.  Such  men  feel  a  certain  satisfaction  in  heaping  to  themselves 
teachers.  In  some  way  they  feel  the  necessity  of  obtaining  the  sanctions  of 
religion.  But  they  come  to  the  prophet  not  to  learn,  but  to  be  confirmed  in  the 
purpose  of  their  evil  heart.  They  have  not  learned  what  it  is  to  surrender  the 
mind  as  well  as  the  heart  and  will  to  God.  2.  They  retain  sin  in  their  heart, 
tJiough  they  avoid  the  outward  manifestation  of  it.  They  abstained  from  the  gross 
forms  of  idolatry  which  were  practised  by  their  countrymen,  but  "  they  set  up 
their  idols  in  their  heart"  (ver.  3).  The  real  root-principle  of  idolatry  was  still 
in  them.  3.  They  take  no  steps  to  remove  the  occasions  of  sin,  "  They  put  the 
stumbling-block  of  their  iniquity  before  their  face  "  (ver.  3^.  While  these  out- 
ward temptations  and  means  of  sin  are  suffered  to  remain,  it  is  of  no  use  to  seek 
first  to  cleanse  the  heart.  Images  must  first  be  destroyed,  else  there  is  little 
prospect  of  rooting  out  idolatry  from  the  land.  Religious  teachers  should  testify 
against  both  outward  and  inward  idolatry.  If  idols  are  not  removed  from  the  eyes 
of  men  the  temptation  to  worship  them  will  remain,  however  faithful  the  teaching 
may  be  against  the  sin  of  it.  The  outward  forms  of  superstition  should  first  be 
destroyed,  else  there  is  little  hope  of  promoting  the  pure  worship  of  the  heart. 

UL  Tliey  are  exposed  to  terrible  Judgments.  Even  though  they  inquire  of 
a  true  prophet  and  cannot  be  charged  with  open  transgression.  1.  They  cannot 
hope  to  deceive  God,  who  sees  and  knows  the  heart,  God  can  see  into  the  depths  of 
the  heart,  which  is  the  real  man.  It  is  the  sinful  heart  within  which  makes  the 
outward  temptations  of  the  world  dangerous.  2.  They  are  left  to  Hie  action  of  tlie 
law  of  retrtbtUioTL  Retribution  in  kind^  "  according  to  the  multitude  of  his  idols  " 
(ver.  4).  They  trusted  in  idols ;  let  them  have  them  now.  Let  them  see  what 
their  own  refuges  can  do  for  them.  God  refuses  to  be  inquired  of  them,  **  He 
heareth  not  sinners'*  (John  ix.  31).  The  Word  of  God  is  taken  away  from  the 
despisers  of  the  truth  (Acts  xiii.  46).  There  is  a  time  when  God  gives  an 
answer,  but  not  as  men  desire,  and  there  is  also  a  time  when  He  refuses  to 
answer.  In  both  these  modes  of  treatment  He  shows  His  righteous  indignation. 
Sinners  are  left  without  answer  or  help  in  order  that  they  might  come  to  the 
true  knowledge  of  their  sin. 

IV.  Their  only  hope  for  escape  is  by  a  thorough  repentance.  1.  The  heart 
must  be  turned  to  God.  "  Repent  and  turn  yourselves  from  your  idols  *'  (ver.  6). 
The  Lord  will  not  share  His  glory  with  another.  The  heart  must  be  entirely 
given  up  to  the  service  and  worship  of  the  only  God.  2.  The  outward  occasions 
of  sin  must  be  removed.  "  Turn  your  faces  from  all  your  abominations  "  (ver.  6). 
They  must  avoid  the  outward  forms  of  idolatry  lest  they  should  become  again  a 
temptation  and  a  snare.  Their  repentance  must  be  a  complete  reformation  both 
of  the  outer  and  of  the  inner  life. 

Idolatry  in  the  Heart  (ver,  8), 

Idolatry  is  an  old  sin.    The  worship  of  the  true  God  is  older ;  but  it  was  soon 
corrupted,  for  men  ^*  did  not  like  to  retain  God  in  their  knowledge  **  (Eom.  i.  28). 
146 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  1X9. 

There  may  be  idolatry  in  the  heart  even  when  idols  are  aboh'shed  from  external 
worship.  God's  commandment  is  "exceeding  broad."  Idols  have  long  been 
banished  from  our  land,  and  therefore  the  second  commandment  has  in  one  sense 
become  obsolete.  But  all  that  is  essential  to  the  sin  of  worshipping  them  may 
still  be  found  even  in  Christian  lands.  Everything  that  stands  between  a  man's 
soul  and  heaven  is  an  idol,— it  is  that  which  he  trusts  in  with  his  whole  heart 
For  the  root-principle  of  idolatry  is  the  tendency  to  put  something  in  the  place 
of  God,  to  allow  the  mind  to  be  deluded  by  phantoms.  Idols  of  all  kinds  are 
mere  phantoms,  they  are  (as  St.  Paul  tells  us)  nothing  in  the  world ;  there  is  no 
reality  in  them.  When  God  is  not  truly  known  to  the  soul  within,  the  man  of 
necessity  becomes  an  idolater.  Whatever  hinders  the  true  knowledge  of  God  is 
idolatry.  Bacon,  the  father  of  modern  science,  has  distinguished  certain  idols 
or  phantoms  which  interfere  with  human  knowledge.  These  idols  he  represents 
as  certain  false  notions  which  possess  the  mind,  and  which  must  be  dislodged 
if  men  would  attain  to  the  truth  concerning  the  knowledge  of  man  and  nature. 
There  are  "idols  of  the  /itJe,"  "of  the  cave;*  "of  the  market-place;*  "of  the 
ibealreJ*    It  will  be  found  that  idolatries  in  religion  spring  from  similar  sources. 

L  Idols  of  the  tribe.  By  which  Bacon  means,  those  errvTS  and  false  concep- 
Hans  which  have  iheir  origin  in  human  nature  itself.  He  says  that  "  the  human 
mind  is  like  a  false  mirror,  which,  receiving  rays  irregularly,  distorts  and  dis- 
colours the  nature  of  things  by  mingling  its  own  nature  with  it.'*  Does  not  this 
speak  to  us  of  our  natural  ignorance  of  God,  which  distorts  all  the  indications 
He  has  given  as  of  His  character  and  will  t  It  may  assume  the  form  of  gross 
idolatry,  of  atheism,  of  indifference,  or  of  the  various  forms  of  superstition  where 
ignorant  fear  is  substituted  for  the  worship  of  Him  who  alone  is  to  be  feared. 

n.  Idols  of  the  cava  Bacon  describes  these  as  the  sources  of  error  which 
belong  to  individual  mm.  These  may  arise  from  the  peculiar  constitution  of  our 
mind,  from  our  early  habits  and  education,  from  all  those  influences  which  form 
our  individual  characters.  **Each  man,"  says  Bacon,  "  has  a  den  or  cave  of  his 
own."  Sometimes  it  is  dark  and  comfortless,  shutting  out  the  light  of  heaven, 
full  of  doleful  things  and  gloomy  fears.  Each  man  has  some  infirmiiy  of  mind 
or  temper  which  leads  him  to  judge  wrongly  of  God  and  of  duty.  Each  man 
has  his  besetting  sin,  and  must  bear  his  own  burden,  fight  against  his  own 
enemies,  and  seek  peace  for  his  own  souL 

nL  Idols  of  the  market-place.  These  are  described  as  false  notions  or  eon- 
ceptionSy  which  arise  from  the  intercourse  of  men  with  each  other.  It  may  be  that  each 
man  in  his  own  cave — in  himself  as  an  individual^is  ashamed  of  the  customs 
and  notions  of  which  men  as  communities  approve.  But  these  are  often  deemed 
respectable  and  right  if  only  they  are  adopted  by  good  society,  or  by  common 
usage,  or  by  the  laws  and  customs  of  that  particular  business  or  profession  to 
which  the  man  belongs. 

IV.  Idols  of  the  theatre.  By  which  are  meant  those  hindrances  to  the  know- 
ledge of  tJie  truth  which  have  been  imported  into  men's  minds  from  the  various  dogmas 
of  human  philosophies.  It  is  certainly  a  hindrance  in  all  intellectual  pursuits  that 
many  ingenious  men  have  gone  wrong  before  us.  Hence  knowledge  is  retarded. 
Mental  power  is  wasted,  for  some  wiser  man  must  arise  to  clear  away  those 
errors  to  which  great  men  of  former  times  have  given  currency.  We  have  such 
idols  of  the  theatre  in  religion, — each  successive  system  of  infidel  philosophy, 
rationalism,  every  device  tor  setting  aside  the  revelation  which  God  has  given 
of  Himself  to  man  in  Jesus  Christ,  every  attempt  to  get  rid  of  the  supernatural 
and  divine  element  in  the  Scriptures  of  God.  All  these  have  hidden  God  from 
many  human  souls.  They  are  the  peculiar  temptations  of  intellectual  meu,  of 
speculative  minds.  Such  are  often  free  from  vulgar  temptations,  and  it  would 
seem  as  if  in  this  way  their  proper  measure  of  the  difficulties  of  probation  is 
filled  up  to  them.     And  all  idols,  whether  they  spring  from  that  natnrp  n  hich  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAi*.  XIV.  HOMILBTIC  COMMENT AR  Y :  EZEKIEL. 

common  to  mankind,  or  from  each  man's  peculiarities  of  temper  and  dispositioii, 
or  from  the  customs  of  human  business  and  conyentional  moralities,  or  from 
those  ingenious  speculations  which  we  find  in  books, — all  these  are  only  to  be 
overcome  by  tlie  recognition  of  God  in  Christ.  They  are  all  mere  phantoms, 
they  hide  God  from  the  soul,  tliey  lead  us  astray,  they  have  no  power  to  teach 
us,  they  cannot  bring  us  nearer  heaven.  But  God  has  not  left  us  to  wander  in 
uncertainty.  He  has  given  us  the  true  Light.  Our  blessed  Lord  said,  **  He 
tliat  hath  seen  Me  hath  seen  the  Father,"  "I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the 
life."  He  gives  the  invitation,  "  Come  unto  Me  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  He  will  give  us  rest  from  the  pursuit  of 
vanities  of  all  kinds,  from  empty  speculations  which  weary  the  soul  for  no  profit. 
If  we  have  found  the  true  we  cannot  worship  the  false.  If  we  are  true  wor- 
shippers of  Christ  we  must  put  away  all  our  idols,  for  He  will  not  share  His  love 
and  worship  with  another.  Christ  gives  us  the  true  idea  of  Grod.  The  sin  of 
idolatry  is  not  now  impossible  though  idols  are  removed  from  the  eyes  of  men. 
The  Second  Commandment  may  be  dead  as  concerns  the  letter  of  it,  but  the 
spirit  of  it  is  as  potent  as  ever  to  convince  men  of  sin.  How  many  professed 
worshippers  in  the  Christian  Church  set  up  their  idols  in  their  heart  and  then 
come  to  inquire  of  God  1  There  is  a  tendency  to  worship  something  which  is 
not  God,  to  deny  Him  the  full  devotion  of  our  hearts.  Even  when  men  will 
scarcely  dare  entirely  to  leave  His  service,  they  still  strive  to  serve  two  masters. 
All  who  love  pleasure,  earthly  honours  and  distinctions,  more  than  they  love 
Ood,  are  idolaters.  In 'short,  all  are  involved  in  this  sin  who  seek  the  world 
first  before  the  kingdom  of  Gk>d  and  His  righteousness. 

The  Inquirkrs  of  Falsb  Prophets  (vers.  9-11). 

I  They  hope  to  obtain  a  more  fkvonraUe  answer.  The  true  prophets  do 
not  speak  that  which  they  would  like  to  hear,  so  they  seek  teachers  after  their 
own  minds.  They  will  undertake  to  decide  for  themselves  what  prophets  are 
true  or  false  by  the  correspondence  of  the  message  with  their  own  corrupt 
wishes.     They  are  willingly  deceived. 

U  They  do  not  thereby  escape  God's  Judgmenta  1.  Even  faiUe  prophets 
are  by  the  will  of  Ood.  "I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet"  (ver.  9). 
God  permits  such  men  to  preach  error,  as  He  permits  all  other  evils  to  prevail 
in  the  world.  He  does  not  suppress  them  by  an  act  of  power.  He  allows 
the  tares  and  the  wheat  to  grow  together  until  the  appointed  time  of  judgment. 
And  we  must  letfm  from  G^'s  dealings  with  mankind  the  lesson  of  tolera- 
tion. If  we  attempt  to  pluck  up  the  tares  we  run  the  risk  of  rooting  out  the 
wheat  also.  No  man  has  knowledge  or  skill  enough  which. will  serve  him  to 
anticipate  God's  final  judgment.  He  who  attempts  this  may,  indeed,  do  some 
good,  but  he  will  certainly  do  much  harm.  2.  Cfod  uses  and  controls  evil  for  the 
working  out  of  His  purposes.  It  is  true  that  "God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil, 
neither  tempteth  He  any  man"  (James  i.  13).  But  God  makes  use  of  the  sins 
of  men  in  working  out  His  great  designs.  Thus  He  allows  men  to  fall  into 
one  sin  as  a  punishment  for  another.  These  exiles  loved  to  be  deceived,  and 
they  were  deceived.  They  loved  darkness,  and  they  were  allowed  to  wander 
into  greater  darkness.  A  man  must  either  repent,  or  he  must  continue  in  the 
sinful  path  towards  his  punishment.  It  is  by  God's  law  that  even  the  germs 
of  sin  are  permitted  to  be  planted,  to  bo  fostered,  and  to  grow,  so  that  sin  shall 
attain  to  its  full  maturity  and  bring  on  its  own  punishment.  God's  Providence 
so  orders  the  course  of  events  that  men  who  will  not  have  the  truth  shall  be 
brought  to  ruin  by  a  lie, 

m  These  Judgments  are  intended  for  the  benefit  of  Ood's  people.  1.  To 
148 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  BZEKIEL.  ohap.  xit. 

preserve  them  from  transgression  (ver.  11).  2.  To  test  their  faith.  By  the  flourish- 
ing of  false  prophets  their  own  fidelity  and  steadfiistness  would  be  tried. 
The  prevalence  of  error  makes  manifest  the  tried  and  approved  children  of 
truth  (1  Cor.  xi.  19).  3.  To  confirm  their  faith.  By  witnessing  the  judgments 
of  God  fulfilled  upon  others.  4.  To  teach  them  to  realise  their  relationship  to  God. 
"That  they  may  be  my  people,  and  I  may  be  their  Gk)d''  (ver.  11).  We  can 
have  no  true  peace  until  we  know  that  the  Lord  is  our  Qod.  The  essence  of 
reli*;ion  consists  in  the  appropriation  of  God  by  the  soul.  6,  To  separate  between 
the  righteous  and  the  ungodly.  God  may  use  even  sin  and  error  to  contribute  to 
this  final  purpose  of  His  judgment  (2  Thess.  ii.  10,  11). 

(Ver,  9.) 

False  prophets  were  both  in  Judea  and  in  Babylon,  and  the  people  had 
often  recourse  unto  them.  They  spake  pleasing  things.  They  told  them  who 
were  in  Judea  that  Nebuchadnezzar  snould  never  subdue  and  carry  them 
captives;  yea,  they  told  them  that  those  in  Babylon  should  shortly  return. 
These  were  vain,  false,  and  deceitful  prophecies,  and  Divine  Providence  ordered 
it  so.     We  have  here — 

L  A  supposition.  "If  the  prophet  be  deceived  when  he  hath  spoken  a 
thing."  The  false  prophets  were  deceived  in  what  they  spake  to  the  people. 
Zedekiah  and  the  rest  of  the  prophets  which  bade  Ahab  to  go  up  to  Bamoth- 
Giiead  and  prosper,  were  deceived  (1  Kings  xzii).  Hananiah  and  Shelemiah 
made  that  people  toust  in  a  lie  (Jer.  xzviiL  16,  xxxix.  31).  They  were 
deceived  in  their  prophets,  and  deceive  others. 

n.  An  assertion.  "  I  the  Lord  have  deceived  that  prophet."  These  words 
sound  very  harsh,  and  no  man  durst  have  attributed  them  unto  the  Lord,  had 
not  He  Himself  said  so.  The  words,  "I  have  deceived"  are  to  be  taken  as 
a  judicial  act  of  God,  who,  dealing  with  them  as  delinquents,  punisheth  them 
with  this  special  judgment  of  seduction ;  they  were  idolatrous  and  hypocritical, 
and  God  punished  those  sins  with  others,  and  so  accidentally  was  the  efficient 
caase  of  their  deception.  God  finding  those  men  false  and  forward  to  deceive, 
hearkening  to  their  own  hearts,  and  following  their  own  spirits  (Ez.  ziiL  2,  3), 
He  gave  them  up  and  over  to  vain  visions,  and  lying  divinations,  which  was 
one  punishment,  and  to  perdition,  which  was  another  punishment  following 
thereupon.  Have  you  a  mind  to  be  prophets,  to  prophesy  lies  1  Ye  shall  be 
so.  In  Isa.  bdii.  1 7,  we  read,  "  0  Lord,  why  hast  thou  made  us  to  err  from 
thy  ways,  and  hardened  our  heart  from  thy  fear  t "  God  did  this  in  judgment 
to  the  people  who  affected  false  prophets,  and  chose  their  own  ways  (Isa.  IxvL 
3),  and  delighted  in  their  abomination&  He  in  judgment  gave  them  up  to 
their  own  ways,  and  to  hardness  of  heart  (Ps.  Ixxi.  11,  12). 

in.  A  threatening.  "  I  will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  him.**  God  would 
put  forth  His  power  to  punish  such  a  prophet.  But  if  God  deceived  him, 
how  can  He  in  justice  punish  or  destroy  that  prophet  1  We  answer,  1.  The 
false  prophet  did  whatever  he  did  freely.  He  was  not  forced  by  any  power  or  act 
of  God.  His  seduction  was  principally  from  himself;  and  it  was  his  own  fault 
that  he  was  deceived,  that  he  deceived  others.  2.  A  man  may  serve  Providence^ 
and  yet  sin  against  the  law  of  God.  The  secret  Providence  had  ordered  it  that 
this  people  should  be  seduced  by  false  prophets,  yet  God  in  His  word  had  for- 
bidden such  (Deut.  xiii).  And  because  men  are  to  look  at  what  is  written,  not 
what  is  secret  and  hidden,  therefore  if  they  violate  the  law,  God  may  justly 
punish  thereupon  (Acts  iv.  27,  28).  Herod,  Pilate,  Judas,  and  the  Jews,  they 
did  to  Christ  whatsoever  God  had  determined  to  be  done,  yet  they  were  not 
without  sin,  nor  without  punishment,  because  they  transgressed  the  rule  given 
tliem.     We  make  two  observations, — (1.)  TJie  Lord,  in  His  injinite  wUd^m  and 

149 


Digitized  by 


Google 


en  A  p.  XIV. 


IIOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL, 


juiHuy  doth  make  a  puntshmerU  of  m,  and  puniA  one  sin  icUh  another.  Besides 
corporal  juilgments  He  hath  spiritual ;  if  the  prophet  be  deceived,  ''  I  the  Lord 
have  deceived  him,"  I  have  laid  this  judgment  upon  him,  that  he  should  l)e 
deceived,  led  itito  errors,  and  deceive  others ;  this  he  hath  deserved  at  my 
hands,  and  this  punishment  in  just  judgment  I  inflict  upon  him.  The  Scrip- 
tures hold  out  frequently  this  way  of  God's  proceedings  with  sinners.  His 
punishment  of  one  sin  with  another;  (2  Chron.  xxv.  17-20 ;  Jer.  iv.  10 ;  Rom. 
h  25,  26 ;  2  Thesa  il  10,  11).  (2.)  Ood  wUl  deal  severely  with  false  prophets,  "  I 
will  stretch  out  my  hand  upon  him."  He  would  be  made  an  example  to  all,  as 
were  Hananiah  and  Shemaiah  (Jer.  xzviii.  15,  16;  xxix.  31,  32. — Greenhill). 

"The  great  sophister  and  prince  of  darkness  (God  permitting  him)  can 
strangely  blindfold  our  reason  and  muffle  our  understanding ;  and,  no  doubt, 
the  chiefest  cause  that  most  of  the  obstinate,  besotted  sinners  of  the  world  are 
not  sensible  that  the  devil  blinds  and  abuses  them  is,  that  he  has  indeed 
actually  done  so  already.  For  how  dreadfully  did  Gfod  consign  over  the 
heathen  world  to  a  perpetual  slavery  to  Satan's  deceits?  They  worshipped 
him,  they  consulted  with  him,  and  so  absolutely  were  they  sealed  up  under  the 
ruling  cheat,  that  they  took  all  his  tricks  and  impostures  for  Oracle  and  Instruc- 
tion, And  the  truth  is,  when  men  under  the  powerful  preaching  of  the  Grospel 
will  grow  heathens  in  the  viciousness  of  their  practices,  it  is  but  just  with  God 
to  suffer  them  (by  a  very  natural  transition)  to  grow  heathens,  too,  in  the 
grossness  of  their  delusions. "^Sbu^ 

JuDAH  AND  Jerusalem  gaknot  cladc  ExEMPnoN  from  Judgments 

BECAUSE  OF  THE  BlOHTEOUS  FEW  THEREIN   (vers.  12-23). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers. 
12,  13.  'When  the  land  sinneth 
against  me  by  trespassing  grievously." 
Their  sin  is  more  particularly  defined 
as  ''trespass/'  the  literal  expression 
being  **  to  trespass  a  trespass,"  ue,  to 
commit  a  very  great  trespass.  The 
first  signification  of  the  Hebrew  word 
is  ''  to  cover/'  and  therefore  it  is  used 
to  denote  acting  in  any  secret  or 
treacherous  manner,  especially  towards 
Jehovah,  either  by  outward  or  inward 
idolatry  or  by  withholding  what  is 
due  to  Him.  Here  the  treachery 
specially  pointed  out  is  that  of  apos- 
tasy from  God  by  idolatry. 

Yer.  14.  *'  Thon^  these  three  men, 
Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  were  in  it. 
These  men  are  named  as  well-known 
examples  of  true  righteousness  of  life. 
They  were  just  in  their  generation, 
living  that  life  of  obedience  which 
springs  from  faith  in  God.  Noah  is 
so  described  in  Gen.  vi.  9 ;  and  Job, 
in  the  Book  of  Job  L  1 ;  and  Daniel, 
in  like  manner,  is  classed  with  these 
ancient  men  as  one  who  confessed  a  true 
faith  by  a  righteous  life.  '*  The  fact 
that  Daniel  is  named  before  Job  does 
150 


not  warrant  the  conjecture  that  some 
other  older  Daniel  is  meant,  of  whom 
nothing  is  said  in  the  history,  and 
whose  existence  is  merely  postulated. 
For  the  enumeration  is  not  intended 
to  be  chronological,  but  is  arranged 
according  to  the  subject-matter;  the 
order  being  determined  by  the  nature 
of  the  deliverance  experienced  by 
these  men  for  their  righteousness  in 
the  midst  of  great  judgments.  Haver- 
nick  shows  we  have  a  climax  here: 
Noah  saved  his  family  along  with 
himself;  Daniel  was  able  to  save  his 
friends  (Dan.  ii.  17,  18);  but  Job, 
with  his  righteousness,  was  not  even 
able  to  save  his  children ''  (Keil), 

Yer.  15.  '^  If  I  cause  noisome  beasts 
to  iMiss  through  the  land."  ''  Beasts  " 
in  the  usual  sense,  or  in  human  form 
(ver.  17.)"  {Hengstehberg\  comp.  Es. 
V.  17;  Lev.  xxvi.  22;  2  Kings  xvil 
25. 

Yer.  16.  ''They  shall  deliver  neither 
sons  nor  danghtera"  "In  the  first 
instance,  it  is  simply  stated  that  Noah, 
Daniel,  and  Job  would  save  their 
soul,  Le.  their  life,  by  their  righteous- 
ness ;  whereas,  in  the  three  others,  it 


Digitized  by 


Google 


no  Ml  LET W  COMMESTARY :  EZEKIEL, 


CHAP.  XIV. 


is  declared  that  as  truly  as  the  Lord 
liveth  they  would  not  save  either  sons 
or  daughters,  but  they  alone  would 
be  delivered.  The  ditference  is  not 
merely  a  rhetorical  climax  or  progress 
in  the  address  by  means  of  assevera- 
tion and  antithesis,  but  indicates  a 
distinction  in  the  thought  The  first 
case  is  only  intended  to  teach  that  in 
the  approaching  judgment  the  right- 
eous would  save  their  lives,  i«.  that 
God  would  not  sweep  away  the  right- 
eous with  the  ungodly.  The  three 
cases  which  follow  are  intended,  on 
the  other  hand,  to  exemplify  the  truth 
that  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous 
will  be  of  no  avail  to  the  idolaters  and 
apostates ;  since  even  such  patterns  of 
righteousness  as  Noah,  Daniel,  and 
Job  would  only  be  able  to  save  their 
own  lives,  and  would  not  be  able  to 
save  the  lives  of  others  also.  This 
tallies  with  the  omission  of  the  assevera- 
tion in  ver.  14.  The  first  declaration, 
that  God  would  deliver  the  righteous 
iu  the  coming  judgments,  needed  no 
asseveration,  inasmuch  as  this  truth 
was  not  called  in  question ;  but  it  was 
required  in  the  case  of  the  declaration 
that  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous 
would  bring  no  deliverance  to  the  sin- 
ful nation,  since  this  was  the  hope 
which  the  ungodly  cherished,  and  it 
was  this  hope  which  was  to  be  taken 
from  them'' (Z'<5tf). 

Vers.  17-20.  Two  more  great  judg- 
ments are  threatened.  **The  four  visi- 
tations of  God,  each  introduced  with 
an  ify  should  actually  come,  as  had 
been  repeatedly  predicted,  unitedly 
upon  the  degenerate  covenant  people, 
upon  the  desecrated  land  of  the  Lord. 
The  transition  from  the  merely  hy})0- 
thetical  to  the  actual  follows  in  ver.  21. 
The/(?r  at  the  beginning  points  to  the 
ground  of  the  discussion  instituted, 
shows  that  it  is  no  mere  idle  common 
place"  (Heng,) 

Yer.  21.  *'How  much  more  when  I 
send  my  four  sore  Judgments  upon 
Jerusalem."  **  How  much  more  must 
the  general  standard  of  the  Divine 
judgments  manifest  itself  before  all 


in  the  servant,  who  knows  his  master's 
will,  and  yet  does  what  is  worthy  of 
stripes  I  *  You  only  have  I  known  of 
all  the  families  of  the  earth ;  therefore 
I  will  visit  upon  you  all  your  iniquities,' 
says  Amos "  (Heng.)  "  The  sword, 
and  the  fomine»  and  the  noisome 
beast,  and  the  pestilence."  ^'The 
number  four  may  possibly  symbolise 
the  completeness  of  the  judgment,  as 
one  on  all  sides.  Formsrly  famine 
was  first ;  here  it  is  the  sward,  because 
the  calamity  of  war  lay  immediately 
before  them.  In  consequence  of  it 
the  other  three  judgments  came  one 
after  another.  War  brin^  famine 
into  the  cities ;  corpses  outside,  which 
attract  the  beasts ;  and  from  all  these 
follows  the  pestilence  "  (Lange). 

Yer.  22.  '<  Therein  shall  be  left  a 
renmant  that  shall  be  brought  forth." 
"A  rerau.\nt,"  t.«.,  persons  who  have 
escaped  destruction.  These  shall  be 
brought  forth,  i.e.,  led  out  of  Jerusalem 
"unto  you."  They  shall  join  those 
who  are  already  in  exile  in  Babylon. 
''Sons  and  daughters."  ''These  are 
called  sons  and  daughters,  with  an 
allusion  to  vers.  16,  18,  and  20;  and 
consequently  we  must  not  take  these 
words  as  referring  to  the  younger 
generation  in  contrast  to  the  older" 
{Keil).  "Ye  shall  be  comforted  con- 
cerning the  evil  that  I  have  brought 
upon  Jerusalem."  They  shall  be  com- 
forted in  seeing  the  justification  of  the 
ways  of  God. 

Yer.  23.  '*  Their  ways  and  their 
doings."  "  Not  those  ways  by  which 
they  had  provoked  the  Lord  to  punish 
the  nation,  but  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness— the  good  works  to  the.  practice 
of  which  they  had  been  recovered  by 
the  severe  discipline  through  the  course 
of  which  they  had  been  brought.  While 
they  justified  God  in  all  the  calamities 
which  He  had  inflicted  upon  them, 
their  being  spared  was  a  proof  of  His 
great  mercy,  and  a  pledge  that,  if  their 
brethren  in  the  captivity  followed  their 
example  by  renouncing  idolatry,  they 
also  should  be  dealt  with  in 'mercy" 
(Hend.) 


151 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  ziT.  EOMILETIC  COMMBNTARY:  BZJSKJSL. 

HOMILETICS. 
The  Judobients  of  God  upon  Nations. 

L  They  usually  take  the  shape  of  great  pnblic  calamities.  1.  Th$  tources 
of  the  naiianal  wealth  are  undermined.  "  I  will  break  the  staff  of  the  bread  thereof, 
and  will  sen*'  famine  upon  it"(ver.  13).  Bread,  the  chief  food  of  man,  may 
well  be  called  "  the  staff  of  life."  It  is  the  prop  which  supports  man's  physical 
nature,  and  when  it  is  taken  away  he  sinks  exhausted  to  the  ground.  Famine 
is  one  of  Ood's  sore  judgments,  for  it  seizes  upon  what  is  man's  greatest  treasure, 
his  life.  Man  and  beast  fail ;  the  means  of  useful  labour  and  food  are  cut  off. 
The  very  foundations  of  life  are  destroyed.  2.  The  invasion  of  enemies,  "If  I 
cause  noisome  beasts  to  pass  through  the  land"  (ver.  15).  Man  was  invested 
with  dominion  over  the  beasts  of  the  earth.  By  virtue  of  the  power  of  his  mind, 
and  not  merely  by  physical  force,  he  retains  his  sovereignty  over  them.  And 
God's  providence  wonder  ully  preserves  the  balance  of  power  between  man  and 
the  lower  animals.  He  sets  a  watch  over  all  His  creatures,  so  that  they  shall  not 
pass  His  commandment,  but  fulfil  His  purpose  in  placing  man  head  overall  here 
below.  But  sin  interferes  with  man's  complete  dominion ;  and  it  is,  after  all, 
but  a  broken  sceptre  that  he  holds  in  his  hand.  God,  for  purposes  of  judgment^ 
allows  beasts  to  overcome  man.  Another  enemy  to  nations  is  the  sword,  God 
says,  "Sword,  go  througli  the  land"  (ver.  17).  War  is  one  of  the  scourges 
which  God  uses  to  punish  wicked  nations.  All  the  evils  mentioned  in  this 
section— devouring  beasts,  pestilence,  and  famine — follow  in  its  track.  3.  Pesti- 
lence, "Or,  if  I  send  a  pestilence  into  that  land"  (ver.  19).  in  famine  and 
other  calamities  men  of  wealth  may  be  able  to  keep  the  enemy  for  a  long  while 
at  bay,  or  even  to  hold  out  to  the  end.  But  they  have  no  defence  against 
pestilence.  Then  does  the  Angel  of  Death  walk  through  the  land  with  impartial 
step,  sparing  no  age  or  condition. 

IL  Though  they  may  be  traced  to  natural  causes  they  are  still  the  work  of 
God.  War,  pestilence,  and  famine,  are  due  to  the  operation  of  natural  laws. 
But  it  is  also  true  that  God  sends  them;  for  He  is  behind  all  nature,  and  behind 
all  human  history,  whether  in  justice  or  in  the  mysterious  march  of  its  events. 
The  calamities  tliat  fall,  upon  nations  have  deep  moral  causes,  and  ultimately 
resolve  themselves  into  the  righteous  will  of  God  in  His  manifest  indignation 
against  human  sin.  1.  Nations,  as  such,  are  under  moral  law.  This  law  expresses 
the  will  of  God  in  regard  to  human  conduct.  2.  The  transgression  of  those  laws 
involves  penalty.  History  has  many  sad  examples  which  show  how  the  moral 
corruption  of  a  nation  may  become  so  great  as  to  bring  about  its  destruction. 
Nations  can  only  be  judged  in  this  life,  for  as  such  they  do  not  exist  in  another 
world.  When  a  land  sins  against  God  by  "  trespassing  grievously,"  the  calamities 
which  are  visited  upon  it  are  seen  to  come  from  God  by  all  who  believe  that 
there  is  a  moral  Governor  of  the  world. 

nL  They  cannot  always  be  averted  by  pleading  the  righteonaness  of  the 
few  therein.  Abraham's  intercession  for  Sodom  establishes  that  principle  of 
God's  government  by  which  whole  nations  are  spared  great  judgments  for  the 
sake  of  the  few  righteous  among  them.  The  faithful  few  among  many  faithless 
are  as  the  salt  which  preserves  the  whole  community  from  corruption.  We  are 
exhorted  and  encouraged  to  pray  for  others,  and  even  to  be  so  bold  as  to  ask 
that  the  hand  of  justice  might  be  stayed  when  it  is  lifted  against  the  ungodly. 
But  there  are  limits  to  intercession.  Even  the  prayers  of  Abraham  could  not 
save  the  devoted  cities  of  the  plain.  In  like  manner  the  iniquity  of  Jerusalem 
had  grown  so  great  that  the  prayers  and  godly  influence  of  men  of  such  famous 
righteousness  as  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  could  not  save  it  from  the  threatened 
159 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nomLETIC  COMMBNTAR  Y:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xit. 


doom.  The  Jews  placed  great  reliance  upon  the  intercession  of  the  saints,  and 
counted  upon  it  as  a  refuge  from  judgment.  They  are  now  told  that  this  is  a 
yain  hope,  that  Qod's  righteous  law  must  take  its  course,  and  that  the  most  holy 
*men  can  but  save  themselves  (vers.  14,  16,  18,  20). 

IV.  The  righteoosness  of  Gk)d  therein  will  appear  unto  His  people.  '^  And 
ye  shall  be  comforted"  (ver.  22).  This  comfort  would  arise  from  clearly  seeing 
the  justification  of  God's  ways  (ver.  23).  Tliere  was  a  sufficient  cause  for  all 
the  evil  which  was  coming  upon  Jerusalem,  and  faithful  souls  should  see  how 
that  the  ways  of  the  Lord  were  just.  However  severe  God's  judgments  may  be 
in  His  dealings  with  mankind,  it  is  a  comfort  when  we  know  and  believe  that 
they  are  righteous.  What  a  lesson  for  Christian  nations  1  They  are  governed 
by  the  same  great  moral  principles,  but  with  added  light  their  responsibilities 
are  greater. 

(Ver.  14.) 

From  this  passage  we  may  infer  two  things — 

I  That  there  are  seasons  when  even  the  intercession  of  the  most  eminent 
will  not  avalL  There  are  seasons  in  which  it  is  unalterably  determined  to 
inflict  punishment. 

H  That  these  are  so  rare  and  so  extraordinary  that  to  declare  He  will 
not  tnm  away  for  intercession  is  the  strongest  token  of  His  fierce  indigna- 
tion. (1.)  If  God  delights  to  hear  prayer  it  is  most  reasonable  to  believe  He  will 
favourably  regard  intercessory  prayer ;  for  then  the  supplicant  is  exercising  two 
most  important  virtues  at  once,  piety  and  benevolence.  He  is  then  employed 
in  fulfilling  the  whole  law,  and  makes  the  nearest  approach  to  the  divine  nature. 
(2.)  Examples  of  its  success— Abraham,  Moses,  and  Job.— -Jt  Hall. 

"Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job." 

Some  make  great  inquiry  why  these  three  men  should  be  mentioned  rather 
than  others,  and  they  give  in  their  answer : — 1.  It  is  thought  that  they  are 
named,  for  that  they  could  not  divert  God's  wrath  by  their  holiness  and  prayers 
from  the  people  of  their  times.  Noah  could  not  keep  off  the  flood,  nor  Job  the 
sad  things  which  befel  him  and  his,  nor  Daniel  the  captivity.  2.  Others  think 
they  are  named  because  they  freed  others  in  imminent  danger  in  their  times. 
Noah  saved  his  family  from  the  flood  ;  Job  prayed  for  his  friends,  and  they  were 
spared ;  Daniel  preserved  the  magicians  and  wise  men.  But  rather  they  are 
named,  because  they  were  men  of  great  holiness,  exercised  with  great  trials,  and 
so  the  more  fervent  in  prayer.  And  what  if  these  men,  who  were  so  acceptable 
to  me,  had  so  much  interest  in  me  and  often  prevailed  with  me,  should  pray  for 
you,  yet  they  should  do  nothing  for  your  deliverance  by  their  prayers.  These 
were  men  in  great  afflictions,  and  affliction  is  the  whetstone  of  prayer,  the 
bellows  to  blow  up  that  fire. — QreenhiU. 

(Vers.  22,  28.) 

1.  When  God's  judgments  are  sorest,  yet  then  He  shows  mercy  to  some. 
2.  The  Lord  will  satisfy  and  comfort  the  hearts  of  His  people  against  the  evil 
and  scandal  that  comes  by  any  of  His  judgments.  When  Jerusalem  was 
destroyed,  the  Jews  rooted  out  and  carried  to  Babylon,  what  joy  was  there  in 
the  nations  1  what  reproachings  of  the  Jews  I  Where  is  now  their  God  ?  At 
these  things  the  Jews'  hearts  in  Babylon  were  grieved,  offended ;  therefore  the 
Lord  tells  them,  they  "  shall  be  comforted  concerning  all  the  evil  He  hath  brought 
upon  Jerusalem."  They  shall  know  the  greatness  of  their  sins  which  moved 
liim  to  do  so.    S.  That  the  Lord  is  righteous  and  just  in  His  judgments.     "I 

163 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XV. 


ffOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZSKIBL. 


have  not  done  without  canse  all  that  I  have  done  in  Jerusalem."  It  is  the  devil's 
design  to  hurt  witliout  cause ;  therefore  saith  God,  **  Thou  movedst  me  against 
him,  to  destroy  him  without  cause "  (Job  iL  3).  But  God  would  not  do  it ; 
whatever  He  doth  He  hath  great  cause  for.  He  is  the  only  and  infinitely  wise 
God,  and  doth  all  things  upon  the  height  of  reason.  Their  sins  were  such  as  im- 
peached His  honour,  corrupted  His  worship,  broke  the  covenant,  questioned  His 
providence,  violated  justice,  and  conformed  them  to  the  heathen.  He  had  cause 
enough  to  do  what  He  did,  namely,  to  vindicate  His  honour,  worship,  covenant, 
providence,  justice,  and  to  show  that  His  people,  if  they  will  sin  with  the  world, 
must  suffer  grevious  things  for  it.  4.  Men  shall  know  in  due  time  the  equity 
of  God's  judgments.  They  are  a  great  depth.  Men  cannot  sound  or  measure 
them  (Ps.  xxxvi.  6).  The  causes  of  them  are  hidden  from  the  eyes  of  most 
Job's  friends  mistook  the  cause  of  God's  dealing  so  sharply  with  him,  but  after- 
wards they  understood  it.  They  in  Babylon,  and  others,  were  astonished  at  the 
sore  judgments  of  God,  but  God  let  them  know  the  cause  of  it,  and  so  they  were 
brought  to  justify  God  (1  Kings  ix.  7-9).  God  proclaims  the  cause  of  His  severe 
judgments,  so  that  men  may  see  the  equity  of  them,  that  "  He  is  righteous  in 
all  His  ways,  and  holy  in  all  His  works"  (Ps.  cxlv.  17). — Ch^eenhill, 


ISBAEL  Compared  to  thb  Useless  Wood  of  a  Wild  Vine  (Chap,  xv.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— In  the 
last  chapter  the  prophet  had  an- 
nounced that  God  would  not  spare 
Jerusalem  for  the  sake  of  the  few 
nghteous  therein.  In  this  chapter  he 
destroys  another  refuge  in  which  they 
trusted.  He  shows  how  His  people 
Israel  have  no  native  superiority  over 
other  nations,  no  such  intrinsic  value 
as  would  entitle  them  to  be  considered 
as  a  special  case.  They  may  have 
rested  secure  in  the  thought  that 
Israel  is  compared  to  a  vine  (Ps. 
Ixxx.),  that  they  could  not  be  rejected 
and  punished  because  of  their  election. 
The  prophet's  answer  to  this  false  con- 
fidence is,  that  Israel  is  no  longer  a 
true  vine,  but  mere  wood,  yea,  even 
the  most  useless  of  all  wood,  and  only 
fit  to  serve  as  fuel  for  the  fire.  In 
vers.  1-5  the  figure  is  worked  out  in 
the  shape  of  a  parable.  In  vers.  6-8 
we  have  the  application  of  the  parable- 
God  will  deal  with  Jerusalem  as  men 
deal  with  the  wood  of  the  forest  vine, 
the  worthless  remains  of  a  barren  tree. 

Vers.  1  and  2.  ''What  is  the  vine 
tree  more  than  any  tree?"  It  was 
A  standing  fiij^ure  with  the  prophets 
to  compare  Israel  to  a  vine  or  vine- 
yard (Isa.  V. ;  Hos.  x. ;  Jer.  ii.  21), 
and  always,  with  the  exception  of 
Ps.  Ixxx.,  to  point  out  its  degeneracy. 
154 


Ver.  3.  Shall  the  wood  be  taken 
thereof  to  do  any  work  7  It  is  useless 
as  a  material  for  making  any  instru- 
ment. "For  use  its  diameter  even 
unfits  it;  while  its  appearance  is  too 
paltry  for  ornament,  and  it  is  too  weak 
to  bear  anything  except  fruit"  (Lange). 

Ver.  4.  "Behold,  it  is  cast  into  the 
fire  for  ftiel ;  the  fire  devoureth  both 
the  ends  of  it,  and  the  midst  of  it  is 
burned.  Is  it  meet  for  any  work  7  " 
The  answer  to  this  qu<*stion  is  given 
in  the  next  verse,  the  force  of  which 
is  this, — If  in  its  perfect  state  it  can- 
not be  put  to  any  useful  purpose,  how 
much  less  when  it  is  partially  scorched 
and  consumed  1 

Ver.  6.  "So  wiU  I  give  the  inhabi- 
tants of  Jerusalem."  "The  Jews 
having  utterly  failed  to  answer  the 
divine  purpose  in  selecting  them  to 
be  witnesses  for  Jehovah  in  the  midst 
of  the  heathen,  they  were  to  be  com- 
pletely broken  up  as  a  nation,  and 
punished  by  severe  and  fiery  trials  in 
succession,  till  the  dross  of  their  idola- 
try was  purged  away.  When  a  pro- 
fessing people  act  unworthily  of  their 
calling,  they  are  only  fit  to  be  rejected" 
(Matt  iii.  10,  v.  13)  (HentUrson). 

Ver.  7.  "They  shall  go  out  firom 
one  fire,  and  another  fire  shall  devour 
them."    "  Out  of  a  fire  one  must  come 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILI'ITIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL  OHap.  xV. 

either  burned  or  scorched.     Israel  has  is  now  about  to  be  given  up  altogether 

been  in  the  fire  alread}'.     It  resembles  to  the  fire"  {KeU), 
a  wild  vine  which  has  been  consumed         Yer.  8.  "  And  I  will  make  the  land 

at  both   ends  by  the  fire,  while  the  desolate."     Repeating  the  threat  of 

middle  has  been  scorched,  and  which  chap.  xiv.  13,  16. 

HOMILETICS. 
Thb  End  of  Man's  Existencb  (ver.  2). 

The  vine-tree  is  weaker  than  roost  trees,  so  as  to  be  unfit  for  any  work,  and 
would  therefore  be  very  contemptible  but  for  that  propertv  it  possesses  of  bring- 
ing forth  a  valuable  and  delicious  fruit.  On  this  account  it  is  highly  prized  and 
diligently  cultivated.  But  if  it  fail  of  producing  fruit,  the  only  purpose  to  which 
it  can  be  applied  is  to  turn  \%  to  fuel.  Such  is  the  figurative  representation 
which  the  prophet  gives  us  in  this  passage  of  man,  considered  especially  as  the 
object  of  divine  care  and  culture.  He  is  naturally  capable  of  yielding  a  precious 
fruit ;  in  this  consists  his  sole  excellency ;  this  is  the  sole  end  of  his  existence ; 
and  if  he  fails  in  this  he  is  of  no  use  but  to  be  destroyed. 

I  Man  is  naturally  capable  of  yielding  a  most  precions  frnit :  this  firait 
consists  in  living  to  God.  1.  He  is  possessed  of  all  the  natwral  powers  which  are 
requisite  for  that  purpose.  He  is  endowed  with  reason  and  understanding,  enab- 
ling him  to  perceive  the  proofs  of  the  being  of  Qod,  and  to  entertain  just,  though 
inadequate,  conceptions  of  the  principal  attributes  of  His  nature :  His  self- 
existence,  His  absolute  perfection,  His  power,  His  wisdom,  His  all-sufficiency, 
His  omnipresence,  His  holiness,  justice,  and  goodness.  Inferior  animals  do  not ; 
on  which  account  He  is  the  vine-tree  amongst  the  trees  of  the  wood,  inferior  in 
many  properties  to  some  of  them,  but  superior  in  those  particulars  which  fit 
him  for  this  end,  and  on  that  account  incomparably  more  valuable.  2.  As  we 
are  possessed  of  ruUural  powers  fitting  us  for  the  service  of  Ood,  so  He  has  bestowed 
upon  us  much  care  and  culture,  with  an  express  vimo  to  this  end.  The  religious 
instruction  He  gave  to  His  ancient  people  is  frequently  compared  in  Scripture 
ta  the  cultivation  which  men  bestow  upon  vines.  "  My  beloved  hath  a  vine- 
yard in  a  very  fruitful  hill "  (Istk  v.  1).  "For  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  of  hosts 
is  the  house  of  Israel,  and  tne  men  of  Judah  His  pleasant  plant "  (Isa.  v.  7). 
He  gave  them  His  will,  His  ordinances.  His  prophets,  and  separated  them  from 
all  nations  by  peculiar  rites,  that  they  might  be  to  Him  for  a  name  and  a  praise 
and  a  peculiar  treasure  above  all  nations.  He  has  done  much  more  for  us  under 
the  Gospel.  None  can  be  ignorant  of  the  intention  of  Ood  in  all  these  pro- 
visions. '*  Yet  I  had  planted  thee  a  noble  vine,  wholly  a  right  seed ;  how,  then, 
art  thou  now  turned  into  the  degenerate  plant  of  a  strange  vine  unto  me  t "  (Jer. 
ii  21). 

IL  This  is  the  only  end  for  which  mankind  are  formed  and  preserved. 
This  is  the  proper  fruit  of  human  nature,  which  admits  of  nothing  being  sub- 
stituted in  its  room.  1.  A  mere  selfish,  voluptuous  life,  cannot  be  supposed  to  be  the 
proper  fruit  of  human  nature.  He  who  lives  to  himself  is  universally  despised 
and  condemned.  "Israel  is  an  empty  vine,  he  bringeth  forth  fruit  to  him- 
self" (Hos.  X.  1).  "For  their  vine  is  of  the  vine  of  Sodom,  and  of  the  fields  of 
Gbmorrah ;  their  grapes  are  grapes  of  gall,  their  clusters  are  bitter "  (Deut 
xxxiL  32).  2.  A  life  of  social  benevolence,  in  which  the  public  good  is  preserved, 
without  a  supreme  regard  to  Ood,  cannot  be  this  fruit.  Can  such  persons  be  said  to 
neglect  the  end  of  their  existence  ?  Undoubtedly,  for  the  following  reasons : 
(1.)  To  do  good  to  our  fellow-oreatures,  without  regard  to  Ood,  is  to  forget  the  principal 
relation  in  which  we  stand,  and,  consequently,  to  neglect  the  principal  duty.  A  right 
behaviour  to  each  other  is  no  proper  compensation  for  the  want  of  obedient 

155 


Digitized  by 


Google 


oiiAK  XV.  HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZSKIEL, 

regards  to  God  (instanced  in  pirates  and  rebels).  A  regard  to  Grol  is  the  root 
and  origin  of  all  real  virtue.  (2.)  The  end  of  man's  existence  cannot,  with  any  pr<h 
priety,  be  considered  as  confined  to  this  world.  But  the  proper  end  accomplished 
by  mere  social  virtues  is  entirely  confined  to  the  present  state.  (3.)  No  collective 
number  of  men  can  be  independent  of  God,  m/ore  than  a  single  individual ;  therefore 
no  such  collective  body  has  a  right  to  constUt  their  common  interest,  to  the  neglect  of 
God,  any  more  than  a  single  individual  to  pursue  his  individual  interest  The  aggre- 
gate of  mankind  appears  something  great  and  imposing  in  the  eyes  of  men,  in 
consequence  of  which  a  peculiar  importance  is  attached  to  those  actions  which 
tend  to  the  public  good.  The  magnitude  of  the  general  interest  imposes  a  value 
on  those  actions  which  are  adapted  to  advance  so  great  an  object.  But,  in  the 
sight  of  Grod,  all  nations  are  as  the  "drop  of  a  bucket;"  "He  taketh  up  the 
isles  as  a  very  little  thing."  Suppose  all  the  subjects  of  a  lawful  prince  were  to 
agree  to  stand  by  each  other,  and  to  promote  each  other's  interests  to  the  utmost, 
would  this  be  allowed  by  the  prince  as  any  atonement  for  a  great  and  persever- 
ing rebellion  1  Or  suppose  a  single  individual  so  disposed,  would  not  the  result 
be  the  same  t     No  other  can  be  substituted  for  this. 

in.  He  who  anBweni  not  the  end  of  his  existence  is  only  fit  to  be 
destroyed.  He  is  like  a  vessel  marred  in  the  hands  of  the  potter,  proper  only 
to  be  broken.  The  barren  vine  may  be  useful  as  fuel,  and  to  this  purpose  it  is 
much  applied  in  eastern  countries.  Thus  wicked  men  may  be  useful  with  a  sub- 
ordinate kind  of  usefulness,  by  their  destruction.  1.  They  may  thereby  become 
edifying  examples  of  the  just  vengeance  of  God,  in  order  to  deter  others.  That  this 
will  be  one  of  the  ends  answered  by  the  punishment  of  the  wicked  seems  inti- 
mated in  several  passages  of  Scripture,  as  well  as  is  sup{>orted  by  its  analogy  to 
human  government,  "  And  they  shall  go  forth  and  look  upon  the  carcases  of 
the  men  that  have  transgressed  against  me ;  for  their  worm  shall  not  die,  neither 
shall  their  fire  be  quenched,  and  they  shall  be  an  abhorring  unto  all  flesh  "  (Isa. 
Ixvi.  24).  2.  They  will  serve  to  manifest  those  attributes  of  the  great  Supreme  which 
their  conduct  disowned,  and  which  it  seemed  virtually  to  call  in  question.  "  What  if 
€k)d,  willing  to  show  His  wrath,  and  to  make  His  power  known,  endured  with 
much  long-suffering  the  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  to  destruction  1 "  (Rom.  ix.  22). 
This  is  a  subordinate  use,  not  a  primary  end.  It  is  that  for  which  men  fit  them- 
selves by  their  presumptuous  and  impenitent  neglect  of  God.  (1.)  What  total 
blindness  attaches  to  those  who  live  in  the  total  neglect  of  Gk)d  and  religion  I 
(2.)  What  little  room  is  there  for  that  confidence  which  many  place  in  correct- 
ness of  deportment  towards  their  fellow-creatures,  while  religion  is  not  even 
pretended  to  be  the  governing  principle  of  their  lives !  (3.)  What  need  have 
we  all  to  examine  ourselves,  and  seriously  to  inquire  whether  we  are  yielding 
that  fruit  unto  Grod  on  which  we  have  been  insisting  I  (4,)  How  ought  those 
to  be  alarmed  when  the  result  of  such  examination  is  that  they  have  been 
hitherto  utterly  without  fruit !  How  strong  the  obligations  on  such,  after  con- 
sidering their  ways,  to  turn  unto  the  Lord.  And  thankful  should  they  be  that . 
space  is  afforded  them  for  repentance  and  salvation. — B.  Hall. 

The  Church  is  not  to  be  a  wilderness,  but  a  vineyard ;  it  is  not  to  bear 
flowers  only,  or  leaves  and  twigs  merely,  but  fruit  She  is  not  an  apple-tree  or 
fig-tree,  but  a  vine.  Wine  cheers,  inspirits,  enlivens.  Outwardly  insignificant, 
there  is  the  noblest  power  within.  The  grace  of  Christ  working  through  poor 
apostles. — A  Lapide. 

(Ver.  1.) 

The  Jews,  who  were  the  Church  of  Qod,  resembled  the  yina     1.  Tines  are 
few  in  respect  of  other  trees,  so  were  the  Jews  in  respect  of  other  people  (Deut 
156 


Digitized  by 


Google 


B0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZBKISL.  OHap.  IT. 

yii  7).  They  were  the  "  fewest  of  all  people."  2.  Vines  are  planted  by  hillsides, 
by  hoases,  in  gardens,  orchards,  &c.,  and  the  Jews  were  planted  in  the  choicest 
land;  "in  a  pleasant  place"  (Hos.  ix  13),  "in  a  very  fruitful  hill"  (Isa.  v.  1). 
The  vine  was  brought  out  of  Egypt ;  it  was  a  chosen  vine,  and  it  was  planted 
(Ps.  Ixxx  8),  but  where  1  in  "  a  good  land,"  even  a  land  of  brooks,  fountains, 
springs,  valleys,  hills ;  in  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  the  glory  of  all 
lands  (Deut  viii.  7  ;  Ezek.  xx.  6).  Therefore  called  a  branch  of  His  own  plant- 
ing, planted  with  His  right  hand  (Isa.  be.  21 ;  Pa.  Ixxx.  15).  3.  Vines  are  weak, 
must  have  props  and  supports  to  uphold  them.  God  dealt  so  by  the  Jews. 
"  In  the  wilderness  the  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee  as  a  man  doth  bear  his  son,  in 
all  the  way  that  ye  went"  (Deut.  L  31).  Children  are  weak,  and  must  be  carried 
in  the  arms ;  and  so  God  did  carry  them  (Deut.  xxxiii.  27).  4.  Fruitful ;  no 
tree  so  fruitful  as  the  vino.  It  is  called  the  "  fruitful  vine,"  it  is  fruitful  in 
branches,  and  fruitful  in  clusters.  The  Jews  were  a  fruitful  nation.  **Thy 
fathers  went  down  into  Egypt  with  threescore  and  ten  persons,  and  now  the 
Lord  thy  God  hath  made  thee  as  the  stars  of  heaven  for  multitude "  ^eut 
X.  32).  i.  It  spreads  much ;  so  the  Jews,  who  were  God's  vine  (Ps.  Ixxx.  9-1 1). 
The  psalmist  saith  there  of  this  vine,  that  it  filled  the  land,  covered  the  hills 
with  its  shadow,  sent  out  her  boughs  unto  the  sea,  and  her  brandies  unto  the 
river,  and  they  spread  far.    6.  It  is  pleasant  and  delightful ;  such  were  the  Jews 

S[sa.  V.  7).  7.  Most  pains  required  about  vines  of  any  plants  or  trees;  much 
igging,  dressing,  pruning,  supporting,  fencing  is  needful.  The  Jews  had  much 
pains  or  cost  bestowed  upon  them  (Isa.  v.  4).  Other  trees  are  little  looked  after, 
but  the  vine  must  have  special  care  (John  xv.  2).  The  husbandman  observes 
every  branch,  the  fruitful  and  unfruitful  (Amos  iiL  2). — OreenhilL 

The  Eeal  Secukity  of  CmiisTiANa 

God's  Church  is  still  the  same  though  the  outward  form  of  it  be  changed. 
It  is  governed  by  the  same  principles,  exposed  to  the  same  sources  of  danger, 
and  only  safe  in  the  same  refuge.  The  Christian  Church  is  God's  Vine,  and  the 
reason  of  its  existence,  of  its  continuance,  is  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  case  of 
His  Church  of  old.     What  is  the  real  security  of  Christians]     Consider — 

1  What  it  is  not.  1.  Not  in  their  high  calling.  God  called  the  Jews  of  old 
from  amongst  the  heathen  to  be  a  separate  people,  a  holy  nation.  He  calk  His 
Church  now  out  of  the  world.  Yet  this  is  only  means  to  an  end,  and  not  the 
end  itself.  He  has  called  His  people  for  a  purpose,  and  if  they  fail  to  answer 
it  they  only  fall  from  a  higher  elevation,  and  therefore  into  a  worse  destruction 
than  others.  2.  Not  in  their  great  gifts  and  endoivments.  They  have  the  gifts 
of  the  Spirit,  the  means  of  grace,  prophets  and  teachers,  the  written  Word. 
With  them  lies  the  sacred  deposit  of  God's  truth.  But  these  are  only  the 
means  and  appliances  of  spiritual  education.  They  are  not  in  themselves 
knowledge,  for  in  spiritual  things  knowledge  comes  of  doing  the  will  of  God. 
Unless  God  is  seen  by  the  eye  of  the  soul,  and  enjoyed  as  a  real  possession 
within,  the  doctrines  and  ordinances  of  religion  become  to  us  but  barren  tradi- 
tions, and  outward  privileges  only  a  temptation  for  resting  in  false  security.  3. 
Not  in  what  God  has  already  done,  (xod  has  cultivated  His  vine,  the  Church, 
with  great  care.  But  if  any  of  her  members  stop  short,  and  so  fail  to  reach  the 
end  of  God's  gracious  design,  the  good  which  He  hath  wrought  for  them  will  be 
forfeited  and  will  only  increase  their  judgment.  From  each  who  hath  not  any 
solid  results  to  show  shall  be  taken  away  what  has  already  been  given,  ''  even 
that  which  he  hath." 

n.  What  it  is.  The  real  security  of  the  Christian  Church  is  its  fruitful- 
ness.  God  planted  it  for  this  very  purpose.  1.  God's  honour  is  concerned  in  the 
Church's  fruitfiUness.     The  husbandman  likes  to  see  and  to  show  the  fruit  of  his 

157 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xn. 


SOMILMTIO  COMMBNTAUT:  SZBKIBL 


labours.     They  are  his  reward,  and  they  commend  to  others  his  diligence  and 
care  (St  John  zv.  8 ;  St  Matt  ▼.  16).     %  It  is  not  what  we  receive,  hui  what 

Stings  up  from  w  into  thefruU  of  goodliringy  thai  ddermines  our  spiritual  condition. 
od*8  gilts  are  a  power  entrusted  to  us  to  be  used  for  His  glory.  They  are 
the  seed  which  is  sown  in  our  hearts ;  but  they  are  entirely  wasted  if  the  fruit 
does  not  appear.  3.  The  end  decides  the  maUer.  It  is  in  vain  to  rejoice  at 
beginning  well,  and  then  imagine  that  all  is  done.  The  end  alone  determines 
our  state  before  God.  We  were  made  for  God's  glory,  and  if  we  have  not 
reached  that  we  have  failed.  4.  fFe  tmut  not  boast  of  Giod!s  gifts  of  grace  as  if 
ihey  were  products  of  cur  own  nature.  No  ground  for  boasting  at  all,  for  we  have 
literally  nothing  which  we  have  not  received.  How  much  more  is  this  true  of 
God's  gifts  of  grace  I  5.  We  must  not  turn  OoSs  benefits  into  an  excuse  for  sin. 
Our  true  security  lies  not  in  our  privileges,  but  in  the  good  use  which  we  make 
of  them. 

(Ver.  8.) 

The  sins  of  the  inhabitants  bring  desolation  upon  a  land.  Ganaan  was  a 
pleasant  and  fruitful  land,  a  very  paradise,  but  because  they  committed  a  tres- 
pass, coiTupted  God's  worship  and  oppressed  the  people,  therefore  God  laid 
waste  the  land,  even  His  own  vineyard ;  He  plucked  away  the  fence,  broke 
down  the  wall,  and  let  in  those  wild  beasts,  bears,  boars,  and  foxes,  the 
Babylonians,  who  tore  the  vine  in  pieces^  and  rooted  it  wholly  up,  and  laid  all 
desolate.  Before  they  came,  the  land  was  as  the  garden  of  Eden,  but  they 
left  it  a  desolate  wilderness ;  and  where  the  vines  grew,  there  were  briars  and 
thorns  (Isa.  vii.  23,  24 ;  Ps.  cviL  3,  4).  If  we  would  therefore  prevent  this, 
let  us  hearken  to  what  is  said,  Jer.  v.  7. — OreenhiU. 


Israel's  Ingratitude,  Punishment,  and,  in  the  End,  Foroiyeness. 

(Chap,  xvi.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  pro- 
phet  surveys  the  entire  development 
of  the  nation,  past  and  future.  Their 
original  condition  was  most  wretched, 
like  that  of  a  miserable  infant  at  its 
birth  utterly  neglected  and  deprived 
of  proper  attention  and  care.  God 
had  brought  them  out  of  this  lowly 
estate,  had  saved  them  from  destruc- 
tion, and  had  fostered  them  with  His 
constant  love  and  care  until  they  had 
reached  to  a  maturity  of  vigour  and 


lovelinesa  But  in  their  ingratitude 
they  sinned  grievously  against  Him. 
They  might  rest  in  their  position  as 
the  chosen  vine  and  think  themselves 
secure,  but  they  are  here  assured  that 
they  are  no  better  than  other  nations, 
and  are  liable  to  be  punished  and 
judged  as  the  heathen  around  them. 
Yet,  in  the  end,  God  will  be  mindful 
of  His  covenant,  grant  them  His  for- 
givenessy  and  restore  them  to  favouz; 


Israel's  Past  Condition,  Helpless,  Unclean,  and  about  to  Perish. 

(Vers.  1,  2.) 


Vers.  1,  2.  "Oause  Jerusalem  to 
know  her  abominations."  Jerusalem 
is  used  as  the  symbolical  representa- 
tive of  the  whole  Jewish  people.  Her 
sins  were  greater  than  those  of  other 
nations;  they  were  "abominations," 
for  they  were  the  sins  of  the  covenant 
158 


people.     The  main  end  of  this  chapter 
is  to  declare  these  abominations. 

Ver.  3.  •*  Thy  birth  and  thy  nativity 
is  in  the  land  of  Oanaan ;  thy  father 
was  an  Amorite,  and  thy  mother  an 
Hittite."  "  Kegarded  merely  as  a  city, 
Jerusalem  was  neither  of  Amoritish 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BO^fTLETTO  COMMENTAnY:  EZBRIBL. 


offAP.  xn. 


nor  Hittite  origin,  but  simply  a  Jebu- 
site  city.  And  it  is  too  obvious  to 
need  any  proof  that  the  prophetic 
word  does  not  refer  to  the  city  as  a 
dty,  but  that  Jerusalem  represents 
the  people  of  Israel,  or  the  covenant 
nation.  It  was  not  the  mass  of  houses, 
but  the  population — which  was  the 
foundling  —  that  excited  Jehovah's 
compassion,  and  which  He  multiplied 
into  myriads  (ver.  7),  clothed  in 
splendour,  and  chose  as  the  bride 
with  whom  He  concluded  a  marriage 
covenant  The  descent  and  birth 
referred  to  are  not  physical,  but  spiri- 
tual descent  Sj>iritually,  Israel  sprang 
from  the  land  of  the  Canaanites ;  and 
its  father  was  an  Amorite  and  its 
mother  a  Hittite,  in  the  same  sense 
in  which  Jesus  said  to  the  Jews,  *  Ye 
are  of  your  father  the  devil'  (St 
John  viii.  44).  The  iniquity  of  the 
Amoritds  was  great  even  in  Abraham's 
time,  through  not  yet  full  or  ripe  for 
destruction  (Gea  xv.  16);  and  the 
daughters  of  Heth,  whom  Esau  married, 
caused  Rebekah  great  bitterness  of 
spirit  (Gen.  xxvii.  46)  "  (KeU). 

Ver.  4.  "Thy  navel  was  not  cut, 
neither  wast  thou  washed  in  water 
to  supple  thee."  The  cutting  of  tlie 
navel-string  is  necessary  for  the  inde- 
pendent life  of  the  child,  and  the 
washing  with  water  to  cleanse  it  from 
the  impurities  attaching  to  it.  If 
these  necessary  offices  are  neglected, 
the  infant  must  perish. 


"  Thou  wast  not  salted  at  all,  nor 
swaddled  at  alL"  "  After  the  washing, 
the  body  was  rubbed  with  salt,  accord- 
ing to  a  custom  very  widely  spread  in 
ancient  tiroes,  and  still  met  with  here 
and  there  in  the  East;  and  that  not 
merely  for  making  the  skin  drier  and 
firmer,  or  of  cleansing  it  more  tho- 
roughly, but  probably  from  regard  to 
the  virtue  of  salt  as  a  protection  from 
putrefaction.  And,  finally,  it  was 
bound  with  swaddling-clothes.  Not 
one  of  these  things,  so  indispensable 
to  the  preservation  and  strengthening 
of  the  child,  was  performed  in  the 
case  of  Israel  at  the  time  of  its  birth 
from  any  feeling  of  compassionate 
love;  but  it  was  cast  into  the  field, 
ie.  exposed,  in  order  that  it  might 
perish.  The  day  of  the  birth  of  Jeru- 
salem, i«.  of  Israel,  was  the  period  of 
its  sojourn  in  Egypt,  where  Israel  as 
a  nation  was  born,  the  sons  of  Jacob 
who  went  down  to  Egypt  having 
multiplied  into  a  nation"  (iTei/). 

Ver.  5.  *'  None  eye  pitied  thee,  to 
do  any  of  these  things  unto  thee." 
"  Those  who  had  looked  up  to  Josepli 
did  not  even  look  down  with  com- 
passion on  thee"  (Lange).  Israel  in 
Egypt  was  an  object  of  contempt 
The  neglect  into  which  it  had  fallen 
might  well  be  compared  to  the  cruel 
desertion  of  an  infant ;  for  Moses,  the 
type  of  his  people,  was  actually  ex- 
posed, and  afterwards  delivered  from 
threatened  death  by  God's  providence 


HOMILETIGS. 
Moral  Corruption  in  the  Chuboh. 

The  prophet  is  speaking  to  those  who  had  been  brought  into  covenant  with 
Ood,  and  called  to  serve  Him  as  His  people.  He  is  not  speaking  of  the  sins  of 
mankind  generally,  but  of  those  of  the  Church.  Of  this  moral  corruption  we 
are  here  taught — 

I  That  it  ought  to  be  thoroughly  brought  home  to  all  concerned.  No  half 
measures,  or  deliciUe  hints,  will  suffice.  Jerusalem  must  **  know  her  abomina- 
tions" (ver.  2).  1.  The  knowledge  of  sin  is,  before  all  things,  necessary  to  salvation. 
It  is  not  sufficient  to  make  a  general  admission  of  our  heritage  in  the  sin  which 
is  natural  to  our  race.  There  must  be  a  real,  heart-felt  knowledge  of  sin  as 
committed  by  ourselves  against  God.  The  sad  wounds  of  our  soul  must  be 
probed  to  the  very  bottom,  a  painful  yet  salutary  process.  2.  The  knowledge  of 
sin  cannot  be  arrived  at  by  our  own  unaided  powers.  However  we  may  lament  the 
f(in  that  U  in  the  world,  we  are  naturally  blind  to  our  own  real  state.     Even  the 

W9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORAP.  xn.  BOMILXTIO  COMMENTAMT:  SZMKIBL. 

engaging  in  the  outward  services  of  religion  may  tend  still  more  to  blind  ns,  for 
we  are  tempted  to  rest  satisfied  with  them,  and,  it  may  be,  to  regard  them  as  an 
atonement  for  our  faults  and  transgressions.  And  religious  people  are  liable 
also  to  the  temptation  of  pleading  the  motive  of  a  good  intention  and  purpose 
as  a  defence  for  what  is  clearly  wrong.  Tliey  use  the  light  which  is  given  them, 
not  to  shine  on  the  path  of  duty,  but  to  aid  their  own  wilfulness.  The  real 
knowledge  of  sin  must  be  brought  to  suth  from  without.  It  is  necessary  that 
the  inspired  prophet  should  speak.  It  is  the  office  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  con- 
vince of  sin. 

n  It  ought  to  be  revealed  in  all  its  enormity.  1.  As  sin  against  the  light 
Those  who  have  church  privileges,  and  yet  live  ungo(Uy  lives,  are  regarded  as 
the  heathen  in  the  sight  of  God  (Matt,  xviii.  17).  2.  As  sin  which  brings  to  a 
most  miserable  condition.  Such  may  be  compared  to  an  abandoned  infant^  ready 
to  perish  (vers.  4,  5). 

(Ver.  2.) 

1.  A  people  may  be  guilty  of  abominations,  and  not  know  nor  acknowledge 
them.  "They  know  not  to  do  right"  (Amos  iii.  10).  When  men  know  not 
what  is  right,  how  can  they  know  what  is  wrong  1  They  stored  up  violence 
and  robbery  in  their  palaces,  they  got  wealth  by  injustice,  oppression,  laid  it  up, 
and  thought  it  well  gotten.  They  know  not  God  (Jer.  ix  3).  "They  know 
not  the  way  of  the  Lord"  (Jer.  v.  4);  therefore  their  own;  ways  seem  good  in 
their  eyes.  They  were  blinded,  and  as  they  knew  not  their  abominations,  so 
they  acknowledged  them  not  (Hos.  ▼.  15).  They  are,  therefore,  urged  to  lay 
their  sin  to  heart  and  confess  it.  2.  There  is  an  unwillingness  in  sinners  to 
hear  of  their  sins.  ''  Cause  Jerusalem  to  know,"  &c ;  she  is  against  it,  but  make 
her  to  know  them.  This  people  were  always  averse  to  hear  of  their  sins  or 
duty  (Zech  viL  11,  12;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  16).  When  Stephen  told  them  of  their 
practices  (Acts  viL  51,  52)  what  followed  upon  it?  "They  were  cut  to  the 
heart,  and  they  gnashed  upon  him  with  their  teeth."  And  when  Christ  told 
them  of  their  sins  they  derided  Him  (Luke  xvi.  14),  told  Him  that  He  had  "a 
devil ''  (John  viii.  48).  And  not  only  wicked  men  are  unwilling  to  hear  of  their 
sins,  but  even  good  men  also.  When  God  reproved  Jonah,  "  Doest  thou  well  to 
be  anfflry  t "  his  reply  was,  "  I  do  well  to  be  angry,  even  to  death."  He  thought 
G^d  did  evil  in  reproving  him,  that  he  had  more  cause  to  be  angry  than  God 
had  to  chide  him  for  his  anger.  Paul  was  become  an  enemy  to  the  Galatians, 
because  he  told  them  the  iiutli,  he  told  them  of  their  sins.  Good  men  do  not 
easily  endure  to  hear  of  their  faults.  3.  What  God  commands  the  prophets  and 
ministers  to  do,  it  matters  not  how  it  is  taken  by  the  people,  they  are  to  do  it 
It  was  not  for  Ezekiel  to  excuse  himself  from  this  service,  to  object  against  it, 
to  say  they  will  mock  me,  despise  me,  misuse  me,  haie  me,  seek  my  hurt.  God 
commanded,  and  it  was  his  duty  to  do  it  carefully,  conscientiously,  and  faith- 
fully. He  muat  make  known  their  sins  to  themselves,  to  the  world,  let  the  event 
be  what  it  will  (Isa.  Iviii.  1).  The  prophet  must  not  whisper,  but  cry,  and  that 
aloud ;  it  matters  not  who  hears,  he  must  lift  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet  When 
men  blow  trumpets  they  do  it  with  all  their  strength,  and  the  sound  of  it  goeth 
far;  so  must  the  prophets  utter  the  sins  of  the  people,  and  show  them  their 
transgressions.  (1.)  That  others  may  take  warning,  and  not  do  as  they  have 
done  (1  Tim.  v.  20).  (2.)  Tliat  they  may  bring  the  parties  to  repentance  (Jer. 
xxxilL  22).  How  shall  sinners  come  to  repentance  if  they  hear  not  of  their  sins, 
if  they  be  not  convinced  of  the  sinfulness  of  them  by  the  prophets  and  ministers 
of  Qodt  The  false  prophets  hid  their  sins  from  them.  (3.)  That  they  may 
deliver  their  own  souls  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  8,  9).  4.  The  sins  of  people  are  abomina- 
tions in  God's  account  Sins  are  works,  but  works  of  iniquity,  abominable  works, 
and  abominable  iniquity  (Ps.  xiv.  1,  liiL  1). — OreenhilL 
160 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTia  aOMMSNTARY:  SZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  XVL 


Israel's  Saltation  fbom  heb  Shamb  and  Misebt  is  dub  to  thb  Lobb 

ALOHB  (vers,  6-14). 


Ver.  6.  **  And  when  I  passed  by 
thee,  and  saw  thee  polluted  in  thine 
own  blood."  Some  render,  "  and  saw 
thee  trampled  in  thy  blood."  Israel  in 
Egypt  was  a  people  trampled  upon, 
utterly  despised.  *I  said  unto  thee, 
when  thou  wast  in  thy  blood>  Live." 
It  was  sad  to  be  despised,  but  the 
chief  danger  was  that  l\fe  was  seriously 
threatened.  From  the  mouth  of  God, 
the  word  "  Live  "  was  a  word  of  power, 
and  was  visibly  fulfilled  in  the  extra- 
ordinary multiplication  of  Israel. 
^'Jehovah  here  represents  Himself  as  a 
traveller  who,  on  passing  by,  discovers 
the  unsightly  and  pitiable  object  which 
had  just  been  described,  and  interposes 
for  its  rescue.  Notwithstanding  its 
pollution.  He  takes  compassion  upon 
it,  and  saves  its  life.  In  this  miserable 
and  helpless  condition  Jehovah  found 
the  Hebrews  in  the  land  of  bondage. 
Extending  the  principle  involved  in 
the  figure  beyond  the  direct  teaching 
of  the  text,  it  is  strikingly  descriptive 
of  the  condition  of  sinners  previous  to 
conversion."—  (^Henderson.) 

Ver.  7.  **  I  have  caused  thee  to  mul* 
tiply  as  the  bird  of  the  field.*'  Ac- 
cording to  the  promise  (Ex.  i.  7,  12). 
'*Thou  art  oome  to  excellent  oma^ 
ments."  Heb., "  Ornament  of  cheeks," 
describing  youthful  freshness  and 
beauty  of  faca  "Thy  breasts  are 
fashioned,  and  thine  hair  is  grown." 
Tho  Heb.  word  when  applied  to  the 
breasts  means  to  expand,  lit  to  raise 
oneself  up.  "The  metaphor  is  still 
continued,  representing  the  infant 
growing  up  to  womanhood,  and  exhi- 
biting unmistakeable  signs  of  puberty." 
— (Henderson.)  **  Whereas  tiiou  wast 
naked  and  bare."  *'  Naked  and  bare 
are  figurative  expressions  for  still 
destitute  of  either  clothing  or  orna- 
ments. This  implies  something  more 
than  the  poverty  of  the  people  in  the 
wilderness  attached  to  Egypt.  Naked- 
ness represents  deprivation  of  all  the 
blessings  of  salvation  with  which  the 


Lord  endowed  Israel  and  made  it 
glorious,  after  he  had  adopted  it  as 
the  people  of  his  possession  in  Egypt, 
Israel  was  living  in  a  state  of  nature, 
destitute  of  the  gracious  revelations 
ofGod."-(Zi«70 

Ver.  8.  "Behold  thy  time  was  the 
time  of  love.**  This  is  not  intended 
u»erely  to  convey  the  idea  that  she 
had  arrived  at  a  marriageable  age,  but 
also  the  further  thought  that  she  had 
become  an  object  of  affection.  **I 
spread  my  skirt  over  thee  and  covered 
thy  nakedness."  "The  spreading  of 
the  corner  of  the  upper  garment  and 
the  covering  of  the  nakedness  symbo- 
lize in  general,  that  He  took  the 
miserable,  helpless  one  under  His 
protection,  interested  Himself  in  her ; 
specially,  however,  with  the  thought 
of  conferring  the  honour  of  betrothal, 
marriage  (Huth  iii.  9).  This  thought 
is  solemnly  carried  out  in  the  swearing 
and  entering  into  covenant,  by  means 
of  which  Israel,  grown  into  a  nation, 
now  became  the  peculiar  people  of 
Jehovah  (Ez.  xx.  5,  6 ;  Ex.  xix.,  xx.  2, 
5 :  Deut.  v.  2  ;  Eph.  y.  32:'—(Lange,) 
'*  There  was  nothing  in  Israel  that  was 
lovely.  It  was  all  pure  affection  on 
the  part  of  Jehovah.  The  advance  in 
the  allegory  is  now  to  that  of  the 
espousals." — (Henderson.)  "I  sware 
unto  thee,  and  entered  into  a  covenant 
with  thee.**  "An  obvious  reference 
to  the  solemn  transactions  at  Sinai, 
when  Jehovah  entered  into  covenant 
with  the  Hebrews,  thereby  contract- 
ing as  it  were  a  conjugal  relation, 
by  which  He  pledged  Himself  to 
love,  provide  for,  and  protect  them ; 
while  they  came  under  an  obligation 
to  love,  worship,  and  obey  Him  to  the 
exclusion  of  every  rival  god.  Hence 
as  it  follows  in  the  sequel,  and  so  fre- 
quently in  the  Old  Testament,  idolatry 
is  represented  as  spiritual  adultery, 
the  nation  tliereby  being  guilty  of  a 
breach  of  the  marriage  coveuant'— * 
(Henderson.) 

161 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBAF.  xn. 


SOMTLETia  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


Ver.  9.  *"  Then  washed  I  thee  with 
water ;  yea*  I  thoroughly  washed  away 
thy  blood  from  theoi  and  I  annointed 
thee  with  oil.**  Preparations  for  the 
marriage  ceremony,  consisting  of  puri- 
fication, the  putting  on  of  ornaments, 
and  aniiointing  with  oil  were  customary 
in  the  East  (Esther  ii.  9-121  Before 
the  Israelites  were  permittea  to  enter 
into  covenant  with  God  they  had  to 
undergo  a  thorough  purification  (Ex. 
xix.  14  ;  Jer.  ii.  2,  3).  "The  anoint- 
ing with  oil  indicates  the  powers  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  which  flowed  to  Israel 
from  the  divine  covenant  of  grace/'— 
(Keil) 

Ver.  10.  "Broideiedwork."  Rich 
garments  of  many  colours,  adorned  with 
figures  wrought  in  silver  and  gold. 
With  such  costly  garments  queens 
were  accustomed  to  clothe  themselves 
(Psa.  xlv.  15).  "And  shod  thee  with 
badger's  skin.*'  "  This  was  a  kind  of 
skin  used  by  the  Hebrews  to  make  an 
over-covering  to  the  tabernacle  (Ex. 
xxvi.  14) ;  and,  as  appears  from  the 
present  verse,  used  also  for  shoes  ;  but 
of  what  particular  animal,  has  been 
disputed.  The  most  probable  opinion 
is,  that  the  seal  is  intended."  — 
{Henderson.)  "And  I  girded  thee 
about  with  fine  linen,  and  I  covered 
thee  with  silk.''  "  The  girding  with 
fine  linen  refers  to  the  head-band 
(Ez.  xxiv.  17 ;  Ex.  xxix.  9 ;  Lev. 
viii.  13),  and  is  applied  by  the  Targum 
to  the  headdress  of  the  priests." — 
{Henderson.) 

Ver.  12.  "And  I  pat  a  jewel  on 
thy  forehead."  The  Hebrew  word 
here  rendered,  "jewel"  properly 
means  a  "ring,"  and  the  word 
rendered  "forehead"  (though  some- 
times used  to  denote  the  countenance 
or  face  in  general)  signifies^  strictly 
and  properly  the  nose.    "  The  jewellery 


included  not  only  armlets,  nose-rings^ 
and  earrings,  which  the  daughters  of 
Israel  were  generally  accustomed  to 
wear,  but  also  necklaces  and  a  crown^ 
as  ornaments  worn  by  princesses  and 
queens"'— (Keil.) 

Ver.  13.  "Thus  wast  thou  decked 
with  gold  and  silver."  This  verse 
sums  up  the  contents  of  verses  9-12. 
*'  Thou  didst  eat  fine  flour,  and  honey, 
and  oil;  and  thou  wast  exceeding 
beautifol,  and  thou  didst  prosper  into 
a  kingdom."  "  The  food  is  referred  to 
once  more;  and  the  result  of  the 
whole  is  said  to  have  been,  that  Jeru- 
salem became  exceedingly  beautiful, 
and  flourished  even  to  royal  dignity. 
The  latter  cannot  be  taken  as  referring 
simply  to  the  establishment  of  the 
monarchy  under  David,  any  more 
than  merely  to  the  spiritual  sovereignty 
for  which  Israel  was  cliosen  from  the 
very  beginning  (Ex.  xix.  5,  6).  The 
expression  includes  both,  viz.,  the  call 
of  Israel  to  be  a  kingdom  of  priesm, 
and  the  historical  realisation  of  this 
call  through  the  Davidic  sovereicntv  " 
(KeU)  ^    ^ 

Ver.  14.  "And  thy  renown  went 
forth  among  the  heathen  for  thy 
beauty."  "  As  a  kingdom  theirs  was 
distinguishingly  flourishing  in  the  days 
of  David  and  Solomon,  the  former  of 
which  monarchs  greatly  extended  its 
boundaries  and  enriched  it  with  the 
spoils  of  his  victories.  The  theocracy 
then  reached  its  highest  point  of  glory, 
and  was  of  great  celebrity  among  the 
surrounding  nations  (1  Kings  x.).  Still 
they  are  reminded  that  their  prosperity 
and  glory  were  not  owing  to  any  merit 
of  their  own.  It  was  a  'comeliness' 
which  Jehovah  their  covenant-God  had 
put  upon  them.  To  His  unmerited 
bounty  they  owedall  that  they  enjoyed" 
{Henderson). 


HOMILETIOS. 

Salvatioii  is  of  thb  Lobd. 

The  salvation  and  advancement  of  Israel  to  position  and  renown  amonff  the 
nations  has  its  parallel  in  the  salvation  and  exaltation  of  belie  vera.   Consider— 
162 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap,  xvl 


I.  The  grace  of  this  salvation.  Israel  is  described  under  the  figure  of  a 
miserable  infant  neglected  at  its  birth,  and  eveu  cast  out  and  left  to  perish. 
This  people  on  whom  God  bestowed  His  grace,  were  lying  in  their  own 
pollutions,  and  fast  sinking  into  moral  death.  Tbey  were  destitute  of  every 
•irnament  and  beauty  of  goodness  (vers.  6,  7).  There  was  nothing  in  them 
to  win  the  love  of  admiration  or  affection,  but  everything  to  excite  loathing 
and  disgust.  When  we  consider  tlie  condition  from  which  Israel  was  called,  we 
must  feel  that  the  salvation  of  the  people  was  by  grace  alone.  And  what  does 
God  see  in  man  as  a  sinner  but  ail  that  is  abhorrent  to  His  own  holy  nature  ! 
'  If  Ghxl  comes  to  the  help  of  such  it  must  be  by  the  impulse  of  a  grace  which  is 
all  His  own. 

11.  The  glory  of  this  salvation.  The  glory  of  it  lies  in  the  fiwjt  that  it  is 
^race  manifested  in  the  most  wonderful  and  excellent  way.  1.  It  had  its  source 
tn  the  love  of  pity  and  compassion.  There  was  nothing  in  the  original  condition 
of  Israel  to  win  the  love  of  admiration.  It  was  the  love  of  pity  and  compassion 
that  saved  them.  Such  a  love  is  worthy  of  the  broad  free  benevolence  of  God. 
It  is  a  love  which  cannot  be  overtasked  by  the  worst  condition  of  human  sin  and 
misery.  The  grace  of  God  meets  the  case  of  the  guilty,  and  His  mercy  that  of 
the  miserable  ;  and  the  glory  of  it  lies  in  the  fact,  that  it  springs  from  pure  pity 
without  any  merit  or  claim  whatever  on  the  part  of  its  object.  2.  It  "was  a 
manifestation  of  that  love  which  desires  to  give  and  bless.  These  are  the  essential 
characteristics  of  all  love  which  is  worthy  of  that  sacred  name.  **  It  is  more 
blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  and  that  blessedness  first  and  above  all  belongs 
to  God.  He  is  the  only  ble&sed  One,  for  He  alone  is  ever  giving  and 
never  receiving.  And  what  is  Creation  but  the  love  of  God  expressing 
itself  in  manifold  gift^;  and  what  is  Redemption  but  the  love  of  God,  as  it 
brings  the  undeserved  gifts  of  salvation  to  the  souls  of  men?  God's  love  gave 
to  ancient  Israel  a  restored  life ;  "  I  said  unto  thee  when  thou  wast  in  thy 
blood,  Live" — gave  them  an  energy  of  growth  and  improvement — invested 
them  with  ornaments  and  beauty  (ver.  7j.  They  also  had  bestowed  ui>on 
them  by  an  extraordinary  grace  the  favours  of  God's  love,  for  they  were  taken 
into  intimate  union  with  Himself  (ver.  8).  And  further,  God  also  gave  them 
influence  among  the  nations  of  the  earth  (ver.  14) — that  influence  which  comes 
from  righteonsneas.  They  had  thus  bestowed  upon  them  that  love  which  both 
gives  and  blesses.  But  in  this  process  by  which  they  were  raised  from  sin  to 
holiness,  the  order  is,  first — forgiveness  ;  and  then  tne  other  gifts  and  blessings 
of  grace.  They  are  first  purifi^  from  their  pollution,  and  then  are  anointed 
(ver.  9).  For  God  must  pardon  before  He  can  heal ;  and  men  must  be  justified 
before  they  can  be  sanctitied.  God  loves  the  sinner  though  vile  and  miserable 
but  His  favour  is  only  re3erved  for  those  who  are  washed  and  sanctified. 

The  first  leason  of  this  passage  is,  that  the  infinite  love  and  pity  of  the  heart 
of  God  is  the  spring  and  origin  of  our  salvation.  Therefore  there  is  no  room 
for  pride  or  boasting  on  our  part.  In  this  matter  of  salvation,  above  all  things, 
we  must  give  the  glory  to  God  alone. 

(Ver.  6.) 

I.  There  is  nothing  in  the  creature  to  move  Ood  to  show  mercy.    Qod 

saw  nothing  to  incline  or  move  Him  to  do  aught,  or  bestow  aught  upon  this 
infant.  But  there  are  several  things  which  move  men.  1.  Birth  and  progeny. 
Royal  and  noble  births  have  affected  many ;  David  was  taken  with  Saul  s 
daughter  (1  Sam.  xviii.  17, 18).  This  moves  not  God,  He  poureth  contempt  upon 
princes  (Job  xii.  21).  He  chooseth  the  poor  to  be  rich  in  faith  (James  ii.  5). 
Believers  are  said  to  be  "  bom  not  of  blood  *'  (John  i.  13),  which  some  refer  to 
£ftmilies  of  noble  and  royal  blood.    **  Not  many  noble  are  called  "  (1  Cor.  i.  26). 

163 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.TVJ.  EOMILBTia  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL, 

2.  Beauty.  Jacob  was  affected  with  the  beauty  of  Rachel ;  Aliasuerns  with  the 
beauty  of  Vashti  (Esth.  i,  11).  God  is  not  moved  with  beauty  ;  if  we  had  it, 
there  is  nothing  in  man  to  afTect  His  eye  (Psa.  xiv.  8).  We  are  altogether  filthy, 
and  God  saw  them  in  their  blood.  3.  Natural  parts  prevail  with  men, 
Ahithophel's  counsel  took  much  with  David  and  Absalom  ;  Joseph,  Daniel,  had 
excellent  spirits,  great  wisdom,  aud  they  were  advanced  thereupon.  Learning 
is  persuasive,  and  conquers  many,  but  parts  and  ]e<arning  can  do  nothing  with 
God  (1  Cor.  L  26  ;  Matt.  xi.  25).    4.   Profitableness,  serviceableness.    So  Paul 

^►ersuades  Philemon  to  take  Onesimus,  because  he  would  be  profitable  unto  him. 
den  are  taken  with  men,  because  they  bring  in  gain  unto  them.  But  the  Lord  - 
is  not  profited  by  the  riditeousness  of  men  (Job.  xxxv.  7)  ;  He  receives  nothing 
at  man's  hands,  and  when  we  have  done  all,  we  are  unprofitable  servants. 
6.  Necessity  moves  men  mightily.  It  caused  Abiathar  to  give  the  shew- bread 
to  David  (1  Sam.  xxi.  6) :  the  necessity  of  the  Cliurch  moved  the  rich  to  sell  their 
lands  and  goods  to  distribute  unto  every  man  as  they  had  need  (Acts  ii.  45). 
This  is  no  motive  unto  Divine  Majesty.  6.  Hope  of  proving  well  draws  forth  men 
to  do  much.  Men  do  much  for  otlievs  with  the  hope  toat  they  may  become  instru- 
ments of  good.  But  God  will  give  tlie  gifts  of  Clirist  for  the  rebellious,  and  dwell 
among  them  (Psa.  Ixviii.  18).  How  rebellious  was  Manasseh  I  How  did  he  sin 
against  heaven  and  earth,  yet  God  had  a  gift  of  life  for  him.  To  Mary  Magda- 
lene and  to  Zaccheus,  Christ  said,  live,  when  they  were  in  their  blood.  He 
showed  mercy  to  Paul,  and  bade  him  live,  when  lie  was  a  persecutor  and  an 
injurious  person.  7.  Nothing  in  the  godly  moves  God,  all  they  do  is  debt 
(Luke  xvii.  10).    The  will  and  deed  are  of  the  Lord  (Phil.  ii.  13). 

IL  The  Lord  shows  mercy  to  men  when  they  are  in  desperate  eonditions* 

When  this  infant  was  cast  out,  and  lay  bleeding  to  death,  God  said  "Live." 
When  Moses,  and  other  Hebrew  children  were  to  be  drowned,  the  Lord  delivered 
them.  When  in  Babylon,  all  the  necks  of  the  Jews  were  upon  the  block  by 
Haman's  plot  and  power,  the  Lord  showed  them  mercy,  and  said,  "  Live/'  The 
thief  upon  the  cross  met  with  life  in  the  gates  of  death. 

III.  When  sinners  look  not  after  Ood,  He  is  pleased  to  look  after  and  find 
out  them.  God  found  out  aud  sought  the  Jews,  when  they  neither  sought  nor 
called  ;  so  it  is  with  the  Gentiles    (Isa.  Ixv.  1).     Both  Gentile  and  Jew  had 

?reventin»,'  grace,  and  were  sought  out  of  God  before  ever  they  sought  God. 
lence  Jerusalem  had  that  promise  or  title,  thou  shalt  be  called,  ''Sought  out" 
(Isa.  Ivii.  12). 

IV.  God  hath  no  need  of  any  people.  He  passed  by,  like  some  great  man, 
that  riding  forth,  finds  a  poor  distressed  infant,  and  out  of  compassion  takes  it 
into  his  family ;  not  because  he  needs  it,  but  he  will  show  kindness  to  it  of  his 
own  good  pleasure.  If  He  needed  people  or  nations  He  could  create  them,  raise 
them  up  from  the  stones.  The^  Samaritan  had  no  need  of  the  wounded  man, 
but  he  needed  the  Samaritan's  wine  and  oil. 

y.  In  bestowing  mercies,  Ood  is  real  1'his  appears  from  the  doubling  of 
the  word — "  Live,"  *'  Live."  When  there  is  a  doubling  of  the  same  word,  tnere 
the  intention,  reality,  and  earnestness  of  the  author  speaking  is  held  out 
(Ez.  V.  8 ;  xxxvii.  5,  6 ;  Isa.  xL  1). 

TI.  When  Ood  hath  done  much  for  a  people,  and  they  are  degenerate  and 
ungrateful,  the  Lord's  way  of  dealing  with  them  is  to  set  before  fhem  fheir 
original  conditioii  and  luf  kindneM  unto  them  (Micah  vi  2-5 :  Dent  xxxii.  6> 

164 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


OHAF.  XVX. 


Israel's  Apostact  faom  God  (vers.  15-34). 


EXEGBTIOAL  NOTES.  Its  origin 
and  nature  (vers.  15-22) ;  its  magni- 
tude and  extent  (vers.  23-34). 

Ver.  15.  The  apostacj  of  Israel  is 
described  under  the  image  of  whore- 
dom and  adultery.  '*  Thou  didst  trust 
in  thine  own  beauty,"  The  gifts  of 
God,  when  they  ceased  to  be  recognised 
as  such,  became  a  snare.  Israel 
prostituted  them  in  the  service  of 
idolatry.  Because  ot  tiiy  renown* 
**  Teaching  that  the  Jews  had  employed 
the  renown,  which  through  the  Divine 
goodness  they  had  acquired,  as  a 
means  of  seducing  neighbouring  nations 
to  commit  spiritual  fornication." — 
(Henderson). 

Ver.  16.  The  "high  places  "were 
temples  erected  upon  heights  by  the 
side  of  altars  (1  Kings  xiii.  82 ;  2 
Kings  xvii.  29).  In  2  Kings  xxiii.  7, 
tlie  Jewish  women  are  described  as 
wearing  hangings  to  adorn  the  temples 
of  Astarte.  The  latter  part  of  the 
verse  expresses  the  idea  that  such  gross 
abominations  in  Israel  were  altogether 
unparalleled  in  the  past,  as  they  would 
be  in  the  future. 

Vers.  17-19.  "Images  of  Men.*' 
Heb.  /'Of  a  male."  This  may  de- 
scribe idolatry  in  general,  and  thus  the 
word  "  male  "  would  be  used  as  cor- 
responding with  the  description  of 
Israel  as  an  adulteress.  But  some 
expositors  think  that  a  reference  is 
made  here  to  a  certain  abominable 
form  of  idolatry.  "  Schok  and  Haver- 
nick  understand  what  were  worshipped 
in  the  idolatrous  service  of  phallus,  or 
the  membrum  virile,  which  the  Egyp- 
tians regarded  as  the  emblem  of  fecun- 
dity, and  which  is  still  licentiously 
worshipped  by  the  Hindoos  under  the 
name  of  lingam  "-^(Henderson). 

Vers.  20-22.  "  To  cause  them  to 
pass  through  the  fire."  A  clear  re- 
ference to  Moloch-worship  in  which 
children  were  sacrificed  to  the  idol  by 


burning  them.  "  The  passing  through 
was  the  mode  of  slaying,  and  the  de- 
vouring was  the  consequence  of  it. 
The  idols  were  thought  to  be  pcesent 
in  the  fire." — (Hengstenberg.) 

Vers.  23-27.  **  An  eminent  place." 
The  Heb.  may  be  rendered  a  brothel, 
or  place  of  prostitution.  The  word 
was  so  understood  by  the  LXX.  Thus 
figuratively  the  prophet  describes  their 
unholy  passion  for  idol-worship.  "  The 
natural  heights  are  too  far  for  the 
people  hungering  after  idols.  They 
wish  to  plant  idolatry  in  the  city 
thoroughfare,  and  so  build  for  them- 
selves artificial  heights.  We  must  dis- 
tinguish between  tne  thought  and  its 
clothing.  The  thought  is,  that  the 
objects  of  idolatry  became  the  prime 
impulse  of  the  popular  life,  by  which 
is  to  be  understood  much  less  relii(ious 
than  political  adultery,  though  both 
went  hand  in  hand." — {flengstenbera.) 
"  And  hast  made  thy  beauty  to  oe 
abhorred."  The  Heb.  verb  in  the  Piel 
conjugation  signifies  to  abhor,  never  to 
cause  to  be  lubhorred.  To  prostitute 
their  beautjr  was  to  show  their  con- 
tempt for  it  By  forsaking  God  and 
His  Holy  worship  they  showed  how 
little  esteem  they  had  tor  the  national 
honour.  * '  And  hast  opened  thy  feet  to 
every  one  that  passed  by."  "  At  an 
earlier  period  Israel  stood,  by  the  situa- 
tion of  their  country,  which  admitted 
no  isolation,  in  manifold  intercourse 
with  the  world  ;  but  in  the  time  which 
the  prophet  has  in  view  they  lay  in 
the  middle  of  the  contending  world- 
powers — the  Asiatic  and  the  African — 
and  were  thus  in  their  intervening 
territory  tempted  by  the  force  of  cir- 
cumstances to  adultery  with  powerful 
neighbours." — (tiengstetiberg.)  **  The 
Egyptians,  thy  neighbours,  great  of 
flesh."  Heb.  "  The  Sons  of  Egypt." 
An  euphemism  to  denote  the  licentious 
character  of  the  Egyptian  worship. 
"The  sons  of  Egypt  are  not  its  gods, 
and  therefore  iJie  reference  is  to 
political  whoredom.    Let  it  be  remem- 

165 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XTI, 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    BZEKIEL, 


bered  how  in  express  terms  intercourse 
with  E<;ypt  was  forbidden  to  Israel, 
how  return  thither  is  threatened  them 
rather  as  the  worst  pniiishraent  (Deut 
xxviii.  68) ;  and  let  one  compare  from 
the  days  of  iSolumon  onwards  (1  Kings 
iii.  1,  ix.  16,  X.  28 ;  2  Kings  xviii. ; 
Isa.  XXX.  xxxi.  1,  xxxvi.  6  ;  Jer.  xxxvii. 
5,7).—{Lange).  **The  daughters  of  the 
Philistines  which  are  ashamed  of  thy 
lewd  ways."  "  The  daughters  of  the 
Philistians  are  the  Phiiistian  states, 
corresponding  to  the  representation  of 
Israel  as  an  adulterous  wife.  The 
Philistians  are  mentioned  as  t^e  prin- 
cipal foes,  because  Israel  fell  completely 
into  their  power  at  the  end  ol  tlie 
period  of  the  Judges  (Judges  xiii. ; 
1  Sam.  iv.) ;  and  they  are  referred  to 
here,  for  the  deeper  humiliation  of 
Israel,  as  having  been  ashamed  of  the 
licentious  conduct  of  the  Israelites, 
because  they  adhered  to  their  gods, 
and  did  not  exchange  them  for  others 
as  Israel  had  done  (Jer.  ii.  10,  11). — 

Vers.  28-34.  "  Thou  hast  played  the 
whore  also  with  the  Assyrians,  because 
thou  wast  nnsatiable."  **  Having  got 
no  satisfaction  in  the  African,  they 
betake  tliemselves  now  to  the  Asiatic 
world-power.  They  long  after  it,  and 
find  no  satisfaction  even  when  the 
longing  is  realized." — (Lange).  "  Not 
satisfied  with  adopting  the  idolatories 
of  Egypt,  the  Jews  practised  those  of 
the  more  distant  Assyrians  and  Baby- 
lonians. They  were  perfectly  insatiable 
in  their  lust.    Their  idolatry  was  an 


amalgamation  of  all  the  different  forma 
which  obtained  in  the  countries  around 
them."— ( Henderson).  "  How  weak  is 
thine  heart."  Some  render  it,  "Yet 
how  languishing  is  thine  heart."  In 
this  sense  we  are  to  understand  that 
sickly  craving  of  lustful  desire,  which 
had  grown  into  a  disease.  Ewald 
designates  the  expression  as  ''  a  biting 
sarcasm ;  how  great  must  be  the  lan- 
guishing of  love !"  Others  understand 
it  more  generally  of  the  tendency  of 
oft-repeated  sin  to  weaken  our  moral 
nature.  *'The  influence  of  sin  on  the 
soul  is  to  render  it  morally  impotent. 
Though  it  may  not  deprive  it  of  the 
powers  which  are  requisite  to  consti- 
tute man  a  responsible  agent,  it  weakens 
his  principle  of  action,  takes  possession 
of  those  powers,  and  forms  itself  into 
habits  which  the  individual  allows  to 
grow  upon  him,  so  that  he  becomes  at 
last  insepsible  to  the  operatiim  of  the 
strongest  moral  motives." — Ulender" 
son).  ''And  the  contrary  is  in  thee  from 
other  women  in  thy  whoredomi."  Israel 
gave  presents  to  it«  lovers,  contrary  to 
the  practice  of  prostitutes  in  general. 
The  Jews  practised  idolatry  not  from 
the  mere  love  of  gain,  but  from  the 
gratification  they  found  in  that  sin. 
They  ha<l  arrived  at  that  lowest  stage 
of  depravity  when  sin  is  loved  merely 
for  its  own  sake.  "Ezekiel  has  thus 
fulfilled  the  task  appointed  him  in 
ver.  2,  to  charge  Jerusalem  with  her 
abominations.  The  address  now  turns 
to  an  announcement  of  the  ponish- 
ment."-(Ar^). 


H0M1LETIC8. 

Isbakl's  Apostaot  :  An  Example  of  MoNSTEouf  iNiQurrr. 

I.  It  was  the  prostitution  of  Ood*s  best  gifts.  '*  Thou  didst  trust  in  thine 
own  beauty,  and  playedst  the  harlot  because  of  thy  renown"  (ver.  15).  They 
ceased  to  recognise  their  superior  endowments  as  the  free  and  undeserved  gifts 
of  (}od*s  great  favour,  ana  therefore  tlie-^e  became  a  snare  to  them  and  the 
occasion  of  falling.  Their  iniquity  was  beyond  that  of  other  nations,  because 
theirs  was  the  sin  of  a  people  taken  into  special  covenant  with  God.  It  is 
more  than  common  iniquity — it  is  monstrous  to  turn  God's  gifts  into  the  means 
of  sin  (Jude  iv.).  The  sins  against  the  clearest  light  are  the  greatest  of  all 
166 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xvi. 

II.  It  took  the  worst  possible  forms.  1.  They  devoted  all  God's  gifts  to 
idols,  (1.)  The  common  gifts  of  Providence.  Fooa  of  various  kinds,  represented 
by  "  fine  flour,  and  oil,  and  honey "  (ver.  19).  (2.)  Luxuries,  "  Jewels  of 
gold  and  silver."  With  these  they  made  images  to  be  employed  in  the 
most  degrading  forms  of  idolatry.  (3.)  Even  their  own  children.  They  gave 
them  up  to  Moloch-worship,  caused  them  *'  to  pass  through  the  fire " 
(ver.  21).  Such  was  their  infatuation  with  this  idolatry,  that  they  silenced 
the  common  instincts  of  nature,  and  gave  up  their  own  children  to  the 
most  cruel  forms  of  death.  The  prophet  speaks  of  their  great  sins  with 
the  utmost  force  of  language  when  he  calls  them  '^abominations."  2.  They 
took  special  pains  to  spread  idolatry,  Tliey  built  idol  temples  close  to  the 
dwellings  of  the  worshippers,  so  that  they  might  not  have  to  seek  them  in 
distant  places.  They  tempted  others  with  all  the  wiles  and  artifices  of  wicked- 
ness, "TIjou  hast  opened  thy  feet  to  every  one  that  passed  by"  (ver.  25). 
With  a  zeal  worthy  of  a  better  cause  they  sought  out  the  wor^t  forms  of  idolati^r 
among  the  nations  of  the  earth — The  Egyptians  (ver.  26),  the  Assyrians  (ver. 
28),  tlie  Chaldean^  (ver.  29).  They  seemed  bent  not  merely  upon  imitating, 
but  even  surpassing  the  worst  aitominatious  of  the  heathen  around  them. 
3.  TJieir  lust  of  idolatry  was  insatiable.  When  they  had  gained  their  desire, 
they  refused  to  be  satisfied,  and  still  cried  out  for  more  (vers.  28.  29).  "  How 
weak  is  thine  heart,  saith  the  Lord  God  ! "  (ver.  30).  Their  lust  was  glutte<l 
until  they  could  feel  only  the  sickly  lan«;uishing  of  "an  imperious  whorish 
woman."  4.  They  loved  the  sin  of  idolatry  Jor  its  own  sake.  Not  for  gain,  but 
because  they  had  a  delight  in  it  (vers.  33,  34).  5.  They  sinned  thus  grievously 
after  due  chastisement,  God  compares  himself  to  a  husband  who  endeavours  by 
means  of  chastisement  to  induce  his  faithless  wife  to  return.  The  supplv  uf 
food,  clothing,  and  of  all  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of  a  wife  are  diminished. 
She  is  even  delivered  over  unto  the  will  of  them  that  hate  her  (ver.  27).  Such 
was  the  discipline  by  which  the  Lord  sought  to  bring  His  ancient  people  to  a 
sense  of  their  folly,  and  to  restore  to  them  the  privileges  of  the  faithful.  He 
did  not  suffer  Israel  to  attain  to  that  glory  and  power  which  was  their  sure 
portion  had  they  continued  to  serve  the  Lord  with  a  perfect  heart.  He  allowed 
their  enemies  to  triumph  over  them,  so  that  they  had  not  the  undisturbed 
possession  of  Canaan.  To  remain  unimproved  under  the  chastisements  of  God, 
and  not  even  to  feel  them,  shows  a  heart  in  the  last  stage  of  hardening.  '*  Thou 
bast  stricken  them,  but  they  have  not  grieved  "  (Jer.  v.  3). 

(Vers.  15-19.) 

I.  Where  Ood  bestows  choice  mercies  upon  a  people,  He  looks  for  answerable 
returns  from  them.  He  gave  life  to  the  Israelitish  state  (ver.  6).  He  multiplied 
it  &s  the  bud  of  the  field  (ver.  7).  He  loved  this  people,  entered  into  covenant 
with  them,  married  them  unto  Himself  (ver.  8).  He  washed  away  their  blood, 
and  anointed  them  with  oil  (ver.  9).  He  gave  them  costly  apparel,  fine  flour, 
honey  and  oil,  royal  dignity,  special  beauty,  great  fame  and  glory  (vers.  10-14) ; 
and  now  expected  that  they  should  have  lived  to  Him,  and  improved  all  for  the 
honour  of  His  name.  "But  thou  didst  trust  in  thine  own  beauty,"  etc.  I 
looked  not  for  this  at  thy  hands  ;  I  looked  that  thou  shouldst  have  been  faithful 
and  fruitful  in  all  good  works,  and  been  as  exemplary  for  holiness  and  justice  to 
other  nations,  as  1  was  exemplary  in  my  mercies  towards  thee  above  other 
nations  (Isa.  v.  2). 

II.  Ingratitude  in  6od*8  people  is  a  provoking  sin,  and  causes  Ood  to  upbraid 
them  for  it.  From  the  beginning  of  verse  6,  to  the  end  of  verse  14,  which  are 
but  nine  verses,  there  is  "  I "  seventeen  times,  and  every  mention  of  it  is  a 
matter  for  upbraiding  unto  them.     When  God  had  made  Adam  after  His  image, 

167 


Digitized  by 


Google 


chAT.xvh  EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :   EZEKIEL, 


planted  him  in  Paradise,  given  bim  dominion  over  all  the  creatures,  for  him 
not  to  obey  one  little  conjmand  was  gross  ingratitude,  provoked  the  Lord  to 
upbraid  him  and  punish  him  for  it  (Gen.  iii.)  Christ  upbraids  Chorazin, 
Bethsaida,  and  Capernaum  where  His  mighty  works  were  done,  because  they 
brought  not  forth  fruits  answerable^  but  were  impenitent  and  ungrateful 
(Matt  xi.) 

III.  We  are  very  apt  to  trust  in,  and  be  proud  of,  the  mercies  God  bestows 
upon  ns.  "  Thou  did'st  trust  in  thine  own  beauty."  Those  things  that  I  gave 
thee  to  make  thee  beautiful,  thou  h&st  abused  and  put  too  much  confidence  in. 
The  heart  of  man  is  ready  to  idolize  every  mercy  God  gives.  There  are  several 
mercies  we  are  apt  to  trust  in.  1.  In  riches,  llie  rich  man  confides  in  wealth 
as  citizens  do  in  a  walled,  well  fortified,  and  well  built  city  (ProT.  x.  15 ; 
Psa.  Iii.  7  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17).  2.  In  princes  and  great  ones  (Psa-  cxlvi.  d ; 
Isa.  ii.  22 ;  Jer.  xyii.  5 ;  Isa.  zxx.  8).  8.  In  vour  awn  natural  excellencies. 
**  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom, '  etc.  (Jer.  ix.  28).  "  He  that 
trusteth  in  his  own  heart  is  a  fool "  (Prov.  xxviii.  26) ;  the  heart  is  the  most 
excellent  nart  of  man  (See  also  Prov.  iiL  5).  4.  In  the  ordinances  and  means 
of  grace  (Jer.  vii.  4,  14,  15. 

lY.  Oreat  renown,  through  man's  corruption,  oft  proves  a  snare,  oocasions 
great  sins.  God  made  this  people  above  all  nations,  in  praise,  in  name,  in 
honour,  that  they  might  be  a  holy  people  unto  Him  (Deut.  xxvi.  19).  Their 
renown  should  have  encouraged  them  unto  holiness,  and  it  was  an  incentive  unto 
looseness.  Solomon  had  great  renown  abroad  in  the  nations  (1  Kings  iv.  81) ; 
that  drew  the  princes  to  bestow  their  daughters  upon  him.  His  name  made 
way  for  unlawful  marriages,  and  they  made  way  for  unlawful  gods. 

y.  The  most  beautiful  and  renowned  church  may  degenerate,  apostatise, 
and  become  corrupt  Thij  Israelitish  woman  was  the  only  spouse  of  God.  He 
entered  into  covenant  with  her,  she  became  His ;  He  put  more  spiritual  beauty 
and  comeliness  upon  her  than  upon  all  the  nations,  and  made  her  renowned 
throu«4hbut  all  the  world;  yet  she  forsook  God,  played  the  harlot,  prostituted 
herself  to  every  idol  and  idolater.  And  now  where  was  the  Church  of  Gfod? 
She  "  played  the  harlot  with  many  lovers  "  (Jer.  iii.  1).  Here  was  visible  apos- 
tacy,  visible  idolatry,  but  no  true  visible  Church.  Neither  was  God  without  a 
true  Church  at  this  time.  There  were  some  godly  ones  in  secret,  who  mourned 
for  the  abominations  done  in  the  city,  temple,  and  everywhere  (Ezek.  ix.  4). 
But  these  lay  hid,  and  durst  not  appear  in  the  ways  of  worship  then  amongst 
them.  So  in  Elijah's  days.  He  complained,  "The  children  of  Israel  have 
for.^aken  thy  covenant,"  etc.  (1  Kings  xix.  10) ;  but  God  had  then  seven 
thousand  in  secret  (ver.  18).  The  true  Church  may  be  brought  to  such  a 
paucity,  such  a  lowness,  that  there  may  be  no  public  meetings,  or  view  thereof. 
The  papists  say  their  Church  cannot  err,  especially  in  things  necassary  to 
salvation  ;  and  why  ?  because  it  is  the  spouse  of  Christ  Was  not  this  Israelitish 
Church  the  spouse  of  God  ?  And  did  it  not  err  in  the  great  and  weighty  things 
of  salvation  ?  Did  it  not  leave  God  and  fall  into  idolatry^  such  practices  as 
exclude  the  kingdom  of  heaven?  What  privilege  hath  the  Roman  Churcli 
more  than  this  had  ?  Whatever  papists  say  or  write,  their  Church  hath  trusted 
in  her  beauty,  been  proud  of  her  renown,  and  played  the  harlot  as  notoriously 
as  ever  Jerusalem  did. — (Greenhill.) 

Israel's  Punishment  will  Correspond  with  Her  Sins,  (vers  35-42). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  35,  brass  has  been  lavished."      Brass  is 

86.       '*  Because  thy  filthiness  was  used  here  to  signify  money.      Israel 

poured  out'*      Heb.      *'  Because  thy  had  spent  the  wealth  which  God  had 
168 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:    SZEKIEL, 


OHAP.  XTL 


given  her  in  the  servise  of  idolatry. 
*'  Tljat  the  Jews,  at  least  those  in  the 
exile,  as  well  as  classic  antiquity,  had 
copper  mouey,  follows  even  from  our 
passage,  and  is  confirmed  by  Matt.  x. 
9,  Mark  zii.  41,  where  brass  occurs 
directly  for  money.  Tlie  paramours 
are,  according  to  what  follows,  pre- 
eminently the  world-powers  themselves. 
Along  with  them  are  named  the  hea- 
then gods,  whose  worship  was  a  con- 
sequence of  political  aependence. — 
{^hengstenberg,)  **  And  by  the  blood 
of  thy  children  which  then  didst  give 
unto  them."  They  were  also  guilty  of 
murder  in  sacrificing  their  children  to 
Moloch  (ver.  20.) 

Ver.  87.  **I  wiU  gather  aU  thy 
lovers.**  Chiefly  those  of  Assyria  and 
Babylon.  '*  With  all  them  that  thou  hast 
hated."  These  were  the  surrounding 
nations  who  were  always  lying  in  wait  for 
an  occasion  against  Israel.  God  would 
gather  friend  and  foe  against  Jerusalem 
and  use  them  as  instruments  to  execute 
His  judgments.  Israel  is  to  be 
punished  in  kind.  She  had  cultivated 
iriendship  with  the  heathen  and  par- 
taken of  their  iniauities,  and  now  she 
shall  be  given  up  altogether  into  their 
power.  '*!  wul  even  gather  them 
round  about  against  thee,  and  will 
discover  thy  nakedness  unto  them, 
that  they  may  see  all  thy  nakedness.*' 
"  The  public  judgment  First  of  all, 
the  assembling  of  the  lovers  as  wit- 
nesses. She  who  has  dishonoured  and 
brought  herself  to  shame  becomes  now, 
by  the  interposition  of  God,  to  the  one 
]iarty  an  object  of  loathing,  to  the 
oihor  an  object  of  mockerv.  The  last 
it tt  Taction,  and  what  might  still  have 
l>oen  an  object  of  regard,  vanishes. 
Ilavornick  refers  to  the  procedure  in 
tlie  case  of  a  married  woman  suspected 
of  adultery  (Num.  v.  18)."— (iLan^A) 

Ver.  88.  **  And  I  vriU  judge  thee, 
as  women  that  break  wedlock  and 
shed  blood  are  judged.*'  This  is  the 
explanation  of  the  figurative  language 
employed  in  the  l&<^  verse.  Israel  was 
to  be  punished  with  the  punishment 
of  adulterers  and  murderers.    "And 


I  will  give  thee  blood  in  ftiry  and 
jealousy.'*  "Thou  shalt  be  turned 
into  blood,  so  that  nothing  but  blood 
may  be  left  of  thee,  and  that  the  blood 
of  fury  and  jealousy,  as  the  working 
of  the  wrath  and  jealousy  of  God 
(compare  verse  42).  To  this  end  the 
heathen  will  destroy  all  the  objects  of 
idolatry,  then  take  from  the  harlot 
both  clothes  and  jewellery,  and  leave 
her  naked,  %.e.  plunder  Jerusalem  and 
lay  it  waste,  and,  lastly,  execute  upon 
her  the  punishment  of  death  by  stoning 
and  by  sword ;  in  other  words,  destroy 
both  city  and  kingdom."— ^^e*/.^ 

Ver.  39.  "And  leave  thee  naked 
and  bare."  "As  thou  wast  before 
the  Lord  had  mercy  on  thee  (ver.  7). 
The  unfaithful  use  of  the  gifts  of  God 
inevitably  brings  on  their  loss.  God 
cannot  be  mocked,**— (Bengstenberg.) 

Ver.  40.  "They  shall  also  bring 
up  a  company  against  thee."  "  This 
may  be  explained  from  the  ancient 
mode  of  administering  justice,  accord- 
ing to  which  the  popular  assembly 
(Frov.  V.  14)  sat  in  judgment  on  crises 
of  adultery  and  capital  crimes,  and 
executed  the  sentence,  as  the  law  for 
stoning  expressly  enjoins  (Lev.  xx.  2  ; 
Num.  XV.  36;  Dent.  xxii.  21).  But 
they  are  also  applicable  to  the  foes, 
who  would  march  against  Jerusalem  " 
(Keil).  *'  And  they  shall  stone  thee 
with  stones."  The  usual  mode  of 
capital  punishment  under  the  Mosaic 
law,  ana  which  was  inflicted  for  the 
crimes  of  idolatry,  adultery,  and 
murder.  This  doom  pronounced  unon 
Jerusalem  was  accomplished  literally, 
for  she  was  "  stone*! "  before  she  was 
burned  (Jer.  xxxiii.  4).  '*  With  their 
swords."  Slaying  with  the  sword  was 
a  mode  of  punishment  adopted  when 
there  were  many  criminals  to  be  put 
to  death.  It  was  also  the  doom  of 
those  who  seduced  men  to  apostacy 
(Dent  xiii.  12-15). 

Ver.  41.  '' And  ezeonte judgments 
upon  thee  in  the  sight  of  many  women.*' 
**  The  many  women  are  the  many 
heathen    nations,    according   to    the 

169 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVI.  nOMTLETIC  COMMESTARY:    EZEKIBL. 


description  of  Jerusalem  or  Israel  as  an  Ver.  42.     '^  So  will  I  make  my  fdry 

unfaithful  wife."— (if^^V.)     "  As  it  is  toward  thee  to  rest,  and  my  jealousy 

the  greates^t  punishnieiit  to  an  adulte-  shall  depart  from  thee."  "Thejealousy 

rous  woman  to  be  exposed  in  her  sin  ceases  because  it  has  found  its  satisfac- 

before  the  eyes  of  other  women  ;  so  will  tion  in  their  punishment, and  exhausted 

tlie  severest  portion  of  Israel's  punish-  itself  therein,  as  the  fire  ceases  when  it 

ment  be,  that  it  will  stand  exposed  in  has  consumed   its  fuel." — (Hengsten- 

its  fcin  before  the  eyes  of  all  other  na-  berg.)     "The  Divine  justice  comes  to 

tions."—  (Klie/orth.)     Concerning  the  an  end  in  its  character  of  jealousy — in 

burning  of  the  houses  of  Jerusalem  with  other  words,  as  the  injured  faithfuhiess 

fire,  see  2  Kings  xxv.  8, 9.     **  And  thou  and    love  of  Israel's  husband.     The 

also  shalt  give  no  hire  any  more."  departing  of  the  jealousy  might,  per- 

*'  Because  thou  wilt    have    no    more  haps,  by  comparison  with  Isaiah  zi.  13, 

lovers  ;  wilt,  on  the  whole,  after  the  show  grace  in  the  background ;  but  the 

dit^solution  of   thy  national   indenen-  connection  with  what  follows  requires 

dance,  be  no  more  in  a  condition  which  rather  a  thought  like  Hos.  ii  4.   Jeho- 

admits  of  impure  intercourse  with  the  vah  gives  up  the  adulterous  whorish 

world-powers." — {hengstenberg,)  wifa" — (Lange.) 

H0MILET1C8. 

Thb  Pdhishment  of  Apostaot. 

I.  The  loathsome  nature  of  the  sin  is  made  manifest  The  sin  which  the 
children  of  Israel  had  committed  by  their  idolatry  is  called  by  its  right  nama 
It  wa?  the  breaking  of  the  sacred  marriage-covenant  into  which  God  had  entered 
with  His  people.  All  what  whoredom  and  adultery  is  in  the  social  state,  all 
what  filthiness  is  in  the  morals  and  manners  of  a  people,  such  was  their  sin  in 
the  siiiht  of  God  (ver.  38).  Israel  was  guilty  of  unfaithfulness  of  the  worst  kind. 
God  had  given  the  nation  the  privileges  of  an  espoused  wife,  but  she  sinned 
with  many  lovers,  thus  despising  the  great  grace  which  had  called  her  to  such 
distinction  and  honour.  God's  punishments  sometimes  begin  by  revealing  our 
sin  to  us  in  all  its  real  vileness.  The  very  conviction  of  sin  is  a  painful  wound — 
the  arrows  of  the  Almighty  within  our  spirit. 

II.  The  very  objects  of  sinful  desire  are  turned  into  the  instruments  of 
punishment.  "  I  will  gather  all  thy  lovers  with  whom  thou  hast  taken  pleasure, 
and  all  them  that  thou  hast  loved,  with  all  them  that  thou  hast  hated ;  I  will 
even  gather  them  round  about  against  thee,  and  will  discover  thy  nakedness 
unto  them,  that  they  may  see  all  th}r  nakedness"  (ver.  37).  Those  who  con- 
tributed to  her  sin  shall  be  made  the  instruments  of  her  punishment.  Sinful 
love,  sooner  or  later,  changes  into  hate.  The  boon  companions  of  the  profligate 
turn  out  to  be  his  bitterest  enemies.  They  thus  become  a  scourge  in  the  hands 
of  God  to  chastise  him  for  his  iniquity.  There  is  no  true  honour  amongst 
transgressors,  for  their  life  is  founded  upon  a  falsehood.  And  as  God  employcNd 
as  a  Fcourge  for  His  people  those  who  once  were  friends,  He  will  also  employ  for 
chastisement  those  who  were  always  enemies.  "  And  with  them  that  thou  hast 
hated."  Those  with  whom  the  children  of  Israel  sinned  would  make  common 
cause  with  their  enemies  for  their  punishment 

III.  The  punishment  will  correspond  with  the  sin.  1.  In  degree  They 
were  to  be  punished  as  murderers  and  adulterers,  for  they  had  sinned  ''as 
women  that  break  wedlock  and  shed  blood "    (ver.  38).      Stoning  was  the 

1)unishment  of  adultery,  and  this  threat  was  literally  fulfilled  upon  Jerusalem, 
or  she  was  stoned  before  she  was  burned  (Jer.  xxxiii.  4).    Their  sb  was  great, 
and  therefore  their  punishment,  so  great  that  even  God's  fury  is  represented  as 
170 


Digitized  by 


Google 


E0M1LETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL,  chap.  xtt. 


being  satisfied  uptm  them,  and  quite  brought  to  a  pause  (ver.  42).  They  could 
no  further  go  iu  iniquity,  and  so  God's  fury  is  represented  as  ceasing  ;  by  which 
we  are  to  understand  that  it  rested  upon  them.  He  left  them  to  their  fate. 
God  can  bring  it  about  that  we  shall  be  able  to  sin  no  further.  2.  In  kind. 
Their  sin  was  public,  and  so  their  shame  and  their  judgment  were  public.  Their 
sin  was  unfaithfulness  towards  God,  and  they  are  punished  by  the  unfaithfulness 
of  men.  They  cast  God  oflF,  and  men  cast  them  oflF.  That  law  which  is  true  of 
individual  man  is  true  also  of  nations,  that  the  very  things  which  they  sow  they 
shall  also  reap. 

(Vers.  39-42). 

1.  God^s  hatred  is  80  great  against  idolatry  and  idolaters  that  Be  will  not 
endure  the  places  where  they  have  med  idolatrous  worship.  The  places  where 
they  sinned  must  be  destroyed,  broken,  utterly  razed  and  ruined.  Hezekiah  is 
commended  for  four  things  ;  and  the  first  is  for  removing  the  high  places  ;  then 
for  breaking  the  images,  cutting  down  the  groves,  and  breaking  the  brazen 
serpent.  2.  When  we  abuse  the  mercies  of  God,  we  give  Him  cause  to  take  them 
away.  I'hey  decked  their  high  places  with  their  garments  (ver.  16) ;  thev 
made  images  of  their  jewels  (ver.  17).  Here  God  threatens  to  take  away  both 
the  one  and  the  other.  He  would  give  them  into  their  hands  who  should  rob 
them  of  their  fair  jewels,  and  strip  them  of  all  their  clothes  (Isa,  xlii.  22). 
"And  leave  thee  naked  and  bare."  Before,  in  ver.  8,  it  is  said,  that  God 
covered  her  nakedness.  He  found  her  naked,  and  now  He  would  leave  her 
naked  and  bare.  3.  When  God  hath  showed  much  kindness  to  a  people,  and 
they  have  been  ungrateful.  He  will  reduce  them  to  their  former  condition,  (iod 
did  much  for  Ephraim,  yet  he  was  un<;rateful,  forgot  God,  went  out  to  other 
lovers  f  Hos.  ii.  2,  3).  God  had  spread  His  skirt  over  this  Jewish  woman,  clothed 
hei  with  embroidered  silk  and  fine  linen,  decked  her  with  choice  ornaments  and 
jewels,  put  His  comeliness  upon  her ;  but  she  abused  all  His  bounty  and  love, 
proved  ungrateful  and  whorish,  and  therefore  He  would  put  her  into  her  first 
condition,  strip  her  of  all,  and  leave  her  naked.  She  came  out  of  captivity,  she 
should  now  go  into  captivity  ;  she  was  cast  out,  and  now  she  should  be  cast  out 
again  ;  she  was  poor,  beggarly,  and  had  nothing,  and  should  be  made  so  again. 
4.  When  judgments  are  executed  upon  a  backsliding  people,  then  God  is  at  rest 
and  is  satisfied.  When  this  woman,  this  Jewish  state,  fell  into  the  hands  of 
enemies,  was  plundered  and  ?])()iled,  and  all  her  glory  laid  in  the  dust ;  then 
God  caused  His  fury  to  rest,  His  jealousy  to  depart,  tiien  He  was  quiet,  and 
angry  no  more.  Before  judgment  be  thoroughly  executed,  God  is  troubled  and 
restless  ;  but  when  it  is  done.  He  is  pacified,  comforted,  as  it  is  in  Ezek.  v.  13. 
Before  Jonah  had  judgment  passed  upon  him,  there  was  a  great  wind,  and  a 
mighty  tempest  in  the  sea.  The  Lord  s  anger  was  let  out.  But  when  Jonah 
was  sent,  and  cast  into  the  sea— justice  done — it  is  said  the  sea  ceased  from 
her  raging.  The  Lord  first  ceased  from  His  fury.  He  was  pacified,  and  mani- 
fested it  by  stilling  of  the  seas.  God  would  bring  the  Assyrians  upon  the  Jews  ; 
and  what  then  ?  **  The  indignation  shall  cease,  and  mine  anger  in  their 
destruction  "  (Isa.  x.  25). — (Greenhill) 

This  dire  judgment  is  jnst;  for  Israel  has  not  only  forgotten  Gtod's  nnde- 
served  favour  to  her  in  her  eleotlon,  but  has  even  surpassed  both  Samaria 
and  Sodom  in  her  abominations. 

(Vers.  43-52). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  43.     ties  as  the  just  punishment  of  their 

**  Hast  fretted  Me  in  ah  these  things."     sin,  they  raged  against  the  Lord.   The 

Instead  of  regarding  their  calama-     judgments  tiiat   ought   to   have   led 

171 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OUAP.  XVI. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZBKIEL. 


them  to  repentance  only  served  to 
make  them  desperate,  and  to  plunge 
them  into  still  greater  depths  of  apos- 
tacy.  *'And  &011  shalt  not  commit 
this  lewdness  above  all  thine  abomina- 
tions.*' "Lewdness  and  abomination 
are  not  in  themselves  different :  the 
thought  is,  that  the  measure  of  the 
lewdness  and  aboiuination  is  now  full — 
that  it  is  time  for  the  punishment  to 
enter  into  the  place  of  sin." — {Heng- 
stenherg,)  "  We  must  explain  the 
words  from  Lev.  xix.  29,  where  the 
toleration  by  a  father  of  the  whoredom 
of  a  daughter  is  designated  as  Zimmdh. 
If  we  adopt  this  interpretation,  Jeho- 
vah says  that  He  has  punished  the 
spiritual  whoredom  of  Israel,  in  order 
that  He  may  not  add  another  act  of 
wrong  to  the  abominations  of  Israel,  by 
allowing  such  immorality  to  go  un- 
punished. If  he  did  not  punish,  He 
would  commit  Zimmfth  Himself, — in 
other  words,  would  make  himself  ac- 
cessory to  the  sins  of  Israel." — (Keil.) 

Ver.  44.  "Behold  every  one  that 
useth  proverbs  shall  use  tnis  proverb 
against  thee,  saying,  as  is  the  mother, 
so  is  her  daughter."  ''  Her  abominable 
life  is  so  conspicuous,  that  it  strikes 
every  one,  and  furnishes  occasion  for 
proverlial  sayin^^s.  The  daughter  is 
of  course  Jerusalem,  as  the  representa- 
tive of  Israel.  The  mother  is  the 
Canaanitish  race  of  Hittites  and  Amo- 
rites,  whose  immoral  nature  had  been 
adopted  by  Israel" — (KeiL) 

Ver.  45.  **  Thou  art  thy  mother's 
daughter  thatloveth  her  husband  and 
her  children ;  and  thou  art  the  sister 
of  thy  sisters,  which  loveth  their  hus- 
bands, and  their  children ;  your  mother 
was  an  Hittite,  and  your  father  an 
Amorit«3.**  Here  Jehovah  is  represented 
as  the  husband,  not  only  of  Israel,  but 
also  of  the  other  nationa  In  their  case, 
also,  idolatry  was  apostacy  from  God 
who  first  gave  them  that  knowledge  of 
Himself  which  they  were  not  willing  to 
retain.  Keil  notes  that  Theodoret  has 
explained  it  correctly  in  this  way :  "  He 
8ht»\vs  by  this,  that  He  is  not  the  God 
ot  Jews  only,  but  of  Gentiles  also  ;  for 
172 


God  once  gave  oracles  to  them,  before 
they  chose  the  abominations  of  idolatry. 
Therefore  he  says  that  thev  also  put 
away  both  the  husband  and  the  chil- 
dren by  denying  Grod,  and  slaying  the 
children  to  demons." 

Ver.  46.  "Thine  elder  sister  it 
Samaria  •  .  •  thy  younger  dtter  is 
Sodom."  "Samaria  and  Sodom  are 
called  sisters  of  Jerusalem,  not  because 
both  cities  belonged  to  the  same 
mother-land  of  Canaan,  tor  the  origin 
of  the  cities  does  not  come  into  con- 
sideration here  at  all,  and  the  cities 
represent  the  kingdoms,  as  the  addi- 
tional words,  "her  daughters,"  that 
is  to  say,  the  cities  of  a  land  or  king- 
dom dependent  upon  the  capital,  clearly 
prove.  Samaria  and  Sodom,  with  the 
daughter  cities  belonging  to  them,  are 
sisters  of  Jerusalem  in  a  spirituid 
sense,  as  animated  by  the  same 
spirit  of  idolatry.  The  Heb.  ought 
to  be  rendered,  ^'Thy  great  sister 
is  Samaria  ....  and  thy  sister, 
who  is  smaller  than  thou,  is  Sodom.*' 
Samaria  is  called  the  greater  sister 
of  Jerusalem,  and  Sodom  the  smaller 
sister.  This  is  not  equivalent  to  the 
older  and  the  younger,  for  Samaria 
was  not  more  deeply  sunk  in  idolatry 
than  Sodom,  nor  was  her  idolatry  more 
ancient  than  that  of  Sodom  "  (Keil). 
The  expressions  "left  hand,"  "right 
hand "  are  employed,  because  the 
Orientals  regarded  the  Eaat  as  the 
principal  point  of  the  heavens.  Hence 
the  left  would  designate  the  North, 
and  the  right  the  South,  the  direction 
in  which  Sodom  had  lain. 

Ver.  47.  **Thou  wast  corrupted 
more  than  they  in  all  thy  ways."  Jeru- 
salem had  greater  guilt,  because  she 
was  distinffuished  by  greater  religious 
privileges  tlian  these  cities.  She  had 
the  temple,  the  sacrifices.  Divinely 
appointed  priests,  and  the  law.  In  her 
midst  God  was  worshipped  once  in  the 
beauty  of  holiness. 

Ver.  48.  *'  Sodom,  thy  sister  hath 
not  done  •  •  •  •  as  thou  hast  done.** 
Compare  Sam.  iv.  6  ;  Matt.  xi.  24. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


Ver.  49.     "Pride,  fiilness  of  bread  to  make  them   appear  comparatively 

and  abnndanoe  of  idleness  was  in  innocent  by  the  side  of  others,  accom- 

her."    Prosperity  proves  dan^'en)U8  to  panied  with  much   more  aggravating 

virtue,  idleness  leads  to  temptation  and  circumstances."— ^-'^^''^^^^^'w  J    Jeru- 

to  every  sin.     Moses  liad  forwarned  salem    had  a  longer  probation    than 

Israel  against  these  dangers  (Deut.  vi.  Samaria,  and   had   been    warned    by 

11, 12 ;  compareHoaxiii.e).    Idlen^  the    example    of   Samaria's    punish- 

predisposes  men  to  infidelity  (Is.  xxxii.  ment      Yet    she    committed     worse 

9,  11  ;  Jer.  xxii.  21).      "Neither  did  crimes  than  those  which  prevailed  in 

she  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  poor  Samaria  after  Jehu   had  suppressed 

and  needy/'    The  "  cry  "  of  the  op-  Baal-worship, 
pressed  in  Sodom  was  the  great  reason 

for  her  destruction.     Such  a  cry  had  Ver.  52.  "  Be  thou  confounded  also, 

also  come  forth  from  Jerusalem.  and  bear  thy  shame*  in  that  thou  bast 

justified  thy  sisters."      '*  Judah  had 

Ver.  50.     "  Therefore  I  took  them  concurred  from  the  heart  in  the  Divine 

away  as  I  saw  good."      Heb.,  "  Ac-  judgment  on  Sodom  and  Samaria,  and 

cording    to    what   I    saw."       "This  exalted  herself  above   them   on  this 

points  to  Gen.  xviii.  21.      God   con-  account,  as  the  Pharisee  in  the  Gospel, 

ducts  the  inspection   by  His  angels."  In  the  condemnation  of  her  sisters  she 

— (Hengstenberg.)  had  condemned  herself  (Rom.  il  1). 

^^                    ^      ^  Jerusalem  has  "justified "  her  sisters, 

Ver.  51.       And  hadst  justified  thy  inasmuch  as  she  has   behaved   worse 

sisters^  in  all  thine  abominations."  than  they,  and  so  retributive  punish- 

"To  justify  the  crimes  of  others  is  ment    must    overtake    her    alsou"  — 

a  Hebrew  mode  of  speech,  denoting*  (Hengstenberg). 


HOMILETIOS. 

Ood's  Judgments  upon  Israel  Justifiedi. 

God's  judgments  for  sin  will  at  last  be  acknowledged  as  just  even  b^  sinners 
themselves.  But  even  in  this  world  we  can  see  enough  of  God's  righteous 
dealings  to  assure  us  thai;  He  will  be  clear  when  He  ju(]^es.  The  prophets  of 
Israel  were  concerned  th&t  men  should  know  that  God's  ways  are  equal — that 
His  punishments  were  not  arbitrary,  but  just  His  judgments  upon  Israel  oould 
be  clearly  justified. 

I.  They  sinned  against  a  great  and  extraordinary  grace.  The  Lord  had  been 
with  this  nation  firom  its  youth  up.  He  bad  adopted  this  people,  had  made 
known  Himself  to  them,  had  distinguished  them  above  all  others  by  gifts  of 
knowledge  and  of  privilege.  The  duties  and  customs  of  the  pure  worship  of 
Jehovah  were  made  known  to  them,  'i'hey  had  every  reason  to  worship  God 
alone,  for  they  were  in  possession  of  the  purest  form  of  religion  known  to  man- 
kind, and  they  ought  to  have  been  superior  to  every  temptation  to  forsake  that 
religion  for  the  debasing  forms  of  idolatry  around  them.  But  they  forgot  their 
high  calling.  "  1'hou  m&t  not  remembered  the  days  of  thy  youth  "  (ver.  43). 
They  had  displeased  a  personal  God  who  could  feel  the  wrongs  done  to  Him  by 
His  creatures.     '*  Thou  hast  fretted  me  in  all  these  things." 

n.  They  surpassed  other  nations  in  iniquity.  Samaria  and  Sodom  were 
punished,  and  they  had  not  sinned  i^ainst  such  great  light  and  privilege. 
**  Thou  wast  corrupted  more  than  they  in  all  thy  ways  "  (ver.  47).  The  people 
of  Israel  would  reckon  themselves  as  saints  when  compared  with  Sodom  and 

173 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


Samaria,  but  how  different  was  God's  judgment !  They  had  been  warned 
a^aioiit  tlie  siiia  of  Sodom  ;  yet  they  had  dune  wori>e,  for  more  was  given  to  them 
and  more  would  be  required  (Deut.  vl  11,  12 ;  comp.  Hos.  xiii.  6). 

in.  They  are  ocndemned  out  of  their  own  mouth.  ''  Thou  also  which  hast 
judged  thy  sisters,  bear  thine  own  shame  for  thy  sins  that  thou  hast  committed 
more  abominable  than  they  ;  tiiey  are  more  righteous  than  thou  :  yea,  be  thou 
confounded  also,  and  bear  thy  shame,  in  that  thou  hast  justified  thy  sisters  " 
(yer.  52).  In  the  condemnation  of  her  sisters  she  had  condemned  herself. 
Israel  had  nothing  to  answer  ;  for  the  f^ame  judgments  upon  others,  which  they 
regarded  as  just,  were  now  visited  upon  themselves  with  equal  justice  (Rom.  iL  1). 
Every  sinner  will  be  brought,  at  last,  to  admit  the  justice  of  God  in  his  condem- 
nation. He  will  be  confounded, — have  literally  nothing  to  answer.  When  men 
see  the  awful  reality  of  things  they  are  forced  into  the  terrible  silence  of 
conviction. 

(Ver.  49.) 

I.  When  a  man  is  said  to  be  idle.  1.  When  he  doth  nothing,  is  unemployed 
(Matt.  XX.  3).  The  Greek  word  for  "idle"  means  a  man  without  work. 
Solomon's  sluggard  would  not  plough  by  reason  of  the  cold  (Prov.  xx.  4). 
2.  When  they  do  not  what  they  should  do.  He  is  idle  who  does  not  do  (jod's 
work.  There  is  a  work  of  God's  appointment  for  the  day,  which  you  ought  to 
take  notice  of,  and  do.  ''There  are  some  among  you  which  work  not  at  all, 
but  are  busy-bodies  "  (2  Thess.  iii.  11),  doing  no  work,  yet  working  about  every- 
where. 3.  When  they  do  not  so  much  as  they  ought  to  do,  but  are  lazy  in  doing 
little.  When  men  put  not  forth  themselves  to  do  what  they  ought  to  do  in 
conscience,  and  according  to  right  reason,  they  are  justly  said  to  be  idle  (Rom. 
xii.  11 ;  Eccl.  ix.  10 ;  Prov.  xviii.  9). 

II.  The  evil  of  this  sin.  1.  It  is  against  the  end  of  maris  creation.  God 
made  man  for  labour  when  he  was  in  a  state  of  innocency  (Gen.  ii.  15).  He 
must  not  be  idle  there,  taking  his  pleasure  in  a  paradise.  And  after  the  Fall, 
in  the  sweat  of  his  face  he  was  to  eat  bread.  It  is  the  end  of  man's  creation 
and  birth  to  be  doing.  2.  It  is  a  sin  against  the  light  of  nature,  which  puts 
every  thing  upon  motion.  The  heavens,  with  the  glorious  lights  thereof  move 
and  are  constant  in  their  motions  (Psa.  xix.  5).  The  ant  b  a  very  little 
creature,  but  exceedingly  laborious.  So  the  bee  is  little  in  bulk,  but  great  in 
employment,  and  wonderfully  busy.  These  creatures,  with  many  others,  con- 
fute the  sluggard  daily,  preach  down  idleness  and  call  for  action.  3.  It  puts 
God's  family  out  of  order.  The  world  is  God's  family,  and  he  hath  appointed 
men  unto  some  employment  in  it.  As  a  wise  artist  make^  no  wheel  in  a  clock, 
but  to  move  and  help  on  the  general  work ;  and  if  one  wheel  stands,  it  is  out  of 
order  and  hinders  all  the  rest.  Idle  persons  are  disorderly  persons  (1  Thess.  v. 
14).  4.  Jt  sets  a  man  among  the  dead.  An  idle  man  is  both  unsavoury  and 
inactive.  The  poorest  and  meanest  man  in  the  world  that  follows  a  calling,  and 
is  laborious  in  it,  is  better  than  the  most  eminent  that  doth  nothing.  One  is 
living,  and  the  other  a  dead  man.  5.  Idleness  exposes  a  man  to  variety  qf 
temptations.  It  lays  him  open  to  Satan,  for  a  man  unemployed  is  like  a  city 
without  walls  and  Rates  whither  any  enemy  may  easily  have  entrance  (EiL 
xxxviiL  11).  An  idle  man  is  like  a  vessel  which  is  empty,  any  one  that  comes 
to  it  may  put  in  what  he  will ;  so  Satan  pours  into  idle  persons  what  liquor  he 
pleases.  Those  who  are  out  of  God's  work  are  most  exercised  with  the  devil's. 
6.  Idleness  is  the  mother  and  nurse  of  our  most  danaerous  enemies,  viz. :  lusts. 
Standing  waters  corrupt  soonest.  Among  the  Sodomites  was  abundance  of 
idleness,  and  abundance  of  lusts,  which  fight  and  war  against  the  souL    And 

174 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL.  chap.  xvi. 


vhat  madness  is  it  for  a  luan  to  harbour  and  feed  the  enemies  that  seek 
his  life.  In  doing  nothing  men  learn  to  do  ill.  7.  Poverty  and  beggary  are 
the  itsiies  of  idleness.  Solomon  tells  the  sluggard  that  his  ''  poverty  sliall  come 
as  one  that  travelletL,  and  his  want  as  an  armed  man  "  (Prov.  vi.  11).  He  liebh 
still,  but  poverty  is  up  and  marching  towards  him.  He  is  without  defence,  but 
that  comes  armed.  The  meaning  is,  poverty  will  come  upon  an  idle  and  slothful 
person  suddenly  and  irresistibly.  "  Drowsiness  shall  clothe  a  man  with  rags  " 
(Prov.  xxiii.  21).  8.  Idleness  is  such  a  sin  as  exempts  a  man  from  the  protection 
of  the  angels.  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy 
ways"  (Psa.  xci.  11).  What  ways?  Those  which  are  according  to  tlis  will, 
which  His  providence  leads  unto,  not  in  tlie  ways  of  sin.  A  man  that  is  idle  is 
in  the  devil's  way,  not  in  God's  way.  Idle  persons  that  have  no  calling  go  out 
from  God  and  the  guard  of  His  angels.  If  these  feared  God,  they  would  walk  in 
a  calling,  and  the  angels  of  God  would  be  about  them  (Psa.  xxxiv.  7).  Faith  is 
a  working  grace,  witness  Heb.  xi. ;  1  Tim.  v.  8.  9.  Idle  persons  are  burden- 
some creatures.  The  fig-tree  was  a  burden  to  the  ground  where  it  stood  (Luke 
xiii.  7).  It  was  a  burden  to  the  garden,  to  the  gardener,  to  the  other  trees,  to 
the  lord  and  master  of  all.  ''  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day  idle  ?  Tou  do  no 
good  to  ourselves,  none  to  your  neighbours,  none  to  the  public,  none  to  posterity, 
nor  bring  any  j:lory  to  God."  10.  It  is  a  wasting  of  precious  time,  a  hiding  of 
our  talent.  Time,  that  is  given  us  to  get  grace,  to  work  out  our  salvation,  to 
glorify  Gh)d.  This  the  idle  person  squanders  away.  Such  are  not  minding  the 
apostolical  role,  "  See  that  ye  walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise, 
redeeming  the  time  "  (£ph.  v.  15,  16).  llie  man  who  had  one  talent  would  not 
use  it,  but  hid  it  in  the  earth.  '*  Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant "  (Matt.  xxv. 
25,  26).  Thus  wickedness  and  sloth  go  together.  When  Joseph's  brethren  came 
into  Egypt,  and  were  before  Pharaoli,  the  first  question  he  asked  them  was, 
"  What  is  your  occupation?''  (Gen.  xlvii.  3).  This  was  a  good  question  of  a 
king,  when  strangers  were  to  come  and  dwell  in  his  land,  to  know  whether  they 
bad  any  calling,  could  get  their  livings,  and  not  be  burdensome  to  his  kingdom 
and  subjects. — (Greenhill.) 

But  these  terrible  punishments  are  not  to  be  the  end  of  the  Lord.  He  will 
remember  His  ancient  Covenant,  and  bring  His  people  out  of  misery,  so  that 
they  shall  attain  to  the  glory  wbioh  He  had  promised  them.  They  must 
however,  reach  this  through  humility  for  the  restoration  of  Sodom  and 
Samaria  are  also  announoecL  Hence  ail  boasting  on  the  part  of  Israel  is 
excluded. 

(Vers.  53-63.) 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  53.  restored  to  favour,  m  order  that  she 

"When  I  shall  bring    again  their  may  bear  her  disgrace,  and  be  ashamed 

captivity,  the  captivity  of  Sodom  and  of  her  sins  (ver.  54) ;  that  is  to  say, 

her  daughters,  and  the  captivity  of  not  because  Sodom  and  Samaria  have 

Samaria  and  her  daughters,  then  will  borne  their  punishment  for  a  longer 

I  bring  again  the  captivity  of  thy  time,  but  to  the  deeper  shaming,  the 

captives  in  the  midst  of  them.**    "The  more  complete  humiliation  of  Jernsa- 

promise  commences  with  an  announce-  lem.     The  Hebrew  expression  means, 

nient  of  the  restoration,  not  of  Jerusa-  "  to  turn  the  captivity,"  not  "  to  bring 

lem,  but  of  Sodom  and  Samaria.     The  back  the  captives ; "  and  it  is  here  used 

two  kingdoms,  or  peoples,  upon  which  in  a  figurative  sense  for  restitutio  in 

judgment  first  fell,  shall  also  be  the  statum  integritatis.   No  carrying  away 

first  to  receive  mercy ;  and  it  will  not  took  place  in  the  case  of  Sodom."— 

be  till  after  then  that  Jerusalem,  with  (KeiQ 
the  other  cities  of  Judah,  will  also  be 

175 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


CHAr.  TVT. 


HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


Ver.  54.  ''In  that  thou  art  a 
comfort  unto  theia.*'  "By  bearing 
di8;;race,  f.^.,  by  its  endurance  of  well- 
merited  and  diHgraceful  punishment, 
Jerusalem  consoles  her  sisters^  Samaria 
and  Sodom  ;  and  tliat  not  merely  by 
fellowship  in  misfortune,  but  by  the 
fact  tliat  from  the  punishment  en- 
dured by  Jerusalem,  both  Samaria 
and  Sodom  can  discern  the  righteous- 
ness of  the  ways  of  God,  and  find 
therein  a  foundation  for  their  hope, 
that  the  righteous  God  will  bring  to 
an  end  the  merited  punishment  as 
soon  as  its  object  has  been  attained." 
(Keil) 

Ver.  55.  ''  When  thy  sisters,  S«dom 
and  her  daughters  shall  return  to 
their  former  estate.**  **  If  Jerusalem, 
Samaria,  and  Sodom,  are  to  be  viewed 
as  symbolical  of  the  surrounding 
people  whose  centre  they  formed,  or 
with  whom  they  stood  connected,  no 
difficulty  will  arise  relative  to  the 
restoration  of  Sodom.  If  we  regard 
her  as  the  representative  of  the  Am- 
monites and  Moabites,  the  descendants 
of  Lot,  we  shall  here  have  only  a  parallel 

Prediction  to  Jer.  zlviii.  47 ;  xlix.  6. 
lowever  obscure  the  lights  of  history 
relative  either  to  the  captivity  or  the 
restoration  of  the  nations  beyond  the 
Bead  Sea,  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that  they  participated  more  or  less 
in  the  fate  of  the  Jews,  to  whose 
country  they  lay  contiguous.  That 
most  of  the  ten  tribes  of  which  Samaria 
had  been  the  capital  were  restored 
under  Cyrus,  is  now  generally  admitted. 
The  restoration  of  all  the  three  classes 
of  people  is  here  predicted  to  take  place 
at  the  same  time." — (Henderson.) 

Ver.  56.  **For  thy  sister  Sodom 
was  not  mentioned  by  thy  mouth  in 
the  day  of  thy  pride."  They  took 
no  heed  of  the  warning  of  Sodom's 
example.  Boasting  themselves  as  "  The 
Temple  of  the  I^rd,"  they  thought 
that  they  needed  it  not  (Jer.  vil  4J. 

Ver.  57.     ''As  at  the  time  of  thy 
reproach  of  the  daughters  of  Syria." 
"  By  the  reproach  of  the  cities  of  Syria, 
176 


was  not  meant  anything  derogatory  to 
the  character  of  those  cities  nationally 
considered,  but  the  indignity  offered 
by  the  Syrians  to  the  Jews,  when, 
under  Rezin,  they  invaded  the  land  of 
Judah  (2  Kings  xv.  37  ;  Is.  viL  1-9). 
That  this  is  the  construction  to  be 
put  upon  the  words  is  evident  from 
the  parallelism,  in  the  corresponding 
member  of  which  the  manner  in  which 
the  Jews  had  been  treated  by  the  Philis- 
tines is  mentioned.  Compare  for  the 
insults  offered  by  both.  Is.  ix  11, 12. 
— {Henderson.) 

Ver.  58.  "Thou  hast  borne  thy 
lewdness  and  thine  abominatioAs.'* 
Jerusalem  would  bear  the  guilt  of  theee 
iniquities,  and  would  know  how  great 
that  burden  was  when  she  would  be 
called  upon  to  atone  for  her  wrong- 
doing. 

Ver.  59.  *'  I  will  even  deal  with 
thee  as  thou  hast  done."  In  mercy 
Jehovah  would  "walk  contrary  unto 
them,"  so  that  thev  might  be  humbled 
and  thus  brought  to  repentance. 
"Which  hast  despised  the  oath  in 
breaking  the  covenant*'  ''  Despising 
the  oath  points  back  to  Dent.  xxiz. 
11,  12,  where  the  renewal  of  the 
covenant  concluded  at  Sinai  is  de- 
scribed as  an  entrance  into  the  covenant 
and  oath  which  the  Lord  then  made 
with  His  people.  But  even  if  Israel 
has  faithlessly  broken  the  covenant, 
and  must  bear  the  consequent  punish- 
ment, the  unfaithfulness  of  man  can 
never  alter  the  faithfulness  of  God. 
This  is  the  link  of  connection  between 
the  resumption  and  further  expansion 
of  the  promise  in  ver.  60  and  the 
closing  words  of  ver.  59.  The  re- 
memhrance  of  His  covenant  is  men- 
tioned in  Lev.  zzvi.  42-45  as  the  only 
motive  that  will  induce  God  to  restore 
Israel  to  favour  again,  when  the 
humiliation  effected  by  the  endurance 
of  punishment  has  brought  it  to  a  oon- 
fessiou  of  its  sins." — {Keil,) 

Ver.  60.  ^'  Nevertheless  I  will  re- 
member My  covenant  with  thee  in  the 
days  of  thy  youth,  and  I  will  establish 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIO  OOMMBNTABT:    EZEKIEL. 


CBUB,  XYL 


unto  thee  on  everlasting  covenant." 
**TI»e  covenant  which  God  concluded 
with  Israel  in  the  day  of  its  youth,  t.^., 
when  he  led  it  out  of  EJgypt,  He  will 
establish  as  an  everlastiug  coveuaut. 
Consequently  it  is  not  an  entirely  new 
covenant,  but  simply  the  perfecting  the 
old  one  for  everlasting  duration.  For 
the  fact  itself,  compare  Isa.  Iv.  3,  where 
the  making  of  the  everlasting  covenant 
is  described  as  granting  the  steadfast 
mercies  of  David,  i,e.^  as  the  fulfilment 
of  the  promise  given  to  David  (2  Sam. 
vii).  This  promise  is  called  by  David 
himself  an  everlasting  covenant,  which 
God  had  made  with  him  (2  Sam.  xxiii. 
5).  And  the  assurance  of  its  everlasting 
duration  was  to  be  found  in  the  fact 
that  this  covenant  did  not  rest  upon 
the  fulfilment  of  the  law,  but  simply 
npon  the  forgiving  grace  of  God  (com- 
pare ver.  63  with  Jer.  xxxi,  31-34)." 

Ver.  61.  ^*  Then  ahait  thou  remem- 
ber thy  ways  and  be  ashamed."  They 
would  be  ashamed  when  they  saw  the 
other  nations  associated  with  them  in 


the  enjoyment  of  the  same  blessings. 
*'I  will  give  them  unto  thee  for 
daughters,  but  not  by  thy  covenant." 
The  covenant  to  which  they  assented 
at  Horeb  excluded  all  other  nations 
from  its  benefits  (Ex.  xxiv.  7).  The 
blessings  which  were  to  come  upon  all 
nations  would  flow  from  the  earlier 
promise  which  Gk)d  made  to  Abraham 
(GaL  iiL  13,  14). 

Ver.  62.  '' And  I  will  establsh  My 
covenant  with  thee."  This  was  the 
old  covenant  made  with  Abraham, 
wherein  Christ  was  promised,  who  was 
to  bless  all  nations.  That  was  a  cove- 
nant pureljT  of  blessing,  and  in  the 
form  of  it  entirely  onconditionid 
(GaL  iiL  17). 

Ver.  63.  ^'And  never  open  thy 
month  because  of  thy  shame?'  This 
would  be  the  shame  of  the  penitent, 
who  is  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of 
God's  extraordinary  goodness,  and  of 
his  own  foolishnesr  %nd  ingratitude 
(Rom.  iii.  19). 


HOMILETlca. 
God's  Pubposb  of  Mebot  towards  Israel, 

I.  It  wonld  not  be  defeated  by  the  greatness  of  their  sin.  Israel  had  sinned 
against  the  clearest  light,  and  in  spite  of  great  gifts  and  priviliges.  Their  sin 
was  greater  than  the  common  iniquity  of  the  nations  around  them,  for  it  was 
in<4ratitude  and  rebellion  against  the  livmg  God.  Yet  this  did  not  overtask 
God's  infinite  mercy,  or  close  the  door  of  liope  against  them  for  ever.  With 
Him  there  is  plenteous  redemption.  The  gospel  ofl'ers  salvation  to  the  worst  of 
sinners,  even  to  those  who  like  Israel,  have  sinned  against  the  greatest  light. 

II.  Its  strength  lay  in  Ood's  ancient  covenant  with  them.    It  was  the  old 

covenant  which  God  would  now  call  to  mind  that  which  He  made  with  them 
when  He  first  chose  them  as  a  people  destined  to  accomplish  His  purpose  of 
salvation  for  the  world.  In  the  meantime  they  were  punished  according  to 
their  works,  which  was  justice.  But,  in  the  end.  His  grace  would  deal  with 
them  according  to  His  mercy  secured  by  His  old  covenant  (ver.  60).  Faith  in 
God's  unchanging  goodness  was  David's  comfort  wheu  he  uttereid  his  'Mast 
words."  He  remembered  many  failures,  and  how  he  and  his  house  had  fallen 
far  short  of  their  high  calling,  but  his  soul  stood  firmly  upon  this  rock,  *'  Yet 
He  hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure : 
for  this  is  all  mv  salvation,  and  all  my  desire,  although  He  make  it  not  to  grow  " 
(2  Sam.  xxiiL  5).  Thus  David  confessed  that  his  house  was  no  suitable  home 
for  Israel's  Great  Ruler,  but  he  had  strong  faith  that  grace  would  prev.iil  over 

M  177 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XTi.  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL, 


all  this  UDworthiness.  And  now  grace  begins  the  work  of  reconciliation,  of 
re-establishment.  God  had  not  broken  His  covenant,  and  now  He  will  make 
the  first  advance  towards  its  renewal  and  fulfilment  All  would  be  seen  to  be 
of  grace,  and  not  of  merit ;  and,  therefore,  there  can  be  no  ground  of  boasting 
on  the  part  of  Israel.  God's  purpose  of  mercy  towards  mankind,  in  Jesus  Christ, 
is  intended  to  prevail  over  all  their  sin.  The  grace  displayed  in  redemption  is 
suthcient  for  the  largest  designs  of  mercy. 

III.  It  would  be  accomplished  through  their  humiliation.  1.  They  would 
be  brought  to  see  their  own  sin  in  all  its  magnitude.  They  would  remember 
the  past  with  shame,  and  the  sen^e  of  God's  infinite  mercy  displayed  in  their 
forgiveness  would  close  their  mouths  in  utter  astonishment.  They  would  be 
both  asiinmed  and  confounded  (vers.  61-63).  2.  They  would  be  put  to  shame  by 
God's  dealings  with  other  nations.  The  restoration  of  Sodom  and  Samaria  was 
also  promised  (vers.  53,  54).  Nations  which  they  thouglit  were  for  ever  beyond 
the  reach  of  Divine  mercy  were  about  to  be  blessed.  This  great  purpose  of 
restoration  is  fully  accomplished  in  the  Gospel  dispensation.  God  chose  from 
His  people,  Israel,  the  apostles  who  were  to  preach  the  Gospel,  "  Salvation  is 
of  the  Jews."  They  were  the  people  appointed  to  spread  the  glad  tidings  of 
salvation  to  the  heathen.  The  old  Covenant  would  expand  into  the  large  and 
unchangeable  purpose  of  God's  mercy  in  the  Gospel.  tVom  Jerusalem  is  to  go 
forth  the  word  of  mercy  that  is  to  save  the  world.  Thus  in  the  end,  it  will  be 
seen  that  God's  love  is  not  partial,  but  contemplates  the  larger  purpose  of 
bringing  the  means  of  salvation  within  the  reach  of  alL 

(Vers.  53,  64). 

But  how  could  a  restoration,  of  Sodom  and  her  daughters  (Gomorrah,  etc.') 
be  predicted,  when  the  destruction  of  these  cities  was  accompanied  by  the 
sweeping  away  of  all  their  inhabitants  from  off  the  face  of  the  earth  ?  Many  of 
the  commentators  have  attempted  to  remove  the  difficulty  by  assuming  that 
Sodom  here  stands  for  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites,  who  were  descendants  of 
Lot,  who  escaped  from  Sodom.  But  the  untenableness  of  such  an  explanation 
is  obvious,  from  the  simple  fact  that  the  Ammonites  and  Moabites  were  no  more 
Sodomites  than  Lot  himself  And  the  view  expressed  by  Origen  and  Jerome, 
that  Sodom  is  a  typical  name,  denoting  heathenism  generally,  is  also  unsatis- 
factory. The  way  m  which  Sodom  is  classed  with  Samaria  and  Jerusalem,  and 
the  special  reference  to  the  judgment  that  fell  upon  Sodom  (vers.  49,  50),  point 
undeniably  to  the  real  Sodom.  The  heathen  world  comes  into  consideration 
only  so  far  as  this,  that  the  pardon  of  a  heathen  city,  so  deeply  degraded  as 
Sodom,  carries  with  it  the  as^surance  that  mercy  will  be  extended  to  all  heathen 
nations.  We  must  therefore  take  the  words  as  referring  to  the  literal  Sodom. 
Yet  we  certainly  cannot  for  a  moment  think  of  any  earthly  restoration  of 
SoJom.  For  even  if  we  could  conceive  of  a  restoration  of  the  cities  that  were 
destroyed  by  fire,  and  sunk  into  the  depths  of  the  Dead  Sea,  it  is  impossible  to 
form  any  conception  of  an  earthly  and  corporeal  restoration  of  the  inhabitants 
of  those  cities,  who  were  destroyed  at  the  same  time  ;  and  in  this  connection  it 
is  chiefly  to  them  that  the  words  refer.  This  does  not  by  any  means  prove  that 
the  thing  itself  is  impossible,  but  simply  that  the  realization  of  the  prophecy 
must  be  sought  for  beyond  the  present  order  of  things,  in  one  that  extends  into 
the  life  everlasting. — (Keil). 

Sodom  represents  the  collective  heathen  world  standing  in  like  relations  with 
her.  That  great  crushing  judgujents  will  fall  upon  the  whole  heathen  world  no 
less  than  on  Sodom  itself  is  the  uniform  announcement  of  the  prophets,  also  of 
£z.,  in  ch.  xxv.  and  xxvi ;  so  that  the  remark,  that  '*  Sodom  is  not  a  type  of 
heathendom  on  this  account,  because  heathendum  does  not  need  to  be  restored/' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTAMT:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  xvl 


is  not  to  the  point  The  representative  character  of  Sodom  lies  in  the  nature 
of  the  thing.  If  God  pities  the  most  notorious  sinners  among  the  heathen,  how 
should  He  not  pity  all  ?  And  it  is  confirmed  by  ch.  xlvii.  18,  where  the  sea 
introduced  in  place  of  Sodom  is  a  symbol  of  the  world  dead  in  sins.  Sodom 
also  stands  frequently  elsewhere  in  the  O.T.  as  a  representative  of  deep  corrup- 
tion (Deut  xxxii.  32  ;  Isa.  i.  10  \  Jer.  xxiii  14).  But  all  doubt  is  excluded  by 
ver.  61.  There  the  representative  character  of  Sodom  is  expressly  affirmed. 
Yet  we  may  not  exclude  even  Sodom  itself  from  salvation.  The  special 
references  to  it  are  too  strong  for  this  (comp.  vers.  49,  50)  Micliaelis  says  : — 
"  As  Samaria  and  Jerusalem,  so  must  Sodom  also,  it  appears,  be  taken  literally." 
As  a  restoration  of  the  city  is  not  to  be  thought  of,  its  inhabitants  swept  away 
by  the  judgment  can  only  be  the  o];)ject  of  salvation ;  and  we  have  nere  an 
allusion  to  a  continuance  of  the  arrangements  of  grace  after  death  for  those  for 
whom  on  earth  salvation  did  not  attain  to  its  highest  completion,  the  0.  T. 
basis  for  1  Pet.  iii.  20,  21 ;  iv.  6,  especially  for  the  latter  passage ;  also  for 
Matt  xii.  41,  42,  a  passage  that  indeed  only  indirectly  leads  to  the  same  result 
— {Hengstenberg). 

(Ver.  62). 

**I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  thee.**  Men  once  sensible  of  breach 
with  God  are  not  easily  induced  to  believe  that  Grod  will  bestow  great  mercies 
upon  them.  The  Lord,  therefore,  out  of  His  abundant  kindness,  douUes  the 
promise  of  making  and  establishing  His  covenant  with  Jerusalem,  so  that  her 
fears  and  disputes  may  cease,  and  she  be  ascertained  thereof  **  Thou  shalt 
know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  The  Heb.  word  signifies  to  know,  to  acknowledge, 
to  understand,  to  be  certain,  and  properly  refers  to  the  mind  and  understanding. 
The  knowledge  here  meant  is  a  saving  knowledge ;  for  He  speaks  not  of  that 
knowledge  which  arises  from  afflictions  and  judgments,  of  which  He  had  oft  spoken 
before.  Thirteen  times  the  Lord  saith,  that  they  sliould  know  that  He  was  the 
Lord  But  this  was  by  His  judgments.  Here  He  speaks  of  such  knowledge  as 
springs  from  a  fountain  and  foundation  of  mercy.  "  Thou  shalt  know  Me,  *  i.e. 
in  another  manner  than  thou  didst  before ;  thou  shalt  know  Me  spiritually, 
with  a  knowledge  of  faith  and  salvation  (John  vii.  17  ;  x.  4).  This  differs  from 
a  legal  and  literal  knowlege,  for — 1.  It  is  a  more  distinct  knowledge  oj  God. 
Human  knowledge  is  more  mixed,  dark,  and  confused.  Every  ungodly  man's 
light  is  darkness  (Job  z.  22).  But  he  who  hath  light  from  God  in  covenant,  his 
light  is  clear.  "The  light  of  the  righteous  rejoiceth"  fProv.  xiii.  9).  If 
it  were  confused  and  obscure,  it  would  not  rejoice.  "The  wisdom  from 
above  is  pure"  (James  iii.  17);  and  the  more  pure,  the  more  clear,  tlje 
more  distinct.  2.  It  is  a  savoury,  relishing  knowledge,  the  soul  is  affected  with 
it.  "Taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good/  The  true  knowledj;e  and  t^^ste  of 
Gkxl  is  as  sweet  as  anv  gain,  as  ever  manna  was.  "  His  fruit  was  sweet  to  my 
taste."  His  knowledge  hath  a  savour  iu  it  (2  Cor.  ii.  14).  Z.  It  is  a  deep- 
rooted  and  well-settled  knowledge.  The  Lord  puts  wisdom  in  the  inward  parts, 
and  gives  understanding  to  the  hearts  of  those  with  whom  He  strikes  His 
covenant  (Job  xxxviii.  36).  "  God  who  commanded  the  light  to  shine  out  of 
darkness  hath  shined  in  our  hearts"  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  Not  in  our  heads  only, 
not  on  our  hearts  only,  but  in  our  hearts.  God  puts  and  writes  His  law  in  the 
hearts  of  His  people  (Jer.  xxxL  33).  Wicked  men  have  knowledge  and  light 
in  their  heads,  but  darkneas  in  their  hearts.  4.  It  is  distinguishable  from  other 
kinds  of  knowledge  by  the  effects  (1.)  It  is  peaceable,  it  causeth  men  to  live 
peaceably  (James  iii.  17  ;  Isa.  xi.  9).  When  men  know  God  savingly,  they  love 
peace,  and  pnrsue  peace  ;  but  when  knowledge  is  literal,  they  are  contentious 
and  bitter.     (2.)  It  humbleth  much.    The  more  men  know  God  in  His  holiness, 

179 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XVI.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    EZEKJEL. 


clory,  and  goodness,  the  more  humble  they  will  be  (Ezek.  xx.  42,  43).  When 
Job  liad  a  clear  and  spiritual  siglit  of  God,  he  abhorred  himself  in  dust  and 
aslies  (Job  xlii.  5,  6).  In  like  manner  the  prophet  Isaiah  and  Paul  (Isa.  vi.  5 ; 
1  Cor.  XV.  8,  9).  (3.)  It  is  working  and  powerjul.  Like  fire,  it  consumes  the 
lusts  of  men's  hearts,  and  separates  the  dross  of  their  spirits.  The  truth  purifies 
the  soul  (1  Pet.  i.  22).  Divine  knowledge  keeps  under  what  hinders  pi-actice, 
and  leads  out  the  soul  to  action  (Psa.  cix.  84).  Men  have  not  the  true  know- 
ledge of  God  when  their  lusts  overpower  them,  and  make  them  disobedient. 
(4.)  7rust  and  confidence  in  the  Lord.  The  knowledge  we  speak  of  hath 
certaintv  in  it,  and  causeth  venturing  (Psa.  ix  10).  They  that  know  God 
spiritually,  His  truths  and  promises,  covenant,  feithfubiess,  wul  resign  up  them- 
selves to  Him  and  lean  upon  Him.  "In  the  Lord,  Jehovah,  is  everlasting 
strength  "  (Isa.  xxvl  4).  When  a  man  hath  the  true,  real,  and  clear  knowledge 
of  this  he  will  trust  in  God.  David  had  the  right  knowledge  of  God  when  he 
said,  "  He  is  my  refuge  and  my  fortress;  my  God,  in  Him  will  I  trust" 
(Psa.  xci.  2).—(GreenAiU.) 

(Ver.  63). 

1.  Godly  sorrow  and  shame  for  sin  arises  Jrom  a  right  knowledge  of  God  in 
the  covenant  of  grace.  If  the  knowledge  be  spiritual  and  evangelical,  the  firuit 
of  the  covenant,  men's  repentance  will  be  suitable  j  sanctified  knowledge  will 
produce  sanctified  shame,  sorrow,  and  tears  (Zech.  xii.  10).  When  men  are  in 
covenant  with  God,  and  have  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  His  love  and  bounty, 
in  giving  Christ  to  take  away  sin,  and  look  upon  Him  in  His  piercings  and 
sufferings  for  their  sins,  then  they  will  mourn  with  a  great  but  spiritual 
mourning,  which  is  the  most  kindly  and  acceptable.  2.  Those  who  rightly  know 
God  in  the  covenant  of  grace^  will  not  murmur  against  Him  for  any  of  His 
dealings  with  them.  They  will  be  silent  and  submissive  before  Him.  They 
know  God  is  infinitely  wise,  just,  and  holy  ;  that  all  their  afflictions  and  chas- 
tisements are  exceeding  short  of  what  they  deserve ;  that  nothing  comes  to 
pass  without  His  Providence;  that  He  can  wrong  none;  that  He  can 
use  unholy  instruments  holily,  and  hath  holy  ends  in  all  His  ways.  Job 
met  with  very  hard  things ;  but  knowing  God  the  right  way,  he  opened 
not  his  mouth  against  Him  but  for  Him.  So  David,  "I  was  dumo;  I 
opened  not  my  mouth,  because  Thou  didst  it"  (Psa.xxxix.  9).  He  was 
silent,  and  patiently  submitted  unto  the  hand  of  God;  he  neither  ac- 
cused Ilim,  nor  excused  himself.  If  I  be  reproached,  persecuted,  afflicted 
any  way,  I  know  it  is  Thy  doing,  and  I  will  be  dumb.  Those  who  have 
spiritual  knowledge  of  God,  and  spiritual  sorrow  for  their  sins  are  most 
silent.  In  whatsoever  condition  they  be  cast,  they  will  say  with  the  Church, 
*'  We  will  bear  the  indignation  of  the  liord,  because  we  have  sinned  against 
Him  "  (Micah  vii  9).  3.  iSin  is  such  an  evil  as  provokes  God.  "  When  I  am 
pacified  towards  thee."  If  there  were  not  oflFence,  no  place  would  be  found  for 
pacification,  for  where  this  has  to  be  made  provocation  hath  gone  before.  Sin 
provokes  God  bitterly,  and  makes  him  angry  every  day  (Hos.  xii.  14  ;  Psa  vii. 
11).  To  kindle  His  anger,  even  but  a  little,  is  a  dangerous  thing  TPsa  ii.  12). 
Paul  knew  it  when  he  said,  "  Do  we  provoke  the  Lord  to  jealousy ;  are 
we  stronger  than  He?"  (1  Cor.  x.  22).  4.  Though  sin  do  provoke  God 
greatly  and  bitterly,  yet  He  is  to  be  pacified.  He  is  not  implacable. 
"  He  will  not  keep  His  anger  for  ever.  His  mercy  endures  tor  ever, 
but  not  His  anger ;  His  wrath  is  momentary,  but  His  kindness  is  everlasting 
(l>a.  liv.  8).  Aaron  made  an  atonement  for  the  people  (Num.  xvi  46). 
Phineas  turned  awav  his  wrath  (Num.  xxv.  11).  Moses  prevailed  with  God,  and 
pacified  Him  when  he  was  very  angry  (Ex,  xxxii.  14).  And  when  the  people 
180 


Digitized  by 


Googlf 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   BZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  xvn. 


were  full  of  sin,  had  greatly  trespassed, "  He  being  fall  of  compassion,  forgave 
their  iniquity,  and  destroyed  them  not :  yea  many  a  time,turned  He  His  anger 
away,  and  did  not  stir  up  all  His  wrath  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  38).  5.  God  being  paci- 
fied toward  a  people  is  a  great  mercy.  This  appears  in  two  things :  (1.)  All 
that  hath  qffejided  is  passed  by  and  forgiven,  **For  all  that  thou  hast  done." 
Not  for  one,  or  two,  or  a  hundred  things  done,  but  for  all  done  ;  the  idolatry, 
oppression,  pride,  fulness  of  bread,  idleness,  neglect  of  the  poor,  injustice,  pro- 
faneness,  etc.  Here  is  the  greatness  of  Divine  grace  ;  be  sins  never  so  ^reat, 
old,  many,  they  are  all  done  away.  (2.)  Be  is  so  pacified,  that  He  will  not  be 
angry  with  thern  again  for  those  evil  deeds.  The  Heb.  word  denotes  such  a 
covering  of  their  sins,  so  that  thev  cannot  be  easily  seen  again  ;  an  expiation,  a 
Wotting  out  (Isa.  xliii.  25).  "  The  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be  sought  for,  and 
there  ^all  be  none,  and  the  sins  of  Judah,  and  they  shall  not  be  found  "  (Jer. 
L  20),— {Greenhill). 


Thb  Humiliation  /jscd  Exaltation  of  thb  Housb  of  David  (Chap  zvii). 


EXEGETIUAL  NOTES.— The  word 
of  prophecy  in  this  chapter  is  intro- 
duced in  the  way  of  a  riddle  and  a 
parable  (ver.  2).  The  parable  itself 
is  told  in  vers.  1-10.  In  vers.  11-21, 
we  have  the  interpretation  of  it  and 
its  application  to  King  Zedekiah.  In 
vers.  22-24,  we  have  the  prophecy  of 
the  exaltation  of  David's  house  and  its 
necessary  connection  with  the  glory 
of  Messiah's  kingdom.  By  the  alliance 
of  Zedekiah  with  Egypt,  the  people 
hoped  to  regain  the  ancient  glory  of 


Israel  The  prophet  shows  that  these 
hopes  are  vain.  They  thought  that 
God  could  not  fail  towards  the  king 
without  reversing  the  promises  which 
He  had  made  to  the  house  of  David. 
The  prophet  announces  that  Zedekiah 
will  meet  with  the  due  reward  of  his 
deeds;  and  yet,  in  a  wonderful  manner, 
God  will  fulfil  His  ancient  promise  to 
the  chosen  people,  though  to  human 
observation  all  seems  to  be  lost.  The 
kingdom  of  David  will  assuredly  be 
exalted  in  the  latter  days. 


Thb  Pabablb,  BEPEESENTiNa  the  Emptiness  of  ai^l  thb  Nation's  Lakihly 
Hopes  op  the  Futubb  (vers.  1-10). 


Vera  1, 2.  "  Put  forth  a  riddle,  and 
speak  a  parable  unto  the  house  of 
IsraeL'*  **  The  parable  mftsh&l,  corre- 
sponding exactly  to  the  N.T.  vapajiok'fi 
is  iiMoi  chldhah,  a  riddle,  because  of 
tlie  deeper  meaning  lying  beneath  the 
])arabolic  shell. — (^eil.)  As  far  as  it 
described  the  future  of  the  house  of 
Israel,  it  was  teaching  by  analogy,  and 
may,  therefore,  be  regarded  m  the 
light  of  a  parable.  In  its  immediate 
bearing  upon  the  fate  of  Zedekiah,  it 
may  be  regarded  as  a  riddle. 

Ver.  3.  "  A  great  eagle  with  great 
wings.**  "The  symbolism  of  this 
parable  has  been  traced  bv  some  to 
Babylonian  influences  working  upon 
the  prophet's  mind,  but  without  any 


tenable  ground.  The  figure  of  the 
eagle,  or  bird  of  prey,  applied  to  a 
conqueror  making  a  rapid  descent  upon 
a  country,  has  as  little  in  it  of  a  speci- 
fically Babylonian  character  as  Uie 
comparison  of  the  royal  family  to  a 
cedar  or  vine.  Not  only  is  Nebuchad- 
nezEar  compared  to  an  eagle  in  Jer. 
xlviii  40;  xlix  22,  as  Gyrus  is  to  a 
bird  of  prey  in  Isa.  zlvi.  11 ;  but  even 
Moses  nas  described  the  paternal 
watchfulness  of  God  over  His  own 
people  as  bearing  them  upon  eagle's 
wings  (Ex.  xix.  4;  Deut.  xzxii  11). 
The  cedar  of  Lebanon  and  the  vine 
are  genuine  Israelitish  figures.  The 
great  eagle  is  tlie  King  Nebuchad- 
nezzar (compare  ver.  12)" — {KeU.) 
The  "great  wings  "are  a  symbol  of 

181 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xvn. 


HO  Ml  LET JC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL, 


the  yastness  of  Nebucliadnezzar's  do- 
miinon.  ''Long-winged,  fall  of  fea- 
thers, which  had  divers  colours."  The 
long  pinions  signify  his  large  and  well- 
disciplined  armies ;  the  abundant 
**  feathers  "  the  numerous  populations 
over  which  he  reigned,  and  the  **  divers 
colours"  the  variety  of  races,  lan- 
guages, etc.,  which  were  found  in  his 
empire.  "  Come  unto  Lebanon."  This 
is  not  a  symbol  of  the  Israelitish 
land,  but  of  Jerusalem,  with  its 
royal  palace  so  rich  in  cedar  wood. 
This  was  the  place  where  the  cedar 
was  planted  (ver.  12).  "And  took 
the  highest  branch  of  the  cedar." 
The  cedar  is  the  Davidic  family,  and 
the  "  highest  branch  "  of  it  is  King 
Jehoiachm  (2  Kings  xxiv.  12). 

Ver.  4  "The  top  of  his  young 
twigs."  "The  youngest  and  most 
tender  member  of  that  family.  Jehoia- 
chin,  to  whom  reference  is  here  sym- 
bolically made,  was  only  eighteen  years 
of  age  when  he  assumed  the  reins  of 
government"  (2  Kings  xxiv.  8). — 
(Henderson,)  "Carried  it  into  a 
land  of  tramck;  he  set  it  in  a  city 
of  merchants."  "  Not  only  was  the 
country  of  Babylon  famous  for  its 
transport  traflSc  by  means  of  the 
Euphrates,  but  the  city  itself  was 
famous  for  its  manufacturing  and 
mercantile  establishments.  From  the 
connection  of  Babylon  with  the  Persian 
Gulf,  the  commerce  carried  on  between 
that  city  and  India  must  have  been  im- 
mense."— {Henderson!)  "That  which 
is  intended  is  rather  tne  Chaldean  di- 
plomacy, the  policy  of  the  interests 
that  were  thus  pursued,  just  as  we 
speak  of  political  negotiations  and 
international    intrigues.       From    this 

Solicy  originated  the  removal  of 
ehoiachin  to  Babylon.  Self-interest 
is  the  point  of  comparison  between 
politics  and  trade.  This  community 
of  principle  also  explains  how  both 
politics  and  trade  are  represented  in 
Scripture  under  the  fi^'ure  of  adultery, 
the  seH-seeking,  that  conceals  itself 
under  the  appearance  of  love  (Rev. 
xiv.  8 ;  xvii.  2) ;  the  self-seeking 
policy  (Nah.  iii.  4) ;  the  trade  (Isa, 
182 


xxiii.  15,  etc.).  It  was,  as  it  were, 
a  profitable  stroke  of  business,  that 
Jeboiachin,  who  was  favourable  to 
^gypt,  should  be  removed  to  Babylon, 
and  a  creature  of  the  King  of  Babylon 
set  up  in  his  stead,  whose  fidelity  he 
might  count  upon,  because  he  had  the 
legitimate  sovereign  iu  his  custody, 
and  could  make  use  of  him  according 
to  circumstances. — (Hengstenberg.) 

Ver.  5.    "The  seed  of  the  land. 

This  expression  signifies  what  we  mean 
by  "  a  son  of  the  soil,"  as  distinguished 
from  a  foreigner.  The  Chaldeans  ap- 
pointed  Zedeldah,  who  was  of  the  old 
native  royal  family  (2  Kings  xxiv.  17). 
**  He  placed  it  by  great  waters."  Heb. 
"  Many  waters."  The  idea  is  that  of 
a  fertile  situation.  Though,  politi- 
cally, Ze^ekiah  was  in  a  dependent 
position,  yet  he  had  abundant  oppor- 
tunity for  exercising  his  gifts^  and 
power  as  a  ruler.  '*  Set  it  as  a  willow 
tree."  This  tree  is  low,  and  grows  near 
streams  (Isa.  xliv.  4).  "  This  means, 
that  he  treated  it  as  a  willow  tree, 
inasmuch  as  he  took  it  to  many  waters, 
set  it  in  a  well-watered  soil,  i^.  in  a 
suitable  place." — {Kelt). 

Ver.  6.  "A  spreading  vine  of  low 
stature,  whose  branches  tamed  to- 
wards him,  and  the  roots  thereof  were 
under  him."  "  This  figure  of  the  vine 
is  not  here  in  contradiction  with  that 
of  the  willow.  The  two  figures  present 
different  aspects.  The  new  king  isavine, 
not  a  cedar,  as  the  earlier  independent 
family  of  David.  '  Spreading,'  so  that 
it  grew  luxuriantly  indeed,  but  in 
breadth,  not  in  height,  which  is  still 
more  definitely  shown  by  the  addition 
*  of  low  stature.'  Its  (Zedekiah  s)  roots 
should  be  under  him — should  not  be 
withdrawn  from  dependence  on  the 
king  of  Babylon." — (Hengstenberg). 
"  The  subjection  of  Zedekiah  to  Nebu- 
chadnezzar is  siguificantlv  expressed  by 
his  bein^  turned  towards  him  ;  while 
he  continued  faithful  as  his  vassal, 
though  he  never  rose  to  any  elevation, 
yet  the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  went  on 
peaceably,  and  the  subjects  increased 
rather  than  diiuiuished.'  — {Uenderson) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIC  aOMMENTARY:   BZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  xvn. 


Ver.  7.  "  Another  great  eagle  with 
great  wings  and  many  feathers." 
This   secoud    eagle   lacks    the    long 

finious  and  divers  colonrs  of  the  first, 
t  represents  the  King  of  Egypt,  who, 
though  he  ruled  over  a  widely-spread 
and  powerful  kingdom,  was  yet  in- 
ferior to  the  King  of  Babylon  in 
imperial  grandeur  and  disciplined 
armies.  *'This  vine  did  bend  her 
roots  toward  him«  and  shot  forth  her 
branches  toward  him,  that  he  might 
water  it  by  the  fiirrows  of  her  plan- 
tation." This  vine  liad  water  enough 
already,  so  that  there  was  no  occasion 
for  her  to  stretch  out  her  branches 
towards  the  otlter  eagle.  Hereby  the 
conduct  of  Zedekiah  is  condemned, 
who,  wearied  with  subjection  to  the 
King  of  Babylon,  applied  to  the  King 
of  Egypt  for  help,  hoping  that  by  this 
means  he  might  establish  the  indepen- 
dence of  his  throne. 


Ver.  8.  '*  It  was  planted  in  a  good 
soil  by  great  waters,  that  it  might 
bring  forth  branches,  and  that  it 
might  bear  fruit,  that  it  might  be  a 
goodly  vine."  "  If  Zedekiah  had  re- 
main^ quiet  under  Nebuchadnezzar^ 
as  a  hanging  vine,  his  government 
might  have  continued  and  prospered." 


Ver.  9.  *'  Thus  saifh  the  Lord  Ood, 
shall  it  prosper!"  "The  subject  is 
the  Eling  of  iJabvlon.  The  roots  sig- 
nify the  national  existence,  the  fruit 
the  produce  of  the^  land,  or  the  collec- 
tive gain.  The  vine  becomes  dry  in 
all  its  sprouting  leaves,  lliese  signify 
all  that  by  which  a  ^osperous  national 
life  is  displayed.  '  Jf  ot  oy  a  great  arm 
or  many  people  will  it  be  taken  away 
with  its  roots.*  According;  to  Jer. 
xxxiv.y  Nebuchadnezzar  led  a  numerous 
armv  to  Jerusalem,  but  there  was  no 
need  of  so  great  preparations.  If  a 
nation  have  Uod  for  its  enemy,  one 
can  chase  a  thousand  of  them,  and  two 
can  put  ten  thousand  to  flight  (Deut. 
xxxii  30).  The  Egyptians  were  quite 
passive  (comp.  ver.  17).  The  taking 
away  with  the  roots  signified  the  total 
abolition  of  the  national  existence." — 
(Hengstenberg,) 

Ver.  10.  "Shall  it  not  utterly 
wither  when  the  east  wind  toucheth 
it!  "  "  The  east  wind  proving  noxious 
to  vegetation  in  Palestine,  is  here  fitly 
employed  as  a  symbol  of  the  Chaldean 
army,  which  came  from  that  quarter. 
It  was  only  necessary  to  bring  that 
army  into  contact  with  the  Jewish  state 
in  order  to  eflfect  its  ruin." — {Hender* 
son,)  The  east  wind  is  the  searching 
wind  of  God's  anger  (Jonah  iv.  8) 


HOMILETlOa. 
TBAOHnra  bt  PARABLwa 


1.  The  form  of  the  discourse  here,  just  as  in  the  case  of  onr  Lord,  who  has 
developed  the  parable  into  one  of  His  ordinary  modes  of  teaching,  is  to  be  ex- 
nlained  chiefly  firom  the  object  in  view, — partly  as  it  was  designed  for  a  circle  of 
hearers,  or  rather  of  reatlers,  which,  although  mixed  up  in  all  sorts  of  ways  with 
higher  interests,  is  yet  to  be  thought  of  as  living  mainly  in  the  world  of  sense, 
and  especially  as  bound  fast  in  the  misery  of  the  exile,  and  sympathising  in  the 
false  and  faithless  policy  prevailing  at  the  time  in  Jerusalem  ;  partly  as  it  might 
recommend  itself  to  the  prophet  in  the  political  circumstances  by  which  he  was 
surrounded.  The  mashal  before  us  in  Ezekiel  goes,  therefore,  far  beyond  mere 
popular  illustration.  Still  less  is  it  to  be  explained  away  from  the  aesthetic 
stand  point,  as  merely  another  rhetorical  garb  for  the  thought  2.  As  in  the 
parable  the  emblematic  form  preponderates  over  the  thought,  so  also  here. 
What  the  prophet  is  to  say  to  Israel  is  said  by  the  whole  of  that  mighty  array 
of  figurative  ein>ression,  for  which  the  animal  and  vegetable  worlds  furnish  the 
figures.    But  the  eagle  does  what  eagles  otherwise  never  do  ;  and  what  is  planted 

183 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  ZYU. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL, 


as  a  willow  grows  into  a  yine  ;  aod  the  vine  ''  is  represented  as  falling  iu  love 
with  the  other  eagle." — (/.  A  Mkk.)  The  contradictory  character  of  such 
a  representation,  and  the  fact  that  in  the  difficulties  to  be  solved  (vers.  9»  10  etc) 
the  comparison  comes  to  a  stand,  and  the  closing  Messiauic  portion  in  which  the 
whole  culminates,  convert  the  parable  into  a  **  riddia"  A  trace  of  irony  and 
the  moral  tendency,  such  as  belong  to  the  fable»  are  not  wanting. — {Lange.) 


Thb  Intbrpbstatiov  of  thb  Paaablb  (vers.  11-21). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Prom 
vers.  12-17  we  have  the  formal  inter- 
pretation of  the  parable.  In  vers. 
19-21,  the  threat  coutained  in  the 
parable  is  confirmed  and  still  further 
ixpanded. 

yer.l2.  "Behold  the  king  of  Baby. 
Ion  is  come  to  Jerusalem,  and  hath 
taken  the  king  thereof!"  The  accouut 
ot  the  carry iug  away  of  the  king,  i.^., 
Jehoiachin,  and  his  princes  into  Baby- 
lon is  related  in  2  Kings  xjciv.  11,  etc. ; 
Jer.  xxiv.  1^  and  xxiz.  2. 

Ver.  13.  ''And  hath  tak^n  of  the 
king's  seed,  and  made  a  covenant 
with  Him,  and  hath  taken  an  oath  of 
Him.'*  ;*The  king's  seed  is  Jehoia- 
chin's  uncle  Mattaniah,  whom  Nebu- 
chadnezzar made  king  under  the  name 
of  Zedekiah  (2  Kings  zxiv.  17),  and 
from  whom  he  took  an  oath  of  fealty  " 
(2  Chron.  xxxvi.  \Z).'-{KeiL) 

Ver.  14.  ''That  the  kingdom  might 
be  base,  that  might  not  lift  itself  up, 
but  that  by  keeping  of  his  covenant 
It  might  stand."  The  design  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar was  to  weaken  tlie  kingdom 
BO  that  it  could  not  revolt  against  his 
authority,  but,  at  the  same  time,  to 
protect  them  if  they  continued  loyal. 

Ver.  15.  ''  But  he  rebelled  against 
Him  in  sending  his  ambassadors  into 
Egypt,  that  they  might  give  him 
horses  and  much  people."  *'  Though 
we  have  no  account  of  this  mission  to 
the  King  of  Egypt  anywhere  else  in 
the  Jewish  records  we  may  rent  satis- 
fied with  the  testimony  of  Ezekiel,  who 
was  a  contemporary.  Egypt  was  cele- 
brated in  ancient  times  for  its  herd  of 
horses.  According  to  Diod.  Sic.  i.  45, 
184 


the  whole  region  from  Thebes  to 
Memphis  was  filled  with  royal  stalls, 
and  such  was  the  abundance  of  horses, 
that  no  fewer  than  twenty  thousand 
chariots,  each  having  two,  could  be 
furnished  in  time  of  war.  It  was, 
therefore,  natural  for  Zedekiah  to 
turn  to  that  quarter  for  aid,  and 
considering  the  hostile  attitude  of 
the  two  great  empires,  he  might 
reasonably  expect  that  his  applica- 
tion would  not  be  made  in  vain." — 
(Henderson.)  *' Shall  he  escape  that 
doeth  such  things  V  or  shall  he  break 
the  oovenanty  and  be  delivered  t" 
"Such  things," — perjury — breach  of 
covenant.  Even  ragan  nations  had 
great  reverence  for  an  oath,  and 
looked  upon  these  as  among  the 
highest  crimes.  When  one  enquired 
of  the  Delphic  oracle  whether  he 
might  break  his  oath,  he  was  told 
that  for  putting  so  impious  a  question 
he  should  be  punished  oy  the  untimely 
death  of  his  children. 

Ver.  17.  ''Make  &r  him  in  the 
war."  Heb.,  "Act  with  him  in  war," 
f.^.,  be  of  service  to  him.  "  Phiuraoh 
will  not  render  him  the  expected 
powerful  aid  against  the^  Chaldeans  ; 
he  will  leave  his  proteg^  in  the  lurch 
when  he  is  hard  pressed  by  his  enemies. 
That  the  Chaldeans  need  no  great 
military  force  against  Jerusalem,  is 
manifest  here  from  this,  that  the 
Egyptians,  against  whom  alone  it 
could  be  necessary,  come  not  to  its  aid 
withanyforce.  Egjrpt  was  already  at  that 
time  worm-eaten,  which  the  Spirit  of 
God  showed  to  his  prophets,  while 
the  world  went  no  further  than  the 
surface." — (  HengstenbergJ 

Ver.  18.    '*  He  had  given  his  hand.** 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  XYIL 


"To  give  the  hand,"  is  still  in  the 
East  a  pledge  of  agreemeut,  or  fidelity 
(2  Kings  X  15 ;  Ezra  x.  19 ;  Jer.  i.  15). 
Zedekiah  proved  faithless  *to  God, 
because  in  pledging  his  fealty  to  the 
King  of  fiauylon  he  made  a  solemn 
ap|)eiil  to  the  God  of  the  Jews  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi.  13).  The  oath  which  Zedekiah 
swore  to  the  King  of  Babylon  is  desig- 
nated in  yer.  19  as  Jehovah's  oath, 
and  the  covenant  made  with  him  as 
Jehovah's  covenant. 

Ver.  20.  ''And  I  will  spread  my 
net  npon  him,  and  lie  shall  be  taken 
in  my  snare,  and  I  will  bring  him 
to  Babylon."  •'  My  net "  (ch.  xii.  13). 
Nebuchadnezzar  was  God's  instrument 
to  punish  this  rebellious  king.  ''And 
will  plead  with  him  there  for  his 
trespass."  To  "p^lead"  with  him 
signihee  to  bring  him  to  submission, 
to  work  conviction  in  him  by  means  of 
suffering  (ch.  zx.  36).  This  prophecy 
was  fulfilled  five  years  afterwards,  when 


Zedekiah  was  carried  away  captive  to 
Babylon,  where  he  died  in  prison 
(Jer.  lii.  8-11). 

Ver.  21.  ''And  all  his  Aigitives 
with  all  his  bauds  shall  fall  by  the 
sword,  and  they  that  remain  shall  be 
scattered  to  aU  winds."  Instead  of 
fugitives  the  Chaldee  reads,  ''chosen 
ones,"  "  his  brave  men,"  or  "  heroes." 
fiut  the  ordinary  reading  yields  a 
suitable  sense,  and  is  the  one  adopted 
by  the  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate.  "  The 
mention  of  some  who  remain,  and  who 
are  to  be  scattered  towards  all  the 
winds,  is  not  at  variance  with  the 
statement  that  all  the  fugitives  in  the 
wings  of  the  army  are  to  fall  by  the 
sword.  The  latter  threat  simply  declares 
that  no  one  will  escape  death  by  flight. 
But  there  is  no  necessity  to  take  those 
who  remain  as  being  simply  fighting 
men;  and  the  word  *'all  '  must  not 
be  taken  too  literally/'— (^dif). 


HOMILETIOB. 

(Vers.  17-21.) 

1.  Men  loot  for  help  from  an  arm  of  flesh  when  in  ek'aits.  Zedekiah  ex- 
pected that  Fharoah's  mighty  army,  and  great  company,  his  chariots  and  horses, 
should  make  for  him.  We  are  prone  to  look  unto  second  causes  and  creature 
help  more  than  God's.  Asa,  being  in  distress,  did  so,  ''  he  relied,"  saith  the 
text,  "  on  the  king  of  Syria,  and  not  on  the  Lord  his  God,"  (2  Chron.  xvi  7) ; 
and  *'  in  his  disease  he  sought  not  to  the  Lord,  but  to  the  physicians  "  (ver.  12). 
Confidence  in  man  is  a  common  practice  of  the  sons  of  men.  Ephraim,  when 
he  saw  his  sickness,  went  to  the  Assyrian  and  sent  to  Jareb  (Hos.  v.  13). 
Men's  spirits  look  any  way,  turn  any  whither,  for  relief,  rather  than  to 
God.  The  arm  of  flesh  is  more  to  them  than  the  arm  of  God.  *'  Some 
trust  in  chariots,  and  some  in  horses;"  Some  in  riches  (Psa.  liL  7)  ; 
some  in  falsehood  (Jer.  zxiii.  25) ;  some  in  strongholds  (ZecL  ix.  3) ; 
some  in  men  (Isa.  iL  22).  But  it  argues  atheism,  ignorance,  pride,  unbelief,  that 
men  look  not  unto  God  at  such  times ;  yea,  it  proclaims  the  baseness  of  our 
spirits,  that  we  fall  upon  what  is  visible,  weak,  unfaithful,  at  a  disUnce»  and 
neglect  God,  who  is  strong,  all-suflicient,  near  :  and  all  because  invisible,  not 
seen  of  ns.  2.  Divine  Providence  overrules  and  orders  things  so,  that  wicked 
men  are  frustrated  and  dissappointed  of  their  hopes  and  eapectations.  Zedekiah 
hoped  and  expected  that  Pharaoh  with  his  great  forces,  should  make  much  for  him ; 
but  "  neither  shall  Pharaoh  with  his  mighty  army  and  ^eat  company  make  for 
him."  It  is  not  kings,  armies,  counsellors,  and  counsels,  will  do  it.  Pharaoh's  army 
came  forth  of  Egypt,  raised  the  seige  when  Nebuchadnezzar  was  before  Jerusalem 
(Jer.  xxxvii.  11)  ;  yet  it  did  not  make  for  him.  The  Chaldeans  returned  again, 
sat  down  before  the  city,  took  it,  Zedekiah,  the  princes  and  others.     Absalom 

185 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xvir.  nOMILETTC  COMAfENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


expected  much  from  the  counsel  and  advice  of  Aliitiiopliel,  but  Gbd  turned  it 
iuto  foolishness  (2  Sam  xvii.  14) ;  and  all  the  strength  lie  iiad  made  not  for  him 
(2  Sam.  xviii).  He  disappointeth  the  devices  of  tiie  crafty,  so  that  their  hands 
cannot perf»)rm  their  enterprise"  (Job.  v.  12).  iiaman  could  not  perform  his 
enterprize.  Herod  could  not  accomplish  liis  design  to  murder  Christ  when  he  slew 
the  infants  (Matt.  ii).  Eingn  and  people  imagine  vain  things,  and  the  Lord  laughs 
them  to  scorn  (Pna.  ii.  1,  4).  lie  brings  ''the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to  nought.  He 
niaketh  the  devices  of  the  i)eopIe/'  princes,  armies,  ''of  none  effect,"  and  estab- 
lisheth  His  own  thoughts  and  counsels,  and  that  toall  generations  (Psa.  xxxiii.  10, 
11).  God  served  His  own  will  upon  Pharoah  and  his  army.  Zedekiah  was  frustrated 
— he  looked  for  light  and  met  with  darkness.  He  leaned  upon  Pharoali,  a 
broken  reed,  that  ran  into  his  hand  and  pierced  him  (2  Kings  xviii.  21).  God's 
providence  works  in  all,  by  all,  and  overrules  all ;  and  He  brings  to  pass  His 
own  sacred  purposes  by  kings'  armies,  by  men's  wits,  wills,  policies,  and  powers. 
3.  The  Lord  takes  notice  of  the  circumstances  and  aggravations  of  men's  sins, 
especially  kings*.  "  He  despised  the  oath  by  breaking  the  covenant,  when,  lo  I 
he  had  given  bis  hand  "  (ver.  18).  I  saw  him,  saith  God,  reach  out  his  hand,  give 
it  as  a  pawn  and  pledge  of  his  fidelity  to  Nebuchaduezsar  ;  he  engaged  himself 
thereby  to  be  subject  and  tributary  to  him.  This  aggravated  his  sin 
much.  It  was  against  the  light  of  nature,  special  mercy,  ft  was  against  his 
superior,  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  greatest  king  then  on  earth.  It  was  against  the 
good  of  the  whole  Jewish  state,  for  it  brought  war,  fftmine,  plague,  captivity 
upon  them  all :  yea,  more  than  all  these,  it  was  a  high  offence  against  Qod  and 
His  attributes,  and  therefore  the  Lord  saith,  "he  trespassed  against  me."  God 
minds  with  what  circumstances  men's  sins  are  clothed.  Solomon's  sin  had  the 
aggravation  nailed  to  it,  "  His  heart  was  turned  from  the  Lord  God,  which  had 
appeared  unto  him  twice  "  (1  Kings  xi.  9).  4.  Oaths  and  covenants  made  with 
men  are  divine  things,  and  not  to  be  slighted,  "Mine  oath  that  he  hath 
despised,  and  my  covenant  that  he  hath  broken  "(ver.  19).  It  was  made 
with  a  heathen  king,  an  idolater,  yet  God  owns  it  as  made  with  Himself, 
because  His  sacred  and  dreadful  name  was  used  therein,  and  judges  the 
breach  and  violation  thereof  as  bad  as  if  it  had  been  formisdly  made 
with  Himself.  Oaths  made  between  man  and  man  are  called  in  Scripture 
the  "  oaths  of  God  "  (Eccles.  viii.  2) ;  and  the  covenant  made  between  Jonathan 
and  David  is  called  "  the  Lord's  oath  "  (2  Sam.  xxi,  7).  Let  not  man,  therefore, 
slight  covenants  and  oaths  they  have  made  with  men,  but  remember  they  have 
to  do  with  God,  who  is  faithful,  performing  what  He  swears,  and  keeping 
covenant  for  ever.  5.  The  Lord  hath  nets  and  snares  to  catch  and  take  perfidious 
princes  and  people  in.  "  I  will  spread  my  net  upon  him,  and  he  shall  be  taken 
in  mv  snare  '  (ver.  20).  There  is  no  evasion  when  God  seeks  after  sinners.  If 
He  throw  the  net,  it  shall  encompass  the  greatest  leviathan ;  if  He  set  the 
snare,  it  shall  take  the  stoutest  lion.  God  had  a  net  for  Pharaoh,  and 
caught  that  great  leviathan  in  the  sea.  An  oak  was  the  net  He  caught 
Absalom  in  (2  Sam.  xviii.  9).  The  earth  was  his  net  to  take  Korah,  Batham, 
and  Abiram.  A  heap  of  stones  was  His  net  thrown  upon  Achan.  A  cave  was 
the  snare  He  took  five  kings  in  (Josh.  x.  16-18).  The  kings  of  Sodom  and  Qo- 
morrah  were  snared  in  slime  pits  (Gen.  xiv.  10).  Herod  could  not  escape  tlie 
worms,  they  were  God's  net  and  snare  to  catch  him.  The  Babylonish  armies 
were  His  nets  and  snares  to  take  Hoshea  (2  Kings  xvii)  ;  Manasseh  (2  Chron. 
xxxiii) ;  Jehoiakim,  Jehoiachin,  and  Zedekiah,  who  were  all  kings  (2  Chron. 
xxxv).  Zedekiah  had  thou|[hts  he  should  escape,  but  he  did  not  escape 
besieging,  taking,  carrying  into  Babylon.  When  the  city  was  taken,  ne 
fled  by  night  (Jer.  xxxix.  4) ;  but  God  spread  His  net  so,  that  it  fell 
upon  him  and  all  with  him.  Let  men  take  heed  of  offending  the  great 
God  of  Heaven  and  earth,  for  He  hath  nets  and  snares  to  take  th«m 
186 


Digitized  by 


Google 


UOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKTEL, 


CHAP.  Tvn. 


with.  If  once  He  throws  His  net  and  set  His  snare,  He  will  take 
them  ;  and  l>eing  taken,  you  may  struggle,  but  shall  never  get  out.  Nets  and 
snares  are  hidden  things,  they  catch  suddenly,  and  hold  certainly. — {GreenhilL) 
Ver.  17.  The  help  of  man  is  of  no  avail  when  God  means  to  destroy.  God's 
help,  on  the  other  hand,  avails  even  against  man's  help.  Zedekiah  with  Egypt, 
Nebucha<lnezxar  with  Jehovah.  Look  at  the  co-partneries  for  thyself,  and 
bestow  thy  confidence  accordingly.  The  latter  firm  is  the  more  reliable.  Cursed 
is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man  (Jer.  xvii.}.  Men  promise,  and  break  their 
promise ;  God  promises,  and  does  not  break  His.  (Ver.  19).  God's  oath  as 
against  Zedekiah's  perjury.  God  does  not  swear,  and  then  fail  to  keep  His  oath  : 
that  shall  be  learned  by  experience  by  those  who  swear  falsely,  or  who  do  not 
keep  their  oath.  If  thou  appealest  to  God  as  a  witness,  thou  summonest  Him 
also  as  a  judge,  as  an  avenger !  We  have  never  to  do  with  men  alone.  (Ver. 
20,  etc.).  No  one  can  escape  God.  The  enemies'  sword  is  sharp  ;  God's  sword 
is  sharper  still.  God's  judgments  are  always  meant  to  lead  to  the  knowledge  of 
Himself  as  well,  and  not  merely  of  ourselves.— (Xan^d). 

Thb  RESTORATioif  OF  Datid's  Housb  (ver&  22-24X 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  dire 
judgments  of  God  which  had  been 
foretold  will  do  their  awful  work.  But 
beyond  them,  the  prophet  sees  God's 
merciful  purpose  to  restore  the  fallen 
House  of  David,  in  the  person  of  His 
Messiah.  The  true  twig  of  the  stem 
of  David  will  spring  up  and  flourish, 
under  whose  shadow  the  whole  family 
of  man  may  dwell  in  safety. 

Ver.  22.  ''  I  also  will  take  of  the 
highest  branch  of  the  highest  cedar, 
and  will  set  it'*  The  cedar,  as  before, 
is  the  House  of  David.  That  sprout  of 
the  House  of  David,  Zedekiah,  on 
account  of  his  rebellion,  would  lose  his 
sovereignty  and  bring  destruction  upon 
the  kingdom  of  Judah,  but  God's  king- 
dom would  still  be  secure.  He  would 
fulfil  the  promise  which  He  had  made 
to  the  seed  of  David.  **  I  will  crop  off 
from  the  top  of  his  young  twigs  a 
tender  one,  and  will  plant  it  upon  a 
high  mountain  and  eminent."  ''As 
the  highest  branch  was  the  furthest 
from  the  roots,  the  reference  is  to  the 
remote  descendants  of  the  royal  family, 
and  the  tender  one  beautifully  sym- 
bolizes the  Me&siah  as  the  shoot  and 
the  sprout,  predicted  (Isa.  xi.  1).  The 
'Miigh  and  eminent  mountain"  was 
Zion  (Psa.  ii.  6).  It  is  here  described 
as  the  mountain  of  the  height  of 
Israel,    as    at   chap.   xx.  40,   m    re- 


ference to  Jerusalem,  which  at  the 
time  of  the  Messiah's  advent  was  to 
be  what  it  had  been,  the  centre  of  all 
the  tribes,  who,  restored  to  their  land, 
would  go  up  again  to  the  festivals,  as 
they  had  done  before  the  revolt.  It 
derived  its  chief  glory,  however,  from 
its  beinff  destined  to  become  the  spot 
where  the  spiritual  kingdom^  was  to  be 
established,  and  whence  it  was  to 
extend  its  blessings  throughout  the 
whole  wotld."-^ HendensonJ, 

Ver.  23.  "  In  the  mountain  of  the 
height  of  Israel"  This  was  Mount 
Zion  regarded  as  to  its  spiritual  sig- 
nificance. In  actual  height,  it  was  far 
behind  Lebanon ;  but  it  was  a  symbol 
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  the  centre 
from  which  salvation  should  go  forth 
(Psa.  xlviii.  3  ;  Ixviii.  17).  This  pro- 
phecv  reaches  it  complete  fulfilment 
in  the  times  of  the  Messiah  (Isa. 
ii  2).  The  kingdom  of  God  is  to  be 
raised  to  a  supremacy  above  all  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world.  **And  be 
a  goodly  cedar;  and  under  it  shall 
dwell  ail  fowl  of  every  wing ;  in  the 
shadow  of  the  branches  thereof  shall 
they  dwell"  "The  Messiah  grows 
into  a  cedar  in  the  kingdom  founded 
by  Him,  in  which  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  earth  will  find  both  food  (from 
the  fruits  of  the  tree)  and  protection 
(under  its  shadow).    For  this  figure, 

187 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xrt.  tlOMILETTC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIRL, 


compare  Dan.  iv.  8,  9.    Birds  of  every  of  the  cedars  embraces  the  idea  of  the 

kind  of  plumage  is  derived  from  Gen.  kingdom,  so  that  the  trees  of  the  field 

vii.  14,  where  birds  of  every  kind  find  denote  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth  to- 

fihelter  in  Noah's  ark.    The  allusion  ^etlier  with    their    kings/' — (Keih) 

is  to  men  from  every  kind  of  people  And  have  made  the  dry  tree  to 

and  tribe/' — (£^.)  flourish."    The  stem  of  Jndah  was  dry 

as  regards   spiritual    promise.      The 

Ver.  24.  ''  I  the  Lord  have  bronght  genealogy  of  the   Messiah    is  traced 

down  the  high  tree,  have  exalted  the  through  such  names  as  Tamar,  Rahab, 

low  tree.*'   "  By  this  all  the  trees  of  Ruth,  and  Bathsheba.      "  How    des- 

the  field  learn  that  God   lowers  the  picable  soever  the  kingdom  of  Christ 

lofty  and  Uits  up  the  lowly.     As  the  may  appear  to  a  worldly  mind,  and 

cedar  represents  the  royal  house  of  however  small  it  was  at  its  commence- 

David,    tiie    trees   of  the   field    can  ment,  it  is  truly  prolific ;  and  while  all 

only  be    the    other   kings    or   royal  the  gloiy  of  earthly  kingdoms  fades 

families  of  the  earth,  not  the  nations  and  perishes,  it   affords   refuge   and 

outside  the  limits  of  the  covenant.    At  nourislimeut  to  man  of  every  colour  and 

the  same  time,  the  nations  are  not  to  every  cUmeJ'-^BenderioikJ 
be  entirely  excluded  because  the  figure 

HOMILETICa. 
Thb  Olort  of  Messiah's  EnroDoii. 

I.  It  is  to  be  erected  upon  the  ruin  of  the  world's  hopes.  The  prophet 
had  hitherto  spoken  only  of  judgments  which  were  to  fall  upon  nations  for 
their  sins,  and  chiefly  against  Israel  for  her  sin  against  greater  light  and 
privilege.  David's  crown  is  cast  to  the  ground,  the  kingdom  of  Judah  is  undone, 
all  human  hope  gone*  But  the  prophet  now  has  a  brighter  vision.  He  sees 
the  storm-cloud  of  judgment  pass  away,  and  the  rainbow  of  mercy  shows 
itself.  From  the  ruins  of  the  kmgdom  the  family  of  David  is  to  be  revived 
in  the  person  of  the  Messiah.  It  was  necessarv  that  there  should  be  a 
long  time  of  chastisement,  afiliction,  and  sorrow,  m  order  to  prepare  the 
chosen  nation  for  the  purpose  of  God.  And  the  same  preparation  for 
the  coming  of  Messiah's  kingdom  was  equally  necessary  for  the  rest  of 
mankind.  Christ  was  to  come  in  "the  fulness  of  time,"  when  events  were  ripe 
for  His  coming.  It  was  necessary  that  the  world  should  have  sufficient  time  to 
make  experiments  in  order  to  discover  whether  men  could  find  all  help  in  them- 
selves. The  world's  pride  and  confidence  had  to  be  broken,  so  that,  in  the  end, 
it  might  humble  itself  under  the  Cross  of  Christ,  and  therein  behold  the  power 
and  the  wisdom  of  (Jod.  7  wo  great  experiments  had  to  be  carried  out.  The  Jew 
had  to  find  out  whether  righteousness  could  come  by  the  law,  whether  the  law  could  ^ 
give  life,  sanctify,  and  save ;  or,  whether  there  was  not  some  intractable  perversity 
in  man's  nature  which  would  baffle  all  such  attempts.  The  same  kind  of  process 
had  to  be  carried  on  in  the  Jewish  nation,  which  was  accomplished  in  the  life  of 
the  individual  when  Saul,  the  persecutor,  was  transformed  into  Paul,  the  Apostle. 
He  had  tried  all  that  the  law  could  do  for  him,  and  from  his  failure,  from  the 
wreck  of  all  his  hopes  he  passed  into  the  kingdom  of  the  grace  of  God.  The 
Gentile  had  to  make  his  experiment  in  order  to  discover,  whether  man  could  un- 
fold bis  own  blessedness  out  of  himself :  whether  art,  or  philosophy,  or  political 
institutions  could  completely  satisfy  all  the  yearnings  of  his  spiritual  nature. 
The  heathen  world  had  time  enough,  and  opportunity  allowed  for  this  experi- 
ment. God  had  raised  up  among  them  men  of  great  parts,  and  gifto ;  and 
strength  of  will  who  could  attempt  this  problem,  and  solve  it,  bad  they  been 
able.  If  the  world  could  have  been  redeemed  by  such  means,  these  men  could 
188 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:   BZEKIEL.  €HAP.  xvil 


have  ac€0iDT>1iRbecl  its  redemption.  But  all  had  failed.  The  histories  of  the  great 
nations  of  old  frurnish  a  sad  illustration  of  the  truth,  that  "  the  paths  of  glorv  lead 
but  to  the  grave  " — the  grave  of  political,  intellectual,  moral  conquests  and  hopes. 
The  prodigal  child,  far  away  from  his  true  home,  had  oome  to  the  husks.  The 
soul  of  man  was  still  hungry.  All  had  failed  to  satisfy.  This  was  that 
emptiness  of  which  Christ's  kingdom  of  grace  was  the  answering  fulness.  Out 
of  the  wrecks  and  fragments  of  the  old  world  was  to  be  built  up  tlie  new. 

n.  It  is  to  be  an  omnipotent  kingdom.  **  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God ;  I  will 
also  take  of  the  highest  branch  of  the  high  cedar,  and  will  set  it"  I,  who  am 
mightier  than  the  royal  eagle  of  Babylon ;  I,  who  bore  Israel  from  Egypt  as 
upon  eagle's  wings.  I  will  lay  hold  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  raise  up  my 
Messiah  from  thence  and  establish  His  kingdom.  That  kingdom  should,  indeed, 
advance  from  weak  beginnings,  ''  I  will  crop  off  from  the  top  of  his  young  twigs, 
a  tender  one."  But  the  tree  was  the  planting  of  the  Lora,  TTin  omnipotence 
would  uphold  it,  and  it  must  stand  for  ever.  Christ  is  to  ''fill  all  things." 
And  His  Church  is  to  be  "  the  fulness  of  Him  who  filleth  all  in  all  **  (Eph.  i  23). 

m.  Its  rule  is  to  be  marked  by  tenderness."  ''The  high  cedar."  "A 
tender  one."  The  donr  of  Lebanon  is  to  be  added  to  the  lowly  but  fruitful 
yine.  Majesty  weaded  to  meekness ;  a  kingdom  of  immortal  strength,  but 
founded  upon  patience  (Rev.  i  9).  Its  victories  were  to  be  the  victories  of  the 
Lamb.  The  omnipotence  and  the  love  of  God  were  to  join  hands  in  the  religion 
of  mercy  which  was  to  be  founded  upon  Calvary  (Matt  zii.  19-21). 

17.  It  is  to  be  a  wide  kingdom.  A  large  fellowship.  Under  the  shadow 
of  this  goodly  cedar  shall  dwell  all  fowl  of  every  wing.  None  are  to  be  left  out. 
It  is  written  of  Zion's  King  that  "  He  shall  be  favourable  to  the  simple  and 
needy,  and  preserve  the  souls  of  the  poor."  His  kingdom  shall  embrace  heaven 
and  earth,  reconciling  all  things.  Christianity  alone  has  the  proper  qualities  of 
an  uniyersal  religion. 

y.  It  is  to  be  an  eternal  kingdom.  Being  phinted  by  God  Himself,  this 
kingdom  could  have  in  it  no  seeds  of  decay.  It  can  neyer  be  moved,  but  must 
stand  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endure,  and  of  the  increase  of  it  there  shall 
be  no  end. 

VI.  It  is  to  bring  abasement  to  all  human  pride*  "  And  all  the  trees  of  the 
field  shall  know  that  I,  the  Lord,  have  brought  down  the  high  tree,  have 
exalted  the  low  tree,  have  dried  up  the  green  tree,  and  haye  made  the 
dry  tree  to  flourish."  Such  has  ever  oeen  the  process  and  the  end  of  the  Lord 
in  His  dealings  with  men  (1  Sam.  ii  7,  8).  The  rich  tree,  boasting  and  promising 
so  much,  is  withered  (Psa.  xzxvii.  35,  36).  The  sapless  stem  shall  be  revived 
(Is.  bd.  3).  It  was  one  of  the  praises  by  which  the  world's  salvation  was 
greeted.  "  He  hath  put  down  the  mighty  from  their  seats,  and  hath  exalted 
the  humble  and  meek."  The  conquests  of  David,  and  the  magnificence  of 
Solomon  ended  in  the  humiliation  and  shame  of  Zedekiah's  reign.  But  that  royal 
family  was  raised  up  again  in  Christ ;  and  from  it  sprang  Messiah,  the  King, 
whose  kingdom  was  destined  to  put  an  end  to  all  those  of  the  world  which  were 
founded  upon  force,  error,  and  fraud.  The  kingdom  founded  upon  love  would 
exalt  the  good  and  the  true,  though  in  lowly  condition  :  and  debase  the  proud, 
thougb  surrounded  by  all  the  glory  which  the  world  could  giva 

Thb  Tsbb  Chbist,  which  God  has  preparbd  fob  ua 

1.  As  to  its  nature,  2.  As  to  its  destiny.  Summer  and  winter  the  cedar  is 
green,  and  neyer  loses  its  leaves  or  its  verdure.     The  everlastingly  green  Tree 

189 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAr.  xvn.  nOMILETlC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


of  Life  is  Christ.  No  wood  is  more  durable  ;  so  Christ  is  the  iudestructible 
foundation  for  our  lio|>e8,  etc.  We  are  the  branches  in  the  cedar  of  God.  Our 
fruits  are  Christ's,  who  pmduces  them  in  us  and  by  us.  John  and  Peter,  Paul 
and  James,  what  boughs  in  that  Cedar !  and  the  fathers  and  the  Reformers, 
and  all  believers  since.  What  a  'IVee  !  W  hat  a  green,  flouribhing,  fruit-laden 
array  of  branches  that  which  sways  around  it !  Wmt  a  mif*hty,  densely-foliaged, 
far-shadowing-crown  I  and  in  the  crown  what  gales,  and  zephyrs,  and  rustlings 
of  holy  life  and  divine  love  I  Here  there  is  promised  to  Christ  and  His  cause 
nothing  less  than  final  triumph  over  the  whole  world — the  pompous  glory  of 
Uabylon,  Egypt,  Rome,  and  Athens,  where  is  it  to  be  found  l-^Krummaeh&r.) 

1.  After  grievous  judgments  threatened,  God  comforts  Bis  people.  When 
God  should  root  out  Zedekiah  and  his  people  the  kingdom  would  be  laid  waste  ; 
the  faithful  should  sufier  much,  lose  estates,  friends,  liberty,  country,  temple, 
ordinances,  and  worship  of  God.  Now  for  comfort  as[ainst  all  these  evils,  he 
tells  them  of  the  Messiah,  'fhe  stem  of  Jesse  seemed  to  be  cut  down,  and  the 
root  of  Jesse  to  be  pulled  up  ;  but  the  Lord  preserved  the  root  and  stem,  out 
of  which  he  brought  a  rod  and  a  branch  for  the  comfort  of  the  faithful,  suffering 
Jews.  This  promise  of  the  Branch  is  often  mentioned  for  the  purpose  of  comfort 
(Jer.  xxiii.  5,  6  ;  xxxiii.  15, 16  ;  Zech.  iii.  8  ;  vi.  12,  13). 

2.  The  Lord  Christ  descended  from  the  highest  '*  I  will  take  of  the  highest 
branch,"  etc.  He  came  from  the  loins  of  Jeconiah,  who  was  King  of  Judah, 
and  from  fourteen  kin^s  before  him  (Matt.  i.).  He  was  the  son  of  nobles,  and 
born  a  king  (Matt.  ii.  12).  He  was  the  first-born  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  the 
right  heir  to  the  kingdom  which  Herod  at  that  time  usurped. 

3.  The  beginnings  of  Christ  were  mean  and  low.  **  I  will  crop  off  from  the 
top  of  his  young  twigs  a  tender  one."  Christ,  at  first,  was  as  a  little  tender  shoot 
of  a  tree  set  in  the  earth  ;  and  how  weak,  mean,  low,  and  inconsiderable  is  such 
a  thing.  Such  were  the  beginnings  of  Christ.  He  took  flesh  of  a  poor  virgin, 
the  wife  of  a  carpenter.  He  was  born  in  a  poor  village  (Mic.  v.  2)  :  in  a  stable, 
laid  in  a  manger  (Luke  ii.  7).  He  was  subject  to  his  parents  (Luke  ii.  51^. 
He  lay  in  the  dark  till  thirty  years  of  age  (Luke  iii.  23) ;  and  then  Ho 
began  with  two  or  three  poor  fishermen  (Matt.  iii.  18-22) ;  then  some  others  to 
the  number  of  twelve ;  and  even  now,  when  He  seemed  to  be  somebody,  He  had 
not  a  house  or  l)ed  for  Himself  or  for  them  (Luke  ix.  58).  And  for  His  main- 
tenance, it  was  at  the  good  will  of  others  (Luke  viii.  3). 

4.  The  Lord  Christ  is  planted  in  the  Church,  and  becomes  a  fruitful  and 
goodly  cedar  therein.  *'  I  will  plant  it  upon  a  high  mountain,"  etc.  Christ  was 
planted  in  Zion,  there  He  grew,  there  He  brought  forth  fruit  With  the  timber 
of  this  cedar  was  the  Church  built,  with  the  fruit  of  this  cedar  it  is  maintained 
(Isa.  iv.  2).  The  branch  was  Christ,  and  He  should  be  for  beauty  and  glory  to 
the  Church,  and  the  fruit  that  should  come  from  Him  should  be  excellent  The 
Church  saith,  '*  His  fruit  was  sweet  to  my  taste."  Wisdom,  righteousness,  re- 
demption, and  sanctification  are  the  fruits  of  this  cedar  {\  Cor.  i.  30) ;  the  life  of 
the  world  (John  vi.  33) ;  the  ordinances  of  the  (Jospel  (Matt  xxtiii.  19 ;  1  Cor. 
i.  23)  ;  "  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises ;  '  reconciliation  (Col.  i.  2Q)  ; 
the  gift  of  the  comforter  (John  xvi.  7)  ;  revelation  of  the  counsels  of  God  (John 
XV.  15)  :  fellowsiiip  with  the  Father  and  the  Son  (John  xiv.  9 ;  1  John  L  B) ; 
"eternal  life"  (John  x.  28).  Such  was  the  fruit  this  cedar  bore.  In  the  midst 
of  the  Church  He  was  planted,  fruitful,  and  sang  praise  to  God  (Heb  ii.  12). 
And  so  high  is  this  cedar  grown,  that  it  is  now  in  heaven  at  the  ridit  band  of 
God  (Eph.  i.  20,  21).  The  mountain  of  the  Lord  is  on  the  top  of  all, mountains^ 
and  this  cedar  on  the  top  of  that  mountain. 

6.   There  is  safetif  under  Christ,  He  will  protect  His  people  from  all  harms. 
**  Under  it  shall  they  dwell."     Men  will  not  dwell  where  there  is  no  safety. 
Those  who  come  under  Christ's  shadow,  His  power  and  government,  shall  dwell 
190 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETW  COMMENTAnY:    EZEKIEL.  OHAP.  rmL 


tliere  in  safety.  ^  He  will  protect  His  Church,  and  tread  down  the  enemies  there- 
of, whatever  their  power,  politics,  and  pretences  are.  He  is  a  cedar  in  wisdom 
(CoL  ii  8)  ;  a  cedar  in  power  (Matt,  xxviii.  18) ;  a  cedar  in  His  providence  and 
vigilance  (Isa.  xxviii.  3)  ;  hence  saith  the  Cliurch,  "I  sat  under  His  shadow 
with  great  delight"  (Cant.  ii.  3).  It  is  Christ  secures  from  sin,  from  the  wisdom 
of  the  flesh,  the  storms  of  the  world,  temptations  of  hell,  and  whatever  is 
dangerous  (Isa.  xxv.  4).  If  vou  be  under  the  shadow  of  this  cedar,  thongh  the 
winds  blow  hard,  the  floods  beat  sore,  and  rain  fall  with  strength,  yet  you  shall 
be  as  safe  as  the  house  built  upon  the  rock  (Matt.  vii.  24,  25). 

6.  Princes  that  are  haughty  and  proud,  God  wiU  bring  them  down  though 
they  be  in  flourishing  conditions.  "  I  have  brought  down  the  high  tree,"  etc. 
Zedekiah  was  a  high  tree ;  the  king  of  Judah,  and  his  snirit  was  high  ;  he 
hearkened  not  to  me  God  of  Israel,  nor  to  His  prophets :  he  would  not  keep 
covenant  and  promise  with  the  king  of  Babylon.  But  Goa  laid  the  axe  to  the 
root  of  this  tree  and  hewed  it  down.  No  trees  are  so  high,  but  the  Lord  who  is 
higher  than  they,  can  lay  them  low.  Let  them  be  green  with  bouj^hs,  branches, 
leaves ;  let  them  have  many  soldiers,  many  counsellors,  many  kingdoms,  all  can- 
not preserve  them  from  ruin.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  a  high  tree,  his  top  reached 
to  heaven  (Dan.  iv.  11) :  but,  "  A  watcher  and  a  holy  one  came  down  from 
heaven,  cned  aloud  and  said,  Hew  down  the  tree,  cut  oflF  his  branches,"  etc. 
(Oan.  iv.  13,  14).  There  is  a  watcher  who  observes  the  plots  and  practices 
of  kings,  and  hews  them  down  at  His  pleasure.  Pharaoh  was  a  high  tree,  the 
hi-ihest  in  all  Egypt ;  he  said,  "  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the 

ril ;  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied  upon  them  ;  I  will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand 
II  destroy  them."  Here  was  pride  and  cruelty,  which  usually  go  together ; 
and  what  followed  hereupon  ?  '*  Thou  did'st  blow  with  thy  wind,  the  sea 
covered  them ;  they  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters  (Ex.  xv.  9,  10.)  Saul 
was  a  goodly  man,  a  high  tree  in  Israel ;  he  was  proud,  cruel,  false,  disobedient 
to  God  ;  and  He  rejected  him,  and  cut  him  down  by  the  Philistines  and  his  own 
sword  (1  Sam.  xxxi).  So  Ahab  (1  Kings  xxii)  ;  Herod  (Actsxii.  23);  Belshazzar 
(Dan.  y.  5,  22,  23,  30).  The  Lord  hath  days  and  times  to  reckon  with  the  high 
and  haughty  ones  (Isa.  x.  33,  84  ;  ii.  12-17;. 

7.  Bow  low  soever  the  conditions  of  kingdoms,  families,  or  persons  are,  God 
is  able  to  raise  them,  "  I  have  exalted  the  low  tree,"  etc.  The  kin«,'dom  of 
Judah,  the  house  of  David,  the  person  of  Jeconiah,  were  very  low  in  Babylon, 
like  low  shrnbs,  dry  trees.  But  God  exalted  them,  and  bronght  a  glorious 
kingdom  and  a  church  out  of  those  low  befiinninjjs.  Was  not  Christ  like  a  low 
and  dry  tree,  when  He  lay  in  the  loins  of  Jeconiah,  a  prisoner,  a  captive  ;  when 
He  lay  in  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  ;  hewed  timber,  made  houses  for  His  living  ; 
especially  when  He  was  cut  down  and  laid  in  the  heart  of  the  earth  ?  Was  He 
not  a  dry  tree  then  ?  But  God  exalted  Him,  set  Him  at  His  right  hand  ;  and 
Peter  proclaimed  it  (Acts  ii.  33,  36). 

8.  God  will  do  all  these  things  so  eminently  that  the  world  shall  take  notice, 
and  be  filled  with  the  gloiy  thereof.  "  And  all  the  trees  of  the  field  shall  know 
that  I,  the  Lord/'  etc.  Not  only  the  orchard  trees,  but  the  field  trees,  not 
domestic  alone,  but  wild  ones.  Men  shall  fear  and^  hide  themselves,  '*  for  the 
glory  of  His  Majesty,  when  He  ariseth  to  shake  terribly  the  earth"  (Isa.  ii.  19). 
^{Greenhill) 

Thb  Equitt  of  ths  Divinb  JusnoB  (chap.  xviiL). 

EXEGETIOAL  NOTES.— The  judg-  ance.  But  this  salutary  purpose  was 
ments  announced  in  chaps,  viii,  xi,  frustrated  by  the  manner  in  which  these 
were  intended  to  bring  Israel  to  repent-     judgments  wereinterpreted.  Thepeople 

191 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xvin. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


considered  themselves  as  innocent  chil- 
dren suffering  for  the  iniquity  of  their 
fathers,  and  that,  therefore,  repentance 
was  useless.  The  prophet  destroys  this 
refuge  by  declaring  that  each  man  shall 


have  to  bear  the  punisliment  of  his  own 
sin.  That  punishuient  can  only  bo 
averted  by  repentance  (vers.  21-29). 
Thus  the  rule  of  Qod's  judgmenta  was 
equity. 


TnB  UNaoDLT  Pboyebb,  ksh  thb  Declaration  that  rr  shall  bb  ho 

MOBB  HBABD  QT  lOBAEL  (Vers.  1-4). 


Vers.  1,2.  ^'  The  fathers  have  eaten 
sour  grapes,  and  the  ohildren's  teeth 
are  set  on  edge.*'  The  same  proverb 
is  qnoted  in  Jer.  xxxi  29,  80,  where  it 
is  also  condemned  as  an  error.  The 
meaning  of  it  is  sufficiently  clear.  The 
sour  grapes  which  the  fathers  eat  are 
their  own  personal  sins  which  they 
commit;  the  setting  of  the  children  s 
teeth  on  edge  is  the  suffering  conse- 
quent upon  these  sins,  and  which  is 
visited  upon  the  children. 

Ver.  B.  ''  Te  shall  not  have  oeoa- 
sion  any  more  to  nse  this  proverb  in 
Israel/'  Ueb.  "  It  shall  not  be  to 
you."  The  meaning  is,  that  it  shall 
be  no  longer  morally  possible  for  them 
to  use  this  proverb ;  lor  they  would  be 
convinced  of  the  justice  of  Uod's  ways, 
not  only  by  the  reason  of  the  thing 
itself,  but  uso  by  the  judgments  which 
would  be  sent  upon  them.  The  equity 
of  God's  dealings  would  be  vindicated 
in  so  clear  a  manner,  that  none  would 
be  bold  enough  to  call  it  in  question. 

Ver.  4.  "All  souls  are  Mine;  as 
the  soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the 
soul  of  the  son  is  Mine."  They  are 
His  by  right  of  creation.  They  have 
come  from  Him,  the  Fountain  of  Life, 
the  Father  of  Spirits.  "God  would 
surrender  His  property  if  He  permitted 


souls,  whether  individuals  or  whole 
generations,  to  suffer  nunishment  for 
the  guilt  of  others,  in  the  likeness 
of  God,  on  which  the  sentence  "  All 
souls  are  Mine  "  rests,  liesthe  nrinciple 
that  souls  cannot  be  degraaed  into 
servile  instrumeats — that  each  can  only 
be  treated  according  to  His  works."— 
{Hengstenberg),  "in  this  ver»B  God 
asserts  His  universal  propriety  in  Hia 
rational  creation.  All  the  soub,  ue., 
persons — the  noblest  part  of  the  con- 
stituent elements  of  the  human  subject 
being  put  for  the  whola  He  had 
created  them  all,  and  having  endtiwed 
them  with  those  powers  ana  faculties 
which  are  necessary  to  constitute  them 
subjects  of  moral  government,  He  had 
a  sovereign  and  indisputable  right  to 
deal  with  them  in  equity  according  to 
their  deserts.  In  punishing  the  guilty. 
He  acts  without  respect  of  persona. 
The  individual  culprit  is  dealt  with  on 
the  ground  of  his  own  personal  deserts." 
— {Henderson),  "The  soul  that  sin- 
neth,  it  shall  die.'*  "Die,  the  end  of 
a  process, — the  separation  of  the  soul 
from  its  life-source,  the  Spirit  of  God 
(Deut.  XXX.  26  ;  Jer.  xxi.  8  ;  Prov.  xi 
19}.  This  cannot  happen  without  an 
act  of  God's  retributive  iustice,  so  that 
the  punishment  inflicted  by  God  most 
correspond  to  man's  guilt  '^Lange). 


HOMILETIOa. 
(Ver.  2). 

Two  things  are  to  be  considered  concerning  this  proverb^ 

I.  The  meaning  of  it.    By  "  sour  ^pes,"  the  Jews  understand  sin,  not  sin 
simply,  but  such  sins  as  bring  heavy  judgments  of  God  upon  a  land  or  people, 
as  idolatry,  murder,  oppression,  drunkenness,  profaneness,  eto.     The  prophet 
192 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMILETIO  OOMMBNTARY:  BZBKIEL.  chap.  xvm. 


Isaiah  warrants  this  sense  of  soar  grapes,  when  he  calls  the  sins  of  Judah 
**  wild  grapes "  (Isa.  v.  24).  God  looked  that  His  vineyard  should  bring  forth 
grapes,  good  fruit,  justice,  righteousness,  truth ;  and  it  brought  forth  wild 
grapes,  oppression,  a  cry,  covetonsness,  lasciviousness,  drunkenness,  pride.  Such 
Bins  are  called  sour  or  wild  grapes,  because  they  wound  conscience,  are  burden- 
some unto  others,  are  as  distasteful  unto  God  as  such  grapes  are  to  us.  They 
provoke  Him  to  lay  waste  the  vine  that  bears  such  fruit.  Hy  this  proverb  thus 
much  is  signified,  that  the  fathers  had  sinned,  and  the  children  suffered  for 
their  sin  ;  the  fathers  did  that  which  was  very  offensive  unto  God,  and  the 
children  were  punished  for  it ;  ihej  did  eat  the  sour  grapes,  brought  forth  the 
bitter  fruit,  and  these  smarted  for  it ;  the  children's  teeth  were  set  on  edge, 
they  were  punished  for  what  their  fathers  had  done.  They  thought  and  said 
that  their  tathers  were  the  cause  of  all  the  evils  which  befell  them.  Like  unto 
this  proverb  are  these:  ''Kings  sin,  and  the  people  suffer."  ''The  child 
offends,  and  the  servant  is  beaten." 

II.  The  ocoasion.  The  princes  and  people  going  on  in  the  wicked  ways  of 
their  fathers,  the  prophets  did  threaten  them  with  destruction  of  their  temple, 
city  and  estate.  Thereupon  they  said,  **  Our  fathers  did  as  we  do,  and  they 
were  spared ;  why  should  we  suffer  "  ?  And  when  the  prophets  pressed  the  sins  of 
Manasseh,  as  Jer.  xv.  3,  4,  "  I  will  aupoint  over  them  four  kinds,  saith  the  Lord  ; 
the  sword  to  slay,  the  dogs  to  tear,  tne  fowls  of  heaven,  the  beasts  of  the  earth, 
to  devour  and  destroy  :  and  I  will  cause  them  to  be  removed  into  all  kingdoms 
of  the  earth,  because  of  Manasseh  the  son  of  Hezekiah,  king  of  Judah,  for  that 
which  he  did  in  Jerusalem."  When  God  stirred  the  prophets  to  tell  them  that 
for  the  sins  of  this  king  he  would  lay  Jerusalem  waste,  as  he  had  the  ten  tribes 
for  Jeroboam's  sins,  they  then  took  up  this  proverb,  and  said,  ''  The  fathers  have 
eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  childrens'  teeth  are  set  on  edge.'  Ahaz,  Manasseh, 
Amon,  and  others  of  our  forefathers,  have  sinned,  and  we  must  suffer !  Or  thus  : 
Zedekiah  and  lus  counsellors  had  perfidiously  broken  covenant  with  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, for  which  the  prophets  threatened  utter  ruin  to  all :  hereuoon  the  people 
said,  "  Our  fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,"  etc.^ ;  the  kings  ana  nobles  have 
transgressed,  and  we  shall  be  ruined  for  it  1^  This  proverb  was  grown  common 
amouust  them,  both  in  Babylon  and  in  Zion,  it  was  tossed  up  and  down  and  spread. 
Ezekiel  tells  them  of  it  in  Babylon,  and  Jeremiah  in  Zion  (Jer.  zxxi.  29).^  The 
evil  of  this  proverb  was  great,  for  besides  their  charging  God  with  injustice  and 
impartiality,  hereby — (1).  They  discovered  their  father's  sins  and  nakedness,  and 
that  without  sorrow  or  repentance  for  them.  (2).  Made  light  of  anything  the 
prophets  threatened  against  them.  (3).  Obstructed  the  way  against  future 
repentance,  or  profiting  by  the  judgments  of  God  which  should  come  uuon  them. 
For  being  persuaded  and  possessed  with  this  opinion,  that  they  sufferea  unjustly 
for  their  father's  sins,  not  their  own,  they  would  never  submit,  mourn,  condemn, 
but  justify  themselves. — (Greenhill). 

The  cause  of  the  cessation  of  this  proverb  is  the  severitv  of  the  Divine  judg- 
ments. When  these  appear,  the  fig-leaves  fall  off,  the  slumbering  conscience 
awakens  and  cries  out.  ''  It  is  I  and  my  sins ! "  There  is  a  multitude  of 
theorems  and  theological  dogmas  which  are  possible  only  in  certain  times,  and 
slink  away  abashed  when  the  thunders  of  Divine  judgment  begin  to  roll. — 
{Hengstenberg). 

Either  a  man  recognises  in  judgment — ^in  the  self-judgment  of  a  believing 
repentance — his  guilt  before  God,  or  Gbd  makes  the  whole  world  recognise  it 
in  us,  through  the  iudj^nnent  which  overtakes  us,  even  when  we  would  deny  our 
^uilt  God  swears  by  His  life  ;  for  where  His  righteousness  is  called  in  question. 
His  life  in  this  world  of  sin  and  death  is  assailed. — (Lange,) 

M  X93 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


CHAP.  XTUL  BOMILETIC  COMMBNTARY:  BZEKIEL. 


(Ver-  4). 

**The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  Hence — 1.  Ood  may  fay  ^hai 
punishment  lie  pleases  vpmi  the  soul  theU  sins,  *"  All  souls  are  Mine/'  and  the 
houl  that  eiiiueth  shall  suffer  whatever  I  see  good,  according  to  the  nature  of 
its  sin.  However  the  words  seem  to  im^iart  an  equal  punishment  for  all  sins, 
yet  it  is  otherwise;  according  to  the  intrinsical  nature,  circumstances,  and 
demerit  of  the  sin,  shall  be  the  death.  God  will  proportion  the  one  unto  the 
other ;  as  He  rewards  men  according  to  their  worlcs,  so  He  will  punish  them 
according  to  their  sins.  God  liath  variety  of  deuths,  and  various  degrees  of  those 
deaths,  variety  of  afflictions,  and  various  degrees  of  the  same  ;  He  lays  on  which 
and  in  what  measure  He  pleases.  If  states  ihink  good  to  inflict  upon  delinquents 
several  punishments,  and  in  high  degree  as  they  find  men  guilty,  how  much 
more  may  God.  He  smote  Jehoram  with  incurable  and  sore  diseases  (2  Chron. 
xxi.  18,  19).  He  sent  fire  and  brimstone  upon  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Gen.  six). 
He  did  that  in  Jerusalem  which  He  never  did  before,  nor  ever  would  do  the 
like  (Ez.  V.  9,  10).  Neither  these  nor  any  that  suffer  in  what  kind  soever,  do 
sufi'er  unjustly;  men  may  pretend  innocency,  but  if  they  suffer,  and  that  severely, 
God  is  not  cruel,  they  are  not  guiltless.  2.  Sin  is  a  deadly  thing  **  The  soul 
that  sinneth  shall  die.  Sin  is  the  great  murderer,  it  let  death  into  the  world, 
and  keeps  death  alive.  If  there  were  no  sin  there  would  be  no  death,  no 
punishment,  but  if  men  sin  they  must  suffer.,  The  old  world  sinned  and  died 
for  it*  Sodomites  sinned  and  died  for  it;  the  Bethshemites  sinned  bv  looking 
into  the  ark,  and  fifty  thousand  of  them  died  for  it :  Jerusalem  sins  and  is  burnt 
for  it,  and  her  children  buried  in  a  Babylonish  grave  ;  Ananias  and  Sapphira  die 
ior  their  dissimulation.  **  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  (Rom.  vi.  23).  Let  us 
then  take  heed  of  sin,  whereby  we  offend  that  God  who  hath  said,  ''The  soul 
tiiat  sinneth  it  shall  die."  He  is  a  dreadful  Majesty  and  ought  greatly  to  be 
feared.  **  Who  would  not  fear  Thee,  0  King  of  nations  ?  for  to  Thee  doth  it 
appertain  "  (Jer.  x.  7).  Fear  is  God's  due,  and  your  duty  ;  "Stand  in  awe," 
then,  "  and  sin  not "  (Psa.  iv.  4).  If  you  sin,  you  must  die ;  death  is  the 
king  of  fears,  and  God  is  the  King  of  death ;  He  can  command  it  to  seise  upon 
you  in  a  moment. — (GreenhUl). 

H0MILET1C8. 

ThB  iNDIVIDnALITT  OF  THB  S0UIi» 

(Ver.  4). 

These  idolatrous  Israelites  complained  that  they  were  unjustly  punished  for 
the  sins  of  their  fathers.  The  innocent  suffered  instead  of  the  guilty.  "  The 
fathers  have  eaten  sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge."  By 
nature's  law  the  man  who  eats  sour  grapes,  and  he  alone,  will  feel  the 
unpleasant  sensation  of  the  acid  on  his  own  teeth.  They  complain  that  the 
dealings  of  Providence,  as  expounded  by  the  prophet,  are  contrary  to  the  equity 
and  justice  of  nature.  And  this  complaint  is,  to  a  very  large  extent,  founded 
upon  a  truth.  Under  God's  moral  j^overnment  the  innocent  do  suffer  for  the 
guilty.  All  generations  of  men  are  subject  to  the  stern  law  of  inheritance,  so 
that  the  entail  of  sin  and  suffering  falls  to  the  lot  of  those  who  are  innocent  of 
the  original  transgression.  But  the  prophet  assures  his  countrymen  that, 
despite  all  appearances  to  the  contrary,  God's  ways  are  equaL  There  is  no 
injustice  done  to  any  man  on  account  of  any  complication  of  his  history  with 
194 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMTLETlC  COMMENTARY:    BZEKIEL.  chap.  xvin. 


tliat  of  anotlier,  or  with  that  of  the  human  race.  **  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord 
God,  ye  shall  not  have  occasion  any  more  to  use  this  proverb  in  Israel."  And 
the  reason  given  is  this : — ''  Behold  all  souls  are  mine ;  as  the  soul  of  the 
father,  so  aUo  the  soul  of  the  son  is  mine  :  the  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die." 
Each  individual  soul  comes  from  God,  who  is  the  fountain  of  life,  is  accountable 
ultimately  to  Him  alone,  and  each  man  will  be  treated  in  sole  regard  to  himself 
without  reference  to  anv  other  man.  He  who  continues  in  sin  will  incur  tlie 
penalty  of  death  ;  which  will  be  visited  upon  him  for  his  own  sins,  and  not  for 
those  of  his  forefathers.  This  death  of  the  soul  is  not  the  loss  of  existence,  but 
such  death  as  the  soul  can  suffer,  i,e,y  moral  and  spiritual  death,  exclusion  from 
God's  light  and  love.  Such  a  man  is  dead  while  ne  liveth.  His  portion  is  a 
living  death.  This  passage  speaks  to  us  of  the  origin,  and  of  the  individuality 
of  the  human  souL 

I.  Theorigfui  of  the  human  souL  "All  souls  are  mine."  They  are  God's 
hf  right  ofcreatioUy  which  is  the  strongest  title  of  ownership.  And  GK)d  said, 
"  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  likeness  "  (Gen.  i.  26).  "  The  Ijord 
God  formed  man  of  the  dust  of  the  ground,  and  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the 
breath  of  life ;  and  man  became  a  living  soul "  TGen.  ii.  7^.  God  is  the 
"  Father  of  spirits,"  and  "we  are  also  His  offspring.'  *'Man  is  from  God  as 
well  as  to  God.  He  is  of  the  blood-royal  of  heaven.  The  Bible  itself,  what  is  it 
but  a  biography  of  the  soull "  Its  noble  and  illustrious  birth,  beautiful  childhood, 
and  its  terrible  fall ;  its  long  and  painful  discipline  of  sorrow  through  the  ages 
of  history ;  the  grace  of  God  towards  it  iu  the  gifts  of  salvation,  the  provisions 
for  its  perfect  restoration  through  a  Divine  Redeemer,  a  paradise  won  for  it 
beyond  the  grave — these  great  facts  concerning  the  soul  are  the  main  burden  of 
the  Bible.  To  know,  as  a  deep  and  heart  felt  conviction,  the  origin  and  worth 
of  the  noul  is  to  be  a  religious  man  :  to  live  a  life  founded  on  that  conviction  is 
to  be  a  Christian. 

II.  The  iadividuality  of  the  soul.  Each  soul  of  man  has  a  separate  existence 
in  eternity  as  well  as  in  time.  When  we  die  we  do  not  become  an  unconscious 
portion  of  the  universal  life.  We  are  not  absorbed  into  God,  like  a  drop 
which  falls  into  the  ocean.  We  do  not  perish  by  infinite  diffusion.  Such 
is  the  teaching  of  the  Bible.  But — 1.  It  is  very  difficult  for  us  to  realise 
this  truth.  The  truth  we  have  to  consider  is — that  each  and  every  one  of 
all  who  now  live,  or  who  have  ever  lived,  is  a  distinct  and  independent 
being.  There  are  certain  facts  and  circumstances  of  human  life  which 
render  it  difficult  for  us  to  realise  this  truth.  Take  the  case  of  the  commander 
of  a  large  army.  Does  such  a  man  realise  this  truth  fully  when  he  sends  a  large 
body  of  men  on  some  dangerous  service  7  Or,  does  he  not  rather  regard  each 
man  as  one  of  the  springs  or  wheels  of  a  vast  machine  ?  To  the  whole  collection 
of  separate  powers  ministering  to  one  end  he  assigns  individuality-  The  only 
fact  IS  not  present  vividly  before  him,  that  the  real  individuality  is  that  of  eacn 
single  soul.  And  all  men  are  liable,  more  or  less,  to  make  this  false  estimate. 
We  are  prone  to  class  men  in  masses,  and  to  regard  them  as  we  do  the  stones  of 
a  building  which  derives  unity  only  from  its  form  and  from  the  disposition  of 
all  its  p'lrts  to  the  general  effect.  We  deal  only  with  great  unities ;  the 
separate  portions  do  not  enter  into  our  thoughts  We  have  a  tendency  to  treat 
abstractions  of  our  own  creation  as  real  things.  Thus  we  speak  of  national 
greatness.  And  what  does  this  mean  ?  It  means  that  multitudes  of  men  who 
happen  to  be  living  together  at  one  time,  and  in  the  same  country,  are  able  to 
act  upon  each  other  and  upon  the  world  at  large  in  such  a  way  as  to  gain  im- 
portance, power,  wealth,  and  eminence.  We  regard  these  multitudes  as  one  great 
body,  and  when  one  and  another  dies  we  do  not  consider  it  as  the  passage  of  a  soul 
into  the  unseen  state.    Their  places  are  supplied  by  others :  the  individual 

196 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xviiL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL. 


perishes,  the  nation  remains.  We  think  of  the  nation  as  still  the  same  in  its 
vast  and  energetic  life,  but  we  are  apt  to  forget  that  it  is  only  the  component  parts 
that  are  the  true  realities.  Consider  again,  the  multitudes  of  a  great  city. 
We  gain  an  idea  of  human  energy,  of  the  splendour  and  magnificence  of  man's 
Morks.  But  what  is  the  real  truth  ?  Why,  that  each  man  in  that  city  is  his 
own  centre,  and  all  things  about  him  are  but  mere  shades  among  which 
be  walks,  as  "  in  a  vain  shadow  and  disquieteth  himself  in  vain."  Nothing 
outside  of  him  can  touch  his  soul  or  quench  his  immortality.  He  most  live 
with  himself  for  ever.  He  has  an  unfathomable  depth  within  him,  and  an 
infinite  abyss  of  existence.  2.  We  ihotdd  make  an  ^ort  to  realise  this  truth. 
Tiie  truth,  that  all  who  have  ever  lived  here  and  have  seen  the  sun  successively 
are  alive  now,  each  one  in  his  own  person  ;  all  those  who  lived  before  the  Flood 
and  in  the  ages  since,  all  who  have  gained  a  name  in  the  world,  or  who  have  died 
without  fame — the  good,  the  bad,  the  wise,  the  ignorant ;  all  those  whose  names 
we  see  written  in  churches  or  churchyards,  great  writers  who  e  works  we  see 
in  our  libraries,  the  workmen  who  have  raised  those  great  buildings  and  monu- 
ments which  are  the  wonder  of  the  world  :  they  are  all  in  God's  remembrance, 
and  before  His  eye — they  still  live.  To  see  a  human  being,  even  by  a  mere 
passing  glance,  is  an  act  which,  in  its  deep  significance,  is  unlike  all  other 
occurrences  in  nature.  The  rain  falls,  the  wind  blows  ;  but  showers  and  storms 
have  no  existence  beyond  the  time  when  they  happened.  They  are  gone,  and 
are  nothing  in  themselves.  But  when  we  have  seen  a  child  of  Adam,  we  have 
seen  the  temple  of  an  immortal  soul.  It  lives  on  ;  and  when  here  on  earth  it 
is  seen  no  more,  it  is  still  somewhere  awaiting  God.  ^.  It  is  as  individual 
souls  that  we  shall  return  to  God,  We  must  all  take  that  solemn  journey 
which  will  bring  us  face  to  face  with  God.  We  cannot  pass  on  one  side  of  Him, 
or  in  any  way  avoid  Him,  but  mast  go  straight  into  His  presence.  Each  man 
will  feel  that  he  is  himself,  and  not  another,  and  that  the  eye  of  God  is  upon 
him.  When  a  few  more  years  have  come  and  gone,  there  will  be  no  need  of 
any  effort  of  mind  on  our  part,  in  order  to  realise  the  individuality  of  the  soul. 
No  need  of  any  effort  to  realise  the  nothingness  of  this  vain  world  when  the 
world  has  for  ua  vanished  away  and  we  are  left  alone  with  God.  There  is  one 
Being  to  whom  alone  we  are  ultimately  accountable.  Strive  to  say  at  last  in 
faith  and  hope, ''  Father,  into  Thy  hands  I  commit  my  spirit*'  **  Lord,  Jesus, 
receive  my  q>irit'' 

(Vers.  6-9.) 

EXE6ETICAL    NOTES.  —  True  precisely  depicted,  not  without  a  ten- 

righteousness  is  described  as  the  ful-  dency  to  antithesis.** — Lange. 
filment  of  the  commandments  of  God. 

Through  such  righteousness  the  right-  Ver.  6.     ''  Hath  not  eaten  upon  fhe 

eous  shall  live.  mountains."     Mountains  where  idol 

festivals   were  held   (Ezek.    vi.    13). 

Ver.  5.^  "That  which  is  lawful  Eating  that  which  was  offered  in 
and  right "  (Heb.)  "Judgment  and  sacrifice  to  an  idol  was  supposed  to 
righteousness."  The  deeds  must  con-  secure  the  favour  of  that  deity  (1  Cor. 
form  to  the  rule  of  right,  and  the  x.  20,  21).  *' Neither  hatii  lifted  up 
motive  must  be  the  love  of  right,  his  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the  house  of 
"The  first  application  of  the  principle  Israel."  The  "lifting  up  of  the  eyes" 
is  made  to  the  righteous  man.  He  is  denotes  the  expectation  x>f  help 
described  according  to  Bei?)g  and  (Psa.  cxxi.  1).  "  Neither  hath  come 
Doing, — essentially  and  actually;  in  near  to  a  menstruous  woman."  Con- 
particular,  doing  yw^^m<?w^,  in  general,  jngal  intercourse  with  a  wi(f  while 
righteousness :  His  doing  is  then  more  she  was  set  apart  for  her  uncleanness 
196 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOUILETIC  COMMENTARY :  MZEKIEL, 


OUAP.XVUZ. 


was  forbidden  by  the  law  of  Israel  on 
pain  of  death.  It  was  a  deBIement  of 
the  marriage  relation.  (Lev.  xviii.  19, 
XX.  18).  "  The  prohibition  of  impuri- 
ties in  the  married  state  is  included, 
which  is  directed  against  unbridled 
lust  that  bows  not  to  the  ordinance 
of  (Jod." — {HengiterAerg.) 

^  Ver.  7.  "  Bestored  to  the  debtor 
his  pledge.'*  This  restoration  was 
commanded  by  the  law,  as  the  things 
taken  in  pledge  were  considered  as 
necessary  to  the  existence  of  the  poor 
man  (Ex.  xxiL  25;  Deut.  x^iv.  6, 
10,  etc.).  "  His  bread  to  the  hungry." 
Not  regarding  it  as  his;  not  saying 
with  Nabal,  "  Shall  I  take  my  bread 

and  give  it  away?"  (1  Sam. 

XXV.  11). 

Ver.  8.    "  Given  forth  upon  usury, 
neither  hath  taken   any  increase.*' 

The  Hebrew  word  for  usury  is  very 
expressive.  It  literally  signifies  biting, 
and  must  liave  originated  in  the  prac- 
tice of  taking  exorbitant  interest  The 
law  of  Moses  absolutely  prohibited  the 


Jews  from  taking  any  interest  from 
their  brethren,  but  permitted  them  to 
do  so  from  a  foreigner  (Ex.  xxii.  25 ; 
Deut.  xxiii  19,  20).  ''Increase''  is 
another  term  expressive  of  interest  or 
usuiy,  denoting  riches  obtained  by 
lending  money  at  higli  interest,  or  by 
making  exorbitant  charges  on  the 
natural  productions  of  the  soiL" — 
{Henderson),  The  taking  of  "in- 
crease" on  a  loan  of  the  necessaries 
of  life  was  forbidden  to  the  Israelite 
(Lev.  XXV.  36,  37).  **  Hath  executed 
true  judgment  between  man  and  man." 
In  the  special  capacity  of  a  judge  or 
arbiter. 

Ver.  9.  "Haisjuit"  Really  such 
— righteousness  as  contra-distinguished 
from  its  semblance.  **  He  shall  surely 
live."  He  shall  save  his  soul — shall 
live  in  the  fullest,  deepest  sense  of  the 
word.  "  The  man  who  was  blameless 
.with  respect  to  all  the  points  here 
specified  was  accounted  righteous  in 
tne  eye  of  the  law,  and  entitled  to 
enjoy  the  life  which  the  law  secured." 
— {Henderson.) 


HOMlLETlCa. 
A  PiOTUBB  OF  Righteousness  (vers.  5-9)l 

The  whole  of  this  paragraph  is  an  expansion  of  the  words,  '*  If  a  man  be  just* 
and  do  that  wliich  is  lawful  and  right "  (ver.  6).  Righteousness  consists  in  the 
fulfilment  of  the  commandments  of  God's  law.  It  is  conformity  to  a  standard 
which  is  not  arbitrary,  but  founded  upon  the  nature  of  God  Himself  and  His 
relations  to  mankind.    But  more  particularly,  righteousness  consists — 

I.  In  the  proper  discharge  of  religious  duties.  Those  duties  which  more 
nearly  concern  God  and  His  worship.  They  are  laid  down  in  the  first  Table  of 
the  Law.  In  this  passage,  they  are  described  negatively  as  consisting,  in  general, 
in  the  avoidance  of  idolatry,  (1)  In  its  grosser  fotms.  Such  as,  "eating  upon 
the  mountains"  (ver.  6),  i.e,y  observing  the  sacrificial  festivals  of  the  heathen 
gods  and,  therefore,  sacrificing  to  idols  (Deut.  xii.  2,  etc.).  This  was  the  chief 
ti  ansgression  by  outward  acts  against  the  l«w  of  Divine  worship.  ^  There  can  be 
no  true  righteousness  unless  God  is  worship[>ed  in  ]mrity  and  sincerity.  But 
idolatry  is  also  to  be  avoided, — (2.)  In  its  more  refined  forms.  Some  of  the 
prophet's  countrymen  could  not  degrade  themselves  so  far  as  to  join  in  outward 
acts  of  idolatrous  worship.  But  the  essential  spirit  of  idolatry  was  in  them. 
They  "  lifted  up  their  eyes  to  the  idols  of  the  house  of  Israel "  in  the^  expectation 
of  help  firom  them,  thus  offering  supplication  to  them  and  making  them  an 
object  of  trust.  Israel  had  done  this  in  times  past,  and  was  doing  so  still 
(Deut.  iv.  19  ;  Ejsek.  vi.  13).    God  will  have  no  compromises  or  accommodations 

197 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.xraL  HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKJEL. 


in  the  matter  of  His  worship.  He  regards  the  direction  of  the  Iie.rt,  and  we 
cannot  escape  His  condemnation  by  merely  avoiding  the  josser  forms  of  sin 
while  we  retain  the  abominable  thing  itselfl 

IL    In  the  proper  discharge  of  moral  duties.   Those  which  are  concerned 
with  the  relations  of  men  to  one  another.    Tiie  moral  law  is  tlie  foundation  of 
the  peace  and  welfare  of  society — the  bond  which  holds  it  togetlier.      The 
following  principles  underlie  the  moral  duties  insisted  on  here.     1.  The  principle 
of  purity.     That  purity  which  consists  in  the  proper  control  of  the  lusts  of  the 
flesli.     **  Neither  hath  defiled  his  neighbour's  wife  "  (ver.  6).    The  marriage  re- 
lation is  to  be  held  sacred.     Sins  against  it  tend  to  destroy  the  very  foundations 
of  society,  make  havoc  of  the  peace  of  families,  and  are  a  fruitful  source  of  many 
crimes  and  disorders.     Sins  ot  impurity  pollute  the  mind,  extinguish  the  better 
instincts  of  the  mind  and  heart,  and  tend  more  than  any  other  to  drag  a  man 
down  to  the  level  of  the  brute.    This  principle  of  purity  is  to  be  observed  within 
the  marriage  relation  itself,  "  Neither  hath  come  near  to  a  menstruous  woman  " 
(ver.  6).      Conjugal  intercourse  with  a  wife  during  menstruation  was  forbidden 
by  the  law  as  a  defilement  of  the  marriage  relation  (Lev.  xviii.  19:  xx.  18). 
Marriage  was  not  to  be  regarded  as  giving  the  right  to  an  unbridled  licence  of 
indulgence,  but  it  was  to  be  under  the  control  of  wholesome  moral  laws.    2.  The 
principle  of  kindness.     The  righteous  man  is  to  abstain  from  all  oppression,  to 
spoil  none  by  violence,  to  withhold  the  hand  from  eveiy  iniquity  done  against 
another  (vers.  7,  8),    But  tlicre  must  be  also  active  goodness.    "  Hath  given  his 
bread  to  the  hungry,  and  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  garment "  (ver.  7). 
kindness  is  to  be  shown  towards  the  unhappy  and  the  unfortunate.     We  may 
claim  the  right  to  do  what  we  like  with  our  own,  and  the  law  of  our  nation 
may  uphold  us  therein.    But  there  is  another  law — the  law  of  kindness  within 
our  hearts — that  bids  us  spend  our  treasure  for  the  good  of  our  fellow  men. 
We  are  just  as  much  l)0U4id  to  do  good  to  others  as  not  to  rob  them,  to  reach 
forth  the    hand    to  help   them    as   not   to    smite    them    with  the  fist  of 
wickedness.    God  uses  the  righteous  man  as  the  means  by  which  He  manifests 
His  own  loving  kindness  to  those  who  are  in  distress.   And  especially  is  kindness 
to  be  shown  towards  brethren — those  who  are  of  the  same  commonwealth  and. 
religion  as  ourselves.    The  Israelites  were  forbidden  to  take  usury  from  their 
brethren  on  a  loan  of  money,  or  **  increase  "  on  a  loan  of  the  necessaries  of  life 
(Lev.  XXV.  36,  37).    They  were  forbidden  to  exercise  their  full  rights,  even 
when  a  brother  through  poverty  had  sold  himself  into  slavery.    "Thou  shalt 
not  rule  over  him  with  rigour,  but  shalt  fear  thy  God"   (Lev.    xxv.    43). 
3.  The  principle  of  mercy.    The  proper  objects  of  kindness  and  pity  are  the 
unhappy  and  unfortunate :  but  ttie  objects  of  mercy  are  the  undeserving. 
Meicy  is  shown  towards  those  who  have  no  claim  upon  us.     "  Hath  restored  to 
the  debtor  his  pledge  "  (ver.  7).     The  godly  man  will  not  stand  upon  his  rights 
to  the  real  injury  of  another.     The  debtor  has  no  claim  upon  us,  and  is, 
therefore,  a  proper  object  of  our  mercy.     4.   I  he  principle  of  justice,     "Hath 
executed  true  judgment  between  man  and  man  "  (ver.  8).     In  every  dispute 
the  righteous  man,  when  appealed  to,  will  give  a  judgment  which  is  according 
to  truth.     "  To  deal  truly,    lit,  "  to  do  truth,"  i.e.,  to  act  with  uprightness  and 
sincerity  (Psa.  11  0;  1  (3or.  v.  8 ;  Ei»h.  iv.  21). 

XII.  In  the  practical  recognition  of  the  truth  that  all  duties  have  reference  to 
God.  The  Bible  knows  notliing  of  "independent  morality."  "  My  statutes," 
"  My  judgments "  (ver.  9).  We  are  to  practise  all  religious  and  moral  duties 
because  they  are  pleasing  to  God  ;  they  are  according  to  llis  will.  This  doctrine 
saves  religion  from  being  degraded  into  a  mere  sentiment  True  religion  is 
devotion  to  a  Living  Person,  obedience  to  a  Living  Will  It  also  saves  morality 
198 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENT  A  Ry :   EZEKIEL.  ohaf.  xvil 


from  being  re;;arded  as  founded  solely  upou  utilitariaoism.    We  are  to  luve  mcu 
and  do  our  duty  towards  them  for  God's  sake. 

(Ver.  7). 

I.  Wherein  tliis  oppression  consists.  1.  In  outreaching  men  in  buying  or 
selling*  Men  must  neither  sell  too  dear,  nor  buy  too  cheap ;  which  is  contrary 
to  the  practice  of  the  world  (Lev.  xxv.  14).  (1.)  It  is  oppression  when  the 
buyer  will  wring  a  atmmodity  out  of  his  neighbour's  or  broth&rs  hand,  which 
he  is  unwilling  to  part  withal.  Ahab  will  have  Naboth's  vineyard  (1  Kin^s 
xxii.)  (2.)  yV/ien  he  makes  adoantaje  of  the  seller*s  necessity.  And  so  many 
monied  men  will  furnish  sellers  and  needy  men  with  money,  upon  condition 
they  may  have  such  wares,  such  a  house,  such  laud,  at  an  easier  rate. 
Such  advantage  they  made  of  them  who  were  necessitated  to  mortgagee  tlieir 
lands,  vineyards,  and  houses  for  money  to  buy  corn  (Neh.  v.  3).  (3.)  When  he 
disparageth  the  commodities  of  the  seller  (Prov.  xx.  14).  2.  In  withholding 
that  which  is  right  and  due  to  others  (St.  James  v.  4 ;  St.  Luke  x.  7  ; 
Lev.  xix.  13 ;  Mai.  iil  5).  If  any  withhold  the  portion  of  orphans, 
legacies  given  to  the  poor,  the  estates  and  rights  of  widows,  they  will 
lie  under  the  censure  of  being  oppressors.  3.  In  laying  too  heaoy  burdens  and 
tasks  upon  others.  The  Egyptians  oppressed  tlie  Israelites  (Ex.  iii.  7).  And 
many  lay  more  upon  their  servants  than  they  can  well  perform.  They  must  be 
up  early,  fare  hard,  work  hard,  and  be  worn  out  before  their  time.  And  what 
is  this  but  oppras^ion  in  a  high  degree  ?  Whereas  the  rule  is,  "  Masters,  give 
unto  your  servants  that  which  is  just  and  equal ;  knowing  that  ye  also  have 
a  Miister  in  heaven"  (Col.  iv.  1).  4.  In  preventing  and  delaying  of  justice 
and  judgment.  In  this  way  tlie  petitions  and  causes  of  widows,  orphans  and 
poor  people  cannot  be  heard  (isa.  i.  23).  'IMie  fatherless  and  widows  had  no 
gifts,  no  bribes  to  give  them  ;  the  rich  had,  and  by  that  means  justice  was 
perverted,  and  judgment  delayed  (Amos  vi.  12;.  And  this  sin  is  reckoned 
amongst  the  mi;;hty  ones  (Amos  v.  12).  5.  In  imposing  upon  men's  consciences 
those  things  which  are  doubtful  and  disputable.  When  doctrines,  wor^hii), 
disciplines  are  imposed  upon  men's  consciences,  which  cannot  clearly  be  matJe 
out  to  them,  it  is  the  heigiit  of  oppression,  and  the  ground-work  of  persecuti'Mi. 
The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  taught  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men  (St. 
Matt.  XV.  9) ;  they  laid  grievous  burdens  upon  men's  shouhlers  and  hearts  (Sc, 
Matt,  xxiii.  4).     Whatever  is  done  with  doubting  is  of  siu  (Rom.  xiv.  23). 

U.  The  evil  of  oppressing.  1.  It  is  an  unnatural  evil.  No  creatures  do 
oppress  those  of  their  own  kind.  But  men  most  unnaturally  prey  upon  one 
another ;  one  man  is  a  wolf  to  another  (Ezek.  xxii.  27).  Lions  have  spared  men 
(Dan.  vL)  ;  ravens  fed  men  (1  Kings  xvii.)  ;  and  yet  one  man  seeks  to  eat  up 
and  devour  another.  2.  Ihere  is  little  fear  of  God  in  tlie  hearts  of 
those  who  oppress  others.  "  Ye  shall  not  oppress  one  auother ;  but 
thou  shalt  fear  thy  God"  (Lev.  xxv.  17).  It  is  here  intimated  that, 
if  they  oppress,  they  do  not  fear  God;  if  they  fear  God,  they  will  not 
oppress ;  for  "  by  the  fear  of  the  Lord  men  depart  from  evil "  (Prov. 
xvi.  6).  The  Jews  oppressing  one  another  is  attributed  to  their  not  fearing 
God  (Neh.  V.  9).  3.  It  is  against  that  great  and  common  rule  of  equity 
(St.  Matt.  vii.  12).  St.  Jerome  calls  this  sentence  of  Christ  '*  the  summary  of 
justice."  4.  It  ie  a  sin  which  greatly  provokes  God.  Dreadful  woes  are 
denounced  against  it,  and  dreadful  judgments  upon  those  who  are  guilty  of  it 
(Micah  ii.  12  ;  ILib.  ii.  12  ;  2ieph.  lii.  1  ;  Jer.  xxii.  13;  Isa.  x.  1-3  ;  Ex.  xxii. 
21-24).  *'  But  hath  restored  to  the  debtor  his  pledge,"  eta  The  Lord  gave  them 

199 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAT.  XTm.  EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL. 


laws  ooDoerning  this  (Ex.  xxii.  26).  They  might  not  take  the  upper  millstone, 
nor  a  widow's  garment,  for  pledges;  and  what  they  did  take  they  were  faithfully 
and  speedily  to  return.  Job  complains  of  the  wicked  that  they  took  the  widow's 
ox  for  a  pledge,  and  the  garments  of  the  poor  (Job.  xxiv.  3,  9).  "  Hath  spoiled 
none  by  violence."  Wicked  men  are  said  to  "  drink  the  wine  of  violence." 
**  They  sleep  not  except  they  cause  some  to  fall "  (Prov.  iv.  16,  17).  "  He  hath 
given  his  bread  to  the  hungry,  hath  covered  the  naked  with  a  garment"  This 
IS  the  exercise  of  faith  (Eccles.  xi.  1).  It  makes  a  man  to  be  of  good  report 
(Psii.  cxii.  9).  It  is  the  special  distinction  of  a  good  man  (Psa.  cxii.  1,  9).  It  is 
feeding  of  Christ  (St.  Matt  xxv.  35,  40).  It  is  an  honour  to  religion 
(St  James  i.  27).  It  procures  many  a  prayer  and  blessing  (2  Cor.  ix.  10  ; 
Job  xxix.  13  ;  2  Tim.  i.  16).  It  makes  like  unto  God  (St  Luke  vi.  36).  It  is 
lending  to  tlw  Lord  (Prov.  xix.  17).  It  is  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God 
(Acts  z. ;  Heb.  xiil  16). — GreenhilL 

(Vers.  10-20). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Two  cases  him,  till  it  be  avenged  by  his  punish- 

are  here  supposed  :     (1).  That  of  a  ment." — (Henderson), 
ri^^hteous  father  who  begets  an  un- 
righteous son.   (2).  That  of  a  righteous         Vers.  14-18.     "  This  case  is  likewise 

son  who    refuses    to    copy    the   evil  that  of  a  son,  not,  like  the  former,  of  a 

example    of   his    father.      And    the  righteous  man,  but  of  the  unrighteous 

prophet   affirms  that,  in    the    former  person  whose  character  has  just  been 

casf^,  the  righteousness  of  the  father  depicted.     This  son  is  supposed  to  be 

will  not  avail  to  save  the  son  ;  and  in  shocked  at  the  sight  of  his  father's 

the  hotter,  that  the  son  shall  not  suffer  depravity,  and  to  be  influenced,  by  a 

for  the  unrighteousness  of  his  father,  due  regard  to  the  consequences,  to 

One  shall  not  die  for  the  iniquity  of  avoid  the  sins  which  his  parent  had 

the  other.     Each  man  shall  save  his  committed.     It  is  expressly  declared 

own  soul  by  his  righteousness.  that  he  should  not  be  punished  for 

the  crimes  of  his  father,  but  that  the 

Vers.  10-13.     "We  have  here  the  father  only,  being  the   guilty  party, 

case  of  an  impious  son,  who,  instead  should  suflfer." — {Henderson). 
of  following  the  good  example  of  his 

pious  parent,  adopts  a  course  directly         Ver.  17.    "Bath  taken  off  Bis  hand 

the   reverse,   and  unscrupulously  in-  from  the  poor"     This  is  to  l>e  uiider- 

dulges  in   crimes  condemned  by  the  stood  in  a  good  sense— to  turn  back 

law.     Upon  him  an  unmitigated  sen-  the  hand,  i.^.,  from  oppressing  the  poor, 

tence  is  pronounced.     In  the  language  He    witiidraws    the    hand    that    was 

of  the  Orientals,  the  blood   which  a  tempted  to  exact  the  full  legal  claim, 
murderer  has  shed  is  said  to  be  upon 

Thb  Law  op  the  Unrighteous  and  op  the  Righteous  Son  (vers.  10-20). 

The  two  cases  here  supposed  show  that — 

I.  The  best  examples  of  righteousness  may  fail  of  their  proper  effects.    The 

righteous  father  may  have  an  unrighteous  son.  The  life  of  such  a  father  must 
have  a  native  power  and  influence  ior  good  He  would  study  to  bring  up  his 
son  in  the  way  of  righteousness.  Yet  his  example  and  instruction  may  altogether 
fail  The  religious  histories  of  the  families  of  good  men  afford  many  a  sad 
illustration  of  the  truth  that  grace  does  not  inn  in  the  blood.  The  power  of 
evil  may  be  stronger  than  the  best  influences  ou  the  aide  of  good. 
200 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKTEL.  oha?.  xvin. 

II.  An  evil  example  may  be  effectual  as  a  warning.  Where  a  good  exam])1e 
fails,  an  evil  example  may  succeed  in  turning  another  to  righteousness.  But  for 
this  salutary  effect  it  is  necessary — 1.  That  the  real  evil  of  the  example  may 
be  recognised.  "  A.  son  that  seeth  all  his  father's  sins  which  he  hath  done  " 
(ver.  14}  sees  them  in  their  vile  nature,  in  their  evil  consequences,  and  as  sins 
against  GoA  Then  such  evil  exannJes  become  like  a  beacon  to  the  voyager. 
They  act  as  a  warning.  The  evil  of  sin  must  be  seen  as  such  in  order  to  be 
dreaded  and  avoided.  It  is  also  necessary — 2.  That  the  sight  of  evil  examples 
should  produce  serious  thought.  "  And  considereth  and  doeth  not  such  like  " 
(ver.  14)  In  most  cases,  evil  examph's  act  like  a  contagion.  But  if  we  seriously 
consider,  they  reveal  to  us  the  sad  effects  of  sin,  and  we  turn  our  feet  to  God's 
testimonies.  We  learn  not  to  do  such  like  things.  Thus  the  sin  of  another 
may  instruct  us  in  righteousness. 

III.  That  righteousness  is  a  matter  of  personal  responsibility.  The  righteous 
son  shall  not  be  punished  for  the  unrighteousness  of  his  father,  nor  the  righteous 
father  for  the  unrighteousness  of  his  son  (ver.  20).  Righteousness  is  not  like 
property,  family  name  or  title,  the  secure  and  necessary  heritage  of  cliildren.  It 
IS  a  matter  between  the  individual  soul  and  God.  '!he  exceptions  to  this  law  of 
God*s  righteous  dealing  are  only  apparent.  Godly  men  share  in  the  geneial 
calamities  sent  upon  nations,  children  suffer  many  evils  from  the  iniquity  of 
their  fathers  ;  but  none  of  these  are  on  that  account  deprived  of  God's  favour. 
These  judgments  in  the  case  of  the  righteous  act  as  a  discipline  of  piety.  Such 
afflictions  are  turned  into  blessings. 

(Ver.  14). 

L  The  nature  of  oonjiideration«  l.  It  is  an  exercise  of  the  understanding^ 
mind,  and  heart.  These  are  at  work  in  consideration  (Psa.  cxix.  59).  This  is 
called  communing  with  a  man's  own  heart  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  6).  2.  Seriotis.  It  is 
not  a  slight  general  thinking  of  a  thing,  but  a  serious,  settled  minding  of  a 
thing ;  it  notes  the  sinking  down  of  a  thing  into  our  minds.  **  I  considered  in 
my  heart "  (Eccl.  ix.  1) :  Hebrew  is,  I  set  it  to  my  heart.  Consideration  is  as 
setting  the  heart  to  a  thing,  or  upon  a  thing,  as  a  bee  sets  upon  a  flower,  and 
sets  her  strength  to  it  to  draw  out  the  sweet  in  it  3.  It  is  about  things  to  be 
done,  or  not  to  be  done.  Contemplation  looks  upon  things  as  the  eye  upon  the 
object.  Judgment  discerns  the  tilings  whether  good  or  bad,  right  or  wrong,  and 
there  leaves  them,  having  pronounced  them  so.  Meditation  is  a  furthor 
inquisition  into  truth,  and  comes  up  nearest  to  consideration  which  is  in  order 
to  doing  or  not  doing.  Men  intend  this  and  that,  and  oft  fall  upon  thini^s 
rashly  to  their  prejudice,  because  they  consider  not ;  now  consideration  reflects 
upon  things  intended.  The  two  sons  in  the  Gospel,  one  said,  I  will  go.  and 
went  not ;  the  other  said,  1  will  not  go,  and  went.  The  one's  purpose  was  to  go, 
the  other's  not  to  go  ;  but  this  last,  considering  of  his  sinful  purpose,  intention, 
and  resolution,  repented,  and  went  (St.  Matt.  xxi.J  It  is  taken  up  about  doinj;, 
or  not  doing  (Prov.  xxiii.  1,  2 ;  1  Sam.  xxv.  17  ;  Judg.  xviii.  14).  David 
considered  his  ways,  and,  not  finding  them  good,  he  ceased  from  walking  any 
longer  in  them  *  and  seeing  God's  ways  the  only  good  ways,  he  turned  about, 
stepped  into,  ana  walked  in  them. 

II.  Wherein  the  strength  of  it  lieth.  1.  In  searching  out  the  causes,  efects, 
rising,  progress,  continuance,  and  issite  of  a  thing.  2.  Jn  comparing  things 
together  and  so  drawina  up  that  which  may  be  most  useful.  When  all  things 
are  laid  together,  weighea,  scanned  over  again  and  again,  a  man  takes  that 
which  is  most  necessary,  seasonable,  suitable,  and  useful    8.  In  pressing  to  and 

201 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OKAP.  xyii> 


nOMTLBTIO  COMMBNTAltY:  EZEKTEL 


assisting  the  saul  in  acting.  When  consideration  Imtli  drawn  up  what  is  to  be 
done,  or  not  to  be  done,  then  it  puts  upon  the  conscience  as  sinful,  if  not 
followed,  and  directs  in  the  execution.  ( 'onsideration  hiys  an  injnnction  upon 
men's  wills  and  consciences  to  be  doing.  Did  men  in  these  days  wisely  consider 
the  Lord's  doings,  they  would  fear,  and  declare  the  work  of  the  Lord. 

III.  The  excellency  of  it  1.  It  is  that  which  God  Himself  doth  (Prov.  xxiv.  12). 
The  Lord  considers,  ponders,  and  weighs  things,  according  to  the  language  of 
Scriptnre  (Ex.  xxxiii.  13 ;  Prov.  v.  21  ;  Dear,  xxxii.  26,  27  ;  Hos.  xi  8,  9). 
2.  Jt  differeth  a  man  from  brutes.  Tliey  are  led  by  sense,  and  cannot  dis- 
tinguish whether  an  action  ought  to  be  done  or  not.  This  is  man's  privilege 
and  power.  But  some  are  guided  only  by  their  senses.  "  Every  man  is  brutish 
in  his  knowledge"  (Jer.  x.  14).  Men  do  not  reflect  u|K)n  their  actions  and 
consider  them  ;  if  they  did,  they  would  not  be  so  sensual,  so  sinful  (Isa.  i.  3). 
B.  It  enables  the  understanding,  completes  a  man,  makes  him  wise  and 
prudential  (Prov.  xvii.  27).  He  who  considers  what  advantage  may  be  made  of 
words,  and  therefore  is  sparing  in  s|>eaking,  shows  the  more  understanding  and 
excellency  of  spirit.  Consideration  looks  inward,  looks  over  the  same  thing 
a«.'ain  and  again.  We  say,  second  thoughts  are  best,  which  implies  that  con- 
sideration ripens  and  perfects  the  man  and  his  actiona  4.  It  puts  life  into 
tliose  principles  and  talents  God  hath  given  a  man.  Like  a  drum  in  an  army, 
that  when  it  beats  all  stir  and  march  ;  like  a  spring  in  a  watch,  when  that  goes 
all  the  wheels  go.  Did  men  consider  what  graces  and  gift«  God  hath  given 
them,  they  would  not  let  them  lie  still  and  fallow,  but  improve  them.  Con- 
sideration will  set  other's  graces  on  work,  and  much  more  a  man's  own 
(Heb.  X.  2i).-'{GreenhiU.) 

(Vers.  21-26.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  ways 
of  life  and  death  are  here  for  all  set 
forth.  A  man's  own  sins  even,  provided 
they  are  forsaken,  will  not  exclude  him 
from  salvation.  "  The  proof  that  every 
one  must  bear  his  sin  did  not  contain 
an  exhaustive  reply  to  the  question — 
in  what  relation  the  righteousness  of 
God  stood  to  the  sin  of  man  ?  For  the 
cases  supposed  in  vers.  6-20  took  for 
granted  that  there  was  a  constant 
persistence  in  the  course  once  taken, 
and  overlooked  the  instances,  which 
are  by  no  means  rare,  when  a  man's 
course  of  life  is  entirely  changed.  It 
still  remained,  therefore,  to  take  notice 
of  such  cases  as  these,  and  they  are 
handled  in  vers.  21-26.  The  ungodly 
man  who  repents  and  turns,  shall  live; 
and  the  righteous  man,  who  turns  to 
the  way  of  sin,  shall  die." — (Keil, ) 

Ver.  21.    "But  if  the  wicked  will 

turn."    This  was  the  real  point  of  the 

controversy.    God  deals  with  each  man 

as  one  who  is  capable  of  renouncing 

202 


evil  and  choosing  good,  {,$.,  He  deals 
with  each  individual  as  a  moral  being. 

Ver.  22.  **They  shall  not  be  men- 
tioned unto  Him."  They  shall  not  be 
remembered  a-rainst  him  (Jer.xxxi.34). 
The  guilt  is  blotted  out  of  remem- 
brance, though  for  the  purposes  of  a 
salutary  discipline  the  chastisements 
of  God  may  be  allowed  to  continue 
(Heb.  xii.  10  ;  2  Sam.  xii.  13,  14), 
^'  In  his  righteousness  that  he  hath 
done  he  shall  live"  Not,  /or  his 
righteousness,  as  if  that  is  to  be  re- 
garded as  the  procuring  cause  of  his 
acceptance  ;  but  in  it,  righteousness 
being  regarded  as  the  fruit  of  his  true 
conversion  (Ezek.  xx.  11). 

Ver.  23.  '*Have  I  any  pleasure  at 
all  that  the  wicked  should  diet*' 
God  had  declared  even  that  concern- 
ing the  sacrificial  victims  He  "had 
no  pleasure  in  them."  (Psa.  xl.  6). 
He  had  no  absolute  and  final  pleasure 
in  them,  for  they  were  ordained  only 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xvin. 

to  bbadow  forth  the  one  sacrifice  for  ring  to  his  present  condition,  which 

sin.     The  providing  of  that  sacrifice  determines  his  real  state.     He  "hath 

would  be  the  highest  proof  that  God  tresiias^ed,"  and  is  therefore  still  **  in 

willed  not  the  death  of  the  sinner,  his  trespasa" 
"  The  motive  for  the  pardon  of  the  re- 

pentihg  einner  is  here  given,  in  the  Ver.  25.     "  Yet  ye  say.  the  way  of 

dec  a«tK,n  that  God  haa  no  pleasure  ^e  Lord  is  not  equil."  They  affimed 

in  the  death  of  the  wicked  man,  hut  4,,^^  ^^  „„,ked  by  no  regular  and 

desires  h.8  conversion,  that  he  may  „„ifor„  ,»„  or  metlfoi    tL  repeat 

none  with  deatl.U  tho^  wh'o  either  ^^r  rjr.'ee"*they  ^d^dX 
Will  not  desist  from  evil,  or  will  not  ^^^JrrA  -«  ,««-i  /j;  *''»** "t^"  *^? 
^rsevere  in  the  way  of  His  comn.nd-     l^t^tH'^^^,  tlZ^t 

duct  toward  men,  is  not  weighed, .'...,  S*"^:^";?  i'' nT""  ^'  ?ft^ 

is  not  just  and' right,  is  ^togethe;  Sf  61   1l  ^    xxivL  8lT    ^^ 

unfounded,    and    recoiU    upon  those  ^^''  61  ,  xx.  4d ,  xjcxvl  81). 
who  make  it.     it  is  not  God's  ways, 

but  the  sinner's  that  are  wrong."—  Ver.  26.  "  And  dieth  in  them/*  Heb. 

{Keil).  "Dieth  n)yon  them."     They  are  the 

footing  upon  which  he  stands  when  he 

Ver.  24.  ''Xnhistre^ass."   Refer-  is  called  to  appear  before  God. 

EOMILEriCS. 

Thb  Equitt  of  God's  Goyebnmbnt. 

The  unbelievers  still  imprudently  contended  that  Gtod's  ways  were  not 
equal,  though  the  contrary  had  been  declared  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet. 
The  equity  of  God's  dealings  is  re-asserted,  and  fresh  instances  and  considera- 
tions are  given  by  way  of  proo£ 

I.  The  case  of  the  repentant  sinner.  He  is  dealt  with  not  on  the  score  of  uia 
past  transgressions,  but  on  the  ground  of  his  new  obedience.  When  the  sinner 
forsakes  his  way,  the  mercy  of  (}od  steps  in  and  accepts  his  repentance. 
1.  Jiepentance,  qf  itself ,  hca  no  efficacy/  to  procure  pardon.  Whatever  it 
might  do  to  set  us  right  in  the  future,  it  could  not  possibly  undo  the  past 
For  that  we  should  still  have  to  reckon.  2.  Repentance  is  accepted  through  the 
mercy  of  God.  God  is  willing  to  forget  the  past  and  to  receive  the  sinner. 
The  pardon  of  sin  is  a  soecial  revelation,  for  nature  teaches  no  doctrine  of 
the  forgiveness  of  sins.  We  transgress  her  laws  and  we  are  punished.  We 
are  not  excused  on  the  ground  of  ignorance.  But  God  in  His  mercy  accepts  a 
genuine  repentance.  He  will  not  punish  the  righteous  man  for  his  father's  sins ; 
and  will  not  even  remember  against  a  man  his  own  sins,  if  he  repents.  **  Scrip- 
ture represents  forgiveness  as  the  result,  not  of  renentance,  but  of  the  death  of. 
Christ, '  in  whom  we  have  redemption  through  His  blood,  even  the  forgiveness 
of  our  sinSy'  repentance  being  essential,  not  to  the  efficacy  of  His  death,  but  to 
the  appropriation  of  the  benefits  secured  by  it  Even  if  repentance,  however, 
could  save  us,  natural  religion  is  unable  to  produce  it  It  is,  in  the  evangel iciil 
true  meaning  of  the  term,  such  sorrow  for  sin  as  flows  from  a  sense  of  the  love 
and  reverence  due  to  God,  and  of  the  heinousness  of  sin  against  Him.  The 
sorrow  of  the  world  is  no  such  feeling.    It  is,  on  the  contrary,  blended  with  fears 

203 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHA?.  JjnL  HOMILETIC  COMMEyTJRY:  E7.EK1EL. 


and  imprewioDB  which  make  it  impossible  to  love  God  or  draw  near  to  Him/'— 

IL  The  case  of  the  man,  once  righteous,  who  abandons  his  righteons  course. 
Such  a  man  in  his  backsliding  will  not  be  supported  by  his  early  righteousness. 
It  can  have  no  merit  to  weigh  against  his  faults.  The  integrity  of  the  past 
cannot  save  him.  l^h  man  will  be  judged  by  himself,  and  in  that  state  m 
which  he  is  found. 

III.  Ood's  motive  in  granting  pardon  to  the  repentant  transgressor.  "  Have 
I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  should  die  ?  saith  the  Lord  God,  and  not 
that  he  should  return  from  his  ways,  and  live  ? "  (ver.  23).  It  is  the  pleasure 
of  God  that  man  should  live  and  not  die.  God  is  not  only  iust,  but  also 
merciful  and  gracious.  He  punishes  none  with  death  but  those  who  will 
not  abandon  their  sins,  or  who  will  not  persevere  in  the  way  of  His  command- 
ments. 

lY.  Ood  only  requires  from  man  what  is  just  and  reasonable.  It  is  surely 
just  to  render  Him  obedience,  and  to  repent  of  our  sin  when  we  have  wronged 
Him.  We  ought  to  be  ready  to  accept  what  is  offered  to  us  through  His 
mercy.  Thus  the  complaint  of  these  sinners  against  God  was  altogether 
unfounded,  and  only  recoiled  upon  their  own  heads.  And  it  is  only  just  that 
repentance  should  be  thorougn.  The  unrighteous  man  must  forsake  "  all " 
his  sins  (ver.  21),  making  no  reservation  in  favour  of  "heart-idols  "  (Ez.  xiv.  4). 
The  wiU  must  be  subdued  "  if  the  wicked  man  will  turn  from  all  his  sins/'  etc. 
Thus  it  is  not  God's  ways,  but  the  sinner's,  that  are  wrong,  for  God  shows,  in 
all  His  dealings  with  man,  His  abhorrence  of  sin  and  His  love  of  righteousness. 

Bbfbntanob  hoi  Effioaciou& 

We  do  not  know  what  the  whole  natural  or  appointed  consequences  of  vice 
are;  nor  in  what  way  they  would  follow,  if  not  prevented,  and  therefore  can  in 
no  sort  sav,  whether  we  could  do  anything  which  would  be  sufficient  to  prevent 
them.      Our  ignorance  being  thus  manifest,  let  us  recollect  the  analogy  of 
Nature  or  Providence.    For  though  this  may  be  but  a  slight  ground  to  raise  a 
positive  opinion  in  this  matter,  yet  it  is  sufficient  to  answer  a  mere  arbitrary 
assertion,  without  any  kind  of  evidence,  urged  by  way  of  objection  against  a 
doctrine,  the  proof  of  which  is  not  reason,  but  revelation.     Consider  then : 
people  ruin  their  fortunes  by  extravagance  ;  they  bring  diseases  upon  themselves 
by  excess ;  they  incur  the  penalties  of  civil  laws ;  and  surely  civil  government  is 
natural  ;  will  sorrow  for  these  follies  past,  and  behaving  well  for  the  future,  alone 
and  of  itself,  prevent  the  natural  consequences  of  them?   On  the  contrary,  men's 
natural  abilities  of  helping  themselves  are  often  impaired  ;  or  if  not,  yet  they 
are  forced  to  be  beholden  to  the  assistance  of  others,  upon  several  accounts, 
and  in  different  ways  ;  assistance  which  they  would  have  no  occasion  for,  had  it 
not  been  for  their  misconduct ;  but  which,  in  the  disadvantageous  condition 
they  have  reduced  themselves  to,  is  absolutely  necessary  to  their  recovery,  and 
retrieving  their  affairs.     Now,  since  this  is  our  case,  considering  ourselves 
merely  as  inhabitants  of  this  world,  and  as  having  a  temporal  interest  here, 
under  the  natural  government  of  God,  which,  however,  has  a  great  deal  moral 
in  it ;  why  is  it  not  supposable  that  this  may  be  our  case  also ;  in  our  more 
important  capacity,  as  under  His  perfect  moral  government,  and  having  a  more 
general  and  future  interest  depending  ?    If  we  have  misbehaved  in  this  higher 
capacity,  and  rendered  ourselves  obnoxious  to  the  future  punii^hment  which  God 
has  annexed  to  vice^  it  is  plainly  credible  that,  behaving  well  for  the  time  to 
204 


Digitized  by 


Googlf 


SOMILETW  COMMENTARY :   SZEKIEL.  cRap.  xvm. 


come  may  be — not  useless ;  Ood  forbid  ! — but  wholly  insufficient,  aloue  and 
of  itself,  to  prevent  that  punishment ;  or  to  put  us  in  the  condition  which 
we  should  have  been  in  haa  we  preserved  our  innocence.  ^  And  though  the 
efficacy  of  repentance  itself  alone,  to  prevent  what  mankind  had  rendered 
themselves  obnoxious  to,  and  recover  what  they  had  forfeited,  is  now 
insisted  upon,  in  opposition  to  Christianity;  yet,  by  the  general  prevalence 
of  propitiatory  sacrifices  over  the  heathen  world,  tliis  notion  of  repentance 
alone  being  sufficient  to  expiate  guilt,  appears  to  be  contrary  to  the  general 
sense  of  mankind.  The  great  doctrines  of  a  future  state,  the  danger  of  a 
course  of  wickedness,  and  the  efficacy  of  repentance,  are  not  only  coi^firmed 
in  the  Gospel,  but  are  taught — especially  the  last  is — with  a  degree  of  light 
to  which  that  of  nature  is  but  darkness. — Butler  8  Analogy. 

(Ver,  26.) 

Some  may  fancy,  from  some  expressions  used  in  Wm  chapter,  that  the 
prophet  is  laying  down  a  new  law  of  God's  dealings,  as  tliough  the  Almighty 
had  been  acting  up  to  that  time  upon  a  certain  principle,  and  now,  hence- 
forward. He  were  about  to  act  upon  a  new  and  different  principle.  It  is  easy 
to  put  the  subject  in  such  a  light  that  all  difficulty  will  vanish.  This  is  one 
end  1  have  in  view.  But  I  have  the  further  end  of  drawing  from  the  subject 
some  useful  thoughts  with  respect  to  (Jod's  government  in  the  world  in  these 
our  days,  and  our  own  duties  as  creatures  living  under  a  government  which  at 
present  we  cannot  whoUj  understand.  The  Jews  complained  of  the  law  under 
which  they  lived  as  unjust;  because  it  spoke  of  the  sins  of  the  father  being 
visited  upon  the  children:  they  used  this  proverb,  "  that  the  fathers  have  eaten 
sour  grapes,  and  the  children's  teeth  are  set  on  edge."  The  punishment  which 
ought  to  have  fallen  upon  the  father  fell  upon  his  guiltless  children.  They 
complained  that  God's  ways  were  not  equal,  not  fair,  not  righteous.  It  was  not 
as  a  mere  piece  oi  philosophical  speculation  that  they  held  this  language 
There  was  a  practical  consequence  belonging  to  the  spread  of  the  proverb 
of  the  sour  grapes,  which  was  of  the  highest  importance.  It  was  not  a 
few  unbelieving,  acute,  clever  students  of  the  law,  who  had  detected  this 
injustice  in  it.  Had  it  been  so,  probably  the  prophet  Ezekiel  would  not 
have  made  the  discovery  the  subject  of  a  general  address  ;  no,  the  thing  had 
passed  into  a  proverb,  it  was  in  the  mouth  of  the  people  at  large,  and  the 
practical  consequence  was  that  it  held  back  the  people  from  thinkmg  of  their 
sins  which  had  brought  them  into  trouble ;  and  from  repenting  of  those  sins. 
Instead  of  this  they  would  look  upon  themselves  as  victims  of  an  unjust  law — 
as  persecuted  rather  than  punished.  The  good  effect  of  any  punishment 
depends  very  much  upon  the  criminal  himself  feeling  and  admitting  that  he  is 
punished  justly.  Let  a  man  feel  this,  and  he  may  be  led  to  sorrow  and  good 
resolutions  for  the  time  to  come.  But  if  he  fancies  that  the  law  is  in  fault 
and  not  himself,  that  he  is  an  injured  man — the  victim  of  cruel  legislation — 
then  punishment  mav  make  him  sullen  and  obstinate,  but  it  can  never  make 
him  sorry  for  his  fault  This  was  just  the  case  with  the  Jews.  They  were 
punished,  for  not  keeping  God's  law.  Ezekiel  would  have  them  see  in  their 
punishment  the  result  of  their  own  sins ;  would  endeavour  to  lead  them  to  that 
**  Godly  sorrow  "  which  works  repentance  :  but  the  devil,  and  those  amongst 
men  who  did  the  devil's  work,  had  a  diflferent  version  of  the  history.  According 
to  them,  the  law  which  the  priests  and  prophets  would  fasten  upon  them  was 
an  unjust  law,  one  which  did  not  deserve  their  obedience.  They  would  arj^ue 
that  from  its  own  principles  the  people  were  not  in  need  of  repentance,  for  the 
law  spoke  of  childroa  suffering  for  their  father's  sins,  and  who  could  say  but 

205 


Digitized  by 


Google 


chap.xviu.  IJOMILSTJC  COMMENTARY:  SZEKIBL, 


that  this  very  chastisement  might  be  the  punishment  of  sins  committed  long 
ago  ?  Who  could  say  but  that  their  teeth  were  being  set  on  edge,  because 
their  fathers  Imd  eaten  sour  grapes  many  years  before  ? 

It  is  clear  that  the  proverb  had  a  very  direct  bearing  upon  the  conduct  of 
the  people.  If  the  proverb  generally  found  favour  in  tlieir  eyes,  then  it  was  of 
no  use  that  Ezekiel  should  talk  of  m\  and  its  punishment,  and  the  need  of 
repentance.  Therefore  Ezekiel  protested  against  the  proverb  as  wicked  and 
profane  ;  and  he  lays  down  the  great  truth  which  should  destroy  the  eflfect  of 
the  lying  proverb,  that  of  the  necessary  punifehineiit  of  sin  :  *'  the  soul  that 
Fiimeth  it  shall  die."  That  was  the  truth  which  God  had  told  man  when  He 
first  made  him,  and  the  truth  of  all  religion  in  all  times. 

Let  us  see  what  ground  the  Jews  had  to  stand  upon  their  proverb.  It  is 
evident  that  there  was  something  which  gave  it  colour  and  likelihood.  Satan, 
as  we  know,  can  quote  Scripture  for  his  purpose,  and  Satan  might  have  made  a 
very  good  Scriptural  defence  of  this  proverb  of  the  sour  grapes.  **  I  the  Lord 
thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  and  visit  the  sins  of  the  fathers  upon  the  children 
unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that  hate  Me,  and  shew  mercv 
untj  thousands  in  them  that  love  Me  and  keep  My  commandments.' 
Now,  the  Jews  might  say  that  their  proverb  only  expressed  as  much  as 
this  passage.  And  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  the  passage  sets  forth 
the  mercy  of  God,  because  the  three  or  four  generations  over  which  His  curse 
extends  are  contrasted  with  the  thousands  to  which  He  shews  His  love.  The 
Jews  might  answer  that  still  i%  did  contain  the  principle  of  children  suffering 
for  sins  which  they  had  not  committed,  that  this  was  unjust,  and  that  it  was  no 
qualification  of  the  injustice  to  say  that  in  a  vast  number  of  instances  children 
received  rewards  for  good  deeds  which  not  they  but  their  fathers  had  done. 
Now,  how  is  this  to  ^  met  ?  It  is  quite  clear  that  the  commandment  does 
recognise  the  principle  of  the  proverb,  and  that  the  people  were  smarting  under 
it.  The  punishment  which  fell  upon  them  was  the  result  of  a  long  course  of 
national  wickedness  and  idolatry,  not  the  consequence  of  sins  committed  in 
their  time  only.     How  can  we  meet  the  objection  and  vindicate  God's  ways  ? 

There  were  two  mistakes  in  the  view  which  the  Jews  took  when  they  used  the 
proverb.  (1.)  They  took  the  expressions  of  God's  law  to  mean,  not  that  the  character 
of  sin  was  such  that  it  sometimes  extended  beyond  the  actual  doer  of  it,  and 
brought  grief  upon  others  besides  hiniself,  but  that  it  brought  grief  upon  others 
wstead  of  himself ;  as  thougli  when  Adam  sinned  he  had  not  brought  death  upon 
himself  awrf  his  posteritv,  but  had  brought  it  upon  his  posterity  and  not  upon 
himself  They  would  have  it  that  the  children  alone  suffered  for  what  their 
fathers  had  done.  (2.)  The  other  error  was  this,  that  they  seemed  to 
have  taken  for  granted  that  they  were  fair  judges  as  to  who  was  punished 
and  who  not.  They  assumed  that  the  fathers  had  not  suffered  for  the 
sour  grapes  which  they  had  eaten  ;  whereas  they  were  manife:jtly  not  sufficient 
judges  as  to  what  amount  of  punishment  had  been  meted  out,  or  would  be 
meted  out  to  different  men.  The  apparent  prosperity  of  vice,  and  the  apparent 
suffering  of  goodness  and  virtue,  have  always  been  difficult  to  understand. 
Diivid  found  the  difficulty  in  his  day,  and  could  not  overcome  it  until  he  went 
into  the  sanctuary  of  Goo.  Then  it  was  that  he  was  able  to  take  a  higher  view 
of  God's  dealings  with  mankind,  and  so  to  understand  the  end  of  those  men 
whose  prosperitv  had  so  much  astonished  him.     Ezekiel  did  not  meet  the 

roverb  by  telling  the  Jews  that  in  future  things  should  be  ordered  differently. 

fe  asserts  the  justice  of  God's  ways,  but  he  gives  them  a  new  truth  to  reflect 
upon,  a  truth  not  inconsistent  with  the  princii^le  assei-ted  in  the  Second  Com- 
mandment, but  which  must  needs  be  borne  in  mind  to  guard  against  the  perver- 
sion of  that  principle.  Ezekiel  asserts  the  truth  which  God  spoke  to  Adam  in 
the  days  of  bis  purity — "  In  the  day  that  thou  eatest  thou  dialt  die  I  "  That 
206 


fi 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  CO^fMEKTAnY:   BZEKIEL  ohap.  xvin. 


was  the  great  practical  truth  upon  which  every  human  soul  stood  before  God. 
God  sends  us  all  into  the  woihl  with  a  conscience  to  tell  us  what  is  right  and 
wliat  is  wrong,  \\\\\\  certain  commands  to  keep,  a  certain  path  to  walk  in ;  and 
He  pays  to  us  all,  "  do  these  things  that  your  soul  may  live."  He  may  say  to 
us  at  the  same  time,  do  these  things  that  it  may  be  well  with  you,  and  with 
your  children  after  you  ;  but  whether  this  be  said  or  not,  still  the  responsibility 
for  his  own  actions  lies  on  the  head  of  each  man  :  if  he  sins,  he  dies ;  and  no 
wrath  which  he  may  bring  upon  his  children  can  save  him  from  the  consequences 
of  his  own  sin.  God  did  not  say  to  Adam,  if  you  disobey  you  will  bring  death 
upon  your  children  ;  He  only  said — "  In  the  day  that  thou  sinnest,  thou  shalt 
die."  Yet,  though  the  consequence  was  not  threatened  the  consequence 
came,  and  Adam's  sin,  which  was  to  bring  death  to  himself,  brought  death  to  his 
pasterity  besides.  Ezekiel  was  not  introducing  any  new  principle  of  government, 
he  was  only  asserting  a  principle  as  old  as  the  creation.  What  he  wished  the 
people  to  believe  was  this — that  although  it  had  been  held  out  as  a  warning 
a<;ainst  disobedience  and  an  encouragement  to  obedience,  that  those  who  sinned 
were  bringing  in  a  curse  which  would  affect  others  besides  themselves,  and  that 
contrariwise  those  who  were  holy  and  good  were  bringing  a  blessing  down  upon 
their  children,  still  this  was  not  supposed  to  be  in  opposition  to  the  great  law  of 
every  man  standing  or  falling  by  his  own  deeds,  being  "judged  by  the  things  done 
in  the  body,  whether  good  or  bad."  There  followed  at  once  this  practical 
consequence,  that  when  they  found  themselves  suffering  under  God's  judgments 
they  were  not  to  speculate  as  to  what  sin  it  was  of  their  fathers  which  had 
brought  this  prief  upon  them,  but  they  were  to  look  into  their  own  hearts  and 
examine  their  own  conduct  Ezekiel  would  say  to  them,  "Do  not  look 
to  your  fathers,  but  look  to  yourselves  :  you  say  that  they  siuned,  and  you  are 
suffering  for  it ;  well,  but  think  whether  you  do  not  deserve  to  suffer  ?  Are 
you  really  better  than  your  fathers  ?  Have  you  no  sins  to  repent  of,  no  idolatry 
to  forsake,  no  ungodliness  to  make  you  ashamed  ?"  "  Indeed,"  he  might  go  on 
to  say,  "  is  not  this  itself  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  wicked  state  of  your  hearts, 
that  you  venture  to  attribute  unrighteousness  to  God?  You  say  that  the 
ways  of  the  Lord  are  not  equal,  but  may  it  not  be  that  His  ways  seem  unequal 
just  because  your  own  are  not  equal  themselves  ?  The  ways  of  Gk)d  seem  to 
you  dark  and  confused,  but  may  not  the  defect  be  in  your  own  eyes?"  He 
would  assure  them  that,  whatever  unworthy  thoughts  Satan  might  put  in  their 
minds,  yet  certainly  God  loved  them  and  had  no  pleasure  in  their  death. 
"  Make  you  a  new  heart,  and  a  new  spirit :  for  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of 
Israel  ?  For  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  saith  the  Lord 
God,  wherefore  turn  yourselves  and  live  ye."  These  words  would  cut  through  all 
the  speculative  doubts  of  God's  justice  which  the  devil  had  raised  ;  they  wouhl 
put  religion  upon  the  true  practical  ground  of  trusting  in  God's  love,  and 
therefore  obeying  His  commands ;  and  they  would  encourage  men  to  walk  in 
the  narrow  path  of  duty,  leaving  all  difficulties  to  be  solved  by  those  wise  words 
of  Abraham,  **  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ? " 

There  is  somethinir  repugnant  to  our  idea  of  justice  in  the  law  that  the  sins 
of  the  fathers  should  be  visited  upon  the  children.  But  this  principle  was  not 
all  peculiar  to  the  Jewish  law.  It  is  manifeiitly  the  principle  upon  which  the 
world  is  governed.  We  see  numberless  instances  in  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  son  does  suffer  for  what  the  father  has  done  amiss.  We  say,  "  Of  course 
it  is  80,  it  cannot  be  otherwise."  Yes  ;  but  why  of  course  t  Why  mustxi  be 
so?  Why  cannot  it  be  otheriPisel  And  how  comes  it  that  we  are  linked 
together  in  such  a  mysterious  manner,  that  we  cannot  help  being  affected  by 
those  over  whom  we  have  no  control  ?  Do  you  not  see  that  this  is  God's  doing? 
We  may  call  it  natural,  or  necessary,  but  aft^er  all  it  is  the  Lord's  doing,  however 
wonderful  it  may  be  in  our  eyes.    And  yet,  when  we  see  this  law  of  God's 

207 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHA?.  xvm.  mMTlETW  COMMnNTARY:    BZEKIBL. 


government  we  see  nothing  to  surprise  us,  because  we  cannot  imagine  it  other* 
wiftO.  And  we  do  not  find  that  persons  have  any  difficulty  in  practice  because 
tltey  suffer  for  their  parent's  faults.  No  one  thinks  it  necessary  to  be  idle  and 
to  starve,  because  his  father  was  idle  before  him.  No  one  doubts  but  that  he 
has  his  own  work  to  do,  his  own  food  to  seek,  his  own  soul  to  save,  and  that  if 
his  father  forgot  his  duty,  that  is  the  very  best  warning  to  him  not  to  do 
the  like.  And  what  follows?  why  this :  that  the  same  way  of  looking  upon  our 
condition  here  is  to  be  applied  in  all  cases.  God  did  not  put  us  here  to  explain 
difficulties,  but  to  work  out  our  salvation.  Qod  does  not  require  us  to  shew  how 
all  His  doings  are  the  best  and  wisest  that  could  be,  but  He  requires  us  to  do 
His  will.  Of  all  things  that  we  have  to  learn,  this  is  one  of  the  chief  and 
greatest,  tiiat  our  life  here  is  to  be  a  scene  of  active  work.  We  are  encompassed 
with  mystery,  above,  below,  and  around  us,  and  there  is  much  in  this  world 
which  our  philosophy  can  never  reach.  God's  wavs  are  too  deep  to  fathom,  too 
large  to  measure.  And  who  does  not  conclude  that  in  the  meanwhile  he  has 
great  positive  duties  to  fulfil,  which  no  speculative  difficulties  can  prevent  him 
from  fiilfilling  ?  "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die,"  though  it  was  proved  by 
the  fall  of  Adam,  was  still  more  strikingly  proved  by  the  death  of  the  spotless 
Lamb  of  God,  the  great  offering  for  sin  ;  and  the  truth  that  God  wills  not  the 
death  of  a  sinner  was  then  proved  in  the  most  wonderful  manner  when  God 
spared  not  His  only  Son  that  He  might  be  able  to  pardon  those  who  repent  of 
their  sins.  Tiie  Old  Testament  denunciation,  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death,"  has 
this  New  Testament  addition  made  to  it,  "but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." — Goodwin's  "  Farish  Sermons.** 

(Vers.  27-32.) 

EXEGBTICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  29.        Ver.  30.    "Therefore  I  wiU  judge 

"A  re  not  your  ways  unequal!"   "They  you."    *•  Therefcire,  because  my  way, 

asserted  (ver.  25)  that  the   ways  of  and  not  yours,  is  right,  I  will  judge 

God    were    not   right — properly,   not  you,  every  one  according  to  his  way. 

weighed  in  the  balance  of  rignteousness  Repent,  therefore,  if  ye  would  escape 

(Job.xxi.  6) — but  regulateil  by  caprica  from  death  and  destruction." — Keil, 
This  assertion  proceeded  from  defective 

consciousness  of  sin,  that  could  find         Ver.  3L    ''  Make  you  a  new  heart 

no  other  key  to  suffering  tlian  this,  and  a  new  spirit."     "  A  man  cannot, 

that  it  was  decreed  unrigliteously,  on  indeed,  create  either  of  these  by  his 

account  of   the  sins  of  the  fathers,  owti  power ;  God  alone  can  give  them 

The  prophet  points  to  this,  that  the  (Ezek.  xi.  19).     But  a  man  can  and 

guilt  lies  on  their  side.     If  they  only  should  come  to  God  to  receive  them  : 

siiicerely  return  to  God,  they  will  no  in  other  words,  he  can  turn  to  God^ 

more  have  cause  to  complain  of  Him."  and   let   both    heart    and    snirit    be 

— BengsUnberg.  renewed  by  the  spirit  of  God.  — Keil. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Av  Earnest  Call  to  Repentanob  (vers.  27-89). 

The  prophet  would  not  content  himself  merely  with  vindicating  the  ways  of 
God,  and  thus  silencing  his  adversaries.     His  design  was  not  to  refute,  but  to 
save  them.     Hence  he  renews  the  call  to  repentance,  and  strengthens  that  call 
by  several  considerationa 
208 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.  chap.  xvm. 

I.  A  genuine  repentance  will  be  accepted.  When  a  man  considers  and 
turns  from  his  evil  ways,  and  practises  righteousness,  God  promises  him  life 
(yer.  27).  But — 1.  The  repentance  must  be  complete.  Mere  outward  reforma- 
tion will  not  suffice.  Tliere  must  be  no  retaining  of  a  few  cherislied  sius.  ''  All 
your  transgressions  "  (ver.  3).  2.  Repentance  mu$t  have  special  regard  to  their 
chief  sins.  They  are  to  **  cjist  away '  all  their  transgressions.  This  expression 
is  used  because  their  chief  sin  was  the  worship  of  idols.  When  the  cnief  sin 
is  conquered,  the  victory  over  the  rest  is  easy. 

II.  Ood*8  judgment  against  impenitent  sinners  is  sure.    God   will   not 

change,  and  therefore  man  must,  if  he  would  escape  destruction.  It  is  men's 
ways  that  are  unequal.  The  prophet  cuts  short  the  controversy  with  a  "  there- 
fore." For  the  rule  of  God  is  invariable,  and,  therefore,  they  must  decide 
whether  it  shall  operate  for,  or  against  them.  The  sinner  who  persists  in  his 
impenitence  is  sure  to  be  brought  to  ruin  (ver.  30). 

HI.  Ood  would  supply  them  with  the  necessary  strength  for  the  life  of 
righteousness.  **  Make  you  a  new  heart  and  a  new  spirit "  (ver.  31).  Such  a 
command  to  change  themselves  into  a  new  nature,  coming,  as  it  does,  from  God, 
carries  the  gift  of  a  new  power.  For  God  does  not  give  to  man  impossible 
commands.  There  is  something  still  for  us  to  do,  but  the  provisions  and 
strength  for  our  duty  are  supplied  to  us.  Tlie  new  man  is  **  created  after  God's 
likeness/'  but  believers  are  commanded  to  "  put  it  on  "  (Eph.  iv.  24).  Wlien 
Jesus  called  on  the  paralytic  man  to  "'arise  and  walk  ;"  and  said  to  the  deaf 
man,  *'  Be  thou  opened,"  with  the  command  He  gave  the  power  to  perform  it. 

IV.  God's  will  and  purpose  are  on  the  side  of  the  repentant  sinner.  God  is 
not  a  mere  judge  or  monarch  whose  only  care  is  to  see  that  the  law  is  out- 
wardly obeyed,  and  that  transgressors  are  punished.  He  is  a  loving  Father, 
who  mourns  over  the  transgressioas  of  His  cnildren  aud  longs  for  their  return 
to  the  privileges  of  their  true  home.  He  has  no  pleasure  in  their  death.  The 
sinuer  must  charge  himself  with  his  own  ruin.  Surely  the  voice  of  the  tenderest 
compasfision  is  in  the  question,  ''  For  why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ? '' 


(Ver,  81). 

If  anyone  feels — I  am  fallen  very  low  in  the  world — here  all  has  been  so 
much  against  me — mv  parents  were  the  ruin  of  me — let  him  remember  this  one 
word  of  Ezekiel,  "Have  I  any  pleasure  at  all  that  the  wicked  should  die? 
saith  the  Lord  God  :  and  itot  that  he  should  return  from  his  ways  and  live  ?  " 
Let  him  turn  from  his  father's  evil  ways,  and  do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right, 
and  then  he  can  say  with  the  Prophet,  in  answer  to  all  the  strokes  of  fortune 
and  the  miseries  of  circumstance, ''  Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy:  when 
I  fall  I  shall  arise."  Provided  he  will  remember  that  God  requires  of  all  men 
something,  which  is.  to  be  as  good  as  they  can  be ;  then  he  may  remember  also 
that  our  Lord  Himself  says,  "  Unto  to  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall 
much  be  required."  God's  ways  are  not  unequal.  He  has  one  equal,  fair,  and 
just  rule  for  every  human  being ;  and  that  is  perfect  understanding,  perfect 
sympathy,  perfect  goodwill,  and  therefore  perfect  justice  and  perfect  love.  Aud 
if  any  one  answers  in  his  heart — these  are  good  words,  and  all  very  well,  but 
they  come  too  late.  I  am  too  far  gone.  I  ate  the  sour  grapes  in  my  youth, 
and  my  teeth  must  be  set  on  edge  for  ever  and  ever.  I  have  been  a 
bad  man,  or  I  have  been  a  foolish  woman  too  many  years  to  mend 
now.  I  am  down,  and  down  I  must  be.  I  have  made  my  bed,  and  I 
must  lie  on  it^  and  die  on  it^  too.    Whoever  you  are  who  says  that,  unsay 

0  209 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xvm.  EOMILETia  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIBL. 


it  again,  for  it  is  not  trae.  Ezekiel  tells  you  that  it  is  not  trae,  aud  one 
greater  than  Ezekiel — Jesus  Christ,  your  Saviour,  your  Lord,  your  God,  tells 
you  tliat  it  is  uot  true.  For  what  happens,  by  God's  eterual  aud  unchangeable 
laws  of  retribution,  to  a  whole  nation,  or  a  whole  family,  may  happen  to  you 
— to  each  individual  man.  They  fall  by  sin ;  they  rise  again  by  repentauce 
and  amendment.  They  may  rise  punished  by  their  sins,  and  punished  for  a 
long  time,  heavily  weighted  by  the  consequences  of  their  own  folly, 
and  heavily  weighted  for  a  long  time.  But  they  rise — they  enter 
into  their  own  new  life  weak  and  wounded  from  their  own  fault. 
But  they  enter  in.  And  from  that  day  things  begin  to  mend — the  weather 
begins  to  clear,  the  soil  be<iins  to  yield  again — punishment  gradually 
ceases  when  it  has  done  its  work,  the  weight  lightens,  the  wounds  heal,  the 
weakness  strengthens,  and  by  God's  grace  within  them,  and  by  God's  providence 
outside  them,  they  are  made  men  of  again,  and  saved.  So  you  will  surely  find 
it  in  the  experience  of  life.  No  doubt,  in  general,  in  most  cases,  "  the  child  is 
father  of  the  man  "  for  good  and  evil.  A  pious  and  virtuous  youth  helps,  by 
sure  laws  of  God,  towards  a  pious  and  virtuous  old  age.  And  on  the  other 
hand,  an  ungodly  aud  profligate  youth  leads,  by  the  same  laws,  toward 
an  ungodly  and  profitable  old  age.  That  is  the  law.  But  there  is 
another  law  which  may  stop  that  law — just  as  the  stone  falls  to  the 
ground  by  the  natural  law  of  weight;  and  yet  you  may  stop  that  law 
by  using  the  law  of  bodily  strength,  aud  holding  it  up  in  your  hand.  And 
what  is  the  gracious  law,  which  will  save  you  from  the  terrible  law  which  will 
make  you  go  on  from  worse?  It  is  this — **  When  the  wicked  man  turneth  away 
from  his  wickedness  that  he  hath  committed,  aud  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and 
right,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive."  It  is  not  said  that  his  soul  shall  come  in  a 
moment  to  perfect  health  and  strength.  No.  There  are  old,  bad  habits  to  be 
got  rid  of,  old  ties  to  be  broken,  old  debts  (often  worse  debts  than  any  money 
debts)  to  be  paid.  But  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive.  His  soul  shall  not  die  of 
itfi  disease.  It  shall  be  saved.  It  shall  come  to  life,  and  gradually  mend  and 
be  cured,  and  grow  from  strength  to  strength,  as  a  sick  man  mends  day-by-day» 
after  a  deadly  illness — slowly  it  may  be,  but  surely :  for  how  can  you 
fail  of  being  cured  if  your  physician  is  none  other  than  Jesus  Christ 
your  liOrd  and  your  God.  If  you  will  but  recollect  that  last  word,  you 
will  never  despair.  How  dare  any  man  say — Bad  I  am,  and  bad  I 
must  remain — while  the  God  who  made  heaven  and  earth  oflfers  to  make  you 
good?  Who  dare  say,  I  cannot  amend,  when  God  Himself  offers  to  amend 
you  ?  Who  dare  say,  I  have  no  strength  to  amend,  when  God  offers  to  give 
you  strength,  strength  of  His  strength,  and  life  of  His  life,  even  His  Holy 
Spirit  ?  Who  dare  say,  God  has  given  me  up  ;  He  has  a  grudge  against  me 
which  He  will  not  lay  by,  an  anger  against  me  which  cannot  be  appeased,  a 
score  against  me  which  will  never  be  wiped  out  of  His  book  ?  Oh  foolish  and 
faint-hearted  souL  Look,  look  at  Christ  hanging  on  His  cross,  and  see  there 
what  God's  grudge,  God's  anger,  God's  score  of  your  sins  is  like.  Love,  love 
unspeakable,  and  nothing  else.  To  wash  out  your  sins,  He  spared  not  His  only- 
begotten  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  for  you,  to  show  you  that  God,  so  far 
from  hating  you,  has  loved  you  ;  that  so  far  from  being  your  enemy.  He 
was  your  father;  that  so  far  from  willing  the  death  of  a  sinner.  He  willed  that 
you  aud  every  sinner  should  turn  from  his  wickedness  and  live.  Now,  even  if 
you  suffer  somewhat  in  this  life  for  your  sins,  that  suffering  is  not  punishment^ 
but  wholesome  chastisement ;  as  when  a  father  chastens  the  son  in  whom  he 
delighteth.  Say  not — I  must  be  as  1  am — when  Christ  died  that  you  should 
noi\}Q  as  you  are.  Say  not — there  is  no  hope — when  Christ  died  and  rose 
a^aiii,  and  reigns  for  ever,  to  give  hope  to  you  aud  all  mankind,  that  when  the 
wicked  man  turns  away  from  the  wickedness  that  he  hath  committed,  and  doeth 
210 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  00MMBNTAR7  :   BZBKIEL 


OHAF.  zvm. 


that  which  is  lawful  and  ri>;ht,  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive,  and  all  his  trans- 
gressions shall  not  be  meutioued  unto  him,  but  in  his  righteousness  that  he  liath 
done  shall  he  live. — {''AU  i^ainfs  Day  and  other  ISermans,'*  by  C,  Kingdey.) 


Lamentatioh  fob  the  Misebable  Fate  AWAirnra  the  Pbinorb  akd  People 

OF  IsBAEL  (Chap,  xix.) 


EXEGETICAL  N0TES.-Ver8.l-9. 
The  prophet  foresees  the  capture  and 
exile  of  the  Princes  into  Egypt  and 
Babylon.  This  judgment  to  come  on 
Israel  is  described  under  the  parable 
of  lion's  whelps  taken  in  a  pit 

^Ver.l.  "A lamentation/'  ''k dirge 
or  elegy  :  a  species  of  Hebrew  poetry 
characteristic  of  the  melancholy  fate  of 
those  who  are  the  subject  of  it,  and 
the  doleful  feelings  to  which  it  gives 
utterance.  Sometimes,  as  in  that  over 
Saul  and  Jonathan,  it  is  exquisitely 
tender  and  pathetic.  The  royal  per- 
sonages here  referred  to,  designated 
princes  of  Israel,  were  in  reality  those 
of  the  kingdom  of  Judah.  They  are 
so  called  because  they  were  the  only 
legitimate  rulers  of  the  Hebrew  people. 
Tliose  who  had  reigned  over  the  ten 
tribes  were,  so  far  as  the  theocracy  is 
concerned,  merely  usurpers." — {Hen- 
derson.) 

Ver.2.  **  Thy  mother."  The  mother 
of  the  people  is  Jerusalem  (Ezek.  xxi. 
20;  Gal.  iv.  25).  •'AUoness.'*  '*The 
people  appear  as  a  lioness  on  the 
ground  of  Gen.  xlix.  9,  to  which  pas- 
sage the  couching  in  particular  refers 
(comp.  Num.  xxiii.  24,  xxiv.  9  ;  Isa. 
xxix.  1),  because  it  was  a  royal  people, 
of  equal  birth  with  other  independent 
and  powerful  nations,  as  this  royal 
nature  was  historically  displayed,  espe- 
cially in  the  times  of  David  and 
Solomon.  The  highest  development 
of  this  lion-nature,  the  true  verifica- 
tion of  Gen.  xlix.  9,  10,  first  came  to 
pass  in  the  future,  in  the  appearance 
of  the  Messiah,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah"  (Rev.  v.  6).—Hengstenberg. 
"  She  lay  down  among;  lions."  These 
lions  are  the  other  kingdoms  of  the 
world,  the  Gentile  nations.  Jerusalem 
— the  people  of  Israel — lay  down  among 


them  when  she  took  her  place  in  the 
family  of  nations  (2  Sam.  vii.  9).  '*  She 
nonrishei  her  whelps  among  young 
lions.'*  "The  whelps  of  the  mother 
are  the  sons  of  the  King  of  Israel.  The 
bringing  up  of  these  among  lions  i)oints 
to  the  fact  that  the  kingdom  of  Israel 
was  of  equal  birth  with  the  mighty 
kingdoms  of  the  heathen  world." — 
{lleugstenberg). 

Ver.  3.  '*  It  learned  to  oatoh  the 
prey;  it  devoured  men.'*  "The 
ignoble  side  of  the  lion-nature  is  here 
brought  to  view.  The  distance,  how- 
ever, is  not  very  great :  there  is  a 
close  connection  between  the  two  sides. 
By  the  constitution  of  human  nature, 
arrogance  is  inseparably  connected  with 
high  rank,  and  therewith  a  rude  bar- 
barity towards  all  who  stand  in  the 
way  of  self-will.  He  only  who  walks 
with  God  can  escape  this  natural  con- 
sequence ;  and  the  walk  of  faith  is  not 
the  attainment  of  every  man.  It 
should,  however,  be  the  attainment  of 
every  man  among  the  people  of  God  ; 
and  where  it  fails,  and  the  corrupt 
nature  unfolds  itself  without  resistance, 
there  the  vengeance  of  God  takes 
effect.  Jehoahaz  proved  to  be  a  bar- 
barous tyrant  toward  his  own  subjects; 
whereas,  according  to  its  constitution, 
the  kingdom  of  Israel  should  exhibit 
a  heroic  power  against  the  enemies  of 
the  people  of  God.  For  this  reason 
he  was  punished."  {Hengstenberg), 
"  The  thought  is  the  following  : — Why 
has  Israel  put  itself  upon  a  level  witli 
the  heathen  nations,  and  adopted  the 
rapacious  and  tyrannical  nature  of  the 
powers  of  the  world  ?  The  question 
involves  the  reproof  that  Israel  has 
struck  out  a  course  opposed  to  its 
divine  calling,  and  will  now  have  to 
taste  the  bitter  fruits  of  this^  assump- 
tion of  heathen  ways," — {Krit). 

211 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  T't 


EOMlLETia  COMMBNTARY :   EZEKIBL 


Ver.  4.  '^  And  they  brought  him 
with  chains  unto  tiie  land  of  Egypt" 
The  Heb.  word  means  properly  hooks, 
or  rings,  which  were  fastened  in  the 
noses  of  wild  beasts,  to  which  a  chain 
or  cord  was  attached  in  order  to  drag 
them  about  TEzek.  xxix.  4).  This 
describes  the  fate  of  Jehoahaz,  which 
is  related  in  2  Kings  xxiii.  31,  etc. 
The  fetters  which  were  fastened  upon 
him  correspond  to  the  ring  by  which 
wild  beasts  were  led  about  against  their 
will  (2  Kings  ziz.  28). 

Ver.  5.  ''Vow when  she  saw  that 
she  had  waited,  andher  hope  was  lost." 
'"  While  circumstances  seemed  to  hold 
out  some  promise  of  the  rastoration  of 
Jehoahaz,  the  Jewish  people  cherished 
some  hope,  but  having  been  disap- 
pointed, their  hope  at  last  expired." — 
{Henderson),  *'  Then  she  took  another 
of  her  whelps,  and  made  him  a  young 
lion."  This  was  Jehoiachin  (2  Kings 
xxiv.  8,  etc 

Ver.  6.  "And  he  went  np  and  down 
among  the  lions."  Jehoiachin  affected 
great  magnificence  amon^  the  kings  of 
the  earth.  He  was  ambitious  to  be 
numbered  among  the  great  lions  of 
the  nations  (Jer.  xxii.  14-15).  "And 
learned  to  catch  the  prey,  and  de- 
voured men."  Jehoiachin,  to  gratify 
his  ambition  was  guilty  of  oppression 
and  bloodshed  (Jer.  xxii.  13-17). 

Ver.  7.  "And  he  knew  their  deso- 
late palaces.**  Some  adopt  the  reading, 
**  and  he  knew  his  widows  and  laid 


waste  their  cities.^  "The  knowing 
denotes  the  practining  of  brutiJities. 
JJis,  that  is,  the  king's  widows,  are 
the  widows  whom  he,  as  king,  was 
bound  to  protect  Ilis  widows  are 
at  the  same  time  their,  the  people's, 
widows,  the  wretched  and  suffering. 
The  subject  is  the  king  as  a  lion, 
as  a  hard  and  cruel  man.  There  is 
an  abridged  comparison  here :  he  acts 
towards  the  wretched,  whom  he  was 
called  on  to  protect,  as  one  who 
injures  a  widow  confided  to  his  pro- 
tection. The  fulness  of  the  land  is 
that  which  lives  and  moves  in  it. 
The  lion  roars  when  he  is  about  to 
rend  ;  and  this  rending  is  to  be  added 
to  the  roar,  as  only  thus  the  efTect 
ascribed  to  the  roar  is  explained." 
(/Jengstenberg).  "As  in  Isa.  xiiL  22, 
the  word  in  question  is  used  poetically 
of  widowed  palaces,  i^^  forsaken  of 
their  inhabitants,  so  here  ironically/* 
(Lange). 

Ver.  8.  "The  provinces.*  **Tho 
provincesare  the  surroundin^countries, 
as  parts  of  the  Chaldean  empire ;  comp. 
2  Kings  xxiv.  2,  according  to  which 
the  Syrians,  Ammonites,  and  Moabites 
were  summoned  against  Jehoiakim,  the 
fatherof  Jehoiachin." — (Hengstenberg). 

Ver.  9.  "Brought  him  to  Ihe  king 
of  Babylon."  Jehoiachin  was  carried 
captive  to  Babylon,  where,  thou>;h  a 
prisoner,  he  was  treated  with  kindness 
by  Evil-Merodach  (2  Kings  zxv. 
27-30). 


E0M1LETIC8. 

LAHEKTATIOir  OYEB  IsBAEL's  FALLEN  ROTALTT. 

This  lamentation  is  in  the  poetical  form.  Poetry  is  the  natural  companion 
of  man's  spirit  through  all  the  heights  and  deptlis  of  life  and  feeling.  The 
greatest  sorrows  and  joys  must  find  their  truest  and  highest  expression  in 
poetry.  Hence  the  Book  of  Psalms  retains  its  place  as  the  hand-book  of 
devotion  for  the  Cliurch  of  God. 

I.  Israers  kings  had  a  noble  origin  (Gen.  zlix.,  9.)    Their  mother  was 
Jerusalem— the  ciry  of  God.     "  She  lay  down  amongst  the  lions,"  she  took  her 
pkce  among  the  family  of  nations.   In  King  David,  God  made  of  Israel  a  great 
2Vd 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMEjSTARY:    EZSKIEL.  chap.  xix. 


same,  like  unto  the  name  of  the  great  men  that  are  in  the  earth  (2  Sam.  vii.  9). 
Had  the  chosen  nation  continued  faithful  they  would  have  remained  in  peace 
and  prosperity.  The  greatness  of  the  eminence  to  which  they  had  been  raised 
by  the  providence  of  God,  gives  a  depth  of  saduess  to  this  lamentation  now 
made  over  them. 

II*  Israel't  kings  were  oormpted  by  evil  examples.  The  society  of  the 
creat  of  the  earth  corrupted  them  in  religion  and  morals  (vers.  6,  7).  They 
learned  the  worst  vices  of  kings.  Monarchs  have  special  temptations  arising 
from  their  position.  They  have  opi»oi  tunity  to  inflict  the  greatest  wrongs  upon 
mankind  ;  such  as  tyranny,  opprebsion,  etc.  They  learn  to  **  prey  "  upon  men, 
yea,  to  "  devour  "  them.  Men  are  "  devoured  "  when  they  are  bereft  of  liberty 
and  of  life  by  tyrants. 

III.  The  violence  and  eunning  of  Israel's  kings  provoked  the  same  in 
others.  The  lion  had  learned  to  catch  the  prey,  and  to  affright  the  nations  by 
the  noise  of  his  roaring.  But  he  was  not  victorious.  He  only  stirred  up 
among  the  nations  the  same  feelings  which  raged  within  himself,  and  provoked 
revenge  (ver.  8).  Tlie  most  powerful  tyrants  must  reap  the  reward  of  their  own 
doings.    The  measure  they  mete  shall  surely  be  measured  to  them  again. 

lY.  The  evil  examples  of  IsraePs  kings  failed  to  teaoh  the  people  wisdom. 
When  they  saw  that  their  hope  was  gone  they  elected  another  king.  This  new 
king  walked  after  the  manner  of  the  rest  (vers.  5-7).  The  nation  suffered  also 
under  him  as  they  must  do  under  all  bad  kings.  His  projects  were  wicked, 
violent,  and  wild,  fitly  represented  by  the  roaring  of  the  lion.  Nations  some 
times  become  so  maddened  that  they  repeat  those  mistakes  which,  as  they  ought 
to  know,  must  plunge  them  in  ruin. 

y.  Gh>d  has  ways  to  punish  the  most  powerfol  princes.  Qod  uses  the  passions 
and  inventions  of  men  to  punish  those  who  commit  wickedness  in  high  places. 
Ho  has  chains,  pits,  hunters,  nets,  and  cages  for  wicked  kings.  Often  by  court 
intrigues  and  by  the  jealousies  of  nations  He  brings  them  to  judgment.  His 
jiiti^^iuents  upon  such  may  be  long  delayed,  but  they  are  sure  to  come  in  the 
end. 

**  ThoDgh  the  mills  of  Go(i  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  smaU  ; 
Though  with  patience  He  stands  waiting^  wiUi  exactness  grinds  He  aU** 

God  will  bring  tyrants  to  an  end.  At  last  the  lions'  roaritig  on  the  mountains 
dies  away  (ver.  9).    Sooner  or  later,  "  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling." 

(Ver.  9.) 
1.  The  hopes  of  the  wicked  are  not  long-lived,  Thev  are  soon  dashed  and 
disappointed.  "  The  hope  of  unjust  men  perisheth, '  and  that  easily  and 
speedily  (Prov.  xi.  7).  It  is  likened  to  a  spider's  web  or  house,  a  little  thing  ; 
a  besom  sweeps  away  the  house  and  inhabitant  together,  and  that. in  a  moment: 
snch  is  the  hope  of  wicked  men,  it  is  suddenly  and  easily  ruined.  There  is  a 
ditl'crence  between  the  hopes  of  the  righteous  and  those  of  the  wicked  :  **  The 
hope  of  the  righteous  shall  be  gladness :  but  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  shall 
perish  "  (Prov.  x.  28).  2.  Qnrnpt  states  are  so  addicted  to  their  princes  that 
they  will  set  them  up  to  rule  over  them,  though  it  be  to  their  own  ruin, 
Jeinsalem,  the  lioness,  sets  ''  up  another  of  her  whelps,  and  makes  it  a  young 
lion."  She  put  this  whelp  into  the  royal  seat,  and  stirred  him  up  to  do  lion- 
like, such  things  as  did  unto  himself  and  Jerusalem  also.  She  learned 
nothing  by  the  loss  of  her  former  whelp,  but  proceeds  in  her  old  way,  and  would 
have  lions,  tyrants  to  be  over  her,  she,  being  a  lioness,  very  corrupt  and  wicked, 
couples  with  that  Egyptian  lion,  Pharoah,  and  brings  forth,  advances  a  lion  like 
themselves.  The  men  of  Shechem  made  Abimelech  king,  but  he  proved  not 
only  a  bramble  to  scratch  them,  but  a  fierce  and  fiery  lion  to  consume  them. 

813 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHxp.  XIX.  UOMILETIO  COMMByTART:    BZEKIBL. 


States  had  better  consider  whom  they  set  over  them,  lest  they  become  liona 
uato  tliem.  d.  IStu^h  as  men  live  amongst  and  converse  untkal,  such  they  prove. 
'*  He  went  up  and  down  among  the  lions,  and  became  a  lion.  Those  lions  he 
conversed  with  talked  of  makiug  themselves  great,  of  having  their  wills, 
of  ruling  by  prerogative,  and  these  things,  and  such  like,  were  soon 
learned  by  this  whelp.  When  Nebuchadnezzar  was  among  beasts,  he 
became  brutish,  and  did  as  they  did.  Ill  company  is  the  Delilah  that 
bewitches,  defiles,  and  ruins  maiiy  in  their  estates,  bodies,  and  souls.  David 
knew  this,  therefore  he  said,  "Depart  from  me,  all  ye  workers  of  iniquity " 
(Psa.  vi.  8) ;  and  "  I  am  a  companion  of  them  that  fear  thee  "  (Psa.  cxix.  63). 
4.  J  hey  who  converse  with  wicked  ones  do  not  only  become  wicked ^  but  many  times 
they  prove  eminently  wicked.  Thev  exceed  their  teachers.  Jehoiachin,  by  his 
converse  with  lions,  became  not  only  a  lion  to  catcli  the  prey,  but  such  an  one 
as  devoured  men,  defiled  widows,  made  desolate  palaces,  laid  waste  cities, 
and  the  land  also.  He  went  beyond  other  tyrants,  he  was  an  inventor 
of  wickedness,  and  profited  above  others  in  his  way,  and  came  to  a  perfection 
of  iniquity.  It  is  incident  to  man's  nature  to  outstrip  one  the  other,  if 
not  in  good,  yet  especially  in  evil.  S.  Tyranny  is  hatful  unto  heathens, 
"Then  the  nations  set  against  him  on  every  side."  Jehoiachin  was 
such  a  roaring  lion  that  the  heathens  would  not  endure  him.  Doubtless 
the  princes  of  the  nations  were  tyrannous  themselves,  yet  this  man  exceeded  so 
in  his  tyrannical  practices  that  he  incurred  the  displeasure  and  hatred  of  them 
alL  Tyrants  cease  to  be  men,  and  become  beasts ;  therefore  here  are  called 
lions,  and  are  ranked  among  wild  savage  creatures ;  which  none  can  endure. 
When  there  are  wild  beaats  in  a  land,  tdl  are  against  them,  and  often  there  is 
a  mutual  agreement  and  concurrence  to  destroy  them.  The  nations  agreed  to 
hunt  and  take  thb  lion.  6.  God  hath  times,  means,  ways  to  catch  lions,  to 
deal  with  covetous  and  cruel  men.  When  Jehoiachin  made  desolate  the 
palaces,  and  wasted  the  cities  and  the  land ;  then  the  Lord  stirred  up  the 
nations.  They  were  His  net.  His  pit.  His  instruments  to  take  this  lion 
withal  God  wants  not  means  to  take  them  ;  He  hath  nations  at  command, 
and  can  call  them  forth  and  set  them  to  hunt  lions  when  he  pleases  QTer  1. 
7.  Tyrannical  princes  are  not  of  long  continuance'  They  are  usually  short- 
lived :  either  thev  lose  their  power,  or  their  power  and  lives  both.  Jehoiachin 
roared  and  played  the  lion  eleven  years,  and  then  he  was  taken  in  the  pit  of  the 
nations  and  lost  his  power.  So  Jelioahaz  before  him.  He  tyrannized 
months,  and  then  was  taken.  When  potentates  oppress  and  tyrannize,  their  ruin 
is  at  hand.  Qod  hath  said,  "  filoody  men  shall  not  live  out  half  their  days  " 
(Psa.  Iv.  23).  And  He  makes  it  good.  "  He  cuts  off  the  spirit  of  princes,  and 
is  terrible  to  the  kings  of  the  earth  **  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  12).  8.  God  takes  away 
wicked  and  tyrannical  princes  that  it  may  be  well  with  His  people^  that  Zion 
mav  have  the  benefit  of  it.  Jehoiachin  was  taken,  chained,  carried  to  Babylon, 
ana  put  in  strongholds,  and  why  ? — ''  that  his  voice  should  be  heard  no  more 
upon  the  mountains  of  Israel ; '  that  the  people  of  God  might  not  be  terrrifietl 
wiih  his  roarings,  nor  torn  with  his  teeth,  but  might  enjoy  freedom  and  safety. 
€k)d,  for  the  good  of  His  people,  destroys  or  drives  out  tlie  wild  beasts*  **  No 
lion  shall  be  there  "  (Isa.  xxxv.  9).—(Greenhill).  » 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Vers.  The  royal  vine  of  Judah  was  torn  up 

10-14.     The  prophet  laments  for  the  when  Jehoiachin  was  carried  captive 

destruction  of  the  kingdom,  and  ban-  to  Babylon.    That  vine  was  planted 

ishment   of   the    people,    under    the  afresh  in  the  person  of  Zedekiah,  so 

parable  of  a  wasted  vina  that  the  life  of  the  whole  plant  de- 
pended upon  him.     The  very  sap  of 

Yer.  10.  ''Like  a  vine  in  thy  blood."  that  royal  tree  was  bis  blood.    Soiae 
2U 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL, 


CHAP.  XIX. 


render,  "  in  thy  likeness ; "  but  this  is 
forced,  and  gives  no  suitable  meaning. 

Ver.  11.  /'Strong  rods."  "These 
represent  princes  of  the  royal  house. 
In  her  prosperous  state,  the  Jewish 
kingdom,  so  far  from  resembling  one  of 
those  vines  which  creep  upon  the 
ground,  was  comparable  to  one  trained 
up  by  the  side  of  a  wall,  or  supported 
by  a  tree.  Some  of  these  are  carried 
to  a  great  height,  such  as  that  men- 
tioned by  Schulz,  the  stem  of  which 
was  a  foot  and  a-half  in  diameter,  and 
about  thirty  feet  high,  while  its 
branches  formed  a  tent  of  upwards 
of  fifty  feet  square." — (Ihnderson.) 
*'  Thick  branches."  The  branches  of 
forest  trees.  The  once  lowly  vine  now 
appears  towering  above  oaks  and  cedars, 
yet  is  still  without  fruit  (Ezek.  zv.  6). 

Ver.  12.  *'  But  she  was  plucked  up 
in  for;,  she  was  cast  down  to  the 
ground.*'  "  Without  the  intervention 
of  anything  further,  there  follows  its 
splendid  growth,  like  a  lightning  flash 
from  the  clear  heavens,  the  complete 
overthrow  of  the  vine,  i.e.  of  Jerusalem 
— Judah,  the  birth-place  of  kings,  and 
therewith  the  Davidic  kingdom.  While 
vers.  2-9  bewailed  the  existing  kings, 
both  as  bearers  of  the  Davidic  royalty, 
and  at  the  same  time  as  suggestive,  by 
their  fate,  to  the  actual  king  ;  now 
Zedekiah,  as  he  with  whom  theDavidio 
kingdom  is  subverted,  becomes  the  sub- 
ject of  the  lament,  just  as  if  everything 
had  already  happened."— (La72^tf). 


Ver.  13.  *' And  now  she  is  planted 
in  the  wilderness."  Figuratively  de- 
scribes the  captivity,  when  David's 
stock  was  transplanted  into  the  "wilder- 
ness "  of  Babylonia  (Ezek.  3tx.  35). 

Ver.  14.  "And  fire  it  gone  out  of 
a  rod  of  her  branches,  which  hath 
devoured  her  fruit."  Zedekiah  was 
the  vain-glorious  rod  of  this  vine, 
'i'he  very  rod  itself  supplied  the  fire 
which  burned  up  the  whole  tree.  *'  It 
was  his  revolt  from  Nebuchadnezzar 
which  caused  that  monarch  to  march 
his  army  into  Judea,  take  Jerusalem, 
and  carry  the  Jews  captive  to  Babylon. 
Thus  an  end  was  put  to  the  vine  and 
its  branches — a  consummation  which 
every  Jewish  patriot  must  deeplv  have 
he^SL\\ed"^( //efiderson,)  **  This,  is 
for  a  lamentation,  and  shall  be  for  a 
lamentation."  ''The  lamentation  is 
(properly  was,  with  pro})hetic  anticipa- 
tion of  the  future)  for  a  lamentation  : 
it  is  not  the  fancy  of  a  gloomy  seer, 
but  the  prediction  of  a  lamentation, 
which  will  actually  flow  in  a  thousand 
voices  from  the  mouth  of  the  people. 
What  Ezekiel  here  pronounces,  the 
people  will  too  soon  be  compelled  to 
repneat  after  him.  His  lamentation  is, 
as  it  were,  the  sowing,  out  of  which  a 
rich  harvest  of  lamentation  grows. 
At  present  the  sky  is  full  of  joyous 
music  to  the  people  :  but  very  soon  it 
will  be  said  :  ''  My  narp  is  turned  to 
mourniuff,  and  my  flute  to  the  voice  of 
weeping. ' — (Hengstenberg.) 


H0MILETIC8. 


Lamentation  fob  the  Kingdom  of  Jui>ah» 


^wo  things  concerning  the  fate  of  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  most  of  all,  sorely 
touched  the  prophet's  mind  and  heart. 

I.  It  was  fallen  from  a  high  estate-  Judah  was  once  a  goodly  vine,  and 
blest  above  all  otliers.  She  was  the  planting  of  the  Lord.  Her  elevation  to 
the  greatest  privileges  serves  sadly  to  reveal  the  depth  of  her  fall 

II.  It  was  doomed  to  destruction.  The  destruction  was  sudden  and  over- 
whelming. For  immediately  before  she  was  full  of  happiness  and  splendour, 
great  among  the  nations,  and  wielding  the  rod  of  power.    Their  destruction 

315 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XIX.  EOMILETW  C0MM£2iTAM"Y  :   EZEKIEL. 


was  brouglit  about  by  the  wrath  of  GocL  "  SLe  was  plucked  up  iu  fury  " 
(ver.  12).  When  nations  cease  to  acknowledge  God,  He  turns  the  glory  and 
growth  of  centuries  into  a  desert  National  sins  spread  like  fire,  and  wrap 
whole  kingdoms  in  the  flames  of  destruction.  'J'he  eid  of  sin  is  "lamentation  " — 
for  individuals,  for  natioua  Judah's  kingdom  fell,  like  others  before  and  after 
it,  b<  caube  it  failed  to  maintain  righteou8ne8s.  There  is  only  one  king  who 
can  deliver  the  nations  and  reign  over  them  for  ever  and  ever.  ''The  Messianic 
hope  was  bound  up  with  the  Davidic  kingdom,  whose  subversion  is  here 
illustrated,  and  its  fulfihnent  is  shown  in  this,  that  He  who  appeared  in  the 
World,  declared,  not  without  reference  to  this  chapter, '  I  am  the  true  vine ' " 
{Lange). 

(Vers.  10,  11.) 

1.  istates  and  kingdoms,  ruined  in  times  of  war  and  trouble,  flourish  again  in 
times  oj  quiet  and  silence,  'lyranny,  oppression,  wars,  pull  down,  root  up, 
destroy  ;  but  when  thrre  is  pence  and  rest,  it  is  otherwise.  **  They  built  and 
prospered,"  and  why  ?  they  had  '*  rest  on  every  side."  Wiien  roaring  lions  are 
taken  away,  and  men  of  peaceable  and  quiet  spirits  succeed,  then  the  vine  grows, 
then  the  land  prospers,  then  breaches  are  repaired.  2.  It  is  through  the  goodness 
and  blessing  of  God  that  wasted  kingdoms  do  become  as  vijies,  and  flourish  again. 
"  Thy  mother  is  like  a  vine,  fruitful  and  full  ot  branches  by  reason  of  many 
waters."  God  watered  the  kingdom  with  blessings ;  He  gave  peace.  He  gave 
the  poor  strength  to  labour,  He  rained  upon  them,  and  gave  sap  to  the 
vine,  that  she  was  fruitful.  When  God  lays  waste  his  vineyards,  then 
He  commands  "  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it  "  (Isa.  v.  6)  ; 
but  when  He  causes  it  to  flourish,  then  He  calls  forth  the  rain,  He 
moistens  the  spirits  of  men  of  all  sorts,  to  contribute  their  help,  thoughts 
and  counsels  for  the  good  of  the  kingdom.  He  stirs  up  tiie  spirits  of 
men  to  be  doing  for  tlie  public ;  He  gives  people  planted  by  Him  many 
waters,  many  blessings.  3.  When  mercies  are  multiplied,  men  are  apt 
to  abuse  them,  and  swell  with  the  enjoyment  of  them.  This  metaphysical  vine, 
tlie  kingdom  of  Judah,  had  ''strong  rods  her  stature  was  exalted  among  the 
thick  branches,  and  she  appeared  in  her  height  with  the  multitude  of  her 
branches."  She  grew  up  again  to  a  height,  greatness.  She  had  a  multitude 
of  branches,  variety  of  mercies,  and  these  swelled  her  so,  that  she  became  proud, 
insolent,  and  despised  others.  Prosperity  is  a  dangerous  thing,  and  hath  hazarded 
many.  The  Babylonian  kingdom  was  so  rich,  great,  populous,  and  plentiful  that 
it  was  called  "  the  lady  of  kingdoms,"  and  she  herself  said,  "I  shall  be  a  lady 
for  ever."  She  prided  herself  in  her  prosperity  (Isa,  xlvil  5,  7),  so  spiritual 
Babylon  (Rev.  xviii.  7).  ''  I  sit  a  queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  shall  see  no 
sorrow."  After  Hezekiah  had  received  many  mercies,  "  his  heart  was  lifted  up  " 
(2  Chron.  zxxii.  23-25).  Rehoboam,  when  he  was  strengthend  in  the  kingdom, 
'*  forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  all  Israel  with  him  ;  "  here  was  a  sad  eftect  ot 
prosperity  (2  Chron.  xii.  i).  This  people  were  seldom  the  better  for  mercies 
and  blessings  bestowed  upon  them  ;  "  I  spoke  unto  thee  in  thy  prosperity,  but 
thou  saidst,  1  will  not  hear.  This  bath  been  thy  manner  from  tliy  youth,  that 
thou  obeyest  not  my  voice  "  (Jer.  xxii.  21).  She  had  forgotten  the  caution  the 
Lord  gave  her  in  the  days  of  her  infancy  (Deut  viii.  11-14). — {GreenhiU). 

(Ver.  18). 

"And  now  she  is  planted  in  the  wilderness."    This  wilderness  was  Babylon, 
which  was  a  fruitful,  pleasant,  and  well-watered  country  ;  the  city   and  laud 
216 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   SZEKIBL.  Ohap.Xix. 


were  tbe  "  glory  of  kingdoms  (Isa.  xiii.  19).  It  had  variety  of  rivers  (Psa. 
cxxxvii.  I).  Wow  if  this  were  the  nature  of  the  country,  bow  is  it  here  called 
a  wilderness  ?  It  is  so  called,  not  in  respect  of  itself,  but  in  reference  to  tbe 
Jews,  who  being  captives  therein,  were  as  in  a  wilderness.  In  a  wilderness,  a  man 
is  destitute  of  all  comforts  and  exposed  to  many  dangers ;  so  were  the  Jews  in 
Babylon.  1.  They  were  destitute  of  comforts^  They  came  naked  into  Babylon, 
where  they  were  amongst  a  people  of  a  barbarous  and  unknown  tongue,  that 
knew  nothing  of  God  ;  there  they  had  no  form  of  a  Church  or  State  ;  they  had 
no  life,  but  were  as  dry  bones  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  11).  There  they  were  captives; 
Babylon  was  a  prison  unto  them,  and  prisons  of  what  kind  soever  are  not  pleasing. 
Prisoners  endure  much  hunger  and  thirst,  and  doubtless  so  did  the  Jews  in 
Babylon.  Though  there  were  plenty,  yet  they  had  little  enough,  and  therefore 
it  was  a  "dry  and  thirsty  land"  to  them.  2.  1  hey  were  exposed  to  many 
dangers.  They  were  amongst  those  that  mocked  and  bated  them.  The  Baby- 
lonians were  **  bitter  and  hasty,  terrible  and  dreadful "  (Hab.  i.  6,  7).  They 
were  like  wild  beasts  in  the  wilderness,  and  sought,  upon  all  occasions,  to  make 
a  prey  of  the  poor  captive  Jews.  They  got  the  three  children  into  the  fiery 
furnace,  Daniel  into  the  lion's  den,  and  Hauian  attempted  the  total  ruin  of 
them.  "  She  is  planted."  Before  (ver.  12),  it  is  j?aid,  **  the  fire  consumed 
them."  What  is  consumed  in  the  fire  is  burnt  to  ashes,  and  how  can  that  be 
planted?  He  doth  not  say  the  whole  vine  was  burnt,  but  her  "strong  rods" 
were  broken  off  and  burnt ;  some  were  burnt  and  consumed  by  famine,  some  by 
the  plague,  some  by  the  sword  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  17).  **  The  king  of  the  Chaldees 
slew  their  young  men  with  the  sword  ; "  but  "  they  that  escaped  the  sword  he 
carried  away  to  Babylon,  where  they  were  servants  to  him  and  his  sons" 
(ver.  20).  If  it  should  be  granted  that  the  whole  vine  was  dried  up,  withered, 
and  burnt  to  ashes,  yet  the.se  words  may  bear  a  good  and  sound  ^ense,  viz., 
thus  : — they  may  be  understood  of  Jehoiachin  and  those  that  were  with  liim  ii\ 
Babylon  at  that  time  when  they  were  spoken  ;  for  the  words  run  in  the  present 
tense,  "she  is  planted,"  not,  slie  shall  be  planted,  for  Ze<lekiah  and  those  that 
escaped  the  sword  were  carried  after  this  prophecy  to  Babylon. — (GreenhiU.) 

Thb  Past,  Fbesbnt,  aitd  Futuhb  of  Israel  (Chap,  xz.) 

EXEGETICAL    NOTES.  —    The  of  Wandering  "  was  passed  (Num.  xi v. 

date  given  in  ver.    1  applies  also  to  29).     It  is  remarkable  that  this  was 

chap,  xz-xxiii.  (compare  chap.  xxiv.  1).  also  the  same  day  on  which  the  Temple 

These  four  chapters  are  bound  together  was  burnt  both  by  the  Chaldeans  (Jer. 

by  their  contents  into  one  group  of  lii.  12,  13),  and  according  to  the  testi- 

connected  words  of  God,  and  also  by  mony   of  Josephus,   by  the  Romans, 

the  threefold  repetition  of  the  expres-  This  chapter  (in  which  Num.  xiv.  is 

sion,  "  wilt  thou  judge  ?"  (chap.  xx.  4;  several  times  referred  to)  announces  a 

xxii.  2 ;    xxiii.  36j.      The  prophet  is  new  and  a  far  heavier  "  Sentence  of 

appointed  to  judge  the  people,  i.e.,  to  Wandering  "   (vers.   35-38).     **  If  we 

make  manifest  their  sin  to  them,  and  compare  the  date  given  in  ver.  1  with 

to  predict  the  punishment.     In  vers.  chap,   viii   1,  we  shall  find  that  this 

1-4,  we  have  the  date,  occasion,  and  word  of  God  was  uttered  only  eleven 

hubject  of  the  prophetical  discourse.  months  and  five  days  after  the  one  in 

chap.  viii. ;  two  years,  one  month,  and 

Ver.  1.      "In  the  seventh  year,  in  five  days  after  the  call  of  Ezekiel  to  be 

the  fifth  month,  the  tenth  day  of  the  a  prophet  (chap.  i.  2) ;  and  two  years 

month."    There  is  a  Jewish  tradition  and  five  months  before  the  blockading 

that  the  tenth  day  of  the  fifth  month  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans  (chap, 

was  the  day  on  which  the  "  Sentence  xxiv.  1).    Consequently  it  falls  almost 

217 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAt.SX 


BOMIIBTIO  OOMMENTAMY:  M2EKIEL. 


in  the  middle  of  the  first  section  of 
Ezekiel's  prophetic  work."  —  {Kelt). 
•*  To  enquire  of  the  Lord,"  HeU  "  to 
seek  Jehovah,**  id.,  to  ask,  a  revelation 
from  Hint 

Ver.  d.  '' Ai  I  live,  saith  fhe  Lord 
Oody  I  will  not  be  enquired  of  by  you." 
I'  The  Lord  8  answer  is  similar  to  that 
in  chap.  xiv.  8.  Instead  of  giving  a 
revelation  concerning  the  future, 
especially  with  regard  to  the  termi- 
nation of  the  penal  sufferings,  wliich 
the  elders  had)  no  doubt,  come  to 
solicit,  the  prophet  is  to  judge 
them,  «.tf.,  as  the  following  clause 
explains,  not  onl^  in  the  passage 
before  us,  but  also  m  chap.  xxii.  3,  and 
zxiii.  36,  to  hold  up  before  them  the 
sins  and  abominations  of  Israel.  It  is 
in  anticipation  of  the  following  picture 
of  the  apostacy  of  the  nation  from  time 
immemorial  that  the  sins  of  the  fathers 
are  mentioned  here." — {Keil).  "No 
repl^  is  given  to  the  sinners,  but 
chiding  (or  their  sins;  and  He  adds 
the  oath,  'As  I  live,'  that  the  sentence 
of  refusal  may  be  all  the  stronger." — 
(Jerome),  When  Saul  "enquired  of 
the  Lord,"  we  are  told  that  "the  Lord 
Answered  him  not "  (1  Sam.  xxviiL  6). 

Ver.  4.  ''WUt  thou  judge  them, 
son  of  man.  wilt  thou  judge  themf ' 
The  repeated  question  has  the  force 
of  a  command,  yea,  even  implies  that 
a  necessity  is  liud  upon  the  prophet 


to  pronounce  judgment  "The  Hebrew 
word  higniBes,  not  merely  to  judge,  but 
also  frequently,  as  here,  to  conduct  a 
cause  betbre  a  tribunal  by  adducin<^'  or 
hearing  such  evidence  as  bears  upon 
it,  and  shall  lead  to  the  delivery  of 
a  righteous  sentence."  {Henderson,) 
"The  question  is  repeated  in  the 
liveliness  of  emotion.  It  is  a  question 
of  impatience,  to  which  things  go  too 
slowly,  and  show  how  little  right  they 
have  to  look  for  grace,  or  expect  a 
pleasing  answer.  The  son  of  man 
cannot  go  soon  enough  for  the  Lord 
to  the  work  of  judgment  and  punish- 
ment for  sin,  which  is  here  alone 
announced,  and  is  to  be  executed  in 
his  name.  Those  who  wish  to  have 
another  answer,  must  repent  before- 
hand. The  summons  to  make  known 
to  them  the  sins  of  their  fathers,  points 
to  this,  that  the  evil  is  deep-seated,  and 
a  radical  cure  is  to  be  desired,  which 
can  only  be  effected  by  a  judgment 
of  inflexible  rigour." — {llengstenberg.) 
**  Cause  them  to  know  the  abomina- 
tions of  their  fathers."  The  evil 
which  called  for  judgment  had  entered 
the  very  life  of  the  nation.  They 
inherited  it  like  a  disease — like  a  bad 
name.  But  the  prophet  not  only 
mentions  the  sins  of  their  fatiiers  in 
order  to  show  the  magnitude  of  their 
guilt,  but  also  that  they  might  see  how 
great  was  the  patience  and  long- 
suffering  of  the  Lord. 


EOMILETICB. 

Thb  Elders  befobb  Ezekdsl. 

This  is  a  very  different  result  from  that  which  we  might  have  expected.  We 
might  have  been  inclined  to  say  of  the  elders,  that  they  could  not  have  inquired 
of  the  Lord  once,  but  they  have  learned  wisdom  from  adversity,  and  they  are 
come  to  enquire  now.  And  so  Esekiel  would  also  have  said  to  these  elders  had 
they  come  in  the  right  spirit  and  temper  of  mind  ;  as  penitents,  with  sorrow  and 
contrition  of  heart,  bemoaning  their  past  obstinacy  and  rebellion,  and  beseeching 
God  to  receive  their  cries  of  earnest  sorrow  and  their  promises  to  do  better  things 
in  the  future.  Had  they  so  come  they  would  have  been  well  received.  That 
prophet  who  was  commissioned  to  say,  "When  the  wicked  man  tumeth  away 
from  his  wickedness  that  he  hath  committed,  and  doeth  that  which  is  lawful  and 
right  he  shall  save  his  soul  alive,"  and  again,  "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have 
no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,"  and  the  like — the  prophet  who  was 
218 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILSTW  OOMMBNTARr:   EiEKIBL  oha*.  xi. 


charged  with  such  messages  as  these  oonid  Dever  have  been  commissioned  to 
drive  away  with  bard  reproachful  words  any  tme  peniteut,  who  came  to  enquire 
of  the  Lord  by  him. 

This  is  the  point  in  which  the  elders  failed.  There  is  no  evidence  of  their 
nenitence.  They  came  to  enquire  of  the  Lord  without  first  repenting  and 
bringing  forth  works  meet  for  repentance.  Look  at  ver.  35,  and  the  great 
reason  will  be  seen  why  the  enquirers  were  rebuffed,  "  When  ye  oflFer  your  ffifts, 
when  ye  make  your  sons  to  pass  through  the  fire,  ye  pollute  yourselves  with  all 
your  idols,  "  even  unto  this  day  " — even  to  this  day ;  jom  perceive  that  their 
sins  were  not  events  of  the  past,  but  things  going  on  m  full  vigour  up  to  this 
very  time.  It  was  in  the  midst  of  these  unrepented  sins  that  they  were  come 
to  enquire  of  the  Lord ;  "  and  shall  I  be  enquired  of  by  you,  0  house  of 
Israel  V* — ^so  the  verse  continues — *  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord  God,  I  will  not  be 
enquired  of  by  you."  Here  you  have  the  repetition  of  the  words  of  the  text. 
The  prophet  is  then  commissioned  to  make  Known  the  abominations  of  their 
fathers.  He  shows  them  that  they  were  as  guilty  as  their  fathers,  and  more 
guilty,  because  they  had  more  teaching,  more  experience,  more  examples.  And 
yet  without  any  repentance,  they  expect  that  they  are  to  be  permitted  to 
enquire  of  the  Lord  acceptably,  but  no— God  will  not  be  mocked  ;  He  will  heai 
the  penitent,  but  not  the  self-satisfied  sinner. 

There  was  nothing  harsh  and  unreasonable  in  the  answer  which  Ezekiel  gave 
to  the  elders.  He  did  not  send  the  hungry  empty  away,  but  only  as  God's 
ambassador  refused  to  answer  those  who  would  not  leave  their  sins  beliind  them 
when  they  entered  into  the  Temple  of  God.  These  elders  wished  to  make  a 
mere  convenience  of  the  oracle  of  God.  They  might  have  enquired  of  God 
continually,  but  they  did  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  when  they  found  themselves 
in  distress,  and  knew  not  which  way  to  turn,  then  they  presented  themselves 
before  God's  prophet  They  were  brought  to  enquire  of  God  not  by  love,  not 
by  a  sense  of  duty,  not  even  by  habit,  but  merely  by  a  desire  to  find  their  way 
out  of  difficulties  from  which  they  were  unable  to  discover  any  human  means  of 
escape. 

We  see,  in  the  first  place,  that  they  were  not  hardly  dealt  with;  and,  secondly, 
that  the  whole  story  may  be  useful  by  way  of  parable  to  teach  people  how  they 
must  enquire  of  God  if  thev  would  enquire  aright.  It  is  well  that  we  should 
look  into  this  matter  carefutly  ;  for  we  are  apt  to  give  an  unlimited  interpreta- 
tion to  what  we  read  of  God's  mercy  in  hearmg  prayer,  that  we  perhaps  forget 
that  there  are  very  important  limitations,  and  that  a  prayer  mav  sometimes 
obtain  no  answer  because  there  is  something  amiss  in  him  who  makes  it  The 
parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  the  Publican  is  an  instance.  The  Pharisee  who 
went  up  to  the  Temple  to  pray  was  a  very  respectable  elder  apparently,  some- 
thing much  more  than  respectable  if  we  attend  to  his  own  account  of  himself, 
— yet  this  Pharisee  received  no  answer,  was  not  justified  as  the  Gospel  has  it. 
God  would  not  be  enquired  of  by  such.  This  is  an  instance  of  unsuccessful 
prayer.    Let  us  consider  what  the  true  conditions  of  successful  prayer  are— 

I*  True  religion  is  emphatically  a  walking  with  God.  It  is  not  a  mere 
occasional  coming  to  Him.  A  certain  amount  of  reproach  seems  to  be  implied 
in  the  manner  in  which  the  day  of  the  visit  of  the  elders  is  accurately  set  down; 
it  was  "  in  the  seventh  year,  in  the  fifth  month,  the  tenth  day  of  the  month." 
These  visits  of  the  elders  were  few  and  far  between,  there  was  no  danger  of 
confounding  one  with  another.  In  chap,  viii.,  we  read,  that "  in  the  sixth  year, 
in  the  sixth  month,  in  the  fifth  day  of  the  month,"  there  was  a  similar  visit  to 
the  prophet,  and  there  appears  to  have  been  none  between ;  so  that  nearly  a 
year  separated  the  one  visit  from  the  other.  The  precise  manner  in  which  the 
date  is  given  may  be  taken  as  conveying  a  reproof  to  those  who,  instead  of 

21«) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    SZEKIEL. 


making  it  their  constant  business  to  Imow  God's  will,  were  contented  to  let  a 
year  elapse  between  two  succe&^ive  visits  to  the  prophet.  Walking  with  God 
IS  the  scripture  phrase  which  well  describes  that  constant  nearnes.s  to  Gud,  that 
affinity  of  heart  and  affections,  which  the  really  religious  man  strives  for.  The 
notion  of  life^  too,  expresses  the  same  thing.  Religion  is  a  /{/%,  by  which  word 
we  intend  to  express,  that  it  is  not  a  series  of  irregular  spasmodic  efforts,  not  an 
enquiry  of  God  now  and  then,  not  a  coming  to  His  prophet  in  the  sixth  year  and 
the  sixth  month,  and  again  in  the  seventh  year  and  the  fifth  month,  but  an 
enquiry  in  all  years  and  all  months  and  all  days,  a  habit  of  opening  our  hearts 
and  consciences  to  Him,  and  of  guiding  our  conduct  by  the  answers  which  we 
are  able  to  obtain. 

II.  We  must  leave  onr  sins  behind  ns  when  we  come  to  enquire  of  God* 
The  severe  answer  which  the  elders  received  was  due  to  the  fact  that  they  came 
witliout  first  repenting.  As  a  further  illustration  of  this  we  find,  that  in  their 
former  visit,  their  presence  at  once  brought  upon  the  prophet  a  vision  of  the 
sins  of  the  people.  The  prophet's  eyes  wandered  in  spirit  to  Jerusalem,  and 
there  he  Faw  all  the  abominations  of  the  house  of  Israel ;  there  were  men  offering 
their  incense  to  idols,  and  saying, ''  The  Lord  seeth  us  not ; "  there  were  women 
weeping  for  Tammuz ;  worse  than  all,  there  were  men  howing  down  in  worship 
to  the  sun  of  the  creation,  not  the  Creator.  These  visions  rose  to  Ezekiel's 
prophetic  eye  when  the  elders  came  and  sat  before  him  ;  and  because  they 
contained  precisely  the  explanation  of  all  the  misery  under  which  the  people 
groaned.  The  elders  may  come  and  sit  before  the  prophet  and  bemoan  their 
captivity,  but  of  what  profit  will  that  be  ?  That  will  not  cure  the  disease. 
The  disease  is  unrepented  sin,  and  without  a  change  here  there  can  be  no 
acceptance,  no  answer  to  prayer.  Self-examination,  earnest  efforts  to  forsake 
the  evil  and  to  do  the  good,  must  ever  be  the  preparations  for  successful  inquiry 
of  God.  Prayer  is  not  a  thing  which  is  at  our  command  at  any  moment. 
thinners  can  come  to  Christ,  but  they  must  leave  their  sins.  John  the  Baptist 
came  as  the  herald  of  Chri.st,  and  because  he  did  so,  his  chief  text  was  :  ''  Bepent 
ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand."  No  other  way  is  sure  but  this  ;  nothing 
else  can  save  us  from  the  possibility  of  such  a  rebuke  as  that  in  the  text^  *'  As 
I  live/'  etc.    The  history  brings  before  us  this  lesson  also,  that — 

III.  Prayer,  or  coming  to  God  in  any  way,  must  not  be  made  a  mere 
matter  of  convenience,  but  must  be  regarded  as  a  matt  r  of  constant  spiritual 
necessity.  These  elders  came  when  they  thought  it  would  answer  their  purpose. 
They  forgot  God  when  all  went  well,  they  sought  Him  when  they  were  at  their 
wit's  end;  they  did  not  look  upon  communion  with  God  as  the  one  great 
spiritual  need  of  their  souls.  They  were  a  type  of  the  mass  of  mankind.  Large 
numbers  of  our  fellow  creatures  do  live  in  utter  neglect  of  God.  They  live 
without  prayer,  and  without  the  Scriptures— passing  a  quiet,  animal  kind  of 
life,  with  no  cares  except  those  of  getting  daily  bread.  And  yet  many  of  these 
persons  will  cry  to  the  Lord  in  trouble ;  put  them  upon  a  sick-bed,  and  they 
will  say  their  prayers,  for  the  most  part,  vigorously  enough.  This  is  no  right 
use  of  prayer,  but  a  most  unchristian  abuse.  It  was  never  intended  that  man  should 
be  careless  while  in  health,  and  religious  in  sickness  ;  never  intended  thatyoun^ 
men  should  be  diasipated  and  only  old  men  sober  and  chaste  ;  never  intended 
that  the  best  of  a  Ciiristian's  life  and  strength  should  be  given  to  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil,  and  only  the  dross  and  refuse  to  Him  who  made  him  and 
redeemed  him.  Prayer  was  never  intended  to  be  made  use  of  as  a  convenience 
when  earthly  aid  fails,  but  to  be  the  medium  of  communication  uith  God,  the 
means  of  gaining  continual  aid  and  daily  blessing  from  Him.  ''Pray  without 
ceasing  "  is  the  best  text  to  enforce  our  duty.  These  did  not  "  pray  without 
ceasing."    It  was  but  an  occasional  work,  a  remedy  resorted  to  in  the  last 

220 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMIIETW  COMMSNTART:    BZEKFEL.  cttAi?.  xt. 


extremity,  a  death-bed  cry  for  help.  If  we  were  independent  creatures  and 
lived  by  our  own  strength  and  energy,  then  we  might  be  content  to  make 
our  approaches  to  Him  rare  and  except ional,  and  only  necessary  when  called  for 
by  special  circumstances.  But  what  a  false  view  would  this  be  of  our  relation 
to  Him  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  beiog,  who  alone  is  able  to 
help  uSy  whom  to  know  is  life  eternal  I  And  how  comforting,  how  satisfying  is 
that  view  which  represents  God  as  a  Father  ever  ready  to  bless  ns,  and  to  whom, 
therefore,  if  we  pray  at  all,  we  can  scarcely  fail  to  pray  without  ceasing ! — 
{Goodwin's  "  Parish  Sermons.'') 

Ver.  1.  It  is  enough  to  say  merely  that  they  came  to  inquire,  for  from  the 
prophet's  mode  of  answering  them  we  see  that  they  made  no  inquiry  as  to 
deliverance  and  the  way  of  salvation  ;  they  were  troubled  as  to  political  thin^^s, 
the  duration  of  the  exile,  the  end  of  the  Babylonish  power,  the  issue  of 
Zedekiah's  faithlessness.  We,  too,  ask,  Watchman,  what  of  the  night  ?  rather 
than,  How  shall  I  find  grace  ?  Why  are  we  so  concerned  about  the  future  ?  It 
will  be  like  our  past.  We  should  be  deeply  concerned  on  account  of  our  past. 
In  our  approaches  to  God,  humility  and  reverence  should  be  combined  with  a 
strong  and  assured  faith,  which  must  acquiesce  in  the  authority  of  the  one  God, 
and  yet  must  not  object  to  hear  God  speak  through  his  servants.  Summon 
thyself  to  the  study  of  the  prophets  and  apostles  through  whom  God  has  spoken ! 
God  will  be  inquired  of,  but  still  more  should  His  will,  which  is  sufficiently 
known  to  us,  be  done.  To  call  on  God,  and  yet  not  to  obey  Him  is  an  abomina- 
tion in  His  sight  "  He  heareth  not  sinners"  (John  ix.  31  ;  Isa.  i.  15).  Vers. 
2,  3.  God's  sugi;estive  silence,  and  His  more  sug<?estive  answer.  God  in  the 
mouth,  and  idols  in  the  heart,  a  most  critical  condition.  God  speaks  not  the 
smallest  word  of  comfort  to  hypocrites.  For  hypocrites  there  is  in  the 
heart  of  God,  and  in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  no  other  counsel  but  to  sincere 
reponlance  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  Thus  these  elders  were  not  in  a  condition  to  hear  God's 
word.  God  hides  Iiin).se1f  from  those  who  hear  His  word  with  their  gaze  fixed 
only  on  their  idols.    They  have  no  part  in  God's  word. — {Langs). 

(Ver.  1.) 

1.  The  Lord  keeps  an  exact  account  of  his  people's  sufferings.  Be  the  time  long 
or  short,  He  observes,  '*In  the  seventh  year,  fifth  month,  and  tenth  day ;"  that  was 
of  their  captivity.  The  Lord  forgot  not  how  long  they  had  been  in  Babylon,  He 
notes  how  the  time  of  their  trouble  passes.  They  were  captives  in  Babylon,  suffered 
hard  things ;  but  God  took  notice  of  the  time,  and  how  the  years  ran  out  It  is 
not  said  only  that  the  woman  had  a  spirit  of  infirmity,  but  the  time  is  recorded 
also,  she  had  it  eighteen  years  (Luke  xiii.  11).  Also  in  John  y.  5,  not  only  the  man 
and  his  infirmity  is  mentioned,  but  the  time  also  how  long,  thirtv-eight  years.  God 
tells  the  years,  months,  and  days  that  His  people  endure  adversity.  Seventy 
years  were  determined  that  they  should  be  in  Babylon  (Jer.  xxix.  10,  11),  and 
God  cave  them  to  see  ;  He  observed  as  well,  yea,  better  than  they,  how  they 
passei  2.  The  time  of  men's  doing  some  things  is  specially  noted  by  the  Lord. 
The  time  of  these  elders  coming  to  inquire  of  the  Lord  is  recorded.  See  how 
the  actions  of  Josiah  are  observed  (2  Chron.  xxkIv.  3).  When  Jeroboam  feasted 
and  sacrificed  to  the  calves  he  had  made,  God  took  notice  of  the  month  and  day 
(1  Kings  xii.  32).  When  the  persecution  of  the  Church  was,  God  took  notice 
of  it;  "at  that  time"  (Acts  viii.  1).  3.  Hypocrisy  is  a  close  sin,  and  is 
in  those  ofttimes  we  little  think.  It  is  found  where  it  was  not  expected. 
"  in  the  elders  of  Israel ; "  those  who  here  came  to  Ezekiel,  pretending  piety, 
sat  before  him,  as  if  they  would  hearken  to  .whatsoever  tne  Lord  should 
say,  and  do  it ;  yet  they  intended  no  such  thing,  but  were  resolved  to  ^o 
on  in  their  own  ways,  and  to  be  as  the  Babylonians  and  heathens  (ver.  32),  so 
that  they  might   enjoy  peace  and  safely.      So  those  who  came  to   Christ 

221 


Digitized  by 


Google 


oBAP.ix.  EOMILBTW  OOMMBNTAHY:   SZBKIBL 


(Matt,  xxil  16-18),  they  carried  a  foul  business  Teiy  smoothly.  There  are  many 
>vho  will  be  found  hypocrites  at  last,  who  now  frequent  the  assemblies  and  come 
to  hear  tlie  word  of  God,  but  do  it  not.  4.  To  inquire  and  ask  counsel  of  the 
prophets  and  man  of  God,  is  of  ancient  standing  and  warrantable.  Their 
coming  was  not  unlawful,  but  tlieir  coming  sinfully*  It  was  a  frequent 
practice  of  old  to  consult  with  the  prophets  (1  Sam.  ix.  9  ;  1  Kings  xxii.  15  ; 
2  Kings  viil  8 :  Jer.  xzL  2 ;  xxxvii.  7) ;  and  their  coming  to  them  was 
coming  to  the  Lord.  What  though,  now  there  are  no  prophets  nor  apostles 
immediately  inspired  and  infallible  to  consult  wiihal,  yet  there  are 
pastors  and  teachers  with  whom  Christ  hath  promised  to  be  to  tlie  end 
of  the  world.  5.  The  prophets  were  to  give  out  the  Lord!s  mind  in  His 
name  and  words.  *'  SpeaK  unto  the  elders  of  Israel,  and  say,  thus  saith  the 
Lord  God."  He  must  not  say,  thus  ^aith  Ezekiel,  but, ''  Thus  saith  the  Lord." 
That  which  is  from  the  Lord  hath  a  divine  stamp  upon  it,  a  divine  power  in  it ; 
but  that  which  is  man's  is  like  himself,  frail  and  feeble.  6.  W/ten  men  come  to 
God  or  His  ordinances  with  hypocritical  hearts,  they  get  nothing  of  Him. 
**  Come  ye  to  inquire  of  me  ?  as  I  live,  I  will  not  be  inouired  of  by  you. '  Job, 
Bi)eaking  of  a  hypocrite,  saith,  "Will  God  hear  his  cry  when  trouble  cometh  upon 
him  ?"  (Job  xxxii.  9).  If  men's  hearts  be  not  upright,  sincere,  let  them  pray  and 
cry  in  prayer,  let  them  come  to  a  prophet  and  ask  counsel  and  wait,  God  respects 
tlieiu  not,  will  not  answer  them.  *' The  way  of  the  Lord  is  strength  to  the 
upright "  (Prov.  x.  29).  What  is  the  way  of  the  Lord  ?  Prayer,  hearing  of  the 
word,  asking  counsel  of  His  prophets  and  servants,  are  the  ways  of  the  Lord. 
In  these  He  appears,  is  found,  lets  out  strength ;  but  it  is  when  men  are  upright, 
not  hypocritical.  7.  Hypocrites  may  deceive  the  prophets  and  servants  of  God. 
Ezekiel  thought  that  they  were  good  men,  and  worthy  of  a  better  entertain- 
ment at  the  hands  of  God,  but  he  was  deceived.  Simon  Magus  demeaned  him- 
self so  that  he  be^at  a  good  esteem  in  the  heart  of  Philip,  and  was  admitted  to 
baptism  (Acts  viii.  13).  False  apostles  had  got  into  the  church  at  Epiiesus, 
and  had  for  a  time  gained  too  much  upon  the  angel  thereof  fEev.  ii  2). 
7.  Hypocrites  are  not  to  be  pleaded  /or.  "  Wilt  thou  ludge  tiiem,  son  of 
man,  wilt  thou  judge  them?  God  would  not  have  tne  prophet  to  plead 
for  or  excuse  them.  Hypocrites  are  not  always  the  greatest  of  sinners,  but  they 
are  ever  the  worst  of  sinners.  The  devil  is  never  more  devil  than  when  he 
transforms  himself  into  an  angel  of  light.  The  Jews  were  "  a  hypocritical 
nation  "  (Isa.  x.  6 ;  Jer.  vii.  9,  10)  ;  and,  therefore,  God  forbids  Jeremiah  to 

Eray  for  them  (Jer.  xiv.  11).  And  what  if  they  should  pray  themselves?  You 
ave  an  answer  in  Job.  xiii.  16  ;  God  tells  you  that  "  an  hypocrite  shall  not 
come  before  Him,"  that  is  to  have  acceptance  of  His  person,  or  hear  any  com- 
fortable answer  from  Him.  9.  lie  prophets  and  servants  of  God,  when  they 
are  inquired  of  by  men,  must  not  proceed  according  to  their  desires,  but  they 
must  wait  for  the  mind  of  God  and  do  answerahly  thereunto.  "  Wilt  thou 
jud^'e  them,  son  of  man  ?  Cause  them  to  know  the  abominations  of  their 
fathers?"  They  would  have  thee  inquire  of  Me  for  them,  but  I  will  not  be 
inquired  of,  they  shall  not  have  their  desirea  Go  thy  ways,  lay  before  them  the 
abojiinable  things  their  fathers  have  done.  Not  the  people's  desires,  nor  the 
prophet's  fancies,  must  be  his  direction,  when  he  is  to  make  answer  to  those 
that  inquire;  but  the  will  of  God  made  known  by  His  word  and  Spirit. — 
{Greenhill.) 

(Vera  6-9.) 

EXEGETIOAL  NOTES.— The  elec-  their  God.  Israel's  ingratitude,  though 

tion  of  Israel  in  Ej^ypt,  where  God  made  the  Lord  brought  them  out  of  Egypt 

Himself  known  to  them   by  wonders  into  a  land  flowiug  with  milk  and 

and  signs,  and  promised  to  become  honey. 


222 


Digitized  by 


Google 


WOMTLETIC  COMMENTARr:   EZEKtEL. 


O&AP.  xz. 


Ver.  5.  "When  I  choie  Israel" 
God  chose  them  for  high  purposes,  of 
His  own  free  grace,  and  not  for  any 
deserving  on  their  part  (Deut  vii  6,  7  ; 
X.  16  ;  viv.  2).  ••  Lifted  up  mine  hand 
unto  the  seed  of  the  honse  of  Jacob." 
The  reference  is  plaiiiljr  to  the  lifting 
up  of  the  hands,  as  in  the  act  of 
swearing  (Gen.  xiv.  22).  *'  I  am  the 
Lord  yonr  God."  Tliis  was  God's 
ancient  promise  renewed  to  Moses 
(Ex.  vi.  6-8). 

Ver.  6.  ''Had  espied.-  "God,  as 
it  were,  spied  out  tiiis  land  for  tliein, 
sought  it  out  with  the  greatest  care  as 
the  hest."—(fJeng8tenberg),  **  The 
glory  of  all  lands."  It  was  a  "  goodly 
land"  (Deut.  viil  7-9),  even  in  its 
physical  characteristics :  but  emin- 
ently ** glorious"  (Dan.  xi  16,  41,45), 
because  it  was  the  scene  wliere  the 
glories  of  the  Son  of  God  were  dis- 
played. It  was  the  land  from  which 
the  streams  of  salvation  should  flow 
all  over  the  earth. 

Yer.  7.  "  The  abominations  of  His 
eyes."  The  worship  of  visible  objects 
which  Israel  had  substituted  for  the 
invisible  God.  *'  Defile  not  yourselves 
with  the  idols  of  Egypt"  "  The  elec- 
tion of  the  Israelites  to  be  the  people 
of  Jehovah,  contained  eo  ipso  the  com- 
mand to  give  up  the  idols  of  Egpyt, 
although  it  was  at  Sinai  that  the 
worship  of  other  gods  was  for  the  first 
time  expressly  prohibited  (Ezek.  xx.  3), 
and  Egyptian  idolatrv  is  only  men- 
tioned in  Lev.  xvil  7.  — (Keil). 

Yer.  8.  ''Neither  did  they  forsake 
the  idols  of  Egypt."  "  History  does 
not  expressly  mention  such  a  revolt 
of  the  people  in  Egypt ;  yet  we  are  led 
indirectly  to  this  by  the  statements  of 
the  books  of  Moses  concerning  the 
perpetual  tendency  of  the  people  m  the 
wilderness  to  the  customs  of  Egypt 
To  this  belongs,  .«.^.,  the  making  of 
the  golden  calf,  in  which  there  is  an 
imitation  of  the  Egy))tian  worship  of 
the  brute;  further  (Lev.  xvii.  17), 
according  to  which  Israel  in  the  wilder- 
ness served  he-goats.     The  worship  of 


a  deity  under  the  form  of  a  he  goat 
was  peculiar  to  Egypt  (Lev.  xviii.  3), 
when  the  people  are  admonished ; 
"After  the  doings  of  the  land  of 
Egypt,  wherein  ye  dwelt,  shall  ye  not 
do."  That  the  Israelites  generally 
served  idols  in  £<(.vpt  is  attested  by 
Josh.  xxiv.  14  ;  and  this  being  so,  it 
is  to  be  expected  beforehand  that  this 
inclination  would  not  immediately 
cease  after  the  true  God  had  made 
Himself  known  to  them.  The  mur- 
muring also  of  the  people  in  Egypt 
again  Moses  and  Aaron  (Ex.  v.  21), 
implies  an  under-current  of  Egyptian 
tendencies."  —  {Hengstenberg),  The 
evidence  furnished  by  Josh.  xxiv.  14). 
established  the  fact  that  the  Israelites 

Practised  idolatry  in  Egypt.  Israel 
ad  to  be  redeemed,  not  so  much  from 
the  bondage  of  Pharaoh  as  from  **  the 
gods  of  Egypt "  (Ex.  xii.  12).  whom 
Plmraoh  and  his  magicians  served. 
The  whole  controversy  with  Phara«)h 
turned  on  the  question,  would  he  allow 
Israel  to  serve  the  Lard  t 

Yer.  9.  '*Bat  I  wrought  for  thy 
name's  sake,  that  it  should  not  be 
polluted  before  the  heathen  among 
whom  they  were."  "  The  missing  ol^ 
ject  explaining  what  He  did,  namely, 
abstain  from  pouring  out  His  wrath, 
is  to  be  gathered  from  what  follows  : 
'  for  my  name's  sake,  that  it  should 
not  be  polluted  before  the  heathen.' 
This  would  have  taken  place  if  God 
had  destroyed  Israel  by  pouring  out 
His  wrath ;  in  other  words,  have 
allowed  them  to  be  destroyed  by  the 
Egyptians.  The  heathen  might  then 
have  said  that  Jehovah  had  been  un- 
able to  liberate  His  people  from  their 
hand  and  power  (Num.  xiv.  16 ; 
Ex.  xxxii.  V2:')—(Keil).  "  Not  only 
the  miserable  circumstances  of  their 
external  condition,  but  still  more  the 
state  of  spiritual  degradation  into 
which  the  Hebrews  had  sunk,  in- 
finitely magnified  the  Divine  mercy 
which  interposed  for  their  deliverance. 
*  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  did  much 
more  abound.'  The  glory  of  this,  as 
well  as  of  the  other  attributes  of 
Jehovah,  was  the  ultimate  end  which 

223 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OMAF.  XI.  noyriLETIO  OOMMKNTARY:    EZEKIEU 


He  had  in  view  in  bringinj^  them  forth  The  preservation  of  that  name  from 

from  the  house  of  bondage.     This  is  desecration  is  repeatedly  spoken  of 

described  as  His  naniBy  i.e.,  the  sum-  this    chapter    (vera    1^    22,    89).— 

total  of  His  known  pt^rfections  (Rom.  (Henderson  * 
ix  17 ;  2  Sam.  vii.  23  ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  12). 


BOMILETIOa. 

Isbael's  Election. 

I.  It  was  of  God's  free  choice.  "In  the  day  when  I  chose  Israel "  (ver.  5). 
This  choice  had  no  reference  to  their  merit  or  special  fitness.  They  were 
selected  to  carry  out  the  special  purposes  of  redemption,  because  such  was  the 
will  of  God,  who  18  not  obligeii  to  give  any  account  to  men  of  His  matters.  We 
must,  however,  avoid  the  error  of  attributing  any  caprice  to  God.  He  works 
not  according  to  mere  will,  but "  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will "  (Eph.  i.  11). 

II.  It  implied  His  willingness  to  be  their  God.  ''  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  " 
(ver.  6).  This  includes  all  that  the  Creator  can  give  to  the  creature — every 
blessing  for  time  and  eternity.  Several  stages  were  necessary  for  the  r#>iiisation 
of  this  gift.  1.  God  revealed  Himself  to  them.  **  And  made  myself  known 
unto  them  in  the  land  of  Egypt."  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  soul 
should  know  Him  whom  it  is  to  serve,  and  from  whom  it  is  to  expect  every 
blessing.  "  He  that  cometh  to  God  must  believe  that  He  is,  atid  that  He  is  a 
rewarder  of  them  that  diligently  seek  Him "  (Heb.  xi.  6).  But  how  can 
we  come  to  God  and  have  faith  in  Him  unless  He  makes  Himself  known  to  us 
as  an  object  worthy  of  our  trust  and  reverence  ?  We  cannot  know  a  person 
except  he  speaks  and  we  cannot  know  God  unless  He  reveals  Himself  in 
an  intelligible  voice.  Therefore  it  is  that  ''faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and 
hearing  by  the  word  of  God "  (Rom.  x.  17).  2.  God  entered  into  covenant 
with  them.  "  And  lifted  up  thine  hand  unto  the  seed  of  the  house  of  Jacob  " 
(ver.  5).  God's  communication  to  His  people  was  a  covenant  wherein  He  bound 
Himself  to  bless  them,  binding  them  at  the  same  time  to  certain  conditions. 
3.  God  engaged  to  lead  them,  **  To  bring  them  forth  of  the  land  of  Egypt" 
(ver.  6).  He  sousht  out  and  prepared  for  them  a  place  of  habitation,  had  espied 
for  them  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  which  is  the  glory  of  all  lands. 
Thus  when  God  promises  His  people  to  be  their  God,  this  promise  implies  all 
that  is  meant  by  godliness  and  its  reward — revelation,  covenant  blessing", 
discipline  and  guidance,  the  peace  and  rest  of  the  lot  of  the  conquered 
inheritance. 

III.  It  demanded  corresponding  duties.  By  every  revelation  of  Himself^  by 
every  gift  of  God,  man  comes  under  obligation.  It  was  the  duty  of  Israel  1.  To 
forsake  aU  Jalse  objects  of  worship  (ver.  7).  But  instead  of  this  they  defiled 
themselves  with  the  idols  of  Egjpt.  2.  To  yield  obedience  to  Gods  commands. 
But  instead  of  this,  they  rebelleii  against  Him.  God  chooses  men  not  for  evil, 
but  that  He  might  redeem  and  save  them.  But  they  cannot  be  saved  unless 
they  are  obedient  to  God's  way  of  salvation.  The  children  of  Israel  were  dis- 
obedient. They  did  the  very  things  which  were  contrary  to  the  purpose  for 
which  they  were  elected.  They  were  infected  by  the  idolatry  of  Egypt.  Though 
they  were  called  out  of  the  world  to  be  a  peculiar  peonle,  yet  the  influence  of 
the  world  overcame  them.  They  wished  to  stand  well  with  Egypt,  which  was 
then  the  world-powen 

2U 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIEL.  chap.  xx. 


IV.  It  heightened  Israel's  ingratitude.  When  they  sinned  against  their 
biVli  calling  their  bin  was  all  tiie  4(reater.  1.  The  anger  of  God  wcu  provoked. 
''  I  will  pour  out  my  fury  upon  them  to  accomplish  my  anger  against  them.*' 
The  Egyptians  were  the  instruments  of  this  ven<^eance.  It  was,  "  in  the  midst 
ol'  ihe  land  of  Egypt"  that  God  would  accomplish  His  anger.  They  were 
punished  by  the  very  people  whom  they  sought  to  propitiate.  Thus  God 
chastises  men  by  those  tilings  in  which  they  most  delight.     2.  hven  in  the 

funishment  of  IJis  peojjle,  God  has  regard  to  the  honour  of  Bis  name.  **  But 
wrought  for  my  name's  sake  that  it  should  not  be  polluted  before  the  heathen 
among  whom  they  were,  in  whose  sight  I  made  Myself  known  to  them,  in  bring- 
ing them  forth  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt"  (ver.  9).  "  But  the  revelation  which  I  had 
given  of  Myself  before  the  eyes  of  the  heat/ien  among  whom  they  were  was  not  to 
be  desecrated  before  these  same  eyes,  esi)ecially  before  the  Egyptians,  as  if  to 
wish  well  to  My  name  were  present  with  Me,  but  not  the  power  of  performance 
(regard  being  had  at  the  same  time  to  the  heathen,  as  Israel  was  placed  in  a 
peculiar  position  in  regard  to  Immanity  as  a  whole)  Comp.  Num.  xiv.  13, 
etc. ;  Ex.  xxxii  12  ;  Num.  xxiii.  19." — (Lange). 

(Ver.  6). 

1.  Old  mercies  should  be  remembered.  Not  only  by  those  they  were  first 
bestowed  upon,  but  also  by  their  posteritjr.  In  this,  and  in  the  former  verse, 
God  reminds  them  of  old  mercies,  His  choice  of  them.  His  professing  to  be  their 
God,  His  bringing  them  out  of  Egyot,  which  were  some  eight  or  nine  hundred 
years  before,  and  His  espying  out  a  land  for  them,  which  was  four  hundred  years 
before  that ;  for  it  was  m  Abraham's  days  that  God  took  notice  of  that  land 
(Gen.  xii.  1,  7).  These  old  mercies  God  would  have  them  to  mind,  though  they 
were  in  Babylon,  and  deprived  of  the  good  land  God  had  given  them.  Let  men 
be  in  what  condition  they  will,  old  mercies  should  not  be  forgotten  (Psa.  xliv.  1,  2 ; 
Judg.  vi.  13).  And  because  men  are  apt  to  forget  former  mercies,  when  they 
grow  old  they  grow  out  of  mind,  the  Lord  laid  a  charge  upon  the  Jews  that 
they  should  not  forget  them  fDeut.  vi.  10-12).  2.  Countries  and  habitatiotis  of 
people  are  appointed  by  the  Lord.  He  distributes  lands  and  habitations  to  whom 
He  thinks  meet  "The  earth  is  the  Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof"  (Psa.  xxiv.  1). 
He  is  the  sole  owner,  the  true  Lord  of  the  soil,  and  all  it  brings  forth,  and 
He  hath  "  given  it  to  the  children  of  men  "  (Psa.  cxv.  16).  He  hath  assigned 
them  their  several  portions  (Deut.  xxxii.  8).  The  most  nigh  God,  being  Lord 
paramount,  would  not  have  the  sons  of  Adam  to  live  all  in  one  country,  but 
appointed  them  several  lands  to  dwell  in,  and  set  their  bounds  and  limits. 
Alter  the  flood,  at  the  building  of  Babel,  God  confounded  the  languages,  and 
dispersed  the  posterity  of  Noah  into  divers  lands,  and  set  them  their  bounds 
(Gen.  xi.  9).  And  so,  when  He  brought  the  Israelites  into  the  land  of  Canaan, 
He  gave  them  their  bounds  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  55).  3.  The  Lord  provides  and  bestows 
the  choicest  mercies  upon  His  own  people*  If  there  be  a  land  in  the  world  that 
flows  with  milk  and  honey,  that  exceeds  all  other  lands  for  plenty  and  pleasantness. 
His  people  shall  have  it.  When  God  carried  Jacob  and  his  family  into  Egypt, 
He  provided  the  good  and  fat  of  that  land  for  them  (Gen.  xlv.  18;  ;  yea,  they 
were  placed  in  "  the  best  of  the  land  "  (Gen.  xlvii.  11).  God  fed  and  filled  His 
l)eople  with  "  the  finest  of  the  wheat "  (Psa.  cxlvii.  14).  Moses  mentions  seven 
things  together  in  Deut.  xxxii.  13-15,  as  **  honey  out  of  the  rock,  oil  out  of 
the  flinty  rock,  butter  of  kine,  milk  of  sheep,  fat  of  lambs,  and  rams  of  the 
breed  of  Bashan,  and  goats,  fat  of  kidneys  of  wheat,  the  pure  blood  of  the 
grape  ; "  these  the  Lord  jirovided  for  His  people,  and  they  had  all  an  excellency 
in  them.    God  bestowed  choice  mercies  upon  this  peoi)le  (Esek.  xvi.  10-13). 

9  225 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  nOMILETia  COMMENTARY:    EZBKIEL. 


David  acknowle^lges  that  lie  had  a  "  goodly  heritage,"  even  a  "  wealthy  place. "* 
Daniel  and  the  three  children  were  set  m  eminent  places  (Dan.  iL  ;  iii).  4. 
Spiritual  mercies  make  a  land  glorious.  Canaan  was  the  glory  of  all  lands,  not  so 
much  for  its  great  plenty  as  for  the  spiritual  mercies  it  enjoyed.  There  was 
the  Lord's  presence,  His  prophets,  His  worship,  His  oracles,  and  His  ordinances, 
and  these  made  it  glorious,  yea,  more  than  all  the  nations  far  or  near.  ''  In 
Judah  is  God  known  :  His  name  is  ^reat  in  Israel.  In  Salem  also  is  His 
tabernacle,  and  His  dwelling-place  in  Zion  "  (Psa.  Ixxvl.  1,  2).  God  was  not 
known  in  Babylon,  in  E^ypt,  in  other  nations ;  His  tabernacle  and  dwelling- 
place  was  not  amongst  them,  therefore  they  were  not  glorious.  ''  Thou  art 
more  glorious  than  the  mountains  of  prey  " ;  thou  Judah,  thou  Israel,  thou 
ISalem,  thou  Zion,  that'  hast  spiritual  mercies  and  blessings,  art  more  glorious 
than  they,  whatever  their  glory  ba  Have  the  nations  abroad  goodly  towers  ? 
thou  hast  the  temple.  Have  they  stately  cities  ?  thou  hast  Jerusalem,  the  city 
of  God.  Have  they  wise  men  ?  thou  hast  the  prophets.  Have  they  gods  of 
gold,  silver,  and  stones  ?  thou  hast  the  true  living  God,  Jehovah,  to  be  thy  God. 
Have  they  human  laws  that  are  good  ?  thou  hast  divine  laws  that  excel.  Have 
they  temporal  excellencies  ?  thou  hast  spiritual.  Have  they  the  glory  of  the 
world  ?  thou  hast  the  glory  of  heaven.  *'  Out  of  Zion,  the  perfection  of  beauty, 
God  hath  shined  "  (Psa.  1.  1,  2).  What  made  Zion  so  glorious  and  beautiful  ? 
It  was  the  presence  of  God  ;  if  He  had  not  been  there,  Ziou  had  been  like  other 
mountains,  and  Canaan  like  other  nations  ;  but  His  presence  was  like  the  sun, 
darting  out  His  beams,  and  making  all  glorious  and  beautiful.  Spiritual 
mercies  are  beams  and  rays  of  that  God  who  is  brighter  than  the  sun  ;  by  these 
lie  shined  in  Zion  and  made  it  the  perfection  of  beauty.  By  these  He 
shined  out  of  Zion,  and  darkened  all  the  glory  of  the  nations.  Wliere 
God  and  His  ordinances  are,  there  is  glory ;  and  where  these  are  not, 
there  is  no  glory,  but  Egyptian  darkness — a  land  wRhout  the  sun.  In 
Canaan  was  spiritual  light  and  glory.  There  were  glorious  ap()earauces  of 
God,  glorious  praisings  of  God,  glorious  conversions  of  sinners  unto  God, 
glorious  sabbaths  and  assemblies,  and  glorious  beauties  of  holiness,  glorious 
types  of  Christ,  and  people  who  were  the  glory  of  God  (Isa.  iv.  6).    There  were 

tlorious  truths,  ordinances,  and  dispensations  of  God,  Plenty  of  outward  things 
0  not  make  a  land  glorious  as  spiritual  mercies  do.  If  God,  Christ,  Gospel, 
and  the  ordinances  of  it  be  in  a  land  they  make  it  glorious  above  all  other 
nations.  Let  us  learn  to  know  our  true  glory,  even  spiritual  mercies,  and  prize 
them  highly,  though  loathed  by  some,  like  the  manna  of  old,  and  pray  that  such 
glory  may  ever  dwell  in  our  land. — (GreenhiU.) 


(Ver.  9). 

God's  name  is  polluted.  (1).  When  it  is  not  hallowed.  Not  acknowledged, 
or  esteemed  to  be  holy  and  honourable.  (2).  When  it  is  slighted,  and  not  used 
reverently.  God's  name  is  great,  glorious,  excellent,  holy,  and  ought  to  be 
reverenced  (Psa.  cxi.  9).  (3).  When  occasion  is  given  to  the  wicked  to  speak 
evil  of  God  and  His  ways.  David  by  his  sins  gave  great  occasion  to  the  enemies 
of  God  to  blaspheme  (2  Sam.  xii.  14).  The  Jews  by  their  sinful  carriage  caused 
the  name  of  God  to  be  profaned  among  the  heathen.  Had  the  Lord,  then, 
destroyed  this  people  in  Egypt,  according  as  He  purposed,  the  Egyptians  and 
other  nations  would  have  slighted  Him,  spoken  evil  of  His  doings,  blasphemed 
His  name,  and  wounded  His  honour.  Therefore,  though  this  people  deserved 
to  die  in  the  way  of  justice,  yet  God  spared  them  in  tlie  wajr  of  mercy  for  the 
honour  of  His  name.  "  Before  the  heathea"  The  Hebrew  is,  "  in  the  eyes  of 
the  heathen."  Qod  would  not  have  them  to  see  or  behold  anything  which  might 
226 


Digitized  by 


Google 


{S 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  CBAP.  XZ. 


occasion  them  to  dishonour  Him.  He  would  not  slay  His  people  in  their 
sight,  but  made  Himself  known  by  His  word  and  mighty  works  unto  the  Jews, 
ill  the  sight  of  the  heathen,  so  that  hereby  He  was  known  unto  both.  1.  The 
Ijird  spares  and  saves  sinners  deserving  deaths  even  for  His  name*s  sake.  God's 
honour  and  glory  are  strong  arguments  to  move  Him  to  show  mercy  to  His 
people.  This  the  servants  of  God  have  known,  and  made  use  of,  in  their  straits. 
When  Jerusalem  was  in  a  manner  laid  desolate,  and  the  jealousy  of  God  burned 
like  fire,  what  argument  did  the  Church  use  then  to  move  God  to  show  mercy 
but  His  " name,"  and  the  glory  of  it?  (Psa.  Ixxix.  9).  What  hurt  would  it 
be  to  God's  name  if  He  did  it  not  ?  It  would  not  be  glorious,  but  dishonoured ; 
for  in  the  next  verse  it  is  said,  **  Wherefore  should  the  heathen  say,  Where  is 
their  (5od  ? "  They  trusted  in  their  God,  and  He  is  a  non-helping  God,  a  non- 
delivering  God.  This  was  the  argument  Joshua  used  when  Israel  fell  before 
their  enemies,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  do  unto  Thy  great  name  ? "  When  the 
ople  forgot  the  multitude  of  great  mercies  they  had  in  Egypt,  and  provoked 
im  at  the  sea,  even  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  deseryed  to  be  drowned  in  it, 
what  saith  the  text  ?  "  Nevertheless,  He  saved  them  for  His  name's  sake." 
(Psa.  cvi.  8).  2.  God^s  sparina  of  His  people  is  an  honouring  and  sanctifying 
of  His  name,  God  deals  with  His  people  sometimes,  not  after  the  ordinary 
rule  and  course  of  His  proceedings,  but  in  a  prerogative  way  ;  He  spares  them, 
though  their  sins  be  great,  because  their  enemies  would  be  proud,  arrogant,  and 
blasphemous.     (Deut.  xxxii.  26,  27.) 

3.  That  notwithstandmg  the  sins  of  God's  people,  He  shows  them  kindness 

3}enly,  and  in  the  face  of  their  enemies.  Though  the  Jews  had  rebelled  against 
od,  and  the  Egyptians  would  have  rejoiced  iii  their  ruin,  yet,  in  their  sight, 
God  made  Himself  known  unto  them,  in  bringing  them  forth  out  of  the  land  of 
Egypt.  God  would  have  the  Egyptians  see  that  He  could  be  kind  to  His 
people,  though  they  were  disobedient  unto  Him. — (Greenhill.) 

(Vers.  10-17). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  — The  sin  the  wilderness  served   to  test  their 

of  the  first  generation  of  Israelites  in  obedieuca 
the  wilderness :  yet  the  Lord  did  not 

make  an  end  of  them.  Ver.  12.    *'  I  gave  them  my  Sab- 
baths.*'   "God  concludes  the  direc- 

Ver.  11,  "  And  I  gare  them  My  tions  for  His  worship  by  urging  upon 
statutes,  and  showed  them  My  jndg-  the  people  in  the  most  solemn  manner 
ments.**  This  was  a  general  expression  the  observance  of  His  Sabbaths,  and 
for  the  law  which  was  delivered  to  thereby  pronounces  the  keeping  of  the 
them.  "God  gave  laws  at  Sinai  to  Sabbath  as  the  kernel  of  all  divine 
the  people  whom  He  had  brought  out  worship.  And,  as  in  that  passage 
of  Egypt,  through  which  they  were  (Ex.  xxxi.  13),  we  are  to  understand 
sanctified  as  His  own  people,  that  by  the  Sabbaths  the  actual  weekly 
they  might  live  before  God." — (Keil.)  Sabbaths,  and  not  the  institutions  of 
''  Which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  even  worship  as  a  whole,  so  here  we  must  re- 
live in  them."  He  who  obeyed  God's  tain  the  literal  signification  of  the  word. 
laws  would  find  them  tend  "unto  life"  It  is  only  of  the  Sabbaths  occurring 
(Rom.  vii.  10 ;  x.  5).  The  life  which  every  week,  and  not  of  all  the  fasts, 
comes  of  obedience  was  not  mere  exist-  that  it  could  be  said  that  it  was  a  sign 
ence,  but  prosperity  and  blessedness,  between  Jehovah  and  Israel  It  was 
bothbodily  and  spiritual,  temporal  and  a  sign,  not  as  a  token,  that  they  who 
eternal  (Deut.  iv.  1  ;  Matt.  xix.  17  ;  observed  it  were  Israelites,  but  that 
Ex.  zx.  12,  etc.).  The  leading  through  they  might  know   that  Jehovah  was 

227 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XZ. 


EOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:   BZBKIEL. 


sanctifying  them,  namely,  by  the 
Sabbath  rest— as  a  refreshing  and 
elevation  of  the  mind,  in  which  L-^rael 
was  to  have  a  foretaste  of  that  blessed 
resting  from  all  works  to  which  the 
ueople  of  God  was  ultimately  to  attain. 
It  is  from  this  deeper  signification  of 
the  Sabbath  that  the  prominence  given 
to  the  Sabbaths  here  is  to  be  explained, 
and  not  from  the  outward  circumstance 
that  in  exile,  when  the  sacrificial 
worship  was  necessarily  suspended, 
the  keeping  of  the  Sabbath  was  the 
only  bond  which  united  the  Israelites, 
so  far  as  the  worship  of  God  was  Con- 
cerned."—(iTi^iA  jTie  weekly  pause 
in  the  midst  ot  earthly  labour  was  a 
"sign"  of  the  s])iritual  work  which  God 
was  performing  among  His  obedient 
people ;  a  "  sign  "  also  that  they  were 
sanctified,  were  set  apart  from  all 
other  nations,  as  that  day  was  from 
the  rest  of  the  week. 

Ver.  13.  **  They  walked  not  in  My 
statutes,  and  they  despised  My  judg- 
ments." Historical  examples  of  Israel's 
rebellion  a^ninst  God's  commandments 
in  the  wilderness  are  given  in  Ex. 
xxxii.  1-6  ;  Num.  xxv.  1-3 ;  and  of 
the  desecration  of  the  Sabbath  in  Ex. 
xvi.  27 ;  Nnm.  xv.  32.  **  My  Sabbaths 
they  greatly  polluted."  "  History  re- 
cords nothing  of  an  external  violation 
of  the  Sabbath  during  the  journey 
through  the  wilderness.  Nnm.  xv.  32, 
where  the  man  who  gathered  wood  on 
the  Sabbath  was  brought  before  the 
congregation,  and  stoned  by  them  after 
formal  sentence,  is  rather  a  proof  that 
in  this  respect  they  were  not  wanting 
in  zeal.  But  the  prophet,  in  accord- 
ance with  Isa.  Iviii.  13,  14,  and  with 
Moses  himself,  who  commanded  to 
sanctify  the  Sabbath,  to  consecrate  it 
in  every  respect  to  God,  and  withdraw 
it  wholly  from  the  region  of  self- 
interest,  of  personal  sinful  inclination, 
according  to  which  the  festival  cannot 
pos^ibly  be  observed  with  indolent 
repose,   forms  a  deeper   and    mora 


spiritual  idea  of  the  Sabbath.  'Thou 
shalt  cease  from  thy  doing,  that  God 
may  have  His  work  in  thee,'  in  this 
sense  the  truly  God-fearing  only  can 
celebrate  the  Sabbath ;  so  that  all  that 
in  the  books  of  Moses  attests  the  want 
of  true  godliness  lunong  the  people  in 
the  wihlerness,  involves  at  the  same 
time  the  charge  of  desecrating  the 
Sabbath." — {Uengstenberg), 

Ver.  14.  •'  But  I  wrought  for  My 
name's  sake."  **  For  His  name's  sake 
God  destroys  not  the  people ;  but  He 
excludes  the  present  generation  from 
the  possession  of  Canaan,  in  just  re- 
tribution for  that  which  thev  have 
practised  against  Him.  To  this  iu^t 
retiibution  points  the — 'And  1  also* 
(ver.  15).  It  depends  on  the  will  of 
every  one  what  position  he  will  take 
towards  God ;  bnt  he  must  be  prepared 
for  this,  that  liis  act  will  be  attended 
with  a  corresponding  Divine  act." — 
(Uengstenherg,) 

Ver.  15.  "Yet,  also,  I  lifted  up 
My  hand  unto  them  in  the  wilderness.*' 
Tl  e  lifiiiig  up  of  God's  hand  signifies 
the  Divine  oath  (Num.  xiv.  28-30; 
Psa.  cvi.  26). 

Ver.  16.  "Their  heart  went  after 
their  idols."  The  idolatries  of  the 
children  of  Israel  dnring  their  wander- 
ings in  the  desert  are  referred  to  bv 
thp  prophet  Amoi,  and  in  St  Stephen  s 
speech  (Amos  v.  25,  26;  Acts  vii. 
42,  43). 

Ver.  17.  "Mine  eye  spared  them 
from  destroying  them,  neither  did  I 
make  an  end  of  them  in  the  wilder- 
ness." Thongh  the  generation  that 
sinned  in  the  desert  perished,  yet  God 
did  not  give  the  whole  of  the  people 
over  to  the  destruction  which  they 
deserved.  The  "  hand  "  of  righteous 
anger  was  lifted  to  smite,  but  the 
"  eye  "  of  gracious  pity  restrained  ik 


228 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMJLETIC  COMMEyTART :    EZBKIEL.  ohaf.  xx. 

HOMILBTICS. 

Thb  Sin  op  thb  first  aEKSRAxioN  op  the  Children  op  Israel  in  tub 
Wilderness  (Vers.  10-17J. 

I.  It  was  a  tin  aggravated  in  its  oliaraoter.  1.  They  sinned  after  a  great 
deliverance.  In  Egypt  they  were  persecuted  and  held  in  cruel  bondage.  They 
learned  to  worship  the  gods  of  the  nation  which  ruled  over  them  fJosh  xxiv.  14). 
But  they  were  brought  out  of  that  land  by  the  manifest  power  of  God,  and  w<Te 
thus  delivered  both  from  bo  lily  and  spiritual  slavery.  2  They  sinned  after 
special  means  had  been  used  to  preserve  their  spiritual  character  as  the 
elect  qf  God.  (1).  Thty  had  a  clear  rerelation  of  Gods  liuo.  6o<l  had 
given  them  His  **  statutes,"  and  showed  them  His  **  judgments."  The  observ- 
ance of  these  would  have  been  their  peace,  happiness,  and  salvation.  (Ver.  11.) 
For  the  law  of  God  tendn  to  "  life"  (Rom.  vii.  20.)  It  is  true  that  the  law 
would  give  the  knowledj^^e  of  sin  (Rom.  iii.  20),  yet  that  knowledge  ought  to 
have  brought  them  to  confess  their  sins  and  to  seek  forgiveness  through  the 
blood  of  the  atonement  They  had  to  render  obedience  not  to  a  blind  power, 
making  in  some  way  for  righteousness,  but  to  a  living  will, — to  the  one  true 
God  who  was  merciful  and  desired  their  salvation.  (2.)  They  were  placed  in 
circumstances  favourable  to  the  spiritual  life.  God  had  brought  them  out  from 
the  bondage  and  seductive  civilization  of  Egypt  and  had  led  them  into  the 
wilderness  (ver.  10).  The  seclusion  of  the  desert  was  favourable  to  contempla- 
tion,— to  seriousness  of  character.  They  would  have  a  time  to  reflect  upon 
God's  loving  kindness  in  redemption.  Obedience  would  have  given  them  the 
means  of  making  a  great  history  (Ex  xix.  3-9).  Placed  in  such  outward  con- 
ditions as  would  naturally  have  the  effect  of  leading  them  to  cast  themselves 
upon  God's  care  and  governance,  and  delivered  from  the  corrupting  influences 
ot  the  world,  they  had  the  most  favourable  opportunity  for  becominir  a  spiritual 
people.  (3.)  They  had  the  ordinance  of  t/ie  Sabbath.  The  Sabbath  was  given 
to  them  as  a  "  sign  "  and  to  promore  the  holiness  of  the  nation  (ver.  12).  For 
this  intermission  of  earthly  work  was  a  pledge  of  that  work  which  God  was  carrying 
on  amongst  His  obedient  people  (Ex.  xxxi.  13).  It  was  a  sign  that  God 
sanctified  the  people,  that  He  separated  them  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  and 
that  He  would  bring  them,  at  last,  to  their  quiet  inheritance  of  rest.  To  keep 
the  Sabbath  with  due  regard  to  its  spiritual  significance  was  truly  to  fear  and 
to  serve  God.  But  they  rebelled  ai^ainst  God  in  the  wilderness,  they  polluted 
His  Sabbaths  (ver.  13).  In  the  pollution  of  the  Sabbath  there  was  a  special 
danger  to  their  religious  life.  For  if  that  sacred  day  was  not  piously  observed, 
it  only  exposed  them  the  more  to  strong  temptation.  If  it  was  not  occupied 
with  thoughts  of  God,  it  laid  their  souls  open  to  the  incur^ions  of  every  evil 
thought  Some  of  the  early  Christian  writers  charge  the  Jews  of  their  time 
with  spending  their  Sabbaths  in  licentiousness.  Thus  Israel  h:ul  superior 
religious  advantages  in  the  wilderness*,  but  idolatry  was  in  the  heart  of  the 
people.    The  corruptions  of  Egypt  clung  to  them  (ver.  16). 

II*  It  was  a  sin  which  was  visited  with  a  fitting  punishment.  A  punish- 
ment, not  only  in  degree,  but  also  in  kind.  They  polluted  God's  Sabbaths,  and 
He  wonld  not  bring  them  to  the  land  of  rest.  His  plan  concerning  them  was 
to  lead  them  to  the  bind  of  their  inheritance,  where  they  might  dwell  in  peace 
and  safety.  But  all  revolt  from  God  must  be  followed  by  darKness  and  disorder, 
by  a  disarrangement  of  all  those  good  things  which  He  has  prepared  for  us. 

ni.  Their  sin  did  not  altogether  shut  out  Ood*s  mercy.  They  were  not  all 
destroyed  in  the  wilderness  as  they  deserved.  Gh)d  has  an  *'  eye  "  of  pity  which 
arrests  His  '*  hand  "  of  righteous  anger. 

229 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL. 


(Vera.  15-17). 

Here  a  difficulty  ariseth.  In  Ter.  6  it  is  said  that  God  had  lifted  up  His  hand, 
Rnd  80  Rworn  to  bring  them  ont  of  the  land  of  Egypt  into  the  land  of  Canaan  ; 
and  here  it  is  said  He  hath  lifted  up  His  hand  to  the  contrary.  It  seems  that 
liere  is  one  oath  against  another.  And  in  Num.  ziv.  34,  God  acknowledges  His 
breach  of  promise,  for  He  saith,  "  Ye  shall  know  my  breach  of  promise."  I  have 
promised  and  sworn  to  bring  you  into  the  land  of  Canaan,  but  you  have  so 
sinned  against  and  provoked  Me  that  I  will  not  do  it,  yea,  have  sworn  you  shall 
not  enter  into  my  rest  (Psa.  xcv.  11).  This  difficulty  is  removed  by  considering 
that  God  did  not  make  His  promise  or  swear  to  those  individual  men  that  were 
kept  out  of  Canaan,  that  tliey  should  be  brought  into  it,  for  if  it  had  been  so 
G<»d  had  forsworn  Himself;  but  His  promise  and  oath  was  that  the  seed 
of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  should  be  brought  into  it  (Gen.  zii.  17  ;  xiii.  15  ; 
XV.  18  ;  xxiv.  4  ;  L  24  ;  Dent,  xxxiv.  4)  ;  and  their  seed  was  brouj^ht  into  the 
promised  land  (Josh.  i.  2  ;  iv.  1 ;  xiv.  1 ;  xxiv.  13) ;  and  so  God's  promise 
and  oatl)  were  kept.  Those  He  swore  against  were  those  that  murmured 
against  Him,  even  all  from  twenty  years  old  and  upwards,  except  Caleb  and 
Joshua,  whose  carcases  fell  in  the  wilderness  (Josli.  v.  6).  As  for  Num.  xiv.  34, 
God's  breach  of  promise  is,  in  the  original,  by  frustration :  you  looked  certainly 
to  have  entered  into  Canaan,  but  for  your  murmuring  and  unitelief  I  have 
frustrated  your  expectations  Or  thus,  you  think  My  oath  cannot  be  true, 
because  of  a  former  oath,  and  that  the  words  I  have  uttered  will  prove  false  ; 
but  you  shall  know  whether  my  words  and  oath  be  false  or  not  [xhe  Revised 
Version  (1885)  has,  "  And  ye  shall  know  my  alienation,"  with  the  rendering  in 
the  margin.     "  lite  revoking  of  my  promise,  'J 

**  Flowing  with  milk  and  honey,  which  is  the  glory  of  all  lands."  Of  these 
words  hath  been  spoken  largely  in  ver.  6.  They  are  repeated  here  to  show  the 
ingratitude  of  the  people,  that  were  not  affected  with  this  land,  which  wr^  a 
second  Paradise,  but  despised  it,  and  raised  an  ill-report  upon  it ;  as  also  to 
show  what  they  lost  in  being  kept  out  of  it,  and  their  folly  in  preferring  Egypt 
before  it.  " 

1.  Meria  sins  disappoint  them  qf  choice  mercies.  Tea,  mercies  promised, 
expected,  and  near  at  hand.  God  had  promised  them  Canaan,  they  were  near 
unto  it  (Num.  xiil),  expected  to  go  in  and  possess  it ;  but  God  would  not  bring 
them  into  the  land  because  they  despised  His  judgments,  walked  not  in  His 
statutes,  but  polluted  His  sabbaths. 

In  Heb.  ii.  19,  it  is  said,  ''  They  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief :'' 
and  Psa.  cvi.  24,  **  they  despised  the  pleasant  land,  they  believed  not  His 
word.*'  It  was  their  sins  kept  them  back  from  so  great,  so  near,  so  longed-for 
a  mercy.  Such  is  the  malignity  of  sin  that  it  drives  mercies  back  when  they 
are  at  the  door,  and  blocks  up  the  passage,  that  none  for  the  future  may  issue 
forth  towards  us.  God  can  hear  and  help  :  **  but  your  iniquities  have  separated 
between  you  and  your  God,  and  your  sins  nave  hid  \lu  face  from  you,  uiat  He 
will  not  hear"  (Isa.  lix.  1,  2);  your  sins  stand  like  a  trap-wall,  a  mighty 
mountain,  between  Him  and  you  ;  they  have  cramped  His  will,  so  that  though 
He  can,  yet  He  will  neither  hear  your  prayers  nor  help  your  persons.  It  is 
sin  that  Keeps  mercy  from  us.     (Jer.  v.  25). 

2.  When  the  heart  is  carried  out  after  unlawful  things,  then  the  ways  and 
ordinances  of  God  are  neglected,  slighted,  and  profaned  (ver.  16).  Theur  idols 
had  stolen  away  their  hearts  from  God.  They  had  whorish  hearts,  and  whorish 
eyes  which  went  after  their  idols,  and  made  them  depart  from  God.  David 
advised  men  not  to  set  their  hearts  upon  riches  (Psa.  Ixii.  10)  ;  th^  will  then 
be  their  idols,  and  make  them  forget  God  and  His  waya^  and  do  those  things 

380 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL. 


OHAP.  XZ. 


which  will  profane  His  ordinances.    Look  well  to  your  hearts,  and  let  not  them 
carry  you  away  (Job  xv.  12). 

3.  When  sinners  provoke  God  into  ways  of  destruction^  He  doth  not  utterly 
destroy  them,  but  shows  some  pity  and  mercy,  "  Nevertheless  mine  eye  spared 
them  from  destroying."  God  did  destroy  many  of  them  in  the  wilderness ; 
three  thousand  upon  their  making  the  calf  (Ex.  xxxii.  28) ;  twentv-four 
thousand  upon  their  committing  whoredom  with  the  daughters  of  Moab  (Num. 
XXV.  9)  ;  much  people  by  fiery  serpents  upon  their  murmuring  (Num.  xxi.  6) ; 
Eorah,  Dathan,  and  Abirani  were  swallowed  up  of  tlie  earth,  and  all  theirs, 
and  the  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  that  offered  incense  were  consumed  by 
fire  (Num.  xvi.  32-3^5) ;  fourteen  thousand  seven  hundrt  d  were  destroyed  by 
the  plaj;ue  (ver.  49) ;  and  many  by  the  Amorites  in  Seir  (Deut  i.  44).  Yet  all 
were  not  destroyed  ;  God  did  not  make  an  end  of  them  in  the  wilderness.  He 
did  not  consummate  and  perfect  His  wrath  upon  them.  Though  men  haye 
sinned  much,  yet  Qod  hath  an  eye  to  spare  and  a  heart  to  pity.  If  He  should 
punish  and  destroy  none,  He  would  be  thought  to  be  like  unto  sinners 
(Psa.  1.  21)  ;  if  He  should  destroy  all,  He  would  be  thought  to  be  cruel ;  to 
show,  therefore,  that  He  is  a  just  God,  He  cuts  off  some;  and  to  show  He  is  a 
merciful  God,  he  spares  some. — (GreenhiU.) 


Ver.  18-26.) 


EXE6BTICAL  NOTES.— The 
propiiet  describes  the  sins  of  the 
generation  that  grew  up  in  the  desert. 

Ver.  18.  "But  I  said  unto  their 
children,"  The  second  generation  of 
the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness. 
**To  the  *  children*  belongs,  among 
other  things,  the  whole  second  law- 
giving, with  its  impressive  admonitions, 
as  it  was  promulgated  in  Arboth-Moab, 
and  is  recorded  in  Deuteronomy" 
(IJengstenberg).  '*  Walk  ye  not  in  the 
statutes  of  your  fathers."  "The 
'fathers*  in  question  are  represented 
in  their  constant  disobedience  to  the 
laws  which  Jehovah  gave  (which  even 
necessitated  their  repetition  and 
renewal  in  Deuteronomy),  as  in  some 
sort  law-givers  according  to  their  own 
ideas  and  on  their  own  authority." — 
(Lange.) 

Ver.  21.  *'  Notwithstanding  the 
children  rebelled  against  Me."  "  The 
sons  acted  like  their  fathers  in  the 
wilderness.  Historical  proofs  of  this 
are  furnished  by  the  accounts  of  the 
Sabbath-breaker  (Num.  xv.  32,  etc.), 
of  the  rebellion  of  the  company  of 
Eorah,  and  of  the  murmuring  of  the 
whole  congregation  against  Moses  and 


Aaron  after  the  destruction  of  Korah's 
company  (Num.  xvi.  and  xvii.).  In 
the  last  two  cases  God  threatened  that 
He  would  destroy  the  whole  congrega- 
tion (Num.  xvi.  21 ;  xvii.  9,  10),  and 
on  both  occasions  the  Lord  drew  ba 
His  hand  at  the  intercession  of  Mo8e?> 
and  his  actual  intervention  (Num.  zv^ 
22  ;  xvii.  11),  and  did  not  destroy  the 
whole  nation  for  His  name's  sake. 
The  statements  in  vers.  21,  22  rest 
upon  these  facts "  (Keil)  God's 
justice  was  slow  to  punish ;  for  from 
the  murmuring  at  Kadesh  (B.a  1453) 
to  the  date  of  this  chapter  (b.o.  593) 
was  860  years;  being  two  cycles  of 
430  years. 

Ver.  23.  "Scatter  them  among  the 
heathen."  Dispersion  among  the 
heathen  is  threatened  to  apostate 
Israel  (Lev.  xxvi.  33 ;  Dent,  xxviii.  64). 
Nearly  nine  centuries  had  elapsed  be- 
fore this  penalty  was  actually  inflicted. 

Ver.  24.  "Their  father's  idols." 
They  had  been  warned  against  these 
(ver.  18).  Tiie  vain  traditions  of  their 
fathers  had  more  authority  with  them 
than  God's  own  word  (1  Pet,  i  18.) 

Ver.  25.    *' Wherefore  I  gave  them 
Ml 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HO  Ml  LET IC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


also  statntes  that  were  not  good,  and 
jndgments  whereby  they  should  not 
liye/'  This  was  a  second  retribution. 
We  may  compare  here  Rom.  i.  24, 
according  to  which  God,  in  just  retri- 
bution for  their  revolt,  gave  over  the 
heathen  to  vile  affections ;  Acts  vii  42, 
where  it  is  traced  back  to  God,  that 
the  heathen  served  the  host  of  heaven  ; 
and  2  Thess.  iL  11,  where  God  sends 
the  apostates  strong  delusions.  Grotius 
writes  :  "  I  have  taken  from  them  tlie 
understanding,  that  in  despising  my 
laws  they  maymake  forthemselves  hard 
and  death-bearing  laws."  {Ilengsten- 
berg.)  "  Various  attempts  nave  been 
made  to  get  rid  of  the  apparent  incon- 
gruity of  the  Unguage  nere  employed 
by  the  Divine  Being.  Taken  abso- 
lutely it  would  be  flatly  contradictory 
of  the  purity  and  rectitude  of  His 
character,  as  well  as  that  of  the  laws 
which  He  actually  gave  to  the  Israel- 
ites (Deut.  iv.  8 ;  Neh.  ix.  13  ;  Rom. 
viL  12).  The  solution  of  the  diflScnlty 
proposed  by  Manesseh  Ben  Israel,  that 
the  words  should  be  read  interrogatively, 
is  altogether  unsupported  by  the  struc- 
ture of  the  sentence,  and  is  otherwise 
not  borne  out  by  Hebrew  usage.  I 
agree  with  those  interpreters  who  are 
of  opinion  that  the  reference  is  to  the 
idolatrous  enactments  of  the  heathen, 
and  that  the  language  may  be  best 
illustrated  by  comparison  with  Ps. 
bcxxi.  12 ;  Hos.  viii.  II  ;  Acts  vii.  42  ; 
Rom.  i.  24  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  11.  Because 
the  Hebrews  cherished  a  propensity  to 
indulge  in  idolatrous  practices,  God  in 
His  holy  providence  brought  them  into 
circumstances  in  which  tiiis  propensity 
might  be  fully  gratified,  without  His 
in  any  way  imposing  upon  them  the 
statutes  of  the  Pagan  ritual.  On  the 
contrary,  He  did  all  that  was  calculated 
in  the  way  of  moral  influence  to  deter 
them  from  idolatry.  Preferring,  how- 
ever, the  rites  and  ceremouies  of  the 


heathen  to  His  holy  and  righteous 
ordinances,  they  exi)erienced  not  only 
that  they  were  not  good,  but,  as  the 
language  by  meiosis  imports,  that  they 
were  most  pernicious." — {Henderson.) 

Ver.  26.  '*And  I  polluted  them  in 
their  own  gifts."  "  The  language  of 
this  verse  is  quite  in  accordance  with 
that  of  the  preceding.  The  Holy  One 
did  not  actunlly  pollute  the  people  ; 
He  only  permitted  them  to  pollute 
themselves,  and  )ironounced  them 
polluted  when  they  had  rendered 
themselves  such.  In  the  language  of 
the  Hebrews,  and  of  the  Orientials  in 
general,  God  is  frequently  said  to  do 
that  which  He  permits  to  be  done." — 
{Henderson.)  **They  caused  to  pass 
through  the  fire  all  that  openeth  the 
womb.'*  They  followed  the  custom 
ot  the  Canaanites  in  sacrificing  their 
children  to  Moloch,  in  whose  fiery 
arms  they  were  destroyed.  This  was 
an  awful  perversion  of  God's  law 
which  bade  them  consecrate  their  first- 
born to  Him  as  "living  sacrifices" 
(Ex.  xiii.  2),  so  that  the  whole  nation 
might  thereby  be  hallowed.  They 
preferred  to  serve  an  imaginary  malig- 
nant deity,  whose,  commands  were 
unnatural  and  cruel,  to  the  one  true 
God  who  gave  them  a  righteous  law. 
This  was  a  sin  which  brought  its  own 
punishment  in  doing  violence  to  the 
most  sacred  feelini^s  of  human  nature. 
The  repeated  prohibition  against  offer- 
ing children  through  the  fire  to  Moloch 
is  an  evidence  that  this  custom  made 
its  way  among  the  Israelites  (Lev. 
xviii.  21  ;  Deut.  xviii.  10).  **To  the 
end  that  they  might  know  tliat  I  am 
the  Lord."  "By  which  they  might 
learu  that  their  paternal  God,  whom 
they  set  at  nought,  is  God  in  the  full 
sense,  whom  to  forsake  is  at  once  to 
fall  into  misery^'-^Hengstenberg,) 


HOMILETICS. 

The  Sm  or  thb  Second  Genrration  op  thb  Chtldrbh  op  Israel  in  thb 
WiLDBftNESS.     (Vers.  18-26.) 

I.  They  sinned  after  many  warning  examples.    Their  fathers  had  forsaken 
God's  ordinances  and  turned  to  their  idols.    The  children  are  warned  against 
282 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL.  chap.  XX 


their  evil  example  (ver.  18)  ;  yet  though  they  saw  the  sad  effects  of  transgression 
aj?ainst  God,  they  sinned  after  the  same  manner.  They  rebelled  at  Kadesh 
(Num.  XX.  2)  ;  by  the  Gulf  of  Akaba  (Num.  xxi.  b^ ;  and  at  Shittim, 
(Num.  XXV.  2,  3).  They  had  seen  by  sad  experiment  now  rebellion  against 
God  must  end,  and  yet  they  persisted  in  eatinj?  the  grapes  which  had 
already  set  their  father's  teeth  on  edge.  They  disregarded  the  lessons  of 
liistory.    Thus  there  was  less  excuse  for  them  than  for  the  first  generation. 

II.  They  sinned  after  renewed  precepts.  1.  Their  relation  to  God  teas 
restated.  **I  am  the  Lord  your  God"  (ver.  19).  2.  Obedience  was  again 
commanded.  They  were  ordered  to  walk  in  God's  statutes,  to  keep  His  judg- 
ments, and  to  observe  the  ordinance  of  the  Sabbaths  (ver.  19). 

III.  Their  punishment.  They  were  to  be  scattered  among  the  heathen,  and 
dispersed  through  the  countries  (ver.  23).  A  retributive  providence  was  at 
work  to  bring  this  terrible  infliction  upon  them.  1.  God  abandoned  them  to 
their  ovon  devices,  '*  Wherefore  I  gave  them  statutes  that  were  not  good,  and 
judgments  whereby  they  should  not  live  "  (ver.  25).  These  were  the  statutes 
of  their  fathers  (ver.  18).  The  meaning  is,  that  God  withdrew  Hw  providential 
restraint  and  permitted  them  to  have  what  they  were  bent  upon  (Psa.  Ixxi.  12 ; 
Acts  vii  42 ;  Rom.  i.  24).  The  parable  of  the  prodigal  son  teaches  us,  that 
if  a  man  thinks  he  can  better  himself  elsewhere,  God  allows  him  to  make  the 
choice.  It  is  a  sad  evil  when  the  sinner  is  left  to  his  own  devices,  when  he 
casts  off  the  authority  of  God  and  becomes  his  own  master  ;  '^  Lord  of  himself, 
that  heritas;e  of  woe. '  2.  God  allowed  their  inward  corruption  to  show  itself, 
"And  I  polluted  them  in  their  own  gifts"  (ver.  26).  They  felt  that  they  must  offer 
gifts  to  some  invisible  Power  of  which  they  were  afraid.  For  they  were  conscious  of 
impurity  within  ;  they  felt  the  burden  of  sin,  but  they  sought  relief  in  will- 
worship  until  they  became  the  victims  of  that  awful  infatuation  whicli  led  them 
to  offer  up  the  fruit  of  their  body  for  the  sin  of  their  soul  (Mic.  vi.  16).  It  is 
the  saddest  punishment  when  a  man's  inward  corruption  is  allowed  to  spread  and 
grow  unchecked.  3.  Ytt  there  was  mercy  in  their  punishment : — 1. — It  was  long 
delayed.  In  order  that  they  might  have  space  for  repentance.  They  had  been 
threatened  long  before  with  dispersion  among  the  hejithen  (Lev.  xxvi.  33),  but 
nearly  nine  centuries  had  elapsed  before  that  sentence  was  actually  inflicted 
2. — It  was  for  a  gracious  end.  **  To  the  end  that  they  might  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord  "  (ver.  26).  In  the  worst  punishments  of  sinners  God  has  a  gracious  end 
in  view.    Mercy,  at  length,  rejoices  over  judgment. 

17.  The  lessons  to  be  derived  from  their  sin  and  punishment  1.  nat  the 
standard  to  which  we  ought  to  conform  our  lives  should  be  the  Word  of  God. 
This  second  generation  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  forsook  the  direct  commands 
of  God  and  followed  the  vain  traditions  of  their  fathers.  They  received  for 
doctrines  the  commandments  of  men.  The  truly  righteous  man  looks  to  his 
God  alone,  and  is  governed  not  by  human  opinion,  or  by  ancient  custom,  but  by 
the  revealed  Word  (Psa.  cxix.  105).  2.  That  even  Godlessness  may  become  a 
law  unto  men.  They  had  "  statutes  that  were  not  good,  and  judgments  whereby 
they  should  not  live  "  (ver.  25).  Thus  the  world  and  the  devil  have  also  their 
statutes  and  ordinances.  3.  I  hat  God  punishes  men  through  the  very  instru- 
ments of  their  sin.  They  had  copied  the  heathen  around  thena,  had  followed 
man's  doctrine,  and  it  had  brought  them  no  rest  or  peace,  nothing  but  sorrow 
and  death.  4.  That  even  the  very  errors  of  the  heathen  show  man's  need  of  a 
religion,  '  The  fact  that  Israel  sacrificed  their  children  to  a  malignant  deity 
shows  that  they  felt  the  burden  of  sin  and  the  need  of  forgiveness.  6.  That 
t/ie  true  reform  of  the  Church  of  God  must  begin  with  youth.    The  law  of  God 

233 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  XZ. 


BOMILETJC  COMMEyTARY :    EZEKIEL. 


as  to  Ilis  Statutes  and  ordinances  was  repeated  nnto  "tlieir  cliiMren  in  the 
wilderne*^"  (ver.  18).  When  the  Church  is  gready  polluted  the  only  hope  lies 
in  the  careful  instruction  of  the  younger  generation. 


(Verses  27-29)- 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  -  Israel 
continued  to  commit  these  sins  in 
Canaan  also,  and  still  refuses  to  give 
them  up. 

Ver.  27.  "  Yet  in  this  your  fathers 
haye  blasphemed  Me,  in  that  they 
haye  committed  a  trespass  against 
Me"  The  prophet  is  adiiressing  the 
people  of  his  own  time,  and  boldly 
charges  them  with  committing  the 
same  sins  as  their  fathers  in  the 
land  of  Canaan.  The  sin  of  the 
children  of  Israel  in  Canaan  took  a 
worse  form  than  their  sin  in  the 
wilderness.  Ic  was  a  more  open 
a£front  to  God,  for  they  deliberately 
**  blasphemed "  His  name.  They  re- 
jected Him  contemptuously  when 
they  left  that  one  place  which  He 
selected  "to  put  his  name  there/' 
and  chose  places  of  their  own,  offering 
sacriBce  **on  every  high  hill."  They 
did  dishonour  to  the  Holy  Place." 

Ver.  28.  "They  "aw  every  high 
hilL  and  all  the  thick  trees,  and  they 
offered  tiiere  their  sacrifices,  and  there 
they  presented  the  provocation  of  their 
offering:  there  also  they  made  their 
sweet  savour,  and  poured  out  there 
their  drink  offerings.*'  The  stricter 
designation  of  blasphemy  follows  in 
this  verse,  after  it  was  designated  in 
general  at  the  close  of  ver.  27.    ''The 


provocation  of  their  offering "  the 
offerings  to  idols,  wherehy  they  pro- 
voked the  anger  of  God  ;  comp.  Dent, 
xxxii.  16,  17,  "They  provoked  Him  to 
jealousy  with  strange  (gods)  ;  with 
abominations  they  made  Him  indig- 
nant. They  sacrificed  to  lords  which 
were  not  Gt)d,  to  gods  whom  they  knew 
not."  Gk>d  says  to  them  in  the  tone 
of  reproach  (1  Kings  ix.  13),  "  What 
is  the  high  place  whereunto  ye  go  ? " 
(ver.  29) :  How  can  ye,  instead  of 
seeking  Me  in  My  true  sanctuary,  turn 
to  these  miserable  places,  with  their 
miserable  gods  ?  And  yet  these  are 
named  high  places  unto  this  day,  in 
the  sense  of  sanctuaries,  and  with  the 
notion  that  they  have  something  pecu- 
liar about  them." — Uengstenberg,  'I'he 
repetition  of  the  word  "  tJure'  three 
times  seems  to  be  an  echo  of  Deut.  xil 
5-7,  "  Unto  His  habitation  .... 
thither  ....  thither  .  •  •  .  "there" 
(ver.  40). 

Ver.  29.  "  And  the  name  thereof 
is  called  Samah  unto  this  day." 
"  Bamah,"  a  Hebrew  word,  signifying 
High-Place.  The  tops  of  liigh  hills 
were  used  by  the  heathen  for  idolatrous 
worship ;  and,  in  consequence,  Moses 
interdicted  the  use  of  tnem  even  for 
the  worship  of  tho  true  God  (Deut 
xii.  1-6). 


BOMILETICS. 

(Vers.  27-29.) 

I.  The  nature  of  the  sin  of  blasphemy.  "  Tour  fathers  have  blasphemed 
Me"  (ver.  27).  This  wiis  the  "trespass"  which  they  committed  against 
Jehovah.  The  essence  of  blasphemy  consists  in  ct^ntimpt  of  God  ;  in  delil)e- 
rately  disobeying  HiscoinmanHs,  especially  as  to  worship.  For  surely  God  has 
the  absolute  right  to  lay  down  the  manner  in  which  He  shall  be  approached 
served,  and  adored.  He  appointed  the  Holy  Place  for  His  worship,  but  Israel 
384 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKTEL.  chap.  xx. 


serred  their  own  Gods  in  places  of  their  own  appointing.     When  once  God 
has  spoken  clearly,  all  mere  will-worship  is  of  the  nature  of  blasphemy. 

II.  Blatpliemy  is  oyer  the  sin  of  the  nnregenerate  heart  We  speak  espe- 
cially of  those  who  have  the  advantages  of  a  Divine  revelation,  and  who  have 
means  therefore  for  knowing  the  mind  and  will  of  God.  Those  who  have  no 
means  of  knowing  God  cannot  consciously  blaspheme  Him  1.  The  unregenerate 
heart  may  recoanise  the  idea  ofGody  and  the  duty  of  worship.  The  Israelites 
of  the  pro))hets  time  felt  that  they  must  worship  some  divinity.  They  must 
have  a  religion.  But  2.  The  unregenerate  heart,  though  it  pretends  to  a 
religion,  leaves  out  the  true  essentials  of  it.  And  what  are  these  ?  A  recogni- 
tion of  God's  supreme  authority  as  a  righteous  Ruler,  a  Saviour  from  sin,  and  a 
Sanctifier.  Such  men  are  ready  to  ''  recognize  the  idea  of  God/'  but  under  the 
pretence  of  a  lofty  phih>S'»pl)ical  religion  they  practically  deny  God's  authority, 
they  destroy  the  foundations  of  all  truth  in  belief  and  worship.  Sinful  man, 
even  when  he  holds  bv  some  prime  necessity  of  religion,  is  ever  prone  to  exalt 
his  own  mind  and  will.  3.  The  unregenerate  heart  has  a  natural  preference 
far  a  burdensome  and  difficult  religion,  Israel  was  not  satisfied  with 
worshipping  God  in  His  holy  temple,  but  preferred  travelling  great  distances 
and  climbing  the  high  hills.  Man  is  ever  ready  to  "do  some  great  thing." 
God's  way  is  too  simple  for  him.  There  is  something  in  human  nature  which 
is  flattered  by  difficult  demands. 

in.  The  sin  of  blasphemy  especially  interferes  with  Ood*8  gracious  pur- 
poses for  mankind.  God  chose  His  ancient  people  that  through  them  all  the 
families  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed.  Salvation  is  of  the  Jews.  Israel  was 
becoming  like  the  heathen,  whereas  it  was  God's  purpose  that  the  heathen 
should  become  like  Israel.  Thus  by  their  idolatry,  and  even  blasphemy,  the 
chosen  people  were  working  against  the  gracious  purposes  of  the  Most  High. 
All  manner  of  blasphemy  a>;ainst  God,  whether  arisin^r  from  intellectual  pride, 
or  superstition,  or  will- worship  hinders  the  progress  of  His  kingdom. 

(Ver.  27). 

**  Have  blasphemed  Me.**  The  Hebrew  word  signifies,  to  revile  with  words, 
to  reproach,  and  blaspheme.  To  blaspheme  is  to  hurt  the  name  or  fame  of  any, 
and  is  a  kind  of  evil  speaking,  derogatin<4  from  the  glory  of.  God.  God's  glory 
or  name  in  itself  is  inviolable,  but  blasphemy  doth  what  it  can  to  violate  it' 
Blasphemy  consists — 1.  Jn  attributing  to  God  what  is  not  congruous  to  Him, 
As  to  say.  He  is  the  author  of  sin  ;  He  sees  not,  He  hath  forsaken  the  earth 
(Ezek.  viii.  12)  ;  He  is  like  unto  man  (Psa.  1.  21).  2.  In  detracting  from  Him 
what  belongs  unto  Him,  As  to  deny  His  providence.  His  omniscience.  His 
omnipotence,  as,  "can  He  provide  a  table  in  the  wihierness?"  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  19) ; 
If  He  should  make  windows  in  heaven  could  this  thing  be  ?  (2  Kings  vii.  2). 
8.  llie  doing  ofsurh  things  as  cause  God*s  name  to  be  blasphemed.  As,  **  The 
name  of  God  is  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  through  you."     As  there  is 

Cractical  atheism,  so  there  is  practical  blasphemy  (Pit.  i.  16).  "In  that  they 
ave  committed  a  trespass  against  Me."  The  doubling  of  the  word  in  the 
Hebrew  notes  the  greatness  of  their  sin,  and  progress  in  their  wickedness.  They 
siimed  not  ignorantly,  or  of  common  infirmity,  hut  with  a  ti^h  hand.  They 
spake  against  the  true  worship  of  God,  and  practised  contrary  thereunto.  Wilful 
sinning  is  a  reproaching  of  God,  and  provokes  liim  greatly,  "  They  have  com- 
mitted a  trespass  against  Me."  They  have  spoken  against  My  worship,  and 
run  out  to  other  ways  which  I  forbade  them.  Other  sins  they  have  committed 
which  I  could  have  winked  at,  but  when  they  sin  wilfully,  despising  Me,  My 

236 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX. 


EOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:    EZEKJEL, 


laws,  My  worship,  they  reproach,  blaspheme,  provoke  Me  so,  that  they  shall 
hear  of  it.  Son  of  man,  go  and  Hpeak  to  the  house  of  Israel ;  go  and  tell  them 
how  tliey  have  dealt  with  Me,  and  how  I  take  it.  Such  sins  deserve  death 
(Num.  XV.  30).  "The  soul  that  doeth  oug'it  presumptuously,  whether  he  be 
born  in  the  land,  or  a  stranger,  the  same  reproacheth  the  Lord."  The  Hebrew 
word  here  rendered  "  reproacheth  "  is  the  same  as  that  rendered  "  blasphemed" 
in  Ez.  XX.  27.  For  he  tnat  reproacheth  the  hoxA  blasphemes  Him,  and  he  that 
blasphemes  Him  reprt)acheth  Him  :  they  are  joined  together  (2  Kings  xix.  22). 
There  was  no  mercy  for  those  who  sinned  in  that  manner  (Heb.  x.  26,  27). 
Many  commit  such  trespasses  in  these  days,  by  speaking  against  providence, 
ordinances.  Scriptures,  angels,  Christ,  Ood  himself;  and  so  sin  away  mercy 
and  their  own  souls  at  once.  David  prayed  that  God  would  keep  him  back 
from  "presumptuous  sins"  (Psa.  xix.  13) ;  and  we  have  need  to  do  it,  for  there 
is  that  in  our  natures  which  carries  us  on  strongly  towards  them.  Solomon 
saith,  "  Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  always ;  but  he  that  hardeneth  hia 
heart" — that  presiimetli,  that  is  wilful,  pertinacious — "shall  fall  into  mis- 
chief/' into  mischievous  sins,  into  mischievous  judgments. — {Green/itU). 


(Verses  30-38.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  pro- 
pliet  addresses  the  men  of  his  day, 
si  lowing  that  they  are  equally  gnilty 
with  tiieir  fathers.  They  are  to  receive 
just  retribution,  and  to  be  purified 
among  the  heathen. 

Ver.  30.  "  Are  ye  polluted  after 
the  manner  of  your  fathers?  and 
commit  ye  whoredom,  after  their 
abominations  ?  These  interrogations 
are  intended  to  imply  a  strong  affirma- 
tive. 

Ver.  31.  "Even  unto  this  day." 
"  Tlie  note  struck  in  the  question  of 
Ver.  29  is  still  maintained,  not  merely 
to  express  astonishment,  but  still  more 
to  compel  self-reflection.  I  ask,  what 
further  communication  you  would 
have  ? " — {Lange,) 

Ver.  32.  "We  will  be  as  the 
heathen"  They  flattered  themselves 
that  the  heavy  judgments  which  the 
pr<»phets  had  threatened  would  not  be 
inflicted  ;  that  they  could  accept  with- 
out molestation  the  state  of  the 
heathen,  and  the  responsibility  of  the 
heathen.  *'  That  which  cometh  into 
your  mind  shall  not  be  at  all.'*  That 
wish  is  declared  to  be  impossible,  for 
they  stood  before  God  on  a  difl*erent 
foundation  from  the  heathen  around 
236 


them.  "  Here  we  have  the  announce- 
ment of  their  continued  punishment. 
The  heathen  stood  under  the  divine 
long-suffering  (Rom.  iii.  25) ;  not  so 
Israel  to  whom  (Jod  had  so  gloriously 
made  Himself  known.  Wherein  the 
heathen  may  prosper,  therein  Israel 
must  decline.  The  designation  of  the 
heathen  gods  as  wood  and  stone,  done 
sufficient  to  counteract  the  strange 
notion  which  attributed  a  real  existence 
to  the  heathen  gods,  is  taken  fh>m 
Deut  iv.  28  ;  xxviiL  Be"—{Heng8ten' 
berg.) 

Ver.  33.  Surely  with  a  mighty 
hand,  and  with  a  stretched-ont  arm, 
and  with  fury  poured  out,  will  I  rule 
over  you."  "  Their  thought  was,  that 
they  should  become  like  the  heathen  in 
the  lands  of  the  earth,  to  serve  wood 
and  stone;  that  is  to  say,  we  will 
become  idolaters  like  the  heathen,  pass 
into  heathenism.  This  shall  not  take 
place ;  on  the  contrary,  Qod  will  rule 
over  them  as  King  with  strong  arm 
and  fury.  The  words,  "  with  a  mighty 
hand,  and  with  a  stretched-out  arm, 
are  a  standing  expression  in  the  Penta- 
teuch for  the  mighty  acts  by  which 
Jehovah  liberated  His  people  from  the 
power  of  the  Egyptians,  and  led  them 
out  of  Egypt  (Ex.  vi.  1,  6 ;  Deut.  iv. 
84,  V.  15,  vil  19,  etc.).    By  the  intro- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  XX. 


dnction  of  the  clause,  "with  fury  poured 
out,"  the  manifestation  q\  tlie  omnipo- 
tence of  God  which  Israel  experienced 
in  its  dispersion,  and  which  it  was  still 
to  experience  among  the  heathen,  is 
described  as  an  emanation  of  the  divine 
wrath,  a  severe  and  wrathful  judg- 
ment.— {Keil),  "  For  the  friendly  and 
gracious  ^vernment  of  God  they  have 
given  Him  little  thanks,  and  have 
wickedly  withdrawn  from  Him.  As 
God,  however,  must  come  to  His 
sovereign  rights,  so  His  sovereignty 
now  assumes  a  terrible  form/' — {Ueng- 
stenberg,) 

Ver.  84.  **  And  will  gather  yon  out 
of  the  conntries  wherein  ye  are  scat- 
tered." "  Although  Keil  explains  the 
'  leading  out '  as  neither  local  nor 
material,  yet  we  do  not  understand  it 
with  him  of  a  spiritual  separation  from 
the  heathen  world  (to  which  they  are 
inimediiitely  brought,  ver.  35),  'lest 
they  should  be  absorbed  in  it,'  etc., 
but  of  an  aggravation  of  their  exiled 
condition,  a  8|)iritual  experience  of  it, 
so  that  they  should  know  and  feel  that 
they  as  the  )>eople  of  God  were  once 
more  in  the  wihlemess,  but  not  at  all 
in  the  same  sense  as  before  (Deut  viii 
15,  xxxii.  10)." — (Lange.) 

Ver.  35.  '*  The  wilderness  of  the 
people.*'  In  ancient  time,  Israel  had 
been  trained  and  disciplined  in  the 
literal  wilderness  (Deut.  viii.  15,  16)  ; 
now  God  was  about  to  send  them  to 
a  new  school  of  affliction,  among  the 
busy,  populous  world.  There  they 
would  be  made  to  feel  their  isolation 
severely.  **  The  wilderness  is  desig- 
nated as  'the  wilderness  of  the  peoples', 
in  contradistinction  to  the  former  wil- 
derness, where  was  only  the  howling  of 
wild  beasts  (Deut.  xxxii.  10;,  lions, 
serpents,  and  the  like  (Deut.  viii.  15; 
Isa.  XXX.  6).  The  new  wilderness 
is  one  in  which  Israel  is  iu  the 
midst  of  the  peoples,  and  can 
therefore  be  no  ordinary  wilderness, 
for  wilderness  and  peoples  exclude  one 
another.  It  must  rather  be  a  sym- 
bolic or  typical  designation  of  the 
irtate  of  punishment  and  purification. 


The  interchange  of  type  and  thing 
is  in  verse  36  separated.  From  the 
defect  of  historical  notices  concerning 
the  state  of  the  exiles,  we  cannot  show 
the  fulfilment  of  this  prophetic  an- 
nouncement. It  is  natural,  however, 
to  suppose  that  the  part  taken  by  the 
exiles  in  the  political  intrigues  of  the 
home  country  bronght  upon  them 
also  severe  suflFerings." — {Henasten- 
berg.)  "There  will  I  plead  with  you 
face  to  face."  "  Jehovah  threatens  to 
deal  with  them  as  in  open  court  by 
clearing  those  who  had  repented  of 
their  wickedness,  and  punishing  the 
ohstinate  as  He  had  done  their  fathers 
of  old."— (^Henderson), 

Ver.  36.  ''  Like  as  I  pleaded  with 
your  fadiers  in  the  wilderness  of  the 
land  of  Egypt"  "  They  were  not  led 
into  the  wilderness  of  the  peoples  as  a 
punishment ;  although  on  account  of 
their  disobedience  it  oden  became  a 
place  of  punishment ;  but  the  divine 
intention  was  to  try  them,  to  prove 
them  (Deut.  viii.  2,  etc.\  from  which 
resulted  separation  ot  individuals, 
purification,  which  was  so  strongly 
urged  upon  them  in  reference  to 
Egypt,  whither  they  were  always 
looking  back  (Num.  xx.  6 ;  xxi.  5)." 
—(Lange). 

Ver.  37.  "  And  I  will  cause  yon  to 
pass  under  the  rod  **  The  reference  is 
to  the  rod  of  a  shepherd  counting  his 
sheep  (Lev.  xxvii.  32).  **  A  shepherd 
lets  nis  sheep  pass  through  under  the 
rod  for  the  purpose  of  counting  them, 
and  seeii^  whether  they  are  in  good 
condition  or  not  (Jer.  xxxiii.  13).  The 
figure  is  here  applied  to  God.  Like  a 
shepherd,  He  will  cause  His  flock,  the 
Israelites,  to  pass  through  under  His 
rod,  t.«.,  to  take  them  into  His  special 
care." — (Keil.)  **  And  I  will  bring  you 
into  the  bond  of  the  coTenant '*  ''  By 
this  we  are  not  merely  to  under- 
stand covenant  punishments  but  the 
covenant  promises  must  also  be  in- 
cluded. For  not  only  the  threats  of 
the  covenant,  but  also  its  promises, 
are  bonds  by  which  God  trains  His 
people.    The  Hebrew  word  is  not  only 

287 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.XZ.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


applied  to  burdensome  and  crushinf;^  send  ttiem  to  wander  in  the  world's 

fetters,  Imt  to  the  bonds  of  love  as  well  wilderness.      Through    unfaitlifulness 

(Cant.  vii.  16)." — {Keil.)  The  "bonds"  they  were  unable  to  enter  "  into  (Jod's 

of  Gods   covenant  are  those  of  love  rest"  (Ps.  xcv.  11).  that  rest  which 

(Hos.  zi.  4).  remaiueth  only  for  those  whose  God  fs 

the  Lord  (Heb.  iv.  9).    "  The  language 

Ver.  38.    "  The  rebels."    Those  who  here  implies  that  the  great  body  of  the 

would  not  have  the  Lord  for  their  king  nation  sliould  be  recovered  from  idola- 

(St  Luke  xix.  14,  27).    **  I  will  bring  try,  and  return  to  their  native  land,  and 

them  forth  oat  of  the  cotintry  where  that  only  a  portion  would  continue  in  a 

they  sojourn,  and  they  shall  not  enter  state  of  rebellion  against  Jehovah,  and 

into  the  land  of  Israel"    Canaan  was  consequentlyreroain  in  exile"  (Herufer- 

called  "  the  land  of  their  pilgrimage  "  son.)    *'  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 

(Ex.  vi.  4).     They  had  debased  the  the  Lord."    "  This  is  the  painful  ex- 

land  which  God  gave  them  to  dwell  in  perience  that  will  sooner  or  later  force 

by  their  idolatries,  and  so  it  became  to  itself  upon  all  those  who  despise  salva- 

thein  the  land  of  bondage.     Therefore  tion." — (Uengstenberg.) 
God  would  bring  them  out  of  it,  and 


nOMILETlCa. 

(Vers.  30-32.) 

God  HiDiNa  Himself  from  Israel  professing  to  seek  Hm. 

The  Elders  professed  that  they  had  come  "  to  inquire  of  the  Lord."  But  they 
came  insincerely.  That  High-place  still  remained  as  a  witness  to  their  idolatries 
(ver.  29).  In  spite  of  the  reformations  under  Hezekiah  and  Josiah,  and  the 
frequent  warnings  of  the  prophets,  they  worshipped  false  gods  even  in  front  of 
the  Lord's  Temple  (1  Kings  xi.  7).  Hence  God's  final  refusal,  through  His 
prophet,  "I  will  not  be  enquired  of  by  you"  (ver.  31).  Why  did  God  hide 
Himself  from  His  people,  who,  through  these  Elders,  were  professing  to 
seek  Him? 

I.  Because  of  their  continuance  in  the  sin  of  idolatry.  They  were  polluted 
after  the  manner  of  their  fathers  (Vers.  30,  31).  God  encourages  all  who  seek 
the  truth  in  sincerity,  even  though  it  be  through  ignorance  and  superstition. 
But  when  the  truth  we  seek  is  a  delusion,  which  we  wilfully  follow — a  mere  idol, 
God  hides  His  face  from  us.  1.  Idolatry  obscures  mans  natural  knowldge  of 
God,  It  leads  the  religious  instinct  astray,  and  into  all  that  is  debasing  and 
vile.  Though  it  may  call  in  the  aid  of  beauty  and  refinement,  yet  it  has  ever  a 
degrading  and  downward  tendency.  2.  Idolatry  in  the  chosen  people  iras 
the  rankest  transgression.  They  were  God's  i)eople  by  vocation,  by  covenant, 
by  special  providence.  This  sin  was,  therefore,  the  worst  that  Israel  could 
possibly  commit.  And  it  shewed  further, — (1.)  The  power  of  bad  example. 
The  corrupting  influences  of  the  idolatries  around  them.  (2.)  1  he  perils  o/aU 
pomp  and  glaring  externals  in  religion.  They  were  attracted  by  the  outward 
and  the  sensual,  which  were  the  characteristics  of  heathen  worship. 

II.  Beoanse  of  the  impossibility  of  their  becoming  in  all  respects  like  the 
heathen.  They  might  imitate  their  customs,  worship  their  idols,  and  sink 
down  into  their  degraded  condition  ;  yet  they  could  not  be  made  to  stand  on 
the  same  footing  before  God.  1.  They  could  not  get  rid  qf  their  responsi- 
bility.  God  had  made  Himself  known  unto  them  by  revelation.  Therefore  they 

388 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL.  CHAP,  xt 


could  not  be  judged  as  the  heathen,  but  by  a  different  standard.  Men  will  be 
judged  by  the  highest  standard  revealed  to  them,  and  not  by  the  lowest,  whicli 
they  have  chosen  in  their  sin  and  folly.  2.  God*s  long  suffering  towards  the 
heathen  did  not  apply  to  Israel,  The  patience  which  God  showed  towards  the 
heathen  could  not  be  expected  towards  those  who  had  higher  religious  advan- 
tages. Z.  It  is  impossible  so  to  obliterate  the  past  as  though  it  had  never 
been.  The  memory  of  the  past  makes  our  whole  life  one.  We  cannot  part 
from  our  former  selves.  However  Israel  might  have  sunk  into  idolatry,  the 
fact  of  their  glorious  privileges  in  the  past  still  remained.  None  oi  th(»8e  who 
dwell  in  a  land  visited  by  the  light  of  God's  Revelation  can  become,  in  all 
respecis,  like  the  heathen.  We  may  choose  the  sins  of  heathenism,  but  we 
must  be  judged  as  those  who  have  had  opportunity  for  the  knowledge  of  Qod. 

(Vers.  37,  38). 

1.  The  Lord  doth  distinguish  llis  people  from  others,  **  I  will  cause  you 
to  pass  under  the  rod."  I  will  examine  which  are  sheep,  and  which  are  goats, 
ana  will  sever  the  one  troni  the  other.  Christ  knew  His  sheep,  His  little  flock, 
from  all  the  goats  of  the  mountains.  When  the  men  appeared  with  weapons 
of  slaughter  in  their  hands,  and  execution  was  to  be  upon  Jerusalem,  the  Lord 
made  His  people  to  "  pass  under  the  rod."  He  numbered  them,  and  set  His 
mark  upon  them,  that  they  might  not  perish  in  the  common  calamity  (Ezek.  ix). 

2.  ITiough  God's  people  do  go  out  from  Him^  and  violate  the  covenant,  yet  He 
will  not  let  them  so  go,  but  will  bring  them  under  His  power.  These  had 
transgressed  the  covenant,  broken  the  bonds,  cast  off  the  ways  of  God,  thought 
to  exempt  themselves  from  His  rule  over  them,  but,  saith  the  Lord,  "  I  will 
bring  you  into  the  bond  of  the  covenant ;"  you  shall  be  under  my  power  and 
law.  Though  I  suffer  Babylonians  and  other  nations  to  be  at  their  own 
disposal,  yet  it  shall  not  be  so  with  you  who  are  my  people  with  whom  I  am 
in  covenant,  and  to  whom  I  must  be  faithful  whatever  you  are  to  me,  and  will 
be  known  to  be  your  Gtod  and  Sovereign.  I  will  have  account  of  you,  and 
make  you   know  that  you  are  under  my  bonds,  and  not  Babylonish   ones. 

3.  Goas  dealings  with  His  people  is  very  different.  He  brings  them  ''  into  the 
bonds  of  the  covenant,"  to  see  what  they  are ;  if  they  be  goats,  wicked,  He 
punisiies  them  and  purges  them  out ;  if  they  be  sheep,  though  they  have  gone 
astray.  He  pardons  them  and  enables  them  to  yield  to  covenant  obedience.  He 
purged  out  the  wicked  by  judgments  and  death,  and  preserved  the  others.  The 
righteous  were  jewels,  and  tiierefore  spared ;  the  wicked  were  stubble,  and 
therefore  destroyed.  4.  Though  the  wicked  be  among  the  godly  yet  they  shall  not 
always  be  so,  "  I  will  purge  out  from  among  you  the  rebels,  and  them  that 
transgress  against  me."  It  is  God's  method,  even  here  in  this  world,  ofttimes  to 
separate  the  wicked  from  the  godly,  to  fan  out  the  chaff  from  the  wheat. 
5.  Whatever  mans  thoughts  are  of  the  world,  the^  are  but  sojourners  therein, 
"  I  will  bring  them  out  of  the  land  of  their  sojouniings,"  were  it  Canaan  or 
Babylon,  they  were  no  more  than  "  sojourners."  Wicked  men  think  they  are 
heirs  to,  owners  and  lords  of  the  earth  (Psa.  xlix.  11).  David,  though  king  in 
Israel,  yet  acknowledgeth  himself  a  sojourner,  as  all  his  fathers  were.  They 
spent  a  few  days  therein,  and  so  passed  away,  and  this  was  his  condition.  Let 
us  look  so  upon  ourselves,  and  "  pass  the  time  of  our  sojourning  here  in  fear" 
(1  Pet.  i  17;  ;  and  mind  that  city  which  hath  foundatitms,  out  of  which,  if  we 
be  once  possessed,  we  shall  never  be  removed.  6.  When  God  brings  His  people 
into  Canaan,  lie  will  shut  out  the  wicked,  they  shall  not  enter  into  the  land  of 
Isi'ael.  Others  shall  be  brought  in,  but  as  for  those  who  would  be  as  the 
world^  M  the  heathen,  as  Babylonians,  they  shall  never  come   into  Canaan, 

389 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX.  BOUILETIC  COMMBNTARr:    EZEKIEL. 


Canaan  was  the  type  of  heaven,  and  this  exclusion  of  these  wicked  ones, 
represents  the  exclusion  of  ungodly  ones  out  of  heaven.  However,  good 
and  bad  are  mingled  together  in  tliis  world,  and  oft  in  the  church,  vet  when  Ood 
brings  His  people  to  the  heavenly  Canaan,  no  unclean  thing  shall  enter  there 
(Rev.  xxi.  7  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9).  7.  Mercies  and  judgments  make  God  knoum 
experimentally.  "  Ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  God  would  purge  out 
the  rebels  from  tlie  obedient ;  there  was  mercy.  Keep  them  out  of  the  land  of 
Israel ;  there  was  judgment.  The  rebels  should  know  and  acknowledge  Him  to 
be  Jehovah,  being  convinced  with  the  equity  of  His  judgments,  and  affected 
with  the  severity  of  them.  The  godly  should  do  it,  being  convinced  and 
affected  with  the  nature,  greatness,  needfulness,  and  freeness  of  that  mercy. 
Judgment  upon  these  rebels  was  mercy  to  the  godly  ;  and  mercv  to  the  godlv 
was  mercy  to  the  rebels ;  and  both  were  brought  to  acknowledge  the  Lord. 
Mercies  and  judiments  work  most  affectionately  and  effectually  upon  the  godly ; 
for  it  is  said,  "  Ye  shall  know,"  ye  that  are  purged,  ye  that  shall  come  to  ttio 
land  of  Israel — (Greenhill.) 

(Ver.  35). 

"  And  I  will  bring  you  into  the  wilderness  of  the  people,  and  there  will  I 
plead  with  you  face  to  face."  The  history  of  the  Jews  is  a  surprising  but  most 
instructive  history.  These  men  have  been  the  moral  benefactors  of  the  world 
by  what  they  have  said,  bv  what  they  have  done,  by  what  they  have  suffered. 
Men  have  been  blessed  in.  them,  and  all  generations  have  reason  to  call  them 
blessed.  In  their  prosperity  they  were  the  lights  of  the  world ;  in  their 
adversity  they  have  been  the  instructors  of  it  also. 

The  situation  of  Judea  was  remarkably  adapted  to  the  moral  purposes  God 
had  in  view.  Placed  in  the  centre  of  those  great  amtinents  of  the  ancient 
world,  at  the  head  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  surrounded  by  those  empires  and 
dynasties  which  contended  for  the  sovereignty  of  the  East,  they  were  happily 
80  situated  as  to  convey  the  light  of  truth  in  different  directions.  They  were 
in  the  direct  line  of  intercourse  between  the  Assyrians  and  Egyptians,  and 
a  prominent  object  of  attention  to  the  Grecians  and  Romans.  It  was  a  place 
of  great  resort  tliough  little  engaged  in  commerce.  Frequent  embassies  were 
exchanged  by  the  Jewish  government  and  foreign  nations,  which  rendered  their 
laws  and  customs,  and,  above  all,  their  Scriptures  known. 

But,  strange  to  say,  in  their  adversitv  they  have  been  quite  as  useful  as  in 
their  prosperity.  In  prosperity  they  held  the  lamp  of  truth  to  the  view  of  the 
nations ;  m  adversity  they  carried  it  wheresoever  they  wandered  ;  a  striking 
proof  that  if  we  will  not  voluntarily  honour  God  in  our  enjoyments.  He  can 
make  us  honour  Him  in  our  distresses.  In  their  very  captivities  they  were 
made  a  blessing.  They  were  scattered  for  their  own  sins,  but  God  brought  a 
revenue  of  glory  to  Himself  and  a  harvest  of  blessing  to  the  world  from  that 
very  event  God  brought  them,  as  the  text  says,  into  the  wilderness  of  the 
nations.  They  were  scattered  into  all  lands, — many  of  them  never  returned, 
and  the  ten  tribes  still  are  mixed  with  the  nations. 

The  subject  arising  from  the  text  is.  The  mixed  character  of  Divine 
dispensations.  '  Not  all  judgment,  lest  we  despair;  nor  all  mercy,  lest  we 
presuma     Affliction  is  here  traced  in  its  causes,  design,  consolations. 

L  The  causes  of  affiiction.     These  are  to  be  traced  to  human  sinfulness. 

Israel's  sorrows  are  here  traced  to  Israel's  sins.     Though  the  righteous  and 

wicked  are  both  involved  in  the  same  calamities,  yet  God  has  different  ends  in 

the  same  dispensation.    That  which  hardens  the  one,  softens  and  sanctifies  the 

S40 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY :   EZEKIEL.  chap,  ml 


other.  The  two  chief  sins  of  the  Jews  were — 1.  The  abuse  of  mercies 
(vers.  5-26 ;  Hosea  ii.  8).  Teichin^  that  sins  under  or  after  peculiar  mercies 
are  greatly  offensive  to  God,  Jesus  said,  *'  Go  thy  way,  sin  no  more,  lest  a 
worse  tiling  come  upon  thee."  It  is  a  remark  respecting  Solomon's  idolatries 
that  he  fell  into  them  ''after  the  Lord  had  appeared  unto  him  twice."  The 
aggravations  of  David's  sin  (2  Sam.  xiii.  7).  Sins  under  or  after  special  mercies 
will  meet  with  a  severe  rebuke.  Nothing  more  distresses  the  conscience  than 
tlie  remembrance,  in  darkness^  of  abused  light ;  in  desertions,  of  neglected  love. 
Great  opportunities  of  service  neglected,  and  great  gifts  unimproved,  involve 
guilt.  2.  'J he  abuse  of  trials.  This  involves  guilt,  and  calls  down  heavier 
afflictions.'  This  constitutes  the  peculiar  instruction  of  their  history.  They 
were  now  in  ciptivity.  The  elders  of  Israel  came  to  Ezekiel  in  the  most 
hypocritical  manner.  They  proposed  to  consult  God  about  their  joining  the 
people  of  the  country,  abandoning  their  religious  peculiarities,  and  conforming 
to  the  customs  of  the  heathen.  God  would  not  be  consulted,  but  instructs 
Ezekiel  to  detect  and  expose  their  hypocrisy.  It  seems  they  had  not  openly 
expressed  the  sentiment,  but  it  was  ''  in  their  mind  "  to  say,  "  we  will  be  as  the 
he  ithen  to  serve  wood  and  8t<me."  This  calls  down  the  threatening  of  the 
text  (vers.  32-35).     Religion  is  the  best  armour,  but  not  the  best  cloak. 

Guard  against  taking  occasion  from  your  afflictions  of  plunging  into  greater 
guilt  Many  fail  to  improve  their  afflictions,  but  it  is  awful  indeed  to  be  the 
worse  for  them  like  Ahaz,  who,  in  his  distress,  sinned  yet  more.  It  is  a  fearful 
thing  to  have  hard  hearts  under  softening  providences,  and  to  have  proud 
hearts  under  humbling  ones.  We  may  say  of  affliction  as  Paul  said  of  the  Law, 
"That  which  was  ordained  to  life,  I  found  to  be  unto  death."  Men's  hearts 
are  of  an  anvil  temper,  made  harder  by  affliction,  and  reverberate  the  blow. 
Guard  against  goini^  farther  from  Glod  under  trials,  against  having  recourse  to 
sinful  means  and  worldly  appliances  to  extricate  yourself  from  calamity,  against 
despising  "  the  christening  of  the  Lord,  or  faintiui;  when  thou  art  rebuked  of 
Him.''  This  course  will  either  call  down  greater  judgments,  or  provoke  God  to 
withhold  chastisement  altogether :  which  is  the  greatest  of  all  jud<;ments.  The 
wrath  of  God  is  then  suffered  to  at -cumulate,  till  it  breaks  down  all  the  fences 
and  barriers  that  restrained  it,  and  then  comes  upon  us  to  the  uttermost.  They 
that  will  not  fear  shall  feel  the  wrath  of  heaven.  The  Fods  shall  be  changed 
into  scorpions.  '*  God  shall  wound  the  head  of  His  enemies,  and  the  hairy 
scalp  of  such  an  one  as  goeth  on  still  in  his  trespasses"  (Psa.  Ixviii.  21.)  The 
chapter  closes  with  solemn  threatening  (Ver.  47.) 

II.  The  design  of  affliction.  God  has  designs  of  love  in  bringing  them  into 
the  wilderness.  ''  Then  will  I  plead  with  you  face  to  face."  Me  pleads  with 
them,  not  against  them.  1.  With  convincing  power.  He  will  be  justified 
when  He  speaketh.  Job  complained  au'^inst  his  friends,  but  not  against  God. 
David  was  "  dumb  with  silence  "  when  the  hand  of  God  was  upon  him.  2.  With 
compassionate  tenderness  (Hosea  il  14,  15,  19-23).  3.  With  long  forbearance 
and  condescension, 

III.  The  consolations  of  which  this  state  is  susceptible.  1.  From  the  A  uthor 
of  affliction  consolation  is  derived,  God  brings  us  into  the  wilderness ;  He  neither 
drives  us  there  nor  leaves  us  there.  Affliction  is  not  casual,  but  designed  by 
Him  who  knows  us  better  than  we  know  ourselves.  It ''  springeth  not  from 
the  dust."  God  pleads  with  us  there.  Better  to  hear  His  voice  in  thunder 
than  to  be  deserted  by  him  altogether.  Better  for  Adam  to  be  called  from  his 
hiding  place  by  a  voice  of  terror  than  to  be  allowed  for  ever  to  separate  himself 
from  God.  It  is  rebuke,  not  destruction  ;  mercy,  not  judgment ;  life,  not 
death.  It  is  the  death  of  the  sin,  not  the  death  of  the  soul.  God  sajrs^  "  I 
will  allure  her."    2.  From  its  design.    The  design  of  affliction  is  to  embitter 

«  241 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :   EZEKIEL. 


sin,  to  separate  the  sin  that  God  hates  from  the  soul  that  He  loves,  to  improye 
the  cliaracter,  to  promote  spirituality,  to  prevent  greater  sufferings,  to  inspire 
sympathy,  to  further  usefulness,  to  prepare  for  higher  enj«»3ment8.  God  says, 
"  I  withheld  thee  Arom  sinning  against  Me  "  (Gen.  xx.  6).  Paul  was  kept  from 
pride,  liow  ?  by  the  thorn  in  the  flesh.  God  prevents  us  by  the  bles.ving8  of  his 
goodness.  By  affliction,  God  promotes  self-knowledge,  humbles  us  and  proves 
us  to  know  what  is  in  our  heart  ''  1  little  thought,''  says  one,  "  that  I  was  so 
proud  till  I  wjis  called  to  stoop ;  or  so  impatient  till  requirecl  to  wait ;  or  so 
easily  provoked  till  I  met  with  such  an  offence  ;  or  so  rooted  to  earth  till  so 
much  h)rce  was  required  to  detach  me  from  it.  3.  I^i'om  its  promised  support. 
"  I  will  be  with  thee  in  trouble,"  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee." 
4.  From  its  ascertained  issue, 

lY.  There  are  some  special  lessons  to  be  learned.  1.  Take  heed  that  you 
do  not  plunge  yourself  into  a  wilderness.  By  careless,  sinful,  inconsistent  con- 
duct. Self-made  troubles  are  liard  to  bear.  2.  If  you  are  in  scenes  of  difficulty, 
be  anxiotis  to  converse  with  Him  who  brought  you  there.  Though  He  **  plead 
with  you  lace  to  face,"  do  not  shun  the  intercourse,  but  submit,  say,  "Show  me 
wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me."  3.  Fray  for  those  who  are  in  the  wilder- 
ness  without  a  shepherd,  and  without  a  hope.  The  heathen,  the  Jews,  the 
4.  Uejoice  that  the  permanent  home  of  God's  people  is  not  the 
They  are  there  but  for  a  short  time  on  their  way  to  a  better 


ungodly,  etc. 

wilderness. 

country. 


{From  MSS,  Sermons  by  the  Uev,  S.  Thodey.) 
(Vers.  39-44.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.-The  pro- 
phet now  declares  the  promise  for  the 
future.  Israel  is  to  be  gathered  again, 
and  to  be  converted  to  the  Lord. 

Ver.  39.  "Go  ye,  serve  ye  every 
one  his  idols,  and  hereafter  also  if 
ye  will  not  hearken  unto  Me.'* 
"  Jehovah  here  utterly  disowns  all 
relationhhip  with  the  rebels.  He  would 
have  idolatrous  worship  severed  from 
all  connexion  with  His  name.  The 
tone  in  which  they  are  addressed  is  one 
of  the  keenest  irony.  Compare  Rev. 
xxii.  11.  It  is  as  much  as  to  say, 
Well,  since  you  will  not  listen  to  Me 
and  return  to  My  service,  you  may 
take  your  own  course ;  we  henceforth 
part  company.  The  expression  ''and 
afterwards"  is  intended  to  give  em- 
phasis to  the  address,  and  anticipates 
the  continued  apostacy  of  the  rebels." 
— (Henderson,) 

Ver.  40.  '*  In  the  mountain  of  the 

height  of  Israel."     Mount  Moriah. 

"  There  shall  all  the  house  of  Israel, 

all  of  them  in  the  land,  serve  Me." 

242 


Not  the  former  rebellious  house  of 
Israel  Tver.  39),  but  the  people  now 
restored  to  the  practice  of  true  religion. 
They  should  all  congregate  at  the 
appointed  festivals  as  of  old,  at  Jeru- 
salem. **  There  will  I  accept  them, 
and  there  will  I  require  your  offerings 
and  the  firstfruits  of  your  oblations, 
with  all  your  holy  things."  The 
Lord  will  then  accept  them  with 
delight,  and  all  their  sacrificial  gifts 
and  offerings.  This  promise  implies 
the  bringing  back  of  Israel  from  its 
banishment 

Ver.  41.  **Your  sweet  savour." 
Heb.,  Odour  of  sati^action,  "  This  is 
the  technical  expression  for  the  cheer- 
ful (well-pleased)  acceptance  of  the 
sacrifice,  or  rather  of  the  feelings  of 
the  worashipper  presenting  the  sacrifice, 
which  ascends  to  Qod  in  the  sacrificial 
odour  (Gen.  viii.  21).  The  thought 
therefore  is  the  following :  When  God 
shall  eventually  gather  His  people  out 
of  their  dispersion,  He  will  accept 
them  as  a  sacrifice  well-pleasing  to 
Him,  and  durect  all  His  good  pleasure 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xz. 


towards  them/'-^JT^tV.)  **  Andl  will  scribed  ;  here  we  have  that  inner  con- 
be  sanctified  in  yon  before  tbe  dition  of  spirit,  that  heart  of  repent- 
heathen.*'  "  The  restoration  of  the  ance,  which  alone  can  make  such  acts 
Hebrews  from  the  captivity,  and  the  acceptable  to  Gbd. 
re-establishment  of  their  religious  ser- 
vices, would  have  the  double  effect  of  Ver.  44.  **  And  ye  shall  know  that 
procuring  honour  to  Jehovah  from  the  I  am  tbe  Lord,  when  I  have  wronght 
surrouncSng  nations,  and  attesting  in  with  you  for  My  name's  sake"  **  The 
their  own  experience  the  hapniness  gathering  of  Israel  from  among  the 
springing  out  of  the  true  knowleage  of  heathen  will  be  fulfilled  in  its  conver- 
the  Divine  character. — {Henderson.)  siou  to  Christ,  and  hitherto  it  has  only 

taken  place  in  very  small  beginnings. 
Ver.  43.    *'  And  there  shall  ye  re-  Thepnncipal  fulfilment  is  still  to  come, 
member  yonr  ways.*'    In  ver.  40  the  when  Israel,  as  a  nation^  shall  be  con- 
outward  acts  of  the  religion  are  de-  verted  to  Christ." — {Keil) 


HOMILETIOS. 

Israel's  Conversion  to  the  Lord. 

I.  The  divine  method  in  their  conversion.  1.  They  were  urged  to  deeUum, 
"  Go  ye,  serve  ye  every  one  his  idols  "  fver.'  39).  Make  your  cLiice,  at  once  ; 
let  there  be  no  douhle-heartedness.  Make  full  proof  of  the  idols  ye  have 
chosen,  "  If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  Him  ;  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him " 
(1  Kings,  xviii.  21).  This  would  have  the  effect  of  detecting  hypocrites,  and 
bringing  the  true  servants  of  the  Lord  to  a  full  determination.  2.  They  are 
brought  to  contrition.  Contrition  for  past  sins  always  accompanies  true  con- 
version. Such  a  condition  is  produced  (1)  By  a  remembrance  of  sin  as  a  trans- 
gression against  God.  "  Ye  shall  remember  your  ways,  and  all  your  doings 
wherein  ye  have  been  defiled  "  ver.  43.  Ye  shall  think  of  your  sins  as  having 
defiled  your  souls,  and  therefore  were  contrary  to  the  nature  and  will  of  a  God 
who  is  holy,  and  whose  commandment  is  holy,  just,  and  good.  (2.)  By  self- 
loathing.  "  Ye  shall  loathe  yourselves  in  your  own  sight  for  all  your  evils 
which  ye  have  done."  The  conviction  of  sin,  when  brought  home  to  a  man, 
makes  him  to  see  himself  in  the  true  light 

II.  The  results  of  their  conversion.  1.  7h^  should  be  in  reality  what  they 
had  hitherto  been  only  in  name.  In  ver.^  39,  they  are  addressed  as,  the  ''  House 
of  Israel,"  though  they  went  after  their  idok  The  name  was  but  a  hollow 
unreality.  They  are  now  the  true  "  House  of  Israel "  (ver.  40).  They  should 
still  worship  on  the  height,  but  that  would  be  on  God's  holy  mountain  and  with  a 
pure  worship  (ver.  28).  2.  They  should  render  an  acceptable  worship  (ver.  41). 
As  they  were  in  a  rignt  state  of  heart,  their  service  of  worship  and  offering 
would  be  well-pleasing  unto  the  Lord.  The  principle  of  Divine  worship,  m 
boti^  Testaments,  is  the  same, — '*  In  spirit  and  in  truth."  3.  The  penalty  of  their 
sin  should  be  remitted.  For  their  sins  they  were  scattered  :  now  the;^  are  to  be 
restored  (ver.  42).  4.  They  should  give  God  all  the  glory.  His  forbearing  merc;^. 
His  forgiving  mercy.  His  mercy  so  great  as  not  to  be  restrained  by  all  their 
sins  from  granting  the  greatest  gifts.  5.  7  heir  conversion  would  promote  the 
true  knowledge  of  God.  (1)  Amona  the  nations  around  them.  "I  will  be 
sanctified  in  you  before  the  heathen,  (ver.  41).  The  heathen  would  see  that 
the  Gk)d  of  Israel  was  holy,  just  in  all  His  ways  ;  yet  merciful,  and  faithful  to 
His  covenant  promises.  (2)  A  mong  themselves.  "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I 
am  the  Lord.    (ver.  44).    And  there  is  a  knowledge  of  God  which  we  can  gain 

248 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  XX.  HOMlLtTtV  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


from  the  history  of  His  dealings  with  His  ancient  people.  We  see  that  God 
brings  His  purposes  to  pass  amidst  all  human  opposition  and  reb'»llion.  We 
know  that,  in  the  worst  times,  there  has  always  been  an  elect  remnant  of 
faithful  men  to  glorify  Him.    And  the  history  of  the  past  assures  ua  that  it 


will  be  thus  io  the  future. 


(Ver.  41). 


"/  wiU  accept  you  with  your  tweet  savour.**  Tlie  spirit  of  the  Gospel  is 
observable  under  the  law.  There  can  be  but  one  way  to  heaven,  havid, 
Isaiah,  Ezekiel,  and  Daniel  were  sinners  s.-ived  by  grace  as  much  as  Paul,  and 
Peter,  and  John.  And  they  were  save<i  by  the  t^anje  Mediator.  Let  us  consider 
the  blessings  promised  in  the  text,  and  then  we  shall  give  some  directions  for  the 
attainment  and  preservation  of  the  enjoyment  it  reveals. 

I.  Some  remarks  upon  the  blessing  promised.  These  are  acceptance  with 
God  through  a  Redeemer,  through  His  grace  and  righteousness.  His  sacrifice 
is  as  a  sweet  smelling  savour,  and  the  worship  of  II  is  people  is  as  incense 
acceptable  to  Him.  Acceptance  stands  opposed  to  condemnation,  and  is  enjoyed 
through  faith  in  Christ.  1.  This  blessing  is  the  grand  discovery  of  the  gospel. 
It  is  tne  design  and  end  of  all  God's  communications  with  men — "  God  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  unto  Himself."  2.  It  is  always  the  result  of  an  experience 
oj  the  work  of  grace  upon  the  soul.  It  puts  the  life  of  hope  into  obedience. 
Our  persons  must  be  accepted  before  our  works.  3.  It  secures  the  true  and  right 
enjoyment  of  all  temporal  blessings.  To  a  man  who  has  no  sense  of  God's 
friendship,  the  best  earthly  enjoyments  lose  their  charm  ;  and  to  a  man  who  has 
hope  of  pardon  through  (Jhrist,  all  outward  trials  lose  thenr  sting.  A.  Jt  i$ 
eesentiaito  a  victory  over  death  and  a  joyful  eternity. 

II.  Some  directions  for  the  attainment  and  enjoyment  of  this  blessing* 
1.  Look  carefully  to  the  fact  of  your  oum  acceptance  of  Chtnst,  and  to  the 
sincerity  of  your  hearts  in  their  covenant  closure  with  Christ,  See  that  you 
take  him,  with  the  happiness  He  has  promised,  for  your  AU.  Take  heed  <iif 
looking  after  another  felicity,  or  cherishing  other  hopes  than  those  of  which  He 
is  the  Author  and  object.  Christ  is  the  great  promise  made  to  faith  ;  and 
faith  is  the  soul's  acceptance  of  Christ  as  He  is  freely  promised.  To  present 
Christ  before  ns  with  all  his  gifts  and  blessings  is  the  design  of  the  Gospel ;  and 
to  rest  in  Christ  as  the  fountain  of  all  our  hope  and  joys  is  the  first  act  of  a 
believer.  God  prays  .you  to  accept  Christ :  as  though  God  did  beseech  you  by 
us,  we  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead  be  ye  reconciled  to  God.  2.  Cherish  habitual 
and  confiding  thoughts  of  the  freeness  and  riches  of  God's  grace  through  a 
Redeemer,  This  will  greatly  kindle  that  love  which  brings  its  own  evidence  of 
its  truth.    This  will  make  God  appear  more  amiable  in  your  eyes,  and  then 


you  will  love  him  more  abundantly  ;  and  as  your  conscious  love  to  Him  increases 
your  doubts  and  apprehensions  will  give  way.  So  much  love,  so  much  comfort 
Those  right  apprehensions  of  God  a£o  will  do  much  to  drive  away  those  terrors 
which  arise  from  false  apprehensions  of  Him.  Delightful  objects  draw  the  heart 
after  them  as  the  loadstone  draws  iron.  In  Christ  you  see  goodness  and  mercy 
in  its  condescension^  and  brought  nearer  to  you  than  the  Diviua 
nature  originally  was.  In  Christ  God  is  come  down  into  our  nature, 
and  so  Infinite  Goodness  is  become  incarnate.  3.  Every  day  renew 
your  apprehensions  qf  the  truth  and  value  of  the  promised  felicity. 
Consider  the  end  of  your  faith,  in  order  to  see  the  vain  and  delusive  character 
of  things  below.  Let  not  heaven  lose  with  you  its  attractive  force  through  jfonr 
forgetfulness  or  unbeliel  He  is  the  best  Christian  who  knows  best  why  ne  is  a 
244 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :    EZEKIEL.  chap.  xx. 

Ghmtian.  Look  upon  all  present  actions  and  conditions  with  a  remenibraiice 
of  their  end.  Value  not  earthly  things  beyond  their  true  uDrtii.  Be  n<;t 
amliitious  of  that  honour  which  must  end  in  confusion,  nor  of  tiie  favour  of 
those  whom  Gc»d  will  call  His  enemies.  4.  Guard  agaiifst  those  snares  and 
temptations  which  you  know  to  be  most  hurtful  to  the  li/'e  of  religion  in  th«  soul. 
5.  Gather  up  and  improve  your  own  past  experience  of  God's  mercy  towards 
jfou  and  others.  We  do  God  and  ourNelves  ^reat  wrong  by  forgetting,  or  not 
improving,  our  experience  of  His  goodneiss.  God  does  not  give  His  mercies  only 
for  present  use,  but  for  the  future  ako.  What  a  wrong  it  is  to  God  in  your 
next  tnal  to  forget  His  last  deliverance!  Have  not  mercies  come  so  un- 
exf)ectedly,  and  iu  such  a  wonderful  manner,  that  you  have  (as  it  were)  the 
name  of  God  written  on  them  ?  (Judg.  xiii.  23).  *'  All  my  bones  shall  say,  who 
ia  like  unto  thee."  You  may  make  great  use  also  of  the  experience  of  others. 
{li-om  MiSS.  tyermone  by  the  Rev.  8.  Thodey). 

(Ver.  43.) 

1.  8en$$  of  fMTcieSy  rather  than  of  judgments,  makes  sin  bitter,  and  leads 
unto  repentance.     Their  captivity,  and  the  sad  things  they  buffered  tlierein,  did 
not  embitter  their  sin  unto  them,  and  break  their  hearts  ;  but  God  8  kindness 
in  bringing  them  out  of  Babylon  into  the  land  of  Israel,  tiiat  prevaileth  with 
them  *  when  they  had  received  marvellous  kindness  from  God,  then  thi^y  were 
marvellously  affected,  greatly  ashamed  of  their  wajrs,  and  loathed  themselves. 
Mercies  in  Zion  produced  that  which  judgments  in  Bab}  lou  did  not.     Great 
mercies  bestowed  upon  great  sinners,  do  preach  the  doctrine  of  repentance  most 
effectually,   convincing  them  strongly  of  their  unworthy  and  vile  carriages 
towards  the  Lord.     David's  kindness  brake  the  heart  of  Saul,  and  made  him  to 
weep  and  say,  "  Thou  art  more  righteous  than  I ;  for  thou  hast  rewarded  me 
good,  where&s  I  have  rewarded  thee  evil"  (1  Sam.  xxiv.)     If  human  favour 
hath  such  influence  into  a  sinful  heart,  what  hath  Divine?     Moses,  by  his 
strokes,  fetched  water  out  of  a  rock ;   David,  by  his  kindness.      God  some- 
times  by  His  judgments  humbles  men,  and  brings  them  to  repentance,   but 
mostly  by  His  mercies.     The  sweet  influences  of  the  Gospel  have  pierced 
deei»er  into  sinnen^'  hearts  than  the  terrors  of  the  law.     2.    l^Vhen  the  Lord 
gathers  uf>  His  people  out  oj  the  world,  and  brings  them  into  nearer  relation  to 
Himt^lf^  into  Canaan,  and  Church  order,  He  looks  that  they  should  review  their 
former  ways  and  be  much  affected  with  them,  and  thoroughly  repent  for  them. 
When  brought  into  Canaan,  they  were  not  only  to  eat  the  milk  and  honey,  to 
behold  the  glory  thereof,  but  they  were  to  remember  days  of  old,  their  sins  in 
B  ibylon,  how  they  had  polluted  themselves  and  provoked  the  Lord ;    and 
therenpim  to  mourn  kindly  for  their  unkindnesses  to  Him,  who  hath  showed 
such  marvellous  loving-kindness  unto  them.     When  God  brings  man  out  of  the 
world  now  unto  Zion,  gives  them  the  milk  and  honey  of  the  gospel,  shows  them 
the  glory  thereof,  then  they  look  back  wonder  at  their  wickedness,  and  loathe 
themselves  for  it,  saying.  Who  is  like  unto  us  in  siu  and  wickedness,  and  who 
is  like  unto  onr  God  in  grace  and  goodness,    in    pardon   and    forgiveness? 
(Micah  vii.   18).     When  it  shall  please  God  to  bring  the  Jews  out  of  that 
Bab)  Ion  they  are  now  in,  unto  the  true  Canaan,  the  Church  of  Christ,  they 
will  remember  their  iniquities,  their  bitter  and  bloody  doings  against  Chri^st, 
mourn  and  loathe  themselves  for  the  same  (Zech.  xii.  10 ;  Rev.  i.  7).)    3.  When 
repentance  springs  from  sense  of  love  and  kindness,  as  it  is  real  and  deep, 
so  it  is  secret  and  universal.    They  should,  being  brought  into  Canaan,  not 
only  remember  their  sins,  but  they  should  loathe  themselves,  be  displeased  so 
with  themselves,  that  they  should  smite  and  abhor  themselves,  and  that  in  their 

345 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XX. 


HOMlLkTIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL, 


own  sifrht,  and  for  all  the  evils  they  had  committed  ;  when  no  eye  saw  them, 
they  would  spreal  all  their  sins  before  them,  and  in  the  sight  and  sense  of  them 
be  vile  in  their  own  eyes. — (GreenhiU,) 


(Vers.  39-44)- 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  The  de- 
struction  of  Jerusalem  under  the  image 
of  a  forest  devoured  by  fire. 

A  comparison  of  these  verses  with 
Ch.  xxi.  2-5,  shows  that  they  belong 
properly  to  Ch.  xxi.  They  form  the 
commencement  of  that  chapter  in  the 
Hebrew  Bible. 

Ver.  46.  "  Set  thy  &ce  towards  the 
south.'*  ''  There  are  three  words  in 
the  Hebrew  text  of  this  verse  to  em- 
press south.  They  are  merely  used 
as  synonyms  for  the  sake  of  varying 
the  expression.  The  first  signifies  to 
be  on  the  right,  honoured  with  refer- 
ence  to  the  })08ition  of  the  quarter  of 
the  heavens  when  facing  the  enst.  The 
word  is  used  both  for  the  right  hand 
and  the  south.  I'he  second  word  is  of 
less  frequent  occurrence,  and  besides 
in  our  prophet,  and  once  in  the  Penta- 
teuch, IS  found  only  in  Job  and  Eccle- 
siastes.  The  third  word  signifies  to  be 
dry,  dried  up  :  hence  the  south,  where 
the  heat  of  the  sun  is  most  severely 
felt.  All  the'  three  terms  specially 
apply  here  to  the  southern  division  of 
the  Holy  Land,  of  which  at  the  time 
Jerusalem  wa?*  the  capital." — {Hender- 
son)  **  Drop  thy  word,"  "  A  very 
common  expression  for  nrophetic  dis- 
course (Deut.  xxxii.  2).  It  is  suggested 
by  the  rain  or  the  dew,  and  points  to 
the  place  of  its  origin, — above,  and 
also  to  the  beneficial  influence  which 
it  is  intended  to  exert,  and  is  used 
even  when  the  discourse  does  not 
contain  promises  merely,  but  also 
threatening  and  judgment,  as  is  the 
csL^e  here  exchusiveiy,  and  to  a  large 
extent  also  in  Deut  xxxii.  May  it 
not  also  hint  at  the  concise,  abrupt 
style  of  composition  adopted  in  this 
chapter  V'—{Lange).  **  The  forest  of 
the  south  field."  Forest  is  used  figura- 
tively to  denote  dense  masses  of  people. 
The  densely  populated  country  of  Jndea 
246 


is  intended.  Ezekiel  here  declares  the 
doom  of  the  Southern  kingdom,  as 
Amos  had  declared  the  doom  of  the 
Northern  kingdom  (Amos  vii.  9, 
11,  17). 

Ver.  47.  **Every  green  tree  in  thee, 
and  every  dry  tree.'*  The  righteous 
and  the  wicked  TCh.  xxi.  3,  4).  Our 
Lord  probably  refers  to  this  passage  in 
St.  Luke  xxiii.  3L  "  The  flaming  Are 
shall  not  be  quenched."  The  fierce 
flame  of  6od*s  jealousy  (Cant  viiL  6). 
'*  All  faces."  '*  Every  single  thing  in 
the  forest,  which  is  caught  at  once  by 
the  flame.  From  south  to  north,  i.e., 
through  the  whole  length  of  the  land. 
From  the  terrible  fierceness  of  the  fire, 
which  cannot  be  extinguished,  every 
one  will  know  that  God  has  kindled  it, 
that  it  has  been  sent  in  judgment." — 
(KeiL) 

Ver.  49.  *'  They  say  of  Ve,  doth  he 
not  speak  parables  V  They  wish  to 
get  rid  of  the  application  of  the  pro- 
phecy to  themselves  by  describing  it 
as  obscure.  They  pretend  not  to 
understand  it.  ''  At  the  same  time,  it 
contains  within  itself  a  request  th&t 
they  may  be  explained.  This  request 
is  granted  ;  and  the  simile  is  first  of 
all  interpreted  in  Ch.  xxi.  1-7  ;  and 
then  still  further  explained  in  verses  8, 
etc"— (KeiL)  " The  riddle  is  easy  to 
solve,  and  the  prophet  has  to  do  with 
a  sharp-witted  people  ;  but  the  hearers 
wtU  not  understand,  because  the  truth 
is  unpleasant  to  them,  and  retire  with 
a  certain  irony  behind  the  difficulty  of 
the  form,  and  make  as  if  they  did  not 
understand.  To  take  away  this  miser- 
able excuse  from  them,  to  punish  them 
for  their  ironical  hardness  of  hearing, 
he  expresses  the  same  in  clear  and 
plain  terms  in  the  following  passaga'* 
— (tiengstenberg,) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL,  chap.  xx. 


HOMILETICS. 
(Ver.  46.) 

**  Drop  thy  word  towards  the  south."  Heb.  Drop  towards  the  south.  The 
word  properly  sigiiifie.s  the  dropping  of  the  clouds,  or  rain,  and  is  metaphorically 
put  for  prophesying  and  preaching.  These  are  likened  unto  rain  or  the 
droppings  thereof.  1.  In  respect  of  the  flowing  and  succession  of  one  drop 
after  another,  "The  heavens  dropped,  the  clouds  also  dropped  water 
CJudg.  V.  4).  So  in  prophesjring,  there  is  one  word,  one  truth  after  another. 
2.  Inr&^pect  to  the  influence  thereof  The  drops  soak  into  the  earth  ;  so  words 
have  influence  into  men's  ears  and  hearts  (Deut.  xxxii.  2).  As  the  rains  and 
dews  insinuate  themselves  into  the  grass  and  ground,  so  do  words  into  the 
heads  and  hearts  of  men  (Psa  cxix.  130).  3.  In  respect  to  the  trouble  and  hurt 
that  oft  rains  and  droppings  produce.  "  A  continual  dropping  in  a  very  rainy 
day  and  a  contentious  woman  are  alike"  (Prov.  xxvii.  15),  alike  grievous, 
troublesome,  wasting,  and  wearying  ;  so  prophesying  of  judgments  and  destmc- 
tion  is  grievous  and  troubles  mucii  ;  it  is  like  great  rains  and  drops  (2  Chron. 
xxxiv.  25).  The  Hebrew  is,  "  shall  drop  upon  this  place."  There  should  be  a 
storm,  and  such  great  drops  of  God's  wrath  as  should  consume  it.    (GreehhilL) 

The  word  of  God  is  rightly  likened  to  rain.  Like  rain,  it  descends  from 
above,  and  not  according  to  man's  will ;  it  is  also,  like  it,  useful  and  beneficial ; 
•as  rain  flows  down  from  rocks  upon  the  fields,  so  the  word  of  God  upon  the 
godless,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  into  pious  hearts ;  and,  like  tiie  rain,  it  is  not 
equally  acceptable  to  all.     (FesseL) 

Thb  Fkopuegy  of  Jerusalem's  Destruotioh. 

(Vers.  45-49.) 

Consider  this  prophecy — 

I.  As  to  its  form.  This  prophecy  is  uttered  in  a  poetioal  form,  roost  wild 
and  rujrged.  The  awful  and  the  terrible,  as  well  as  the  beautiful  and  tender, 
find  their  expression  in  poetry.  The  imageiy  here  is  that  of  a  forest  on  fire, 
and  its  devouring  flame  raging  l»eyond  the  control  of  man.  The  boldness  of  the 
image  will  account  for  the  strange  and  wild  forms  of  the  expressions  u.sed,  and 
the  rapid  transitions  from  one  thought  to  another.  We  can  only  understand 
the  style  of  the  Bible,  in  its  prophetic  writings,  when  we  consider  the  intensity 
and  depth  of  those  feelings  which  possessed  the  minds  of  the  prophets. 

II.  As  to  its  substance.  The  '*  forests"  sij^nify  multitudes — the  preat  masses 
of  the  population  upon  whom  terrible  judgments  are  about  to  fall  1.  The 
judgments  are  irresistible.  The  power  of  God,  which  is  a  righteous  power, 
would  be  at  work  in  them.  The  storms  of  the  Almighty  nish  over  the  forest, 
and  tlie  trees  must  bend.  Moreover,  God  sends  fire,  against  which  nothing  can 
prevail.  *'  The  flaming  fire  shall  not  be  quenched."  2.  Tlie  judgments  fall 
even  upon  the  righteous.  "  And  it  shall  devour  every  green  tree  in  thee,  and 
everv  dry  tree."  The  "  dry  tree"  would  be  fuel  for  the  flame,  but  so  great 
would  be  the  destruction  that  even  the  "green  tree"  could  not  escape. 
Judgment  would  come  even  upon  the  house  of  God.  Even  the  peonle  of  God 
have  sins  enough  to  bring  up  m  them  great  calamities.  **  I  will  kindle  a  fire  in 
thee,"  in  Jerusalem,  the  centre  of  religious  life,  of  Church  privileges.  Like  a 
raging  fire,  God's  judgments  devour  all  before  them.  3.  The  ungodly  are 
admonished  by  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous.      The  prophet  Zechariah  warns 

247 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHiF.  XX.  BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL, 


the  people  that,  when  the  great  and  noble  among  their  oonntrymen 
fall,  tliey  caunot  possibly  escape,  **  Howl,  fir  tree,  fur  the  cedar  is 
faUen "  (Zech.  xi.  2.)  This  is  but  another  form  of  the  Apostle's  state- 
ment ;  "  If  judgment  first  begin  at  the  house  of  God,  what  shidl 
the  end  be  of  them  that  obey  not  the  c^ospel  of  Christ?"  It  is  the 
very  truth  vhich  the  same  apostle  puts  in  the  form  of  a  question,  "  If  tlie 
righteous  scarcely  be  saved,  where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear?  " 
When  our  Lord  bids  the  daughters  of  Jerusalem  to  weep  for  themselves  for  the 
destruction  which  was  about  to  come  ujmju  their  devoted  city,  He  adds,  **  For 
if  they  do  these  things  in  the  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry?" 
(St.  Luke  xxiii.  31).  When  the  green  tree  cannot  stand  before  the  flame,  how 
can  the  dry  tree  hope  to  escape  !  Christ  was  riL^liteous,  yet  He  did  not  escape 
the  judgments  of  sin.  He  sulTered  for  sin.  'Mt  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise 
Him  and  to  put  Him  to  ^rief."  "  He  was  numbered  with  the  transgressors." 
We  can  see  bow  real  a  thing  sin  is,  and  how  hatetul  in  the  sight  of  God,  when 
we  reflect  how  terribly  the  effects  of  it  were  visited  upon  Jesus  Christ,  the 
Righteous.  And  God  employs  judgments  to  purify  His  people  ;  yet,  even  in 
their  case,  these  are  truly  chastisements.  God  is  specially  severe  in  His 
judgments  upon  the  chosen  people,  *'  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families 
of  the  earth  ;  therefore  will  1  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  His  very 
intimacy  with  them  is  put  forward  as  a  reason  for  leaving  no  iniquity 
unpunished.  \\\  all  His  dealings  with  His  chosen,  God  has  ever  acted  upon 
this  principle.  Witness  the  wanderings  nnd  suff'erings  of  the  patriarchs — the 
disper-'ions  and  captivities  of  Israel — the  untimely  death  of  Moses  and  of  Aaron 
— the  troubles  of  Eli — the  sorrows  of  David — the  present  aflSictions  of  the 
righteous.     If  the  green  trees  thus  sniffer,  the  dry  cannot  be  spared. 

IlL  As  to  its  reception.  The  prophecy  is  objected  to  as  obscure,  as  a  dark 
and  mysterious  sa}  ing.  "  Then  said  1,  Ah,  Lord  God  !  they  say  of  me.  Doth 
he  not  speak  parables  ? "  As  if  they  said,  "  He  is  a  speaker  of  parables,  a 
mere  utterer  of  dark  sayings."  There  is  probably  a  vein  of  irony  in  these 
words  with  which  the  hearers  received  the  prophet's  message ;  as  if  they  would 
thus  speak,  **It  is  a  clever  saying  of  things  which  sound  very  terrible,  if  we 
could  only  understand  it."  JSitmers  never  want  excuses  for  neglectina  th^ 
frophet's  message.  Either  the  message  is  too  dark  and  mysterious,  or  else  it 
IS  too  simple.  If  the  prophet  announces  unwelcome  truths,  and  touches  their 
conscience,  they  cry  out  against  him.  If  he  threatens  God's  jud laments,  he  is 
not  to  their  mind.  They  will  have  none  but  those  who  prophesy  smooth 
things.  Ihus  men  find  fault  now  with  God's  revelation.  If  He  says  what 
we  already  know,  we  think  it  is  superfluous :  we  do  not  want  a  revelation 
to  teach  us  that.  If  He  says  one  word  beyond  what  nature  or  reason 
mii^ht  have  taught  us,  we  say  it  is  irrational.  One  plain  declaration  of  the 
Bible  we  pronounce  as  inconsistent  with  probability,  another  as  inconsistent  with 
some  human  authority,  another  as  inconsistent  with  God's  justice,  and  another 
as  inconsistent  with  Christian  charity.  And  in  the  same  way  men  treat  the 
proofs  and  evidences  of  religion.  One  does  not  like  miracles,  and  another 
objects  to  the  very  idea  of  prophecy.  The  one  sayinjr,  that  it  is  altogether 
unworthy  of  God  to  suspend  His  own  laws  ;  and  the  other,  that  it  is  unworthy 
of  God  to  dignify  human  persons  by  the  prediction  of  their  names  and  deeds. 
Another  will  hear  of  nothing  but  the  internal  evidence  of  the  truth,  the  good- 
ness of  the  word  spoken,  the  comfort  conveyed  to  his  own  heart.  And  what 
each  man  does  not  personally  like,  he  casts  aside  as  of  no  value.  Objections  of 
this  kind  are  often  out  mere  excuses.  The  real  repugi.rince  is  to  the  idea  of 
being  taught  anything  from  God  or  His  prophets.  Neither  the  ministry  of  John 
the  Baptist  nor  even  of  Christ  Himself  could  please  the  evil  generation  of  their 
day.  "  But  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children." 
248 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:   BZEKISIk 


OHAP.ZZL 


Thb  Fibb  akd  Sword  of  Divine  Justicb  go  forth  against  Hbathenised 
Jerusalem.     (Chap  xxi.). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  people 
had  turued  all  their  hopes  towanis  the 
mother  country, — the  city  and  king- 
dom. The  prophet  shows  this  to  be  a 
delusion.  The  sword  of  the  Lord  will 
cut  off  Jerusalem  and  the  land  of 
Israel,  both  righteous  and  wicked, 
(ver.  1-17).  The  instrument  to  be 
used  is  the  king  of  Babylon,  \iho  will 
draw  his  sword  against  Jerusalem  and 
the  children  of  Ammon,  first  putting 
an  end  to  the  kingdom  of  Judnh,  and 
the^i  destroying  the  Ammonites  (vers. 
1^-23).  The  design  is,  to  withdraw 
the  people  from  their  delusions,  and 
to  tench  them  that  they  must  trust 
no  longer  in  human  policy  but  rather 
in  repentance  towards  God. 

Vers.  1-7.  The  sword  of  the  Lord 
18  to  be  drawn  against  Jerusalem,  in 
which  the  people  placed  all  tiieir  con- 
fidence. 

Ver.  2.  "  The  holy  placw."  "  Heb. 
sanctuaries.  These  include  not  only 
the  temple  with  its  holy  places,  but 
also  the  other  edifices  appropriated  in 
purer  times  to  Divine  worship,  and 
afterwards  called  synagogues'  (Psa. 
bcxiii.l7) — {Henderson),  Hengstenoerg 
refers  the  plural  to  tlie  glory  of  the 
one  sanctuary,  and  understands  it  of 
"the  spiritual  abode  of  the  people." 
Others  account  for  the  plural  form  of 
the  word  by  understanding  it  of  the 
individual  buildings  of  the  temple,  its 
two  or  three  parts."  **  The  land  of 
Israel."  Equivalent  to  "the  forest 
of  the  south  held."     (Ezek.  xx.  46). 

Ver.  8.  "My  sword."  "The  fire 
kindled  by  the  Lord  is  interpreted  as 
being  the  sword  of  the  Lord.  It  is 
true  that  this  is  a  figurative  expression  ; 
but  it  is  commonly  used  for  war,  which 
brings  with  it  devastation  and  death, 
and  would  be  generally  intelligible." — 
(Keil)  ''Out  of  his  fheatb."  ^fhe 
sword  of  God  had  rested  in  its  sheath 
for  above  400  years.  In  the  days  of 
David  it  was  suspended  over  Jerusalem ; 


but  the  arm  of  the  Destroying  Angel 
was  then  "  stayed."  David  by  God's 
direction  offered  burnt-offerings  on  the 
very  ))lace  where  the  temple  was  after- 
wards built ;  and  the  destroying  sword 
was  returnetl  "  into  the  sheath  thereof" 
(1  Chron.  xxi.  16,  27  ;  xxii.  1).  God's 
forbearance  was  the  sheath  in  which  it 
rested  so  long.  Now  Israel  had  become 
heathenized,  the  vile  profanation  of 
God's  altar  was  no  longer  to  be  endured, 
and  the  sword  must  again  leave  its 
scabbard.  **The  righteous  and  the 
wicked."  "  This  is  not  in  contradic- 
tion with  Ch.  IX.  4,  according  to 
which  the  righteous,  amidst  the  im- 
pendimr  catastrophe,  are  the  object  of 
the  protecting  and  sustaining  activity 
of  God.  For  if  two  suffer  the  same, 
vet  it  is  not  the  same.  To  those  who 
love  God  must  aU  things  be  for  the 
best"  (Rom.  viii.  28). — (Hengstenberg  ) 
"  There  is  no  real  contradiction  between 
the  doctrine  taught  in  this  passage,  and 
that  vindicated  ch.  xviil  X^ough 
removed  from  their  native  land  along 
with  the  wicked,  inasmuch  as  they 
were  nationally  connected  with  them, 
yet  the  righteous  were  to  be  regarded 
only  as  the  subjects  of  corrective  disci- 
pline, whereas  to  the  idolatrous  Jews 
the  sufferings  were  unmitigated  punish- 
ment."— (Henderson.) 

Ver.  4.  "From  the  south  to  the 
north.**  The  whole  extent  of  the 
country,  from  Dan  to  Beersheba. 

Ver.  5.  ''It  shall  not  return  any 
more."  It  shall  go  on  to  make  a  full 
end.  The  same  idea  as  in  ch.  xx.  48, 
where  it  is  stated  that  the  fire  of  God's 
judgments  shall  not  be  quenched. 

Ver.  6.  "  Sigh,  therefore,  thou  son 
of  man,  with  the  breaking  of  thy 
loins.'*  The  loins  are  said  to  be  broken 
when  acute  pain  robs  a  man  of  all 
power  and  strength  (Dent  xxxiii.  11). 
"  The  more  deeply  to  affect  his  country- 
men with  a  sense  of  the  dire  calamities 
which  were  so  soon  to  overtake  them, 

249 


Digitized  by 


Google 


dUP.xxi.  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL, 


the  prophet  is  commanded  openly  to  heard'  which  is  passinir  into  fulfihnent; 

assume  the  appearnnce  of  a  person  in  therefore  liis  pnm.     But  they  shall  be 

deep  distress,  clanping  his  loins  with  compelled  to  experience  in  themselves 

bis   hands,  as    sadly    bruised ;    and,  what  they  perceive  in  him.     In  all, 

giving  utterance  to  piteous  groans  in  courage  gives  place  to  terror,  activity 

the  bitterness  of  his  spirit,   he  was  to  prostration,  counsel  to  )>erplexity. 

to    present  himself   before  them." —  No    one    holds    out    any    longer." — 

(Henderson.)  (Lange.)    *'A11  knees  shall  be  weak 

as  water.**    They  become  like  water  in 

Ver.  7.     **ror  the  tidings,  because  laxity  and  incoherence.     Their  strength 

it  oometh."    "  That  which  to  others  is,  as  it  were,  dissolved,  flows  away  and 

is  merely  tidings,  is  to  the  prophet  is  scattered  in  all  directions, 
already  coming,  or  it  is  to  him  a  'tiling 


EOMILETICS. 

(Vers.  6,  7.) 

Such  fear  should  possess  them  upon  the  tidings  of  the  Babylonish  army's 
approaching,  as  should  make  their  rocky  hearts  melt  as  snow  before  the  sun,  or 
fat  of  lambs  before  the  fire  ;  and  the  bands,  spirits,  and  knees  of  their  stoutest 
man  to  be  feeble,  faint,  and  weak ;  so  that  they  should  be  inept  unto  all 
services,  especially  military  <mes.  1.  Gwl  will  have  the  prophet  to  see  what 
prophetical  signs  will  do,  when  prophetical  threats  did  nothing.  **  Sigh,  son  of 
man,  with  the  breaking  of  thy  loins,'*  &c.  These  were  prophetical  sighs,  repre- 
senting unto  them  the  great  evils  which  were  coming  upon  them  ;  that  so  they 
might  consider,  sigh  in  like  manner  for  their  sins,  and  prevent  their 
destruction,  or  else  certainly  expect  the  same.  God  laid  a  heavy  burden  upon 
the  prophet  when  he  is  called  so  to  8i<;h.  2.  ///  tidings  sink  the  hearts  and  spirits 
of  hypocrites  and  wicked  ones.  When  they  hear  of  wars  and  great  forces 
coining  against  them,  not  only  doth  their  mirth  cease,  but  their  hearts,  hands, 
spirits,  knees  fail  them.  When  Nebuchadnezzar  came  their  hands  were  upon 
their  loins,  they  knew  not  what  to  do,  whither  to  go,  where  to  hi<te  themselves. 
But  in  Psa.  cxii.  7,  it  is  said  of  a  godly  man,  "  He  shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil 
tidings ;  his  heart  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord." — {GreenhiU.) 

(Ver.  1-7.) 

God's  Sword  of  Vengeance  against  Jerusalsil 

The  parabolic  character  of  vers.  45-49  in  the  last  chapter  is  continued.  Ilien 
the  destruction  by  fire  was  threatened  ;  now  it  is  the  sword.  Of  this  sword  of 
vengeance  against  Israel  for  their  sins  we  learn  : — 

I.  It  was  lifted  against  those  things  in  which  the  people  trusted  most* 
"  Toward  Jerusalem,  the  holy  places,  the  land  of  Israel  "  (ver.  2).  The  Jews 
turned  their  faces  towards  Jerusalem  when  they  prayed  in  war,  or  in  a  foreign 
land.  The  sword  of  the  Lord  was  to  be  drawn  against  all  thone  glories  of  their 
country  in  which  they  most  prided  themselves.  The  candlestick  will  be  removed 
from  unfaithful  churches. 

n.  It  was  manifestly  the  Sword  of  the  Lord.    "  My  sword "  (ver.  8). 
Human  instruments  were  to  be  used,  human  passiions ;  yet  behind  all  these, 
250 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZ BEJEL.  chap.  xn. 


and  directing  them,  God  was  working  out  his  own  purposes  Tlie  swords  were 
His,  though  men  bare  them.  This  will  teach  us  to  iudge  rightly  of  war,  wherein 
the  enmities  of  nations  are  so  controlled  by  Providence  that  they  are  made  to 
minister  to  the  moral  and  intellectual  welfare  of  the  human  race.  God 
''  maketh  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  Him,"  and  the  "  remainder "  of  that 
wrath,  which  might  work  but  unmixed  evil,  He  restrains  from  so  futile  a 
purpose.  He  can  punish  by  whatever  instrument  He  pleases.  And  because 
this  judgment  coming  upon  Jerusalem  and  the  land  of  Israel  is  described  as 
the  sword  of  God,  it  follows  that  that  iudgment  is  a  reality.  The  prophet  is 
to  drop  his  word  of  prophecy  toward  Jerusalem.  That  "  word  "  was  not  a 
mere  sound  ;  but  a  sword,  a  real  calamity.  With  God,  words  stand  for 
things  which  have  a  real  existence^  The  threatening^  against  sinners,  however 
they  may  be  disregarded  in  the  present,  will  in  the  future  have  a  terribly  real 
meaning. 

nL  It  was  long  threatened  before  it  was  drawn  to  smite.  *'  And  will  draw 
forth  My  sword  out  of  his  sheath  "  (ver.  3).  It  had  lain  in  the  sheath  for  400 
years,  during  all  their  wanderings  and  rebellions.  The  sheath  in  which  God's 
sword  of  vengeance  lies  unused  is  His  forbearance. 

IT.  It  still  hangs  over  nnrighteons  nations*  "  It  shall  not  return  any 
more,"  but  "go  forth  against  all  flesh"  (vers  4,  5).  This  was  the  sword  of 
the  Chaldeans  :  it  was  *  followed  by  the  sword  of  the  Romans.  And  so  the 
sword  of  God  will  rest  not  until  the  last  Antichrist  and  his  desolation.  Israel 
fell  beneath  the  stroke  of  God  for  her  sins,  and  who  then  can  escape  ?  Whole 
nations  have  perished  for  hick  of  righteousness. 

V.  The  thought  of  it  should  produce  the  greatest  terror  and  alarm.  1.  In 
the  prophet  who  utters  the  threat  of  it.  "Sigh  therefore,  thou  son  of  man" 
(ver.  6).  The  sigh  is  the  momentary  failure  of  the  heart  when  suddenly  over- 
come by  the  thought  of  sorrow.  It  answers  to  the  tongue  dumb  with  silence 
at  tiie  tidings  of  some  overwhelming  calamity.  The  prophet  charged  with 
the  message  is  to  sigh,  as  if  completely  overcome.  Even  God's  people 
may  well  tremble  when  they  think  of  His  judgments  (Dan.  ix.  4,  etc.). 
Christ  wept  over  Jerusalem  at  the  thought  of  her  doom,  and  as  if  unwilling 
to  abandon  her  to  her  enemies.  It  is  with  reluctance  that  the  Almighty  Jud^e 
pronounces  sentence.  Judgment  is  God's  "  strange  work."  The  preacher  who 
wishes  to  affect  the  feelings  of  others  must  feel  himself.  The  thought  of  God's 
sword  of  vengeance  should  produce  the  greatest  terror  and  alarm, — 2.  In  the 
people  to  whom  his  message  is  delivered.  If  the  prophet  who  simply  announces 
the  judgments  is  bidden  to  sigh,  what  must  they  do  on  whom  the  judgments 
are  to  fall  I  The  prophet  is  to  sigh  for  the  tidings,  ''because  it  cometli."  He 
knows  that  they  shall  be  fulfilled  in  grim  reality.  Therefore  he  announces  that 
as  concerning  the  people,  '*  Every  heart  shall  melt,  and  all  hands  shall  be  feeble, 
and  every  spirit  shall  faint,  and  all  knees  shall  be  weak  as  water  "  (ver.  17). 
They  refused  to  hear,  now  they  shall  be  made  to  feel.  Those  who  were  so 
insolent  in  prosperity,  and  defied  God,  become,  when  His  judgments  fall  upon 
them,  faint-hearted  and  desolate.  *'  Weak  as  water :"  the  strength  of  the 
most  daring  sinners  melts  away  before  the  righteous  anger  of  God. 

EXEGETIOAL  NOTES.  (Verses  Ver.  9.  *' And  also  furbished."  As 
8-17.)  The  sword  is  sharpened  for  if  the  sword  so  lonjf  unused  had  rusted 
slaying.  As  they  are  a  people  who  in  its  sheath.  "  The  repetition — a 
refuse  to  understand,  the  judgment  is  sword,  a sword,ia  not  without  effect — 
Minounced  in  the  plainest  terms.  definitely  pointing  to  the  destructive 

251 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  XXL 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SZEKJBh 


weapon  to  be  employed  in  the  war. 
To  aiij?ment  the  terror  which  the 
announcement  was  calculated  to  in- 
spire, the  sword  is  dej^cribed  as 
sharpened,  prepared  to  do  execution, 
and  also  polished.  The  gl  i t  teri  ng  of  a 
highly-polislied  sword,  wielded  in  the 
sun,  is  truly  terrific  (Deut.  xxxii.  41  ; 
Job  XX.  2b'*).— {Henderson,) 

Ver.  10.  It  if  sharpened  to  make  a 
sore  slaughter.  Heb.  That  slaying  it 
may  slay.  It  is  made  ready  not  for 
display,  but  for  its  terrible  work  of 
judgment.  It  is  furbished  that  it 
may  glitter.  Heb.  Have  lightning, 
Comp.  ver.  28.  This  is  the  sword 
spoken  of  in  Deut  xxxii.  41,  where 
the  expression,  "  My  glittering  sword  " 
is  literally  "  the  lightning  of  My 
sword."  Such  also  is  the  sword  wielded 
by  the  Cherubim  (Ezek.  i  13, 14),  and 
by  those  who  were  the  avengers  of 
God's  broken  Law.  (Exod.  xix.  16). 
'*  Should  we  then  make  mirth  t" 
Nothing  could  be  worse-timed  than  to 
make  light  of  these  juHffments.  **  It 
contemneth  the  rod  of  My  son,  as 
every  tree."  "Mv  son,"  is  the  same 
as  **  My  people,  in  ver.  12,  The 
expression,  the  rod  of  My  son,  is  the 
genitive  of  object — i  e.,  the  instru- 
ment employed  in  punishing  My  son. 
In  accordance  with  this  is  the  render- 
ing of  the  Revif^ed  Version,  "The  rod 
of  My  son,  it  contemneth  every  tree." 
The  sword  of  Nebuchadnezzar  was  the 
rod  which  punished  God's  people,  and 
that  rod  of  the  universal  conqueror 
set  at  nought  all  others. 

Ver.  1 1 .  "And  He  hath  given  it  to 
be  furbished  that  it  may  be  handled." 
"  He  hath  given,"  used  impersonally 
for  and  it  is  given,  acconiing  to  an 
idiom  common  in  Hebrew.  "The 
instrument  of  destrnction  was  quite 
prepared,  and  only  required  to  be  em- 
ployed by  Jehovah  against  His  apostate 
people." — (Henderson.) 

Ver.  12.    "  For  it  shall  be  upon  My 

people"   The  object  ot  the  Chnldean 

expedition  is  here  clearly  pointed  out. 

The  Jews  were  not  to  delude  them- 

252 


selves  with  the  idea  that  it  was  Egypt 
or  any  other  neigh  l)ouriiig  nation  that 
was  to  come  under  the  judgment  of 
God's  avenging  sword.  The  punish- 
ment would  full  upon  themselves. 

Ver.  13.     ''Because  it  ii  a  triaL^ 

"  These  words  point  with  the  utmost 
brevity  to  the  character  of  the  impend- 
ing time,  which  presented  itself  in  rosy 
hues  to  the  politically  excited  people. 
Trial  is  a  terrible  word  to  a  people 
that  suffers  the  deepest  calamities. 
When  the  trial  comes,  nothing  remains 
undisclosed,  nothing  unrequited;  every 
varnish  disappears,  and  all  glitter 
vanisi  \  es. "  —  ( llenastenherg).  And 
what  if  the  sword  contemn  even  the 
rodt  it  shall  be  no  more,  laith  the 
Lord  God."  "With  a  view  to  the 
sanguine  imaginations  by  which  the 
people  sought  to  banish  the  thought 
of  the  hardness  of  the  times,  the  pro- 
phet  then  asks,  '  And  how  ?  should  the 
despising  rod  (the  punishment  that 
far  outstrips  all  other  punishments, 
ver.  10)  not  be  ? '  And  the  answer  to 
this  question  he  gives  in  the  names 
of  God,  which  utter  a  loud  no  to 
these  illusions." — (Hengstenberg,)  "If 
Nebuchadnezzar  should  really  despise 
the  resistance  made  by  the  Jewish 
state,  which  lie  did  (ver.  10) — what 
was  to  be  expected  as  the  consequence  f 
That  state  must  necessarily  come  to 
an  end,  it  shall  not  be.  Such  I  regard  as 
themeaning  of  this  most  difficult  verse." 
— {Henderson!)  The  general  idea  of  tlie 
text  is,  what  if,  under  this  terrible  judg- 
ment, Judah's  temporal  power  and 
royalty  shall  cease  to  exist  ?  ^  And  in 
ver.  27,  we  are  told  that  this  result 
shall  certainly  come  to  pass.  But  the 
kingdom  shall  be  restored  by  One 
whose  sceptre  of  righteousness  despises 
every  earthly  power. 

Ver.  14.  "And  let  the  iword  be 
doubled  the  third  time."  "  These  words 
are  desi^^ned  to  express  the  tremendous 
size  and  power  of  the  sword  to  be  em- 
ployed. It  was  no  ordinary  foe  that 
was  to  attack  the  Jews.  All  liones  of 
escape  were  vain.  It  was  a  swora  that 
had  been  well  tried,  and  proved  sue- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKIBL. 


OBXB,  ZXI. 


cessfnl  in  many  a  battle, — the  sword 
of  the  slain.** — (Henderson.)  'Which 
entereth  into  their  privy  chambers.'* 
It  will  invade  the  sanctity  of  their 
houses  (Deut.  xxxii.  25).  There  may 
be  some  reference  also  to  its  pene- 
trating into  their  secret  '*  chambers  of 
imagery"  (Ezek.  viii.  12). 

Ver.  15.  "I  have  set  the  point  of 
the  sword  again4  all  their  gates." 
The  gates  of  their  city  are  to  be 
besieged  by  the  naked  sword.  **And 
tbeir  ruins  be  multiplied."  Heb.,  And 
ths/allen  be  numerous  in  all  their  gates, 
"Wrapped  up  for  the  slaughter." 
Kather,  made  keen,  or  sharpened,  for 
the  slaughter. 

Ver,  16.  "(Jo  thee  one  way  or  other, 
either  on  the  right  hand  or  on  the 
left,  whithersoever  thy  face  is  set.'* 
The  address  is  to  the  sword,  as  if  it 
were  an   army.    The   "right"   and 


"left"  show  how  wide  is  the  area 
over  which  God  shall  execute  His 
judgments  ;  so  wide  that  it  embraces 
not  only  Judea,  but  a  whole  group  of 
peoples.  The  word  "whithersoever" 
seems  to  imply  the  idea  of  direction 
by  the  "living  creatures"  (Ezek.  i. 
9,  12). 

Ver.  17.  ''I  will  also  smite  Mine 
hands  together."  ''  By  a  strong 
anthropopathy  Jehovah  declares  He 
will  do  what  He  had  commanded  the 
prophet  to  do  (ver.  14).  Smiting  the 
hands  together  is  an  indication  of 
violent  grie£  "  I  will  cause  My  fury 
to  rest'  signifies,  not  the  forbearing 
to  pour  it  out  in  judgment,  but  the 
full  and  permanent  infliction  of  it " 
(Henderson).  The  fury  of  God  is  said 
to  "  rest "  when  it  reaches  its  object, 
thus  abiding  upon  it.  "  Jehovah  will 
smite  His  hands  together  and  cool  His 
wrath  upon  them  "  iKeU)* 


BOMILETICS. 


Thb  Sacred,  terriblb  swoRD-soNa 

The  prophets  doubtless  treated  politics  both  on  their  outward  and  inward  side, 
but  only  the  politics  of  the  kingdom  of  God  (ver.  9).  God  shows  us  the  sword, 
and  waves  it  over  our  heads,  so  that  we  should  be  duly  and  protitably  alarmed. 
He  can  use  every  creature  as  HU  sword ;  it  is  always  prepareil  to  execute  His 
command.  War  as  a  divine  judgment,  therefore,  for  the  punishment  of  evil 
doers ;  but  it  is  also  a  preaching  of  repentvnce,  when  God  sharpens  the  sword 
and  makes  it  glitter.  He  who  will  not  submit  to  the  sword  of  Gods  word 
(Heb.  iv.  12)  will  be  overtaken  by  the  sword  of  the  enemy.  God  Himself  takes 
the  offering  which  men  will  not  give  Him  voluntarily  (ver.  10).  There  can  be 
joy  amid  the  deepest  sufferings,  but  not  over  another's  suffering,  especially 
wlien  it  is  punishment  for  Hin.  The  sin  of  the  people  presses  the  sword  into 
the  hand  for  war  (ver.  11).  Sin  was  also  interwoven  with  the  conquering 
chaplets  of  the  victors,  as  the  dew  upon  these  chaplets  was  innumerable  tears  and 
drops  of  blood.  This  must  ever  be  remembered  amid^  songs  of  triumph !  Fortune 
of  war,  as  men  call  it,  what  a  sad  fortune  I  God  is  the  ludge  behind  and  in  the  con- 
queror. "  Upon  all  the  princes  of  Israel"  (ver.  12.)  Even  the  great  have  no  privi- 
lege to  sin.  Trial  is  a  terrible  word  to  a  people  that  suffers  the  deepest  calamities. 
A  tried  sword  is  a  dreadtnl  thing  when  it  turns  against  a  people  whom  God  has 
given  up  to  judgment.  One  day  an  end  will  oe  made  of  all  despisers  of  God 
and  man.  The  history  of  the  world  as  the  fulfiment  of  prophecy  (ver.  14). 
Symbolical  prophecy — the  emblems  of  punishment.  Some  must  prophesy 
judgment  who  would  so  willingly  speak  of  redemption,  and  redemption  alone  ; 
men  will  not  have  the  blessing,  and  therefore  the  curse  must  be  exhibited. 

263 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORiLP.zzL  BOM ILETIC  COMMENTARY:   EZEKTEl. 


6od*8  sword  draws  not  back  from  human  elevation ;  it  reaches  the  dwellers 
in  the  valley,  and  those  also  who  sit  on  lofty  seats.  No  earthly  throne  is  a 
protection  from  the  sword  of  God  ;  the  history  of  the  world  is  filled  with  prooGi 
of  thia  The  last  mighty  pierced- through  one  is  AntichrisU  Alas,  who  can 
hide  from  the  wrath  of  God  1 — (LangeJ 


(Ver.  13). 

**  Because  it  is  a  trial*'  We  may  consider  vers.  12,  13  as  thus  understood : 
There  is  cause  thou  shouldst  cry,  howl,  smite  upon  thy  thigh,  because  the  sword 
shall  be  a  trial ;  and  what  also  if  it  shall  not  be  a  despising  rod  ?  If  it  be  a 
trying  rod,  there  is  cause  enough  to  mourn,  but  it  shall  l^  a  despising  rod, 
and  so  there  is  more  cause  to  mourn.  If  this  rod  make  them  not  try  their 
ways,  repent,  and  turn,  it  shall  be  a  rod  to  despise  the  stoutest  of  them  and 
to  destroy  them.  1.  That  the  judgments  of  God  are  trials.  They  discover  and 
make  known  what  people  are.  The  fire  tries  the  metals,  and  declares  what  is 
good  silver,  good  gold  and  what  is  reprobate.  God  kept  the  children  of 
Israel  forty  years  in  the  wilderness,  to  prove  them,  and  know  what  was  in 
their  hearts  (Deut.  viii.  8).  The  hard  things  they  met  with  there  discovered 
some  to  be  murmurers,  some  idolaters,  some  fornicators,  some  backsliders. 
''It  shall  come  to  pass  that  when  they  shall  be  hungry,  they  shiJl  fret 
themselves,  and  curse  their  king  and  their  God"  (Isa.  viii.  21).  When 
evil  was  upon  them,  then  their  wickedness  appeared.  So  Jehoram  said, 
"  This  evil  is  of  the  Lord,  why  should  I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer? "  His 
vileness  came  out  in  the  time  of  his  distress.  When  great  winds  are  abroad, 
they  discover  what  trees  are  sound  or  rotten.  2.  God  tnes  before  he  destroys. 
Rods  of  trial  came  before  rods  of  destruction.  When  the  sword  is  drawn,  fur- 
bished, and  whet,  the  Lord  tries  men  thereby,  whether  they  will  consider  their 
ways,  repent  and  turn  to  Him,  before  He  cut  and  destroy  therewith.  Tidings 
and  terrors  of  the  sword  precede  the  strokes  of  it.  God  tries  His  people  by 
threatenings,  by  bringing  judgments  near  unto  them,  by  inflicting  lesser 
judgments  u}>on  them,  before  He  makes  an  utter  destniction  of  them ;  that 
they  may  learn  righteousness,  humble  themselves,  and  so  either  prevent  the 
judgments,  or  have  them  turned  into  mercies.  3.  When  rods  of  trial  do  us  no 
good,  t/ien  follow  rods  of  destruction.  When  the  trying  rod  hath  been  despised, 
then  comes  the  rod  that  will  not  regard  high  or  low,  prince  or  people.  At  first 
God  did  lightly  afflict  Zebulun  and  Pl^apthali,  but  that  being  in  vain,  aft^erwards 
He  afflicts  them  more  grievously  (Isa.  ix,  1).  When  Dimon  profited  not  by  her 
first  strokes,  God  laid  more  upon  her  (Isa.  xv.  9).  When  smiting  the  lintel  of 
the  door,  and  shaking  the  posts,  did  not  prevail,  then  did  the  Lord  cut  and 
slay  with  the  sword  (Amos  ix.  1).  If  fear  work  not,  He  hath  a  pit ;  if  that  do 
it  not.  He  hath  a  snare  (Isa.  xxiv.  17,  18).  When  paternal  chastisements  profit 
not,  God  hath  destroying  judgments.  He  will  deal  then  with  men,  not  as  erring 
children,  but  as  open  enemies. — (GreenhilL) 

EXE6ETICAL  NOTES.— (Vers,  "appoint,"  is  to  draw  a  symbolic  sketch, 

18-22).     The  sword  of  the  king  of  to    give    an    ocular    demonstration. 

Babylon  will  smite  Jerusalem,  and  then  Ezekiel  is  to  draw  on  a  table  or  tablet 

the  Ammonites.  a  sketch  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem. 

The  Hebrew  word  rendered  "  choose" 

Ver.  19.    ''Appoint  thee  two  ways,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  has  the 

that  the  sword  of  the  king  of  Babylon  primary  meaning  of  to  cut,  and  points 

may  come.*'    The  force  of  this  word,  to  the  cutting  or  engraving  of  a  repre* 


Mi 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIBL. 


OHAP.  XXL 


sentation.  **Both  twain  shall  oome 
forth  out  of  one  land."  Or,  *'  the  land 
of  one,  i.e.,  the  land  of  the  Babylonish 
king,  from  wliicli  both  ways  shall 
proceed.  **  Choose  thou  a  place,  choose 
it  at  the  head  of  the  way  to  the  city." 
**  Tlie  *  one  land '  wlience  the  two  ways 
proceeded  was  that  of  Babylon,  and  the 
ways  ran  in  a  westerly  direction  ;  the 
more  northerly  by  Kiblah  in  Syria;  and 
the  more  soutliefly  by  Tadmor,  or 
Palmyra,  in  the  desert.  The  former  was 
that  usually  taken  from  Babylon  to 
Jerusalem  ;  the  latter  from  the  same 
city  to  Rabbah  on  the  east  of  the 
Jordan.  The  prophet  is  directed 
to  choose  a  place  at  the  head  of 
the  way,  or  as  it  is  literally,  to  cut 
a  hand  (Ueb.  yod,  a  hand  or  a 
sign),  a  sign  pointing  to  the  direction 
in  which  the  Chaldean  army  was  to 
proceed.  Tiiis  he  was  to  place  at  the 
head  or  commencement  of  the  way^ 
where  the  two  roads  separated,  each 
taking  its  own  course  ;  while  we  are 
necessarily  to  understand  its  being 
made  to  point  towards  that  which  the 
King  of  Babylon  was  to  select,  as  we 
are  taught  in  ver.  21.  Our  authorised 
translators  have  adopted  the  secondary 
signification  of  the  word  to  cut,  by 
rendering  it  choose.  That  the  hand  is 
not  supposed  to  have  been  formed  by 
sculpture,  would  appear  from  the 
circumstance  that,  in  case  it  had  been 
so,  a  different  Hebrew  verb  would 
have  been  employed.  It  may  have 
been  made  of  wood,  just  like  our 
finger-posts,  with  the  representation 
of  a  city  cut  in  it.     The  word  city  is 

f>urposely  indefinite,  the  Article  being 
eft  to  be  supplied  by  the  consciences 
of  those  whom  the  prophet  addressed.'' 
— Henderson.) 

Ver.  20.  "That  the  sword  may 
come  to  Eabbah  of  the  Ammonites.*' 
"  It  may  at  first  sight  appear  inap- 
propriate that  Rabbah,  the  metropolis 
of  the  country  of  the  Ammonites, 
should  be  mentioned  before  Jerusalem, 
the  gnilty  city  against  which  the 
prophet  was  especially  commissioned 
to  denounce  the  Divine  judgments; 
but>  considering  to  what  an  extent  the 


Jews  had  adopted  the  idols  of  the 
AuimoniU's,  there  was  a  singular  pro- 
priety in  first  taking  up  the  heathen 
city,  to  intimate  that  as  the  Jews  had 
participated  in  its  crimes  so  they  might 
expect  to  share  in  its  punishment 
Rabbah  oj  the  children  of  Ammon,  so 
called  to  distinguish  it  from  a  city  of 
the  same  name  in  the  tribe  of  Judah. 
It  was  built  on  the  banks  of  the  river 
AIoret'Amman,  which  empties  itself 
into  the  Jabbok."  {Henderson.)  "Judah 
in  Jerusalem  the  defenced."  The 
royal  house  of  Judah  was  the  special 
object  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  inaigna- 
tion.  "  The  defenced "  ;  same  word 
as  in  Dent,  xxviii.  52,  '*  thy  high  and 
fenced  walls,  wherein  thou  trustedst." 
It  was.Zedekiah's  trust  in  the  strong 
fortifications  of  Jerusalem  that  led 
him  to  break  faith  with  his  sovereign. 
**  Instead  of  simply  expressing  the 
name  of  Jerusalem,  the  other  metro- 
polis, that  of  the  inhabitants  is  prefixed, 
to  mark  them  as  the  guilty  objects  of 
the  Divine  indignation.  The  reason  why 
Jerusalem  is  here  said  to  be  defenced 
would  seem  to  be  to  intimate  the  vaiu 
confidence  which  the  Jews  reposed  in 
their  fortifications."    {Henderson.) 

Ver.  21.  "The  King  of  Babylon 
stood  at  the  parting  of  tiie  way,  at  the 
head  of  the  two  ways,  to  use  divina- 
tion; he  made  his  arrows  bright,  he 
consulted  with  images,  he  looked  in 
the  liver/*  "Nebuchadnezzar  is  sup- 
posed to  have  marched  his  army  to  a 
certain  point  to  the  west  of  Babylon, 
where  the  road  branched  off  into  the 
two  referred  to.  The  '  parting ' 
(Heb.  ths  mother  of  the  way),  so- 
called,  not  as  generally  supposed, 
because  there  the  road  divided,  for 
that  is  immediately  afterwards  de- 
scribed as  the  head  of  the  two  ways, 
but  because  it  was  the  principal  road. 
Here  the  monarch  is  represented  as 
having  been  at  a  loss  to  determine 
which  of  the  routes  he  should  take  ; 
and,  in  order  to  decide,  as  having  re- 
course to  divination.  Of  this  as  prac- 
tised by  the  ancients  there  were  dif- 
ferent kinds,  some  of  which  are  here 
mentioned.  '  Made  his  arrows  bright ;' 

355 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORAP.  XXX. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:    EZEKIEL. 


Heb.  he  shook  the  arrows— i,e.,  the 
lielmet,  quiver,  or  whatever  else  they 
were  put  into.  It  is  most  probable 
that  he  caused  the  name  Jerusalem  to 
be  inscribed  on  one  arrow,  and 
Kabbah  on  another,  and  mixing  them 
with  others,  determine<l  to  march 
against  the  city  whose  name  was  first 
drawn  out.  This  mode  of  divining  by 
arrows  was  practised  by  the  Arabs  till 
the  time  of  Mohammed,  who  strictly 
prohibited  it  in  the  Koran.  Another 
species  of  divination  to  which  the 
King  of  Babylon  had  recourse,  was 
that  of  looking  into  the  liver  or  the 
entrails  of  a  newly-killed  sacrifice,  and 
judging  that  any  undertaking  would 
be  prosj)erous  or  otherwise  according 
as  they  were  found  in  a  healthy  or  un- 
healthy stAte.  This  art  is  mentioned 
by  Diodorus  as  practised  among  the 
Chaldeans.  Not  satisfied  with  the 
use  of  these  two  species  of  divina- 
tion, Nebuchadnezzar  consulted  the 
Teraphim,  which  appear  to  have  been 
penates  or  family  gods,  from  whom  it 
was  thought  possible  to  obtain  infor- 
mation relative  to  future  events 
(Gen.  xxxi  19,  34  ;  Judges  xvii,  6 ; 
xviii.  l^)."— (Henderson.) 

Ver.  22.  At  his  right  hand  was  the 
divination  for  Jernsalem."  The  king 
with  his  right  hand  draws  out  the  arrow 
on  which  was  marked  the  name  Jeru- 
salem. The  omen  decides  for  him,  and 
he  is  represented  as  holding  up  the 
arrow  to  encourage  his  army  in  their 
march  against  Jerusalem.  **To  open 
the  month  in  the  slaughter."  ''  This 
expression  cannot  well  be  taken  in  its 
usual  signification  of  murder,  but  must 
be  understood,  as  Gesenius  explains, 
as  an  outbreak  of  the  voice  ;  both 
terms  thus  energetically  expres-ing  the 
horrible  war-shout  of  the  Chaldean 
soldiers  when  commencing  the  attack." 
— (/Jenderson.)  "  The  slaughter-cry 
of  the  besie^iers  is  called  slaughter, 
because  the  slaughter  is  virtually  con- 
tained in  it." — {Hengstenberg). 

EXEGETICAL   NOTES.— Vers. 
23-27.  ^  Though  this  announcement  of 
Ood's  judgments  will  appear  to  the 
256 


people  of  Judea  as  a  deceptive  divina- 
tion, yet  it  will  surely  come  to  pass. 
The  prophet,  however,  sees  beyond  all 
these  evils  the  hope  of  redemption. 
The  Me-'siah  is  promised,  who  is  to  be 
the  founder  and  restorer  of  perfect 
right  on  earth  (ver.  27).  See  also, 
Psa.  Ixii.  ;  Isa.  ix.  6  ;  xiiL  1 ;  Jer. 
xxiii.  5 ;  xxxiii.  17. 

Ver.  23.  **  And  it  shall  be  nnto  them 
as  a  false  divination  in  their  sight,  to 
them  that  have  sworn  oaths ,  but  He 
will  call  to  remembrance  the  iniquity, 
that  they  mav  be  taken.'*  *'  Though 
the  Jews  were  prone  themselves  to 
believe  in  divination,  yet  they  affect 
to  despise  it  when  it  tells  against 
tiiem.  The  second  *  to  them '  may 
be  understood  to  refer  to  the  Jews,  as 
they  had  come  under  solemn  engai^e- 
roents  to  l>e  subject  to  the  Babylonians, 
but  those  engagements  they  had 
violated  ;  and  for  this,  as  well  as  their 
other    sins,    they    were    now    to    be 

Sunished.  The  oaths  were  those  the 
ews  had  taken  to  the  King  of 
Babylon.  '  He  will  call  to  remem- 
brance,' refers  to  Nebuchadnezzar,  to 
whom  the  Jews  had  proved  faithless, 
and  who  now  should  recall  to  their 
mind  the  crime  of  perjury,  of  which 
they  had  been  guilty." — {Henderson), 

Ver.  24.  ''  So  that  in  all  your  doinf  s 
your  sins  do  appear."  They  dragged 
their  old  sins  into  light  again  by  the 
new  enormities  which  they  committed. 
Their  rebellion  against  God  is  here 
spoken  of  as  "your  iniquity,"  "trans- 
gressions," "sins."  These  words  are 
the  same  as  those  mentioned  in  con- 
nection with  the  offerings  on  the  day 
of  Atonement,  when  "  a  remembrance 
was  made  of  sins"  (Lev.  xvi ;  Heb. 
X.  3).  Tlien  the  people  confessed  their 
sins  and  were  forgiven  ;  but  now  they 
refuse  to  acknowledge  their  guilt 
(Ezek.  xviii.  2),  and  so  their  sin  is 
"  discovered,"  it  stands  over  for  punish- 
ment. 

Ver.  25.  **  And  thou,  profane  wicked 
prince  of  IsraeL"  Zedekiah  is  pointed 
out    by  name  as  the   prince  whose 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OHAP.  XXL 


wickedness  had  desecrated  his  charac- 
ter as  the  Lord's  anointed,  **When 
iniquity  shall  have  an  end/'  Heb., 
in  the  time  of  final  iniquity.  Their 
iniquity  was  now  full,  when  justice  can 
no  longer  stay  her  hand  (Gen.  xv.  16). 
It  was  the  treachery  of  Zedekiah 
towards  Nebuchadnezzjir  that  brought 
their  national  affairs  to  the  crisis,  to 
the  time  of  judgment.  In  the  person 
of  that  wicked  prince  the  temporal 
sovereignty  of  David's  house  received 
a  wound  from  which  it  never  recovered. 
He  brought  complete  destruction  upon 
the  Jewish  state. 

Ver.  26.  ''Remove  the  diadem." 
More  accurately,  "  the  mitre."  Besides 
this  passage,  the  word  is  found  only  in 
Exod.  xxviii ,  xxix,  xxxix  ;  Lev.  viii., 
xvi.  ;  and  it  is  always  used  of  tlie 
High  Priest's  mitre.  'The  crown" 
The  re«;al  crown.  This  word  occurs  in 
the  books  of  Samuel,  Kings,  and 
Chronicles,  but  only  in  the  history  of 
David's  conquest  of  Rabbah  (2  Sam. 
xii.  30) ;  1  Ohrou.  xx.  2).  "  Ideally 
regarded,  the  kin^'  bears,  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  tite  whole  people,  along 
with  the  crown,  the  head  band,  or 
priestly  cap.  The  two  are  closely  con- 
nected. The  crown  without  the  band 
is  an  empty  show.  The  forgiveness  of 
sins,  which  was  secured  by  the  media- 
tion of  the  high  priest,  whose  dignity 
was  overthrown  with  the  fall  of  the 
sanctuary  forms  the  foundation  of  all 
the  royal  blessings  of  Qod.  In  the 
Messiah,  in  whom  the  kinglom  at- 
tained to  its  full  reality,  a  real  union 
of  the  kingly  and  priestly  offices  is  to 
take  place  (Zecii.  vi.),  which  were 
practically  divided  under  the  Old 
Testament  on  account  of  human  weak- 
i\QiisC*'—( Ileng^tenberg),  "This  shall 
not  be  the  same."  (Heb.)  This  is  not 
this.  The  meaning  is  that  there  shall 
be  a  complete  revolution  in  the 
existing  state  of  things.  By  a  sad 
reversal,  the  hallowed  nation  is  un- 
holy ;  the  mitre  which  had  written  on 
it,  "Holiness  to  the  Lord,"  is  profaned, 
the  regal  crown  disgraced  by  such 
wickedness  is  laid  in  the  dust.    All 


things,  hitherto  sacred,  have  now  be- 
come unreal,  and  must  be  swept  away 
by  a  righteous  Judgment..  **  Exalt  him 
that  is  low,  and  abase  him  that  is 
high."  **  In  a  gjueral  overthrow  the 
low  is  exalted  even  by  the  fact  that  it 
becomes  like  the  high,  who  are  involved 
in  the  same  downfall.  The  people 
have  in  their  procedure  turned  the 
lowest  into  the  highest,  and  in  just 
retribution  the  same  takes  place 
in  their  experience.  All  is  levelled." 
— (Ilengstenberg),  "This  is  not  to 
be  taken  as  the  enunciation  of  a 
general  truth,  but  it  is  to  be  under- 
stood specifically  of  the  Messiah  and 
of  Zedekiah.  There  is  a  direct 
reference  to  the  Messiah  in  the  follow- 
ing verse.  The  two  are  here  placed 
in  the  strongest  contrast : — the  root 
out  of  the  dry  ground  (Isa.  liii.  2), 
whom  the  prophet  sees  in  the  future, 
and  the  haughty  monarch  immediately 
present  t«)  his  view  upon  the  r«»yal 
Jewish  throne.  The  commands  giveu 
ill  this  verse  are  a  strong  mode  of 
declaring  prophetically  tiiat  the  things 
should  be  done." — (Henderson), 

Ver.  27.  "I  will  overturn,  over- 
turn,  overturn  it "  (Heb.)  An  over- 
throw,  overthrow,  overthrow,  will  I 
make  it  The  threefold  repetition  is 
intensive,  conveying  the  idea  that 
there  shall  be  overthrow  upon  over- 
throw. "And  it  shall  be  no  more.** 
The  words  can  be  rendered,  even  this 
is  no  more.  The  kingdom,  though 
constituted  by  Go  I  HimseU",  should 
perish,  as  though  it  had  never  been. 
*' Until  He  come,  whose  right  it  is; 
and  I  will  give  it  Him."  Tnere  is  an 
evident  reference  here  to  Gen.  xlix.  10. 
Judah's  royalty  is  taken  away,  but  not 
for  ever.  His  inherent  dignity  persists 
through  all  the  wreck  of  his  fortunes 
and  hopes,  until  it  is  assumed  by  the 
Messiah,  who  has  both  the  rigiit  and 
the  power  to  rule.  The  outw.ird 
royalty  and  priesthood  must  pass 
away,  but  the  true  King  of  Israel  is 
coming,  who  is  also  a  "Priest  upon 
His  throne."  (Zech.  vi.  13 ;  Acts  iii. 
14;    Heb.    vii.    26;    Zech.    ix.    9). 

t  U7 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  XXL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZBKIEL. 


"Nowhere  is  tliere  rest,  nowhere 
security,  all  things  are  in  a  state  of 
flnx,  till  the  coming  of  the  Great 
Restorer  and  Prince  of  Peace.  He  to 
whom  this  rigiit  belongs,  and  to  whom 
God  will  give  it,  is  tiie  Messiah,  of 
whom  the  prophets  from  the  times  of 
David  onwanU  have  prop)ie>i<  d  a-*  the 
founder  and  restorer  ot  ptrJCvt  iigi)t 
on  e  irtii  (Psa.  Ixxii. ;  Isa.  ix  6 ;  xiii. 
1 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5  ;  xxxiii.  17)." — (Keil), 
**  It  is  not  expressly  said  what  ^^as  to 
be  given  Him,  and  should  stand 
waiting  for  its  proper  possessor  till  He 
should  come ;  but  the  C4>ntext  forbids 
Qs  to  understand  anything  li>ss  than 
what  was  taken  away — the  things  re- 
presented by  the  priestly  mitre  and 
the  royal  crowa  The  true  prirstly 
dignity,  and  the  proper  regal  glory, 
were  to  be  gone  for  a  time  into 
al  eyance;  some  partial,  temporary  and 
fluctuating  possession  of  them  mi<.ht 
he  regained,  but  nothing  more;  the 
adequate  and  permanent  realization 
WM8  only  to  be  found  in  the  person  of 
Messiah,  because  in  Him  alone  was 
therrt  to  be  a  fitting  represeniation  of 
the  Divine  rigitteousness.  It  is  true 
that  there  ^as  something  like  a 
restoration  of  the  standing  and 
honour  of  the  presthood  afier  the 
return  from  the  Babylonian  ex\h  ;  and 
if  the  ideas  curiently  eniertaiied  upon 
the  snliject  were  conect,  there  mi^^ht 
appear  in  that  a  failure  of  the 
prophecy.  But  there  was  no  right 
restoration  of  the  priestly,  any  more 


than  of  the  regal  dignity  at  the  time 
specified ;  it  was  but  a  shadow  of  the 
original  glory.  For  there  was  no 
longer  the  distinctive  prerogative  of 
the  Urim  and  Thummim,  nor  the  aik 
of  the  covenant,  nor  the  glory  over- 
shadowing the  mercy-seat ;  all  was  in 
a  depressed  and  mutilated  condition, 
and  even  that  subject  to  many  inter- 
ferc^nces  from  the  encroachments  of 
foreign  powers.  So  much  only  waa 
given,  both  in  respect  to  the  priesthood 
and  the  kingdom,  as  to  show  that  the 
Lord  had  not  forsaken  His  people,  and 
to  serve  as  a  pledge  of  tne  coming 
glory.  But  it  was  to  the  still  pro- 
spective, rather  than  the  present  state 
of  things,  that  the  eye  of  faith  was 
still  directed  to  look  for  the  proper 
restoration.  And  lest  any  should  ex- 
pect otherwise,  the  prophet  Zechariah, 
after  the  return  from  Babylon,  took 
up  the  matter,  as  it  were,  where 
Ezekiel  had  left  it,  and  intimated  iu 
the  plainest  manner,  that  what  was 
then  accomplished  was  scarcely  worth 
taking  into  account;  it  was,  at  the 
most,  but  doing  in  a  figure  what  could 
only  find  its  real  accomplishment  in 
the  person  and  work  of  Messiah  (Zech. 
vi.  14).  Thus  the  mitre  and  the 
crown  were  both  to  meet  in  Him,  and 
the  temple  in  its  noblest  verse  be  built 
and  the  ^lory  be  obtained,  such  as  be- 
came the  Lord's  Anointed  to  possess. 
Meanwhile,  all  was  but  preparatory 
and  imperfect." — (Fairbaim). 


HOMlLHTIOa. 


(Ver.  27.) 

The  word  "  overturn  "  is  trebled,  to  show  not  only  the  certainty  and  evidence 
of  thft  thii»g.  hut  tli^  gTiviation  and  c«mtinuance  of  it ;  for  the  kingdom  of 
Jiidah  by  certain  degr  es  fell  from  its  height.  After  that  Zedekiah  was  deposed, 
there  was  no  crown  nor  kin;(  more  in  Judah.  After  the  captivity  there  were  no 
kings,  hut  governors,  captains,  rulers  ;  after  them  the  high  priests  had  the  power, 
in  whose  hands  it  c<»iitinued,  even  to  Hyrcanus,  who  usurping  kingly  authority 
was  miserably  s'ain — Herod,  a  stranger,  succeeding.  **  Until  He  come  whose 
right,  it  is."  The  crown  shall  neither  fit,  nor  be  fastened  to  any  head,  till  He 
come  that  hath  the  right  to  it ;  and  that  is  neither  Nebuchadnezzar  nor 
Zerubbabel ;   nor  Aribtobulus,  Alexander,  or  Hyrcanus,  who  assumed  kingly 

869 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xxi. 


<H^iiit7  to  tliemselveH,  in  time  of  the  Maccabees  ;  but  Christ  tlie  Messiah,  who 
is  tlie  true  Heir  and  Successor  of  David,  when  He  comes,  shall  raise  up  the 
kinirdom  of  Judah,  being  miserably  afflicted,  destitute,  and  Io.^t  to  tho  eye  of 
the  world ;  He  changing  it  into  a  spiritual  kingdom,  shall  restore  it  to  a 
higher  gloir  than  ever  it  had.  The  crown  here  was  reserved  and  laid  up  for 
the  Lord  Christ,  who  was  born  King  of  the  Jews  (Matt.  ii.  2) ;  to  whom  the 
angel  told  Mary  that  the  Lord  should  give  the  throne  of  His  father  David,  and 
that  He  should  reign  over  the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever  (Luke  i.  32,  33). 
Nathaniel  called  Him  "the  King  of  Israel"  (John  i.  40).  The  Father  hath 
appointed  Christ  to  be  king  of  Israel,  gave  Him  power  (£«.  ix  6  ;  Micah  y.  2). 
Christ  claimed  to  be  such  Himself  (John  v.  22).  "  And  I  will  give  it  Him." 
Christ,  when  He  comes,  shall  not  be  kept  off  from  His  rights.  Though  He 
come  in  a  mean  and  low  way,  yet  He  shall  be  king  and  reign« 

I.  The  Lord  doth  lay  the  glory  of  crowns  and  iceptres  in  the  duft  when  He 
pleases.  "  I  will  overturn."  There  is  no  crown  so  sure  to  any  mortal's  head, 
no  kingdom  so  stable,  but  tiie  L^rd  can  pluck  away  the  crown,  shake  the 
kingdom  to  pieces,  throw  out  the  possessor.^,  and  dispossess  their  heirs.  Some- 
times the  Lord  doth  suddenly  overiuin  empires  and  kingdoms  (Dan.  v.  30,  31)  ; 
sometimes  He  proceeds  gradually  as  with  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judali. 
*'  I  will  be  unto  Ephraim  as  a  moth,  and  to  the  house  of  Judali  as  rottenness. 
A  moth  eats  up  a  garment  by  degrees,  now  it  makes  one  hole  in  it,  and  anon 
another  ;  so  rottenness  enters  by  degrees  into  a  tree,  first  into  one  branch,  then 
another,  after  into  the  body  and  root.  So  God,  by  degrees,  wasted  and 
consumed  these  kingdoms.  Be  it  suddeijly  or  gradually.  He  overturns  them 
when  He  plciises.  He  breaks  the  staves  of  the  wicked,  and  the  sceptres  of  the 
rulers  (Isa.  xiv.  5). 

XL  When  Ctod  overturns  crowns  and  kingdoms  He  keeps  those  in 
snch  a  condition,  while  he  pleases.  "And  it  shall  be  no  more,  until  He 
come,  whose  right  it  is."  This  was  near  500  years ;  for  from  Zedekiah's  depa-al 
to  the  birth  of  Christ  were  492  years,  which  wa<)  a  long  season  for  His  crown  and 
kinglom  to  lie  in  darkness,  and  a  (les'date  condition.  Hosea  told  us  long  since 
tliat  the  children  of  Israel  should  "abide  many  days  without  a  king  and 
without  a  prince"  (Hosea  iii.  4).  The  kingdom  of  Israel  was  overturned  by 
the  hand  of  God  above  a  hundred  years  before  the  kingdom  of  Judali,  and  lies 
overturned  to  this  day  ;  and  so  hath  been  above  two  thousand  years  in  a  sad, 
dark,  distressed  condition.  Their  sins  were  great,  which  caused  the  Lord  to 
overturn  them,  and  He  lets  them  lie  under  the  punishment  of  their  iniquity 
many  years.  When  kingdoms  are  down,  many  may  strive  to  lift  them  up  to 
their  former  dignity,  but  it  cannot  be  till  the  Lord's  time  come. 

III.  The  Lord  Christ ;  the  promised  Messiah,  was  the  true  King  of  Judah, 
and  Prince  of  Zion.  ''Until  ile  C4)mes  whose  right  it  is,  and  I  will  give  it 
Him."  TliH  Father  had  appointed  Him  to  be  King,  given  Him  the  kingdom, 
and  made  it  known  long  before  His  coming  in  the  flesh.  He  was  the  Shiloh, 
the  Pro^perer,  unto  whan  the  gathering  of  the  people  should  be  ;  I]6  gathered 
Jews  and  Gentiles  to;;^ ther.  He  was  spoken  of  as  the  "  Star  of  Jacob,"  and 
the  ** Sceptre "  wht)  **  should  rise  out  of  Israel"  (Num.  xxiv.  17).  In  many 
other  places  of  Scripture,  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  His  riglit  thereunto,  ana 
the  Father's  donation  thereof  unto  Him  are  spoken  of.  The  people's  hearts 
were  towards  llim,  and  they  would  have  made  Him  a  king  (John  vi.  16). 
However  He  appeared  to  the  world,  the  Apostles  beheld  i^lory  and  majesty 
in  Him  (John  i.  14  ;  2  Pet.  i.  16) ;  and  Pilate  wrote  over  His  head,  "  This  is 
Jesus,  the  King  of  the  Jews  "  (Matt  xxvii.  37).    Christ  was  born  a  king,  died 

B  2  2«9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  x^r.  nOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


a  V\\\g,  He  lives  and  reigus  at  this  day  Kiitg  of  Zion,  and  of  all  saints 
(Ilev.  XV.  3). 

IV.  The  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Lord  towards  His  people,  that  when 
He  tells  them  of  the  severest  judgment  He  mingles  some  mercy.  Tliough 
He  threatens  their  Church  and  St.ite  for  a  long  time,  yet  He  tells  them  of  the 
coming  of  Christ  who  siiould  be  their  kin^  wear  the  crown,  and  raise  up  the 
kingdom  again.  Tliis  was  a  g'e.it  mercy,  in  the  depth  of  mi.sery  ;  if  they  lost 
an  earthly  kingdom,  they  should  have  a  spiritual  one  ;  if  they  io4  a 
profane  and  temporal  kin^,  they  should  have  a  kintr  of  righteousness,  an 
eternal  king.  It  is  the  method  o\  the  Lord,  when  He  is  bringing  in  drejulful 
judgments  upon  His  people,  that  have  provoked  Him  bitterly,  to  lay  in  some- 
thing that  may  suftport  and  comfort  tiio-e  who  have  served  Him  faithfully 
(Amos  ix.  8-1  i).     Here  is  goodness  with  severity. 

V.  That  how  contrary  soever  God*s  actings  appear,  yet  He  will  make  good 
His  promises.  The  Lord  had  promised  to  set  up  His  son  Christ  to  be  Eiin(  iu 
Zion,  the  hill  of  His  holiness  (Psa.  ii.  6) ;  that  the  Government  should  be 
upon  His  shoulder  (Isa.  ix.  6) ;  that  He  would  "cause  a  Branch  of  righteous- 
ness to  grow  up  unto  David,  and  He  shall  execute  judgment  and  righreousuess 
in  the  land  (Jer.  xxxiii.  15).  What  likelihood  was  there  that  thase  things 
should  be,  when  the  Lord  overturns  the  land,  plu«  ks  up  all  by  the  roots,  and 
layt<  all  in  a  dead  condition,  and  that  for  many  days  and  years?  They  might 
have  thonght  and  said,  Surely,  this  death  of  the  crown,  of  Church  and  State, 
will  be  the  death  of  all  those  and  other  promises  ;  hut  it  was  not  so.  Though 
a  sentence  of  death  was  u|M)n  the  land,  upon  the  Jews,  yet  the  living  (jod 
kept  life  in  the  promisefl,  He  remembered  them,  and  said,  I  will  give  it  to  Him, 
He  shall  have  this  land,  the  kingdom  and  the  crown,  Hp  shall  sit  upon  Zion, 
reign  and  execute  judgment.  The  actings  of  God  sometimes  are  such,  that 
to  man's  apprehen8ion8  thev  will  make  void  the  promises  of  God.  In 
Psa.  Ixxvii.  7,  8;  saith  Asaph,  *' Will  the  Lord  cast  off  for  ever?  And  will 
He  be  favourable  no  more?  Is  His  mercy  clean  gone  for  ever?  Doth  His 
promise  fail  for  evermore  ?  G^d's  band  was  heavy  upon  him,  his  soul  was 
greatly  afflicted  so  that  he  questioned  the  truth  of  God's  promises,  and  was 
ready  to  despair.  But  what  saith  he  in  the  tenth  ver^e,  "  This  was  my 
inhrmity."  There  was  no  infirmity  in  God  ;  He  had  not  forgotten  Ilis  promise, 
it  was  not  out  of  His  sight,  though  out  of  Asaph's.  Man's  faith  may  fail  him 
sometimes,  but  God's  faithfulness  never  fails  Him  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  33).  God's 
operations  may  have  an  aspect  that  way ;  the  devd's  temptations  and  our 
unbelieving  hearts  may  not  only  make  us  think  so,  but  persuade  us  it  is  so  ; 
whereas  it  cannot  be  so,  for  the  Lord  will  not  suffer  it,  He  will  not  make  a  lie 
in  His  truth  or  faithfulness ;  so  the  Hebrew  is  :  He  is  Truth,  and  not  one  of 
His  promise**  can  fail.  Tttis  must  afford  strong  consolation  unto  all  that  are 
under  any  promise  of  God. — Green/dU, 

(Vers.  18-27.) 

Jerusalem's  Fall  and  RisiNa 

The  prophet  announces  the  fall  of  the  temporal  sovereignty  of  David's  house 
in  the  person  ol  Zedekiah.  He  declares  his  nie.-sage  as  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
"Exalt  him  that  is  low,  and  abase  him  that  is  high"  (ver.  26).  This  may  be 
considered  as  the  principle  up<»n  which  Go  I  acts  in  His  government  of  mankind 
throughout  all  ages.  When  the  mother  of  our  Lord  thought  of  the  honour 
260 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY  :  BZEKIEL.  chap,  xxl 


which  had  been  bestowed  upon  her,  that  one  so  obscure  and  lowly  should  be 
chosen  to  brujg  forth  \he  Saviour  of  the  worhl,  she  broke  forth  into  a  song  of 
praise,  saying,  *' He  hath  put  down  the  miglity  from  their  seats,  and  exalted 
tlientt  of  low  degree"  fLuke  i.  52).  Christ  taught  the  general  principle, 
"Everyone  that  ezalteth  nimself  shall  be  abased,  and  he  that  humbleth  hiui&elf 
shall  be  exalted  "  (Luke  xviL  14).  Even  the  great  French  sceptic,  Bayle,  says 
of  these  words,  that  they  contain  "the  abridgment  of  all  human  history." 
Such  is  the  law  of  Qod's  kmgdom.  Jerusalem  is  to  fall,  but  in  due  time  to  be 
raised  to  a  better  and  nobler  condition.  Her  true  King  will  come  unto  her  in 
the  person  of  the  Messiah.    Her  fall  is  to  be  unto  rising  (ver.  27). 

L  Jerusalem's  fall.  1.  It  ispcrtraped  by  an  enigmatic  representation.  The 
event  is  now  near  and  the  prophet  is  bidden  to  portray  the  judgments  which  are 
to  fall  upon  Jerusalem.  He  draws  a  symbolic  sketch  of  the  siege  of  the  city, 
representing  the  advance  of  Nebuchadnezzar  towards  it  from  his  own  country. 
The  King  of  Babylon  is  seen  standing  on  the  highway,  at  a  point  from  which 
two  roads  diverge,  one  leading  to  Jerusalem,  the  other  to  Kabbah.  Which  road 
shall  he  take  ?  He  determines  his  course  by  augury  in  three  of  its  branches, 
employing  divination  by  arrows,  by  images,  and  by  the  appearance  of  the 
entrails  of  a  newly  killed  sacrifice.  The  omens  all  point  to  Jerusalem  as  the 
first  object  of  attack.  Thus  Providence  so  ordered  it  that  judgment  most  begin 
at  the  house  of  Qod.  2.  7ii«  threat  of  it  is  received  with  irreverent  credulity. 
When  the  Jews  hear  that  the  King  of  Babylon  is  advancing  against  Jerusalem 
they  make  light  of  it.  They  say  that  the  king  has  been  misled  by  a  false 
divination  (ver.  23).  They  forget  that  they  themselves  were  deluded  by  vain 
divinations  and  Ijring  prophets  (Ezek.  xxl  29  ;  Ex.  xiii.  6,  7  :  xxiL  28).  They 
despise  augury  when  it  is  against  themselves.  In  their  infatuation  they 
cannot  read  the  signs  of  the  times,  nor  see  that  their  judgment  is  nigh  at  hand. 
They  readily  take  refuge  in  any  interpretation  of  events  which  can  lend  some 
support  to  their  vain  hope.  Tliey  are  blind  to  the  sad  facts  of  their  own 
spintual  condition,  which  must  inevitably  draw  these  judgments  upon  them. 
They  have  the  worst  omens  against  them,  their  iniquities,  transgressions, 
sins  (ver.  24)  ;  and,  more  particularly,  their  treason  and  perjury  (ver.  23). 
And  all  this  was  ''discovered"  sin,  it  affected  the  social  and  political  life 
of  the  nation  ;  it  appeared  before  the  eyes  of  all  men  (ver.  24).  3.  The 
instrument  which  was  to  bring  it  about  was  chosen  qf  God.  The  human 
instrument  who  was  to  compass  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  was  the  King  of 
Babylon,  who,  in  this  instance,  was  God's  servant  for  judgment.  Though  an 
heathen  king,  and  one  who  consulted  augury,  he  was  truly  an  instrument  in 
the  hands  of  God  for  the  correction  of  His  people  and  for  working  out  His 
purposes  towards  mankind.  God  can  guide  even  men's  appeals  to  chance,  and 
overrule  them  for  His  own  purpose  (Prov.  xvi.  33).  The  Magi,  who  were 
worshippers  of  the  hosts  of  heaven,  and  who  thought  that  they  could  read  in 
them  the  destinies  of  nations,  were  yet  led  to  Christ  by  a  star.  Apart  from  all 
his  consultation  of  omens,  the  King  of  Babylon  had  justice  on  his  side.  He 
was  truly  a  chosen  vessel  to  accomplish  God's  righteous  will  concerning 
Jerusalem.  4.  The  blame  must  be  charged  upon  the  Jews  themselves.  **  Because 
ye  have  made  your  iniquity  to  be  remembered"  (ver.  24).  The  King  of 
Babylon  must  not  be  charged  with  their  disasters,  nor  his  resorting  to  divina- 
tion, but  to  their  own  treason  and  perjury  they  must  impute  the  blame.  It 
was  not  their  father's  sins  but  their  own  that  brought  destruction  upon  them. 
5.  Judgment  was  inevitable,  "Jerusalem  thedefenced"  (ver.  20)  must  fall. 
The  measure  of  her  iniquity  was  full.  Justice  could  forbear  no  longer,  in 
Zedekiah  the  iniquity  of  the  nation  culminated  (ver.  25).  In  him  the 
sovereignty  of  David's  bouse  came  to  an  end. 

S61 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXL 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL, 


n.  Jeni8alem*8  rising.  In  one  man  Jerusalem  fell,  but  a  greater  Man  shall 
restore  it.  The  sovereignty  of  David's  house  came  to  an  end  in  Zedekiah,  but 
not  for  ever.  Jerusalem  has  a  future.  She  shall  rise  from  her  ruins  in  a  far 
more  glorious  form  than  that  in  which  she  was  lost,  even  as  the  ''Jerusalem 
which  is  above,  the  mother  of  us  all  "  ((ifil.  iv.  26).  1.  The  rising  is  to  come 
through  the  Messiah.  It  is  not  by  a  doctiine,  or  a  truth,  but  bjr  Sk  person  that 
God  wiU  deliver  His  people.  Zedekiah  represented  the  nation  in  its  fall ;  Christ 
in  its  rising.  The  Messiah  is  the  rightful  sovereign  of  men  (ver.  27).  He  is 
the  true  pnest,  and  the  true  king.  All  others  are  but  shadows  of  Him.  He 
alone  has  the  supreme  right  and  power.  Among  the  Israelites  the  offices  of 
priest  and  king  were 'jealously  separated  ;  but  in  Christ  they  can  be  united  with 
perfect  safety,  for  He  is  both  holy  and  just.  2.  The  deliverance  through  the 
Messiah  only  comes  after  the  complete  wreck  qf  the  nations  fortunes.  "  I  will 
overturn,  overturn,  overturn  it;  and  it  shall  be  no  more"  (ver.  24).  This 
complete  destruction  issued  in  that  fulness  of  time  in  which  the  Son  of  Man 
should  come.  The  Messiah  appeared  upon  the  wreck  of  the  world's  hopes. 
Judah's  royalty  had  long  been  laid  in  the  dust,  Greece  had  long  ago  fallen,  and 
Rome  was  fast  sinking  into  decay,  when  God  sent  His  Son  to  redeem  the  world 
Men  were  permitted  to  make  the  sad  experiment  of  trying  to  live  without  God, 
in  order  that  they  might  learii  their  need  of  a  Redeemer  who  was  the  "  Desire 
of  all  nations." 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  —  Vers. 
28-32.  The  overthrow  of  the 
Ammonites.  Israel  is  to  rise  after 
judgment,  but  Ammun  is  to  be  utterly 
destroyed. 

Ver.  28.  "Concerning  the  Am- 
monitesyand  oonoeming  their  reproach 
even  say  thou,  the  sword,  the  sword 
is  drawn."     "Lest  it  should  be  sup- 

Eosed  that  because  Nebuchadnezzar 
ad  taken  the  route  to  Jerusalem,  and 
not  that  to  Rabbah,  there(bre  the 
Ammonites  should  escape  being  in- 
vaded by  his  army,  the  prophet  is 
instructed  to  denounce  judgment 
against  them  also.  The  reproach 
with  which  the  Ammonites  are  here 
charged,  was  their  opprobrious  and 
insulting  treatment  of  the  Hebrews 
at  different  periods  of  their  history, 
and  especially  when  Jerusalem  was 
taken  by  the  Chaldeans."— Y//^»^- 
son),  "The  children  of  Ammon 
represents  the  world — power  hostile 
to  the  kingdona  of  God.  Yet  the 
representative  is  not  taken  «cci- 
dentally  out  of  the  multitude  of  the 
heathen  peoples  hostile  to  the  kingdom 
of  God  ;  out  the  prophet  takes 
occasion  from  the  circumstances  of  the 
time.  Ammon  bad  at  that  time,  no 
less  than  Judah,  incurred  the  anger  of 

263 


the  Chaldeans,  and  so  it  was  natural 
to  exemplify  in  him  the  general  truth, 
the  more  natural  because  the  ven- 
geance was  first  to  fall  on  Judah, 
while  Ammon  appeared  to  come  out 
of  the  affair  with  high  shoes,  and 
mocked  Judah,  who  had  to  pay  the 
score.  "  Their  reproval " — the  insults 
which  they  heaped  upon  Judah.  The 
prophet  forsees  that  the  Ammonites, 
on  the  approach  of  danger,  will  with- 
draw from  the  coalition  (Lam.  i.  2), 
and  on  the  catastrophe  of  Jerusalem, 
give  free  course  to  their  ancient  hatred 
against  Judah.  Judah  exchanges  the 
prophecy  that  was  unfavourable  to 
him  for  the  divination  (ver.  23),  and 
by  this  fatal  exchange,  falls ;  Ammon 
exchanges  (ver.  29)  the  divination 
favourable  to  him,  for  the  prophecy,and 
thereby  prepares  himself  at  all  events, 
for  the  downfall" — (IJengstenberg). 

Ver.  29.  '*  Whiles  they  see  vanity 
unto  thee,  whiles  they  divine  a  lie 
unto  thee."  (Heb).  Ihey  have  seen 
falsehood  for  thee,  they  have  divined 
for  thee  a  lie.  The  Ammonites  also 
had  those  among  them  who  practised 
divination.  But  these  had  divined  a 
"  lie  "  for  them,  promising  them  peace 
and  safety  when  judgment  was  hard 
at  band.    ''To  bring  thee  upon  th9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL  chap,  xxl 


neoks  of  ihem  fhat  are  slaiit'*     The  is  an  unnatural  figure — but  rather  a 

AmmoniteB  are  to  be  inyolyed  in  one  blowing  wliick  increases  the  intensity 

common  ruin  with  the  Jewa.  of  the  flame.      ''  Brutish  men,  and 

skilful  to  destroy."    *•  The  word  must 

Ver.  30.    **  I  wiU  judge  thee  in  be    explained    from    Psalm    xcii.   7, 

the  place  where  thou  wast  created/*  *  brutish/  foolish,  always  bearing  in 

''  The  Ammonites  were   not   to    be  mind  that  the  Hebrew  associated  the 

carri^  away  captives,  like  the  Jews  to  idea  of   Gbdlessness   with  folly,  and 

Babylon,  but  were  to  perish  in  their  that  cruelty  naturally  follows  in  its 

own  land.     While  the  Jews  were  to  be  tn:m.*'—(KeU)  . 
restored  after  the  captivity  had  cured 

them   of   idolatry,   the   Ammonitish  Ver.  32.     *'Thou  shalt  be  no  more 

kingdom  was  to  cease  for  ever.    The  remembered.**    Ammon  was  to  perish 

prophecy  was  fulfilled  five  years  after  utterly.     For  her  there  was  no  hope 

the    destruction    of   Jerusalem.'' —  of  restoration,  like  that  held  out  to 

(Henderson.)  Israel  in  yer.  27.     *'  From  the  times  of 

the  Maccabees,  the  Ammonites  and 

Ver.  31.     **  I   will  blow  against  Moabites  have  quite  disappeared  out 

thee  in  the  fire  of  my  wrath."  The  of  \i\stoij"—(Ile7igiUnberg.) 
idea  is  not  to  blow  with  fire — which 


HOMILbTIOS. 

(Vers.  28,  29). 

1.  When  God  brings  judgments  upon  His  people  for  their  iniquities,  thm 
their  enemies  take  advantage  and  revile  them.  The  Ammonites  were  glad  that 
the  calamity  of  Jerusalem  was  at  hand.  They  were  neighbours  of  the  Jews, 
brethren  also  as  coming  from  the  brother  of  Abraham  ;  yet  they  reproached  the 
Jews  and  added  affliction  to  affliction  (Zeph.  ii.  8).  The  rabbies  say,  that  when 
the  Chaldeans  carried  the  Jews  captive,  through  the  land  of  tbe  Ammonites  and 
Moabites,  the  Jews  wept,  and  they  reproached  them  saying,  why  do  ye  afflict 
yourselves  ?  Why  do  you  weep  ?  Are  you  not  going  to  your  father's  house  ? 
They  meant  Chaldea,  which  was  Abraham's  coun&y  and  habitation.  These  and 
many  other  reproachful  speeches  they  used  against  the  Jews,  when  they  were 
spoiled  and  led  into  capitivity,  and  **  magnified  theuiselves  against  their  bJorder." 
They  said,  now  their  border — their  land — should  become  theirs.  Thus  they 
reproached  and  wronged  the  Jews.  So  likewi>e  did  the  Edomites  in  "the  day 
of  Jerusalem  "  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7),  that  was  in  the  day  when  Nebuchadnezzar's 
force  took  and  plundered  it.  They  cried,  "Rase  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the 
foundation."  The  adven>aries  saw  Jerusalem,  and  did  mock  at  her  Sabbaths  ; 
they  scoffed  at  all  her  festivals,  religion,  and  worship.  Where  is  your  God, 
whose  days  you  have  so  religiously  observed  ?  Why  did  He  not  defend  you 
from  this  day  of  your  sufferings?  Either  He  was  infirm,  and  could  not,  or 
unfaithful,  and  would  not.  2.  The  Lord  takes  notice  of  the  evemies  reproaching 
//is  people.  He  tells  the  prophet  of  the  reproachings  of  the  Ammonitas. 
Ezekiel  was  in  Babylon,  and  knew  nothing  of  it,  but  God  heard  and  observed  it 
(Zeph.  ii.  «).  God  saith  in  His  indignation  unto  Moab,  "Was  not  Israel  a 
derision  unto  Thee  ?  "  Deny  it,  if  thou  darest  I  saw  it ;  I  heard  it  This  is 
some  comfort  to  the  Church  and  people  of  God,  that  He  observes  not  onlv  the 
wrongs  wicked  men  do  unto  His  people,  but  also  the  reproaching  speeches  they 
utter  against  them  (Fiam.  iii.  6.)  3.  Reproaching  and  reviling  God's  people, 
when  they  are  in  affliction,  draws  judgments  upon  the  reproachers  and  revilers. 

263 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xxn.  EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKTEL. 


The  Ammonites  re))roached  the  Jews  when  the  Babylonish  sword  came  upon 
them,  and  here  the  prophet  must  tell  them  the  sword  is  drawn  and  furbished 
for  slangliter.  Reproach  of  this  kind  is  a  provoking  sin  ;  God's  name,  truths 
ordinances,  suffer  when  His  people  are  reproached  for  His  correcting  hand  upon 
them  for  their  iniquities.  Moab  for  reproaching  should  be  reproached  ;  yea, 
grievously  afflicted,  yea,  utterly  destroyed.  4.  When  the  Lord  threatens  8it{ful 
nations  with  sore  judgments,  they  have  those  amongst  them  which  divert  them 
from  the  truth,  possess  them  with  delusions,  and  put  them  upon  destructive 
practices.  Tlie  Ammonites  were  threatened  here  with  the  Babylonish  swonl, 
but  they  neither  believed  Ezekiel  nor  Jeremiah,  who  told  them  the  same  thine. 
Their  false  prophets,  their  diviners,  beat  them  off  from  it,  possessed  them  with 
vanities  and  lies,  put  them  upon  insulting  over  the  Jews  when  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  was  most  heavy  upon  them,  and  so  brought  them  to  suffer  by  the  same 
sword  the  Jews  did.  it  is  just  with  God  to  give  men  and  nations  over  to 
believe  lies  and  lying  prophets,  which  shall  lead  them  to  destruction,  when  they 
have  stopped  their  ears  against  the  true  prophets.  Ahab  would  not  believe 
Micaiah,  but  the  false  prophets  who  spake  words  according  to  his  mind ;  but 
they  were  vanity,  lies  and  he  smarted  for  it  (1  Kings  xxii.)  5.  7 hough  the 
Lord  bears  long  with  sir\ful  nations,  yet  He  hath  His  days  and  times  qf  reckon- 
ing with  them.  The  day  of  the  Jews  was  come,  and  their  iniquity  had  an  end. 
The  day  of  the  Ammonites  came,  and  their  iniquity  had  an  end.  God  punished 
them  severely  for  their  sins  (Ezekiel  xxv.)  Babylon  and  its  king  had  a  time  to 
sin  and  a  time  to  suffer.  God  stayed  many  days,  yet  had  His  day,  and  came 
at  the  day  appointed  TJer.  1.  31 ;  li.  13).  Babylon  was  insatiably  covetMis, 
robbing  the  nations  of  tneir  riches,  but  all  her  wealth  could  not  purchase  one 
day's  respite  from  the  wrath  of  God,  nor  all  her  waters  preserve  her  from  the 
fire  of  His  indignation  The  fire  God  sent  in  His  day  burnt  up  their  habita- 
tions, and  licked  up  the  water  of  Euphrates  whereon  Babylon  sat.  God  bare 
long  with  us,  and  the  nations  about  as,  but  His  day  is  come.  He  is  visiting  ; 
we,  they,  have  had  our  times  of  sinning,  and  must  now  have  our  times  of 
Buffering. — (GreenhUl.) 

Tnn    Sins  of  Jerusalem   and   Israel  :    The   General   Corruption   of 
Prophets,  Priests,  Princes,  and  People  (Chap,  xxii.) 

EXEGE  riCAL  NOTES.— We  have  This  chapter  may  be  considered  as 

here  another  description  of  the  sins  standing  in  contrast  with  Chap.  xx. 

<.f  Jerusalem  and  Israel;  and  thus  the  In   this  latter,  the  whole  of  Israel's 

judgments  pn  dieted  in  the  last  chapter  history  was  reviewed  as   revealing   a 

are  clearly  justified.     Three  words  of  growing    corruption    which    must    of 

God  are  here,  closely  connected  together  necessity  bring  down  God's  judgments 

ill  their  substance  and  design,  viz.:  upon  the  peo|3e.    The  present  chapter 

(1)  The  blood-guiltiness  and  idolatry  descriles   the    existing    condition    of 

of  Jerusalem  hastening  the  coming  of  Jerusalem.     In  one  case  the  prophet 

the  day  of  retribution,  when  the  city  was  commanded  to   "  Make  them  t«> 

will  be  an  object  of  scorn  to  all  nations  know  the  abominations  of  their  fathers" 

(vers.  1-16).     (2)  '1  he  house  of  Israel  (ch.  xx.  4) ;  in  the  other,  he  is  coin- 

lias  I  ecome  dross,  and  is  doomed  to  be  manded  concerning  Jerusalem  to ''Make 

melted  in  the  fire  of  God's  righteous  her  to  km »w  her  abominations"  (ver.  2). 
anger  (vers.  17-22).     (3)  All  ranks  of 

the  kingdom — i)rophets,  priests,  princes  Ver.  2.  *'  Wilt  thou  judge  the  bloody 

and  people  have  bi'comeutterlycorrnnt,  city!"     The  same  expression  as  in 

and    therefore  the  threatened    judg-  chap.  xx.  4,  denoting  that  the  prophet's 

inents  are  inevitable.  reproof  still  continues.    The  question 
2G4 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTIC  COMMBNTART  :  EZEKIBt. 


onAP.  ixiT. 


impIidB  the  idea  that  judgment  can 
wait  DO  lonffer,  and  the  prophet  must 
be  wakened  up  to  realise  fully  the 
ioeat  iniquity  of  his  nation. 

Ver.  3.  "The  city  sheddeth  blood 
in  the  midst  of  it."  **  On  account  of 
the  murders  committed  in  Jerusalem 
and  the  offering  of  children  in  sacri- 
fice to  Moloch,  slie  might  well  be  de- 
nominated *  the  bloody  city.'  In  this 
respect  she  rivalled  Nineveh  (Nah. 
iii.  1),  and  miffht  justly  anticipate  the 
same  doom.  Instead  of  deriving  any 
advantage  from  their  idolatries,  they 
were  only  involved  tliereby  in  ruin  " 
{Henderson).  "That  her  time  may 
come."  The  limit  of  her  probation — 
tiie  crisis  of  judgment  (Isa.  ziii.  22  ; 
Ezek.  zxx.  3).  "  Maketh  idols  against 
herself  to  defile  herself."  By  her  per- 
sistence in  iniquity  still  heaping  upon 
herself  moral  defilement  with  all  its 
consequences. 

Ver.  4.  "  Thou  hast  caused  thy 
days  to  draw  near,  and  art  come  even 
unto  thy  years.*'  The  full  term  of 
(laysi  and  years  when  the  limit  of 
Divine  patience  shall  be  reached. 
"The  Jewish  commentators  distinguish 
between  the  *  days '  and  the  *  years ' 
here  mentioned,  interpreting  the  former 
of  the  siege  and  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem, and  the  latter  of  the  captivity  in 
Babylon  "  (Henderson).  "  A  reproach 
unto  the  heathen,  and  a  mocking  to 
all  countries."  "  Defiled,  unclean  with 
regard  to  the  name,  t.^.  having  forfeited 
the  name  of  a  holy  city  through  capital 
crimes  and  other  sinful  abominations." 
—(Keil.) 

Ver.  5.  '*  Those  that  be  near " 
(Heb.).  *'  The  women  that  be  near." 
The  cities  of  the  nations  are  personified : 
as  in  Ezek.  xxiii.  48.  "  Infamous  and 
much  vexed"  (Heb.).  "Polluted  in 
name,  much  in  vexation."  Her  ancient 
renown  had  now  descended  to  the  dust. 
She  that  had  been  once  "  great  among 
nations"  (Lam.  i.  1)  had  now  only 
a  pre-eminence  in  calamity  and  dis- 
grace. "  Formerly  Jerusalem  had  been 
renowned  as  '  the  holy  city.'    Now  it 


had  been  defiled  by  every  kind  of 
crime.  It  was  also  tumultuous,  great 
of  cof^fusion,  from  the  seditions  and 
violence  which  obtained  among  the 
inhabitants.  To  all,  both  far  and  near, 
the  Jewish  metropolis  was  to  be  an 
object  of  derision.*  — (Henderson.) 

Ver.  6.    "To  their  power."  Heb. 
'*  To  his  own  arm."   Each  man  adopted 
the  principle  that  might  was  nght 
With  each  man  the  strength  of  his 
own  arm  was  his  god.     "Instead  of 
reigning  accordinff  to  law^  and  justice, 
the  princes  of  Judah,  in  the  most 
despotic    manner,  crushing    by    the 
strong  arm  of  power  all  who  were  the 
objects  of  their  personal  displeasure." 
-^Henderson).     "To   shed   blood." 
"  By  the  repetition  of  the  refrain,  to 
shed  blood  (vers.  6,  9  and   12),  the 
enumeration    is   divided    into    three 
groups  of  sins,  which  are  placed  in  the 
category  of   blood-guiltiness   by  the 
fact  that  they  are  preceded  by  this 
sentence  and  the  repetition  of  it  aftt»r 
the. form  of  a  refi^in.    The  first  gr«iup 
(vers.  6-8)  embraces  sins  which  are 
committed  in  daring  opposition  to  all 
the  laws  of  morality.     By  the  princes 
of  Israel  we  are  to  understand  pri- 
marily the  profligate  kings  who  caused 
innocent  persons  to  be  put  to  death, 
such  for  example,  Jehoiakim  (2  Kings 
xxiv.  4),  Manasseh  (2  Kings  xxi.  16), 
and    others.     In   the   second    group 
(verses      9-11),     in     addition      to 
slander  and  idolatry,  the  criines  of 
lewdness  and  incest  are  the  principal 
sins  for  which  the  people  are  reproved, 
and  here  the  allusion  to  Lev.  xviii. 
and  xix.  is  very  obvious.    The  third 
group  (ver.  12)  is  compohod  of  sins  of 
covetousness.     For   the  first  dauae, 
compare  the  prohibition  in  Ex.  xxiil 
2 ;    for   the    second,    Ezekiel    xviii., 
8,  13.     The  reproof  finishes^  with  for- 
getfulness  of  God,   which  is   closely 
allied  to  covetousness. — (KM). 

Ver.  9.  "  Men  that  carry  tales  to 
shed  blood."  Heb.  "  Men  of  traflic" 
Describing  those  who  travelled  about 
for  the  purposes  of  trade,  such  as  ped- 
lars or  wandering  merchants.     Men  of 

265 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xxn. 


nOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL 


this  kind  would  be  likely  to  become 
Dotorious  for  carrying  reports  from 
place  to  place.  Hence  the  phrase 
came  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  tale- 
bearers. In  the  present  injitance,  the 
reference  is  plainly  to  a  class  of  men 
whom,  in  the  present  day,  we  should 
call  informers.  **  They  eat  upon  the 
monntaio8«"  See  "Ex^etical  Notes," 
(ch.  xviii.  6.) 


•Ver.  10.  "Discovered their fitther's 
nakedness."  Mother,  or  step-mother ; 
{Comp,  Lev.  xviii.  7,  8;  xx.  11;  1  Cor. 
ver.  1.)  "  Set  apart  for  pollution." 
"This  suggests  the  idea  of  a  female 
deviited  to  prostitution,  whereas  all 
that  the  Hebrew  expresses  is  one  that 
is  unclean  by  reason  of  the  menstrual 
discharge.  The  character  of  the  Jews, 
as  here  described,  is  aptly  given  by 
Tacitus:  ' projectissima  ad  libidiuem 
^ens,  alienarum  concubitu  abstinent, 
inter  se  nihil  illicitum'  (Hist  lib.  v. 
cap.  5)  "  {Henderson,) 


Ver.  11.  "  And  one  hath  oommit* 
ted  abomination  with  his  neighbour's 
wife :  and  another  ,  .  .  and  anothen 
&c."  **  There  were  such  cases  !  Im- 
purity in  every  firm.  A  specimen  of 
the  moral  atmosphere  as  a  whole  (Ezek. 
xviii.  6 ;  Lev.  xviii.  15  ;  xx.  12 ;  2 
Sanu  xiil  12." — (Lange,) 


Ver.  12.  "Taken  gifts  to  shed 
blood."  "Gifts,"— the  word  is  here 
used  in  the  sense  of  bribes.  "Hast 
forgotten  He,  saith  the  Lord  Ood." 
**The  crowning  sin  with  which  the  Jews 
are  charged,  and  that  which  is  strictly 
speaking  the  source  of  all  sin,  is  for- 
^tfulness  of  Gorl.  It  is  only  as  God 
18  kept  out  of  view  as  the  omnipresent, 
omniscient,  holy  and  rig)  i  teous  Governor 
of  the  world,  that  sin  can  be  indul^^ed 
in  "  (Henderson,)  Two  of  their  pro- 
phets describe  forgetfiilness  of  God  as 
the  root  of  all  their  evil  (Dent,  xxxii. 
18 ;  Jer.  iil  SL 
266 


Ver.  13.  ''I  have  smitten  Mine 
hand  at  thy  dishonest  gain."  A 
gesture  figuratively  describing  God's 
wrathful  indignation.  ''  This  verse  is 
closely  connected  with  the  preceding. 
This  serves  to  explain  the  &ct  that 
the  only  sins  mentioned  as  exciting 
the  wrath  of  God  are  coveteousness  and 
blood-guiltiness  "  (Keil). 

Ver.  14.  '*  Can  thine  heart  endnre» 
or  can  thine  hands  be  strong,  in  the 
days  that  I  shall  deal  with  theef " 
The  courage  of  sinners  mast  fail  when 
the  judgment  of  God  reckons  with 
them. 

Ver.  15.  "And  wiU  oonsome  fh7 
filthiness  out  of  thee."  "The removal 
of  the  uncleanness  of  Jerusalem  is 
effected  by  the  extirpation  of  the  sinful 
inhabitants"  ( Hengstenberg).  "The 
object  to  be  attained  by  the  dispersion 
of  the  Jews  was  their  recoveiy  from 
idolatry  and  from  the  polluting  in- 
fluences which  followed  in  its  train*" — 
{Henderson). 

Ver.  16.  "Thou  Shalt  take  thine  in- 
heritance in  thyself  in  the  sight  of  the 
heathen."  "The  only  translation  of 
these  words,  which  suits  the  connection, 
is  that  given  in  the  margin  of  the  com- 
mon version :  and  thou  shaU  be  pro^ 
faned  in  thyself.  The  meaning  appears 
to  be :  thou  shalt  be  inwardly  conscious 
of  thy  polluted  condition,  aud  shalt 
loathe  thyself  on  acconnt  of  thy  sins. 
There,  among  the  heathen,  thou  shalt 
learn  to  appreciate  mv  character  as  a 
God  of  holiness,  rignteousne^,  and 
truth  "  (Henderson),  "  Jerusalem  has 
desecrated  the  sanctuaries  of  the  Lord 
fver.  8) ;  therefore  shall  it  also  be 
ctesecrated  for  a  requital  (ver.  16).  It 
has  wickedly  insulted  the  dignity  of 
God  ;  for  this  it  must  suffer  the  loss  of 
its  own  dignity.  'In  thee,'  so  that 
thou  must  experience  in  thvself  the 
desecration  ;  whereas  before  thou  didst 
send  it  forth  from  thee.  Such  things 
always  return  to  him  from  whom  they 
yToo&^*'--( Hengstenberg). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap,  xxil 

I10MILETIC8. 

Thb  Catalogue  of  Jerusalem's  SiNa 

1.  Consider  the  sins  in  detaiL  Tbe  prophet  is  not  now  speaking  of  the  sins 
of  their  forefathers,  but  of  those  of  his  own  day.  They  were  all  **  abominations  " 
in  the  sight  of  God  (ver.  2),  corrupting  and  daring  sins  which  brin^  down  God's 
judgment  swiftly  upon  nations.  1.  Blood  guiltiness,  Jerusalem  is  calli*d  "  Tlie 
bloody  city"  (vers.  8, 4, 6,  9, 12).  To  be  guilty  of  anr.ther's  blood  is  the  highest 
offence  which  a  man  can  commit  against  his  fellow.  When  this  crime  becomes 
the  characteristic  of  a  nation,  that  nation  sinks  into  a  savage  and  degraded 
condition.  2.  Idolatry.  **Maketh  idols  Against  herself  to  defile  herself" 
(ver.  8).  In  forsaking  the  worship  of  the  true  God  they  taxed  their  own  powers 
of  invention,  and  this  was  a  ^'reater  wickedness  than  merely  adopting  the  errors 
and  superstitions  which  had  been  handed  down  to  them.  8.  Destruction  of  the 
fundamental  idea  of  justice.  "  To  their  power  to  shed  blood  "  (ver.  6).  As  the 
Ileb.  has  it,  to  his  own  arm,  i.e.,  each  man  made  his  own  strength  the  rule  of 
right,  made  of  his  arm  a  god.  The  notion  that  might  is  right  destroys  the 
very  foundations  of  justice.  3.  Disregard  qf  parental  authority  (ver.  7).  The 
Family  is  the  oldest  institution,  the  most  changeless,  and  it  will  outlast  all 
others.  When  the  essential  laws  of  the  Family  are  disregarded,  the  Nation 
must  decay  and  perish.  4.  Oppression  qf  the  suffering  and  defenceless.  The 
stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  tne  widow  (ver.  7).  5.  Frqfanation  of  God^s 
ordinances.  They  profaned  the  sanctuary  and  the  Sabbath  (ver.  8).  6.  Bear^ 
ing  false  witness.  "Men  that  carry  tales  to  shed  blood"  (ver  9).  Ba«^e 
intbrmers  and  slanderers  who  scrupled  not  for  their  own  wicked  ends  to  swear 
men's  lives  awav.  The  fact  that  there  were  such  men  in  considerable  numbers 
suggests  that  there  must  also  have  been  wicked  rulers  and  judges  who  encou- 
laj-ed  such  naen.  7.  Impurity  (ver.  10-11).  The  individual  was  corrupted, 
then  the  family,  and,  last  of  all,  the  state.  God  sees  snch  sins  when  man  sees 
them  not.  Vices  of  this  kind  impair  the  physical  energy  of  nations,  and  if 
unchecked  must  bring  them  to  destruction.  8.  Covetousness.  This  spirit  of 
covetousness  led  them  to  take  bribes,  to  become  usurers,  and  extortioners. 
Thus  those  in  authority  became  corrupted,  and  the  evil  spread  fast  throughout 
the  whole  nation.  Jewish  tradition  ascribes  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  to 
covetousness,  that  being  regarded  as  the  root  of  all  evil. 

IL  Consider  these  sint  in  their  root-principles.  1.  Forgetfulness  of  God. 
"  And  hast  forgotten  Me,  saith  the  Lord  God  "  (ver.  12).  Former  prophets  had 
reminded  them  that  this  forgetfulness  of  God  was  the  bitter  root  out  of  which 
all  their  evils  grew  (Deut.  xxxii.  18  ;  Jer.  iii.  21\  Whatever  was  good  or  great 
in  this  people  arose  from  their  connection  witn  (}od,  so  that  by  forsaking  His 
worship  and  service  they  cut  themselves  off  from  a  glorious  past  They  who 
forsake  God  are  bound  to  follow  evil  The  morality  of  a  nation  cannot  be 
preserved,  even  \>j  the  best  rules  and  resolutions,  if  the  truths  of  God  and 
immortality  are  rejected. 

"  Troth  for  troth  and  good  for  good  !    Be  good.    The  troe,  the  pore^  the  just- 
Take  tbe  charm  for  ever  from  them  and  they  oromble  into  dust." 
{Tennyton:   "  Locksley  HaU  Sixty  Tears  After.") 

2.  Selfishness.  Having  cast  off  God,  each  man  made  himself  the  centre  of 
all  interest,  the  rule  of  all  dutv.  Hence  covetousness,  leading  to  extortion, 
oi)|»ression,  and  the  taking  of  bribes,  the  consequent  perversion  of  justice  to  the 
injury  of  the  poor  ana  defenceless.  Hence  the  deification  of  force*— the 
doctrine  that  might  was  right.    In  such  a  condition  of  things  each  man  will 

267 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xxiL  HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  SZEKIEL. 


regard  that  which  is  a  benefit  to  himself  as  right  and  good.  Whatever  a  mao 
could  get  by  force  would  be  his,  and  he  would  have  no  right  to  it  longer  than 
he  had  strength  to  defend  it.  Such  a  doctrine  as  this  would  destroy  the 
foundations  of  morality.  3.  Sensuality,  This  was  another  root-principle  of  the 
nation's  evil.  The  animal  nature  was  let  loose  without  restraint,  and  sins  were 
committed  which  sank  men  lower  than  the  beast.  These  sins  are  described 
(ver.  10)  by  such  words  as  "abomination,"  "lewdness,"  "defiling"  and  "humbling" 
those  whose  chastity  they  were  bound  in  honour  to  respect. 

III.  Consider  these  sins  in  their  punishment.  "  I  will  scatter  thee  among 
the  heathen,  and  disperse  thee  in  the  countries  "  (ver.  15^.  This  punishment 
included  many  afflictions.  1.  The  sorrows  and  danaers  q/exUs.  The^  had  to 
leave  their  beautiful  country  with  all  its  hallowed  asssociations,  their  homes, 
their  kindred,  their  religious  privileges  which  had  made  them  great.  They 
would  learn  to  realize  the  worth  of  these  when  once  they  had  lost  them.  2. 
Abandonment  qf  their  own  evil  principles.  They  were  permitted  to  carry  out 
their  own  evil  principles.  They  had  acted  like  the  heathen,  and  now  they  shall 
learn  what  heathenism  means,  in  its  own  proper  home.  GK)d  allows  men  to  work 
out  such  experiments  for  themselves  ;  if  haply  they  may  come,  at  length,  to  the 
knowledge  of  their  own  helplessness.  The  discipline  of  failure  prepares  the  way 
for  the  glory  of  GKmI's  salvation.  The  prodigal  in  the  parable  thought  that  he 
could  better  himself  elsewhere.  He  is  allowed  to  make  the  trial,  lie  gets  his 
portion  and  departs.  By  the  smart  of  the  experiment  he  is  brought  to  a  better 
mind.  Hard  experience  taught  him  those  lessons  which  the  sober  convictions  of 
duty  failed  to  teach.  Those  who  refuse  to  learn  by  God's  precepts  shall  learn  by 
His  judgments.  3.  They  would  be  a  reproach  among  the  heathen.  The  heathen 
could  only  despise  them  for  their  folly  and  inconsistency.  They  would  be  "  a 
mocking  to  all  countries  "  (ver.  4.)  They  would  witness  how  great  her  fall  from 
ancient  renown,  and  point  at  her  the  finger  of  scorn  when  she  had  now  only  the 
pre-eminence  in  calamity.  3.  Tlie  judgments  would  be  severe  and  effectual. 
"And  will  consume  thy  filthiness  out  of  thee"  (ver.  16).  The  trial  by  fire  is  the 
hardest  and  most  searching  of  all  trials.  We  can,  therefore,  only  understand  this 
threatening  to  mean  the  extinction  of  Jerusalem's  polluted  inhahitants.  The 
ungodly  are  to  be  separated  from  the  righteous.  What  a  suggestion  of  the 
final  judgment!  4.  No  human  power  could  avert  the  judgment,  or  courage 
resist  it.  "  Can  thine  heart  endure,  or  can  thine  hands  be  strong,  in  the  days 
that  I  shall  deal  with  thee  ?  "  (ver  14).  When  sin  is  committed  men  imagine 
themselves  strong  and  full  of  courage,  but  how  different  their  bearing  when  the 
time  of  judgment  comes !  When  Qod  once  rises  up  in  judgment  against  sinners, 
heart  and  hand,  courage  and  strength  fail.  There  was  now  no  way  of  escape  for 
the  guilty.  He  against  whom  the^  had  sinned  had  uttered  His  word,  and  it 
must  be  fulfilled  to  the  utmost  in  dire  judgment ;  "  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it, 
and  will  do  it"  (ver.  14).  5.  7he  agency  of  man  in  the  judgment.  "Son  of 
man,  wilt  thou  judge  the  bloody  city  ? "  (ver.  2).  The  prophets  of  old  judged 
the  world  through  the  word  of  the  Lord,  the  apostles  through  the  Holy  Spirit 
convincing  the  world  of  sin.  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  "the  saints  shall  judge  the 
world  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  2)  ;  by  which  we  are  to  understand,  not  that  they  shall  sit 
upon  the  judgment  seat,  but  rather  that  they  by  their  righteousness  shall  ooii- 
demn  those  who  having  the  same  opportunities  yet  resisted  the  grace  of  God. 

(Vers.  14-16). 

1.  Sinners  are  apt  to  confide  in  their  wisdom,  strength^  power,^  riches,  or 

friends.    Jerusalem  thou<:ht  that  she  had  wherewith  to  keep  off  all  judgments* 

or  sufficient  to  enable  her  to  wrestle  with  tiieni  if  they  came.     "Can  thine  heart 

endure,  or  can  thine  hands  be  strong  ? "    Jerusalem  thought  so,  had  confidence 

268 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL  ohap.  xxil 


that  way,  else  the  Lord  would  not  have  put  tliese  questions  to  her.  "  Thou 
didst  trust  in  thy  beauty  "  (Ezek.  xvi.  15) ;  in  thy  wealth,  in  thy  walls,  in  thy 
soldiers,  in  thy  counsellors,  m  thy  temple,  in  thy  mountains,  which  were  thy 
beauty.  In  Jeremiah's  days  it  is  evident  that  the  wise,  the  rich,  and  strong 
men  in  Jerusalem  did  too  much  confide  and  glory  in  their  wisdom,  their  riches, 
and  strength  (Jer.  ix  23).  Her  confidence  was  in  falsehood  (Jer.  xiii.  25) ;  that 
was  in  things  which  proved  false  and  deceitful  :  one  of  this  kind  was  the 
Egyptian  strength  (Isa,  xxx.  2  ;  Ezek  xvii.  17).  It  is  not  good  to  lean  on  our 
own  wisdom,  to  rest  upon  our  own  strength,  or  strength  of  others;  whoever 
makes  flesh  within,  or  flesh  without,  his  arm,  lies  nnder  a  curse  (Jer.  xvii.  5)  ; 
but  he  that  trusts  in  the  Lord,  and  in  Him  only,  he  hath  the  blessing  (Jer. 
xvii.  7).  2.  God  hath  His  times  to  reckon  with  sinners.  To  make  them  smart 
for  their  evil  doings.  *'  In  the  days  that  I  shall  deal  with  thee."  God  had  His 
day  to  deal  with  E^t  (Ezek.  xxx.  9),  with  the  Midianites  (li-a.  ix.  4).  Ahab 
had  his  day  to  do  wickedly,  and  God  had  His  day  to  deal  with  him  (1  Kings  xxii. 
34,  35).  Men  sin,  and  think  to  hear  no  more  of  their  sins,  but  Gk)d  remembers 
them,  and  hath  His  days  to  visit  for  them  (Bom.  ii.  6,  9).  3.  God's  judgments 
discover  the  vanity  and  rottenness  of  human  confidences  *'  Can  thine  heart 
endure?  can  thine  hands  be  strong?"  In  the  days  when  I  shall  deal  with  thee, 
when  I  shall  bring  the  sword,  plague  and  famine,  thy  heart  will  be  faint  and  thy 
hands  feeble.  God's  judgments  are  fires  which  consume  man's  confidences,  and 
make  them  see  their  own  weakness.  If  footmen,  horsemen,  and  the  swellings  of 
Jordan  weary  and  sink  men,  what  will  the  Lord  of  Hosts  do  (Jer.  xii.  5)  ?  If 
they  cannot  bear  the  lesser  judgments,  how  will  they  bear  the  greater?  If 
briars  and  thorns  conceit  tliemselves  to  be  oaks  and  cedars,  can  they  endure  the 
fire  ?  They  will  be  burnt  to  ashes  (Isa.  xxvii.  4).  4.  7 he  word  of  the  Lord 
shall  take  place,  whatever  men's  thoughts  are.  They  thought  Nebuchadnezzar 
would  not  come,  or  if  he  did,  that  they  and  the  Egyptians  should  be  able  to 
deal  with  them,  and  prevent  those  evils  which  were  threatened  by  the 
prophets ;  but  "  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and  will  do  it"  Neither  will  the 
Lord  revoke  what  He  hath  gaid,  and  so  prevent  iudgments  intended  :  "  He  is 
wise,  and  will  bring  evil,  and  will  not  call  back  His  words"  (Isa.  xxxL  2). 
Men  often  speak,  threaten,  and  then  after  eat  their  words,  call  back  their 
threatenings,  saying  thev  were  uttered  in  passion,  inconsiderately,  and  so  show 
their  folly  ;  but  God  when  He  speaks,  it  is  in  wisdom.  His  words  shall  stand, 
and  not  be  removed  or  called  back  (Amos  vi.  11).  Hence  it  is  that  the  Lord 
saith,  ''  They  shall  know  whose  word  shall  stand,  mine  or  theirs  "  (Jer.  xliv.  28). 

5.  7  he  Lord  by  His  judgment  doth  purge  out  qf  cities  and  nations  the  wicked, 
and  makes  them  and  their  wickedness  to  cease.  **  1  will  consume  thy  filthiness 
out  of  thee,"  i,e.,  thy  filthy  ones.  God  brought  the  sword,  famine,  and  pesti- 
lence upon  Jerusalem,  and  by  these  did  cut  off  and  consume  the  filthy  ones 
there  (Jer.  xiv.  15  ;  xvL  4 ;  Ezek.  viii.  14).  By  His  judgments  the  Lord  con- 
sumes the  filthy  out  of  the  city  and  land,  and  filthiness  out  of  the  saints. 

6.  The  wickedness  of  God's  people  doth  disinterest  them  in  God:  it  makes  God 
disown  them,  and  leave  them  to  themselves.  They  miffht  thinK  and  say  they 
were  still  the  people,  the  "  inheritance  "  of  God,  that  they  had  an  interest  in 
Him;  but  "thou  shalt  take  thine  inheritance  in  thyself;"  I  disclaim  thee, 
I  cast  thee  off  as  profane,  and  look  upon  thee  no  otherwise  than  I  do  upon 
heathens.  Israel  had  cast  off  the  thing  that  was  good,  viz.,  the  worship  of  God 
(Hos.  viii.  3)  ;  and,  therefore,  the  prophet  said, ''  Thy  calf,  0  Samaria,  tiath  cast 
thee  off"  (Hos.  viii.  5);  that  is,  thy  false  worship  hath  made  Me  to  cast  thee  off, 
to  declare  thee  to  be  none  of  my  city,  and  thy  people  to  be  none  of  mine.  The 
prophet  Jeremiah  tells  us,  that  the  Jews  were  once  very  dear  to  God,  even  as  dear 
as  a  wife  can  be  to  a  husband  ;  but  because,  like  lions,  they  carried  it  stoutly 
against  God,  and  cried  out  against  Him  and  His  prophets,  therefore  He  forsook 

269 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  xxn. 


nOMtLi:TlC  COMMEyTlRY:  EZEKIEL. 


them,  and  gave  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Babylonians  ;  and  becanse  Jerusalem 
was  as  a  "  speckled  bird  "  in  the  eye  of  God,  through  her  variety  of  gods,  altars, 
superstitions  and  idolatries,  therefore  Ood  caused  the  birds  of  ail  the  nations  to 
hoot  at  and  hate  her,  even  as  birds  do  a  speckled  bird,  inviting  tliem  and  all  the 
beasts  of  the  field  to  come  and  devour  her.  And  all  this  becau>e  they  dealt 
treacherously,  they  were  hypocritical,  they  were  wicked  (Jer.  xii.  1,  2,  4,  7-9\ 
The  Jews  had  been  a  people  precious  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  honourable 
(Isa.  xliii.  4)  ;  Jerut^alem  His  habitation,  and  the  people  of  it  His  inheritance 
and  His  glory,  whom  He  protected  (Isa.  iv.  5) ;  yet,  by  their  sins  they  provoked 
God,  so  that  He  gave  "His  strength  into  captivity,  and  His  glory  into  the 
enemy's  hand"  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  61).  7.  That  God* 8  judgments  bring  people  to  the 
knowledge  of  God.  God  wouLl  scatter  them,  consume  them,  cast  them  o£F, 
leave  them  to  themselves,  and  they  should  know  that  he  is  the  Lord.  *^  The 
Lord  is  known  by  executing  judgments  "  (Psa.  ix.  16)  ;  His  power.  His  justice, 
and  sovereignty  are  known  thereby,  and  so  men  are  made  to  fear  and  stand  in 
awe  of  Him.  When  Ch)d  is  silent,  and  spenks  not  by  His  judji^ents,  men  think 
He  is  like  themselves  (Psa.  1.  21)  *  and  are  emboldened  to  sin  (Eccl.  viii.  11)  ; 
but  when  God  thunders  by  His  judgments,  they  have  other  apprehensions  of 
Him  (1  Sam.  vL  19,  20).'-{Greenhill). 


(Vers.  17-22.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Jerusa- 
lem besieged  by  her  enemies  is  the 
furnace  in  which  God  will  refine  His 
people  Israel 

Ver.  17.  "  The  word  of  the  lord 
came  unto  me."  "  This  second  word 
of  God  rests,  no  doubt,  upon  the  figure 
in  ver.  15,  of  the  unclean  ness  or  dirt 
of  sin ;  but  it  is  not  an  exposition  of 
the  removal  of  the  dirt  as  predicted 
tliere.  For  that  was  to  be  effected 
through  the  dispersion  of  Israel  among 
the  nations,  whereas  the  word  of  God, 
from  ver.  17  onwards,  represents  the 
siege  awaiting  Jerusalem  as  a  melt- 
ing procesj*,  through  which-  God  will 
separate  the  'silver  ore  contained  in 
Israel  from  the  baser  metals  mingled 
with  ii:*—(Keil) 

Ver.  18.  "  The  house  of  Israel  is 
to  He  become  dross;  all  they  are 
brass,  and  tin,  and  iron,  and  lead, 
in  the  midst  of  the  furnace ;  they  are 
even  the  dross  of  silver."  Some  kinds 
of  silver  ore  contain  a  large  amount  of 
copper,  iron,  and  lead,  with  other 
impurities.  The  inhabitants  of  Judea 
are  described  as  a  mass  of  the  baser 
metals  intermixed  with  the^  impure 
residue  of  silver.  The  good  silver  had 
been  drained  out  of  Judali  by  death 
870 


or  exile,  and  those  who  remained 
had  altogether  become  a  compound  of 
wickedness. 

Ver.  20.  "  So  will  I  gather  you  in 
Mine  anger  and  in  Hy  fury,  and  I 
wiU  leave  you  there,  and  melt  yon.'* 
^'  The  smelting  is  treated  here  simply 
as  a  figurative  representation  of  punish- 
ment, and  consequently  the  result  of 
the  smelting,  namely,  the  refining  of 
the  silver  by  the  removal  of  the  baser 
ingredients,  is  not  referred  to  any 
further,  as  is  the  case  in  Isa.  L  22,  25; 
Jer.  yi.  27-30 ;  Mai.  iii.  2,  3.  Thid 
smelting  process  was  experienced  by 
Israel  in  the  last  sie^e  of  Jerusalem  by 
the  Chaldeans."— ^JT^j/;.  "  In  the 
spiritual  department,  the  silver  may 
become  altogether  dross.  ^\\q  furnace 
is  Jerusalem,  according  to  its  destina- 
tion to  serve  for  a  smelting  pot  Dross 
of  silver  is  silver  that  has  become 
dross.  They  are  all  gathered  into 
Jerusalem  (ver.  19),  as  the  people  far 
and  wide,  nnder  the  pressure  of  the 
foe,  seek  refuge  in  the  fortified  city. 
In  the  whole  section  the  judgment  is 
regarded  not  in  the  light  of  purifica- 
tion, but  in  that  of  destruction,  as 
Ezekiel  usually  considers  the  population 
of  Jerusalem  as  an  nngodly  multi- 
tude doomed  to  be  extirpated.**— 
(Bengstenberg), 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMIIETIC  COMMESTAnY:  EZEKIICL  chai'.  xxii. 


Ver.  22.     "As  silver  is  melted  in  and  silver,  can  resist  the  scorifying 

the   midst   of  the   farnace."      "  lu  iufluence.    In  Jer.  vi.  28-30,  we  have 

modern  luettllurgy,  lead  is  employed  a  perfect  description  of  this  process, 

for  the  pur|io-e  of   purifying    silver  If  we  take  silver  having  the  impurities 

from    other    mineral    products.     The  in  it  described  in   the  text,  namely, 

alloy  is  mixed  with  lead  exposed  to  iron,  copner  and  tin,  and  mix  it  with 

iusion  upon  an   earthen  vessel,  and  lead,  and  place  it  in  the  fire  upon  a 

submitted  to  a  blast  of  air.    By  this  cupell,  it  soon  melts;  the  lead  will 

means  the  dross  is  consumed.     This  oxidize  and  form  a  thick,  coarse  cru  t 

process  is  called  the  cupelling  opera-  upon  the  surface  and  thus  consume 

tion,   with   which  the  aescription  in  away,     but    eflFecting    no    purifying 

Ezek.  xxii.  18-22  accurately  coincides,  influence.    The  alloy  remains,  if  any- 

The  vessel  containing    the    alloy    is  thing,  worse  than  befora    The  silver 

surrounded  bv  the  fire,  or  placed  in  is  not  refined  because    'the  bellows 

the  midst  of  it,  and  the  blowing  is  not  were  burned,'   there  existed  nothing 

applied  to  the  fire  but  to  the  fused  to  blow  upon  it." — (Smith's  Diet.  ^ 

metals.      And    when    this    is    done,  the  Bide,  art.  **  Lead"). 
nothing  but  the  perfect  metak,  gold 

ffOMILETICa. 

God  has  a  threefold  smelting  furnace.  1.  0/  sin.  In  which  one  can  become 
dross.  2.  0/  trial.  In  which  furnace  the  silver  is  tested.  8.  0/  judgment. 
In  which  eveu  the  dross  is  consumed. — Lange. 

1.  Churches  and  states  may  degenerate  from  their  preciousness  and  purity, 
into  viteness  and  pro/aneness,  **  It  was  full  of  judgment,  and  righteousn&ss 
lodged  in  it "  (Isa.  i  21-23),  but  instead  of  these,  now  there  was  oppression  and 
murder.  '*  Thy  silver  is  become  dross,  thy  wine  is  mixed  with  water."  Thy 
money  is  counterfeit,  and  thy  wine  corrupt.  Whatever  was  pure  in  thee  is  now 
corrupted,  the  law  is  corrupted  with  false  expositions,  the  worship  is  corrupted 
with  idols  and  human  traditions,  justice  is  corrupted  with  bribery  and  cruel 
oppressions,  chastity  and  sobriety  are  corrupted  with  lewd  and  unclean  practices. 
Kome  was  once  a  golden  city  for  her  faith  and  holiness  (Rom.  i.  8  ;  xvi  19)  ; 
but  now  is  so  corrupt  in  doctrine,  worship,  and  manners,  that  she  is  become 
"  the  mother  of  harlots  and  abominations  "  (Rev.  zviL  5).  The  Seven  Churches 
were  once  golden  candlesticks,  but  throu<{h  their  corruptions  and  weaknesses, 
they  soon  degenerated  into  dross.  2.  Men  professing  godliness,  and  living 
ungodlily,  are  not  acceptable  to  God,  nor  ft  materials  qf  a  church,  **  The  house 
of  Israel  is  to  Me  become  dross  ;  "  tliey  profess  My  name,  and  so  judge  them- 
selves good  silver  ;  but  they  live  wickedly,  and  to  Me  they  are  no  better  than  dross, 
than  brass,  tin,  iron  and  lead,  too  base  materials  to  make  a  temple  for  Me  to  dwell 
in,  or  a  cantUestick  for  Me  to  set  a  prophetical  light  in.  Whatever  profession  they 
make,  whatever  parts  orprivileges  they  have,  they  are  no  silver,  but  the  dross,  the 
excrements  of  silver,  which  defile,  disgrace  the  name,  the  Church,  the  ordinances  of 
God,  and  must  be  separated  from  the  gold  and  silver  (2  Cor.  vi.  17).  Many  that 
appear  silver  unto  men  will  be  found  dross  unto  God.  Hypocrites  and  wicked  ones 
are  dross  ;  only  hypocrites  are  the  "  dross  of  silver."  3.  77/^  greatest  part  o/ 
prqfessors,  when  they  come  to  the  trial,  will  be  found  corrupt  and  naught. 
*' All  they  are  brass,  and  tin,  and  iron,  and  lead,  in  the  midst  of  the  furnace." 
The  furnace  discovered  them  to  be  base  metal.  The  number  of  sincere  and 
silver-like  Christians  will  be  few.  4.  lliose  who  degenerate  from  God  and  His 
ways  shall  meet  with  fury  and  fire  from  tJte  Lord  (ver.  21).  When  the  church 
of  i^hesus  decayed  in  her  fiiBt  love,  that  of  Fergamos  turned  aside  to  the 

271 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP  xxn. 


nOMJLETW  COMMENTAnj :  EZEKIEn 


doctrines  of  Balaam  and  the  Nicolaitanes,  that  of  Thyatira  to  the  teachinga 
and  seductions  of  Jezebel:  when  Sardis  abated  in  her  zeal,  and  Laodicea 
became  lukewarm,  tlie  Lord  thre  itened  them  severely,  and  at  last  brake  the 
candlesticks,  and  put  out  the  lights  (Rev.  ii.  iii.).  God  will  put  away  all  the 
wicked  of  the  earth  from  Him  like  dross  (Psa.  cxix.  119).  5.  Melting  and 
consuming  judgments  upon  a  people  are  the  wrath  of  God,  whoever  be  the 
executioners  thereof,  Nebuchadnezzar  should  besiege  Jerus  liem,  and  make  it 
like  a  furnace  to  melt  and  consume  the  Jews,  and  this  the  Lord  owns  to  be  His 
doing  (ver.  22).  The  enemies  of  Jerusalem  were  but  the  vials  or  vessels  by 
which  the  fury  of  God  was  poured  out. — {GreenhilL) 


(Vers.  28-81.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— The  cor- 
rupt  condition  of  all  ranks  of  the  people 
as  the  immediate  cause  of  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  kingdom. 

Ver.  24.  "  Thou  art  the  land  that  is 
not  cleansed."  The  priests,  whose  office 
it  was  to  keep  the  land  iree  from  moral 
and  ceremonial  defilement  had  neglected 
their  duty  (Lev.  xvl  19).  The  whole 
land  had  become  corrupt,  but  Jerusalem 
was  to  be  regarded  as  a  concentration 
of  the  iniquity  of  the  whole  land. 
'  Nor  rained  upon  in  the  dayof  indig- 
nation "  Heb.  **  that  hath  not  her  rain." 
The  rain  which  was  her  proper  portion 
which  ought  to  have  fallen  upon  her. 
By  this  rain  is  signified,  the  gentle, 
sanctifying  showers  of  the  proi>hetic 
word  (Dnut.  xxxii.  2).  The  blame  of 
this  desolate  state  of  things  is  imputed 
to  the  prophets  who  were  utterors  of 
vain  speeches  and  Iving  visions  (ver. 
28).  "  A  land  that  has  no  rain  in  the 
day  of  indignation,  is  a  land  that  in  the 
outburst  of  the  divine  judgment  finds 
no  grace,  and  simply,  as  the  connection 
shows,  because  its  impurity  is  not  re- 
moved. The  rain  in  the  day  of  indig- 
nation Would  be  a  benefit.  It  would 
quench  the  flame  of  the  divine  indig- 
nation. To  the  indignation,  the  full 
energy  of  which  is  here  called  forth  by 
the  uncleanness,  may  be  applied  that 
which  is  said  in  the  Song  of  Songs 
(viii.  7)  of  the  fire  of  love.  *  Many 
waters  cannot  quench  love,  neither  can 
the  rivers  drown  it'" — (Heng&tenherg), 

Ver.  25.  "  A  oonspiracy  of  her 

prophets."  These  professed  to  be  the 

messengers  of  God,    but    they    were 
272 


conspiring  against  Him.  They  were 
His  enemies,  even  as  roaring  lions  are 
the  enemies  of  their  prey.  **  The  false 
prophets  are  first  singled  out ;  on  ac- 
count of  the  greater  influence  which 
they  exerted  in  seducing  the  people  by 
their  impious  teachings.  Not  satisfied 
with  each  propagating  error  within  his 
own  sphere,  tney  had  formed  a  complot 
to  oppose  the  messages  of  the  servants 
of  the  Lord.  Thus  forming  a  powerful 
body,  they  resembled  a  roaring  lion, 
tearing  in  pieces  his  prey.  Uncon- 
cerned about  the  welfare  of  the  souls 
of  whom  they  professedly  had  the 
cure,  and  intent  only  upon  their  own 
gain,  they  had  occasioned  the  death 
of  those  who  perished  in  the  war  with 
the  Chaldeans,  and  thus  increased  the 
number  of  widows  " — (Henderson.) 

Ver.  26.  "  Her  priests  have  violated 
My  law,  and  have  profaned  Mine  holy 
things."  The  priest's  lips  should  keep 
knowledge,  and  give  it  out  as  from  a 
pure  fountain  (Mai.  ii.  1\  But  these 
did  violence  to  God's  law,  both  by 
breaking  it  themselves  and  making  it 
void  to  others  by  false  interpretations. 
''  They  have  put  no  difference  between 
the  holy  and  profane."  The  priests  also 
knowingly  admitted  persons  to  God's 
sacred  ordinances,  without  any  regard 
or  discrimination  as  to  their  moral  or 
spiritual  fitne  s  for  partaking  of  them. 
They  showed  utter  indifference  to  all 
moral  distinctions — right  and  wrong, 
pure  and  impure.  Upon  them  lies  the 
woe  pronounced  upon  those  who  call 
evil  good,  and  good  evil  (Isa.  v.  20). 
''  Have  lud  their  eyes  from  Hy  Sab- 
baths."     They   neither  observe   the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIBL. 


OHAP.  xxn. 


Sabbath  themselTes,  and  shut  their 
eyes  to  the  desecration  of  it  by  others. 
'I'Jius  they  failed  to  carry  out  the  chief 
coiumand  and  reason  of  their  office, 
which  (as  laid  down  by  Moses)  was  "  to 
teach  the  children  of  Israel  all  the 
statutes  which  the  Lord  had  spoken 
unto  them."  (Lev.  x.  11).  ''The  law 
of  the  Sabbath  is  given  as  an  example. 
This  they  rob  of  its  deep  spiritual 
import,  and  limit  it  to  the  external 
rest,  as  if  it  were  given  for  animaU, 
and  not  for  men,  who  are  to  serve  God 
in  spirit  Because  they  thus  let  down 
the  commandments  of  God  to  the  level 
of  man,  and  make  tliem  minister  to 
human  inclination,  God  Himself  is 
desecrated  by  them.  ''  I  am  profaned 
among  them."  In  place  of  the  dread 
and  holy  God,  who  visits  the  iniquity 
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children,  ap- 
pears a  lax  and  siu-favuurin^  god,  who 
creates  no  one,  and  is  glad  if  any  one 
will  only  acknowledge  him,  and  is 
thankful  for  every  bow  that  is  made  to 
him  '*^Hengstenberg). 

Ver.  27.  "  Her  princai 

like  wolves  ravening  the  prey."  The 
term  "princes"  is  applied  generally 
to  all  the  political  authorities  and 
officials.  These,  in  their  rapacity  are 
compared  to  wolves,  which  are  noted 
for  their  fierceness  and  cruelty. 

Ver.  28.  "Her  prophets  have  daubed 
fhem  with  untempered  morter." 
"Them,"*. A,  the  princes.  These  were 
prophets  who  meddled  with  pnolitical 
matters,  and  upheld  the  princes  in  their 
iniquity.  "The  false  prophets  recur 
here  once  more,  as  abettors  of  the 
nobles,  to  whom  they  hold  out  deliver- 
ance, and  thereby  confirm  them  in 
their  shameful  course,  instead  of  ve- 
hemently testifying  against  their  sins, 
and  setting  before  them  the  judgments 
of  God.  In  ch.  xiii.  10  we  have  an 
example  of  the  manner  in  which  the 
prophets  daubed  with  this  untempered 
mortar.  The  building  of  the  wall  by 
the  people  denotes  the  political  ac- 
tivity whereby  they  sought  to  raise 
themselves  up — the  efibrt  made  by  the 


coalition.  The  false  prophets  daubed 
this  wall ;  they  gave  to  the  impious 
and  the  ungodly  movement  of  the 
people,  that  was  condemned  by  the 
word  of  the  true  prophets,  the  appear- 
ance of  a  higher  sanction,  and  con- 
firmed them  in  it.  The  wall  is  a 
spiritual  one,  and  so  the  absurdity 
suits  it  as  a  spiritual  mortar.  The 
attempt  to  put,  instead  of  the  spiritual, 
a  material  mortar,  has  arisen  only  from 
the  want  of  capacity  in  expositors 
to  understand  the  interchange  of 
figure  and  reality.  Nothing  can  be 
more  absurd  than  to  announce  safety 
to  a  people  living  in  sin,  and  to  promise 
success  to  counsels  that  are  in  open 
contradiction  to  the  revealed  counsels 
of  God  "  {Hengstmiberg).  These  false 
prophets  assured  the  princes  that  the 
King  of  Babylon  would  not^  take 
Jerusalem,  in  direct  contradiction  to 
the  Word  of  God. 

Ver.  29.  "  The  people  of  the  land." 
"As  placed  here  immediately  after  the 
classification  of  persons  holding  office, 
we  are  to  understand  the  inhabitants 
generally  without  distinction  of  rank 
or  office.  Corruption  had  spread  down- 
wards through  the  whole  mass  of  the 
community  (Jer.  v.  1-4).  They '  vexed 
the  poor  and  needy,'  they  '  oppressed 
tlie  stranger  wrongfully.'  So  far  from 
encouraging,  by  their  kindness  and 
holy  example,  those  foreigners  who 
sojourned  among  them  to  devote  them- 
selves in  spirit  and  truth  to  the  service 
of  Jehovah,  the  Jews  did  everything 
that  was  calculated  to  alienate  them 
from  His  worship."— (Henderson.) 

Ver.  30.  "I  sought  for  a  man 
among  them  •  •  •  but  I  found  none." 
"  Jeremiah,  by  his  powerful  preaching 
of  repentance,  presented  himself  as 
such  a  public  deliverer  ;  but  they 
despised  him,  and  he  could  gain  no 
position.  The  man  alone  is  nothing. 
The  position  must  be  added,  and  the 
people  must  gather  around  him." — 
(Hengstenberg.)  It  was  expressly  for- 
bidden  to  Jeremiah  to  intercede  for* 
them  (Jer.  xi.  14). 

273 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xxn.  nOMILBTIO  COMMENTART:  EZEKTBL. 


Ver.  31.  "Their  own  way  have  I  filled  They  are  punished  for  tlieir 
recompensed  upon  their  heads."  Thus  own  personal  transgressions,  and  no^ 
the  words  of  Ezek.  xviiL  30  are  fnl-     for  those  of  their  fftthexa. 

HOMILliTICS. 
The  Corruption  of  the  Natiok. 

I.  It  was  spread  through  all  ranks  and  classes.  1.  Prophets.  ''They  have 
devoured  souls ;  they  have  taken  the  treasure  and  precious  things;  they  have 
njade  htr  many  widows  in  the  midst  thereof"  (ver.  261  They  were  the  enemies 
of  God  aid  of  the  souls  which  He  had  made.  By  tneir  lying  prophecies  they 
brought  ihe  judgment  of  the  sword  upon  the  city,  so  that  she  was  rifled  of  her 
treasure  and  her  widows  were  multiplied.  2.  Priests.  Her  priests  violated 
God's  law ;  not  only  hy  breaking  it  themselves,  but  by  jmtting  false  interpreta- 
tions on  it  for  the  purpose  of  their  own  selfish  ends.  They  were  ordained  to 
promote  holiness,  but  they  put  no  difference  between  the  holy  and  the  profane, 
bttween  the  unclean  and  the  clean.  They  destroyed  the  very  foundations  of 
religion  and  morality.  They  profaned  the  blessed  ordinance  of  the  sabbath, 
which  God  had  given  to  men  for  rcbt  and  worship,  and  which  was  wonderfully 
suited  to  nourisii  the  growth  of  religion  by  promoting  serious  thought  and 
meditation  (ver.  26).  3.  Rulers.  These  no  longer  ruleid  by  righteousness,  but 
shed  blood  and  destroyed  souls  to  get  dishonest  gain.  And  the  prophets  were 
linked  with  them,  upholding  them  in  their  iniquity  (ver.  27,  28V  4.  People, 
These  could  not  be  expected  to  be  better  than  their  guides.  There  was  not 
a  man  to  be  found  among  them  to  stand  in  the  gap,  and  to  save  the  land  by 
his  righteousness  (ver.  30).  We  are  reminded  how  when  God  sent  His  sou. 
He  was  rejected  by  all  these  classes  in  succession, — by  the  religious  teachers, 
then  by  the  rulers,  and,  last  of  all,  by  the  people. 

II.  We  can  trace  the  cause  and  progress  of  it.  The  prophets  were  utterers 
of  lying  visions  and  spurious  oracles.  Their  object  was  only  to  flatter  the  civil 
antliorities  for  their  own  si  Ifish  purposes.  The  priests  had  lost  all  sense  of 
sacred ness.  1.  7 he  dec ty  of  a  nations  life  begins  when  false  doctrines  are 
promulgated.  The  history  of  the  children  of  Israel  was  the  history  of  religion. 
They  were  what  they  were  because  of  certain  doctrines  and  ordinances  con- 
cerning God,  and  His  service,  and  human  duty.  These  were  revealed  to  them 
from  heaven.  They  were  bound  by  solemn  obligations  to  obey  them.  And 
God's  law  is  violated  just  as  much  by  putting  false  interpretations  upon  it  as  by 
actual  trHnsgres>ion,  False  doctrines  are  not  immaterial.  They  are  not  mere 
errors  of  the  head, — harmless  speculations  having  no  real  influence  upon  life 
and  duty.  For  it  will  be  found  that  what  is  wrong  in  doctrine  springs  from 
the  fountain  of  an  evil  heart.  False  doctrines  are  on  the  side  of  the  passions. 
They  are  htiraan  inventions  to  justify  the  errors  of  heart  and  life.  A  right  life 
must  have  right  principles  for  its  foundation.  If  we  examine  the  errors  of 
Popery,  we  find  that  they  have  their  origin  in  corrupt  human  nature.  They 
have  an  eye  to  political  ascendancy,  to  the  supremacy  of  a  priestly  class,  to 
gain,  to  worldly*  ambitions,  and  to  salve  the  consciences  of  men  by  easy 
and  convenient  methods  of  dealin«(  with  sin.  True  teaching  concerning  God  and 
human  duty  can  alone  promote  holiness  of  heart  and  life,  which  is  the  salt  of 
nations  to  preserve  tnem  from  corruption  and  decay.  2.  The  decay  of  a 
nation's  life  aho  sets  in  when  its  rulers  are  no  longer  governed  by  conscience. 
When  they  set  aside  G«»d*s  law  of  righteousness,  and  are  intent  only  upon 

,  dishonest  gain,  then  they  become  oppres.sors  of  the  poor  and  defenceless,  and 
acruple  not  to  shed  innocent  blood     3.  The  decay  of  a  nation's  life  is  imminent 
274 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  SZEKTEIh  OHAP.  xttl 


when  priests  become  mere  courtiers.  When  they  flatter  those  in  power,  with 
tlie  view  only  of  advancing  themselves.  Corruptions  of  this  kind  soon  followed 
wlieii  Rome  embraced  the  Christian  religion  under  Gonstantine,  by  which  the 
clergy  acquired  political  importance.  The  temptation  to  worldly  ambition  was 
strong,  and  tiiey  yielded  to  it.  They  sought  to  please  princes  in  order  to  promote 
the  temporal  interests  of  the  Church  and  their  own  wealth  and  grandeur.  And 
when  princes  and  priests  are  corrupted  it  is  no  marvel  that  the  evil  influence  at 
length  affects  public  opinion.  When  the  reigning  powers  and  public  opinion 
are  on  the  side  of  tyranny  and  wrong,  corruption  must  find  its  way  even  to 
the  seat  of  justice.  Instead  of  equity  we  have  caprice  and  irrational  and 
nnjust  maxims  and  practices.  And  corruption  in  all  these  departments  soon 
spreads  into  family  life,  and  thus  the  last  retreat  of  a  nation's  strength  and 
purity  is  invaded. 

III.  Itbronghtsnre  judgment  The  dire  judgments  which  fell  upon  the  people 
were  inevitable.  They  happened  by  a  moral  necessity  God  had  done  every- 
thing for  His  vineyard  that  could  be  done  in  it,  and  there  remained  nothing 
more  to  be  tried.  1.  The  ministry  of  the  true  prophets  had  failed.  The  people 
had  been  instructed  and  warned.  When  Goi's  teaching  by  the  mouth  of  His 
holy  prophets  does  no  good,  then  have  the  people  judged  themselves.  When 
Jerusalem  killed  the  prophets,  and  stoned  them  that  were  sent  unto  her,  then 
her  house  was  left  unto  her  desolate.  "  Your  house,"  said  our  Lord,  as  much 
as  to  say,  My  house  no  longer.  Tiiey  had  profaned  it,  and  God  departed  from 
His  temple.  2.  No  righteous  men  were]  to  be  found  amongst  them  (ver.  30). 
Abraham's  intercession  for  Sodom  teaches  us  that  the  presence  of  a  few  righteous 
among  a  people  stays  the  hand  of  justice.  When  those  who  fear  God  decline  in 
a  land,  judgment  is  coming.  3.  In  tfiese  judgments  God  was  treating  them  on 
their  oum  terms.  They  had  {)uni8hiuent  in  kind  as  well  as  in  necessary  degree. 
The  priests  had  made  no  distinction  between  the  holy  and  the  profane.  And 
thus,  by  their  own  admission,  they  were  not  "  a  holy  nation."  Let  it  be  so, 
then  ;  let  them  be  profaned  by  being  treated  as  such.  Holiness  was  the  very 
reason  of  their  existence  as  a  nation,  and  wanting  that,  there  remained  only  a 
looking  for  judgment.  The  foundation  of  their  national  privile^^es  was  thus 
destroyed.  They  profaned  the  sanctuary,  and  they  were  themselves  profaned 
among  the  heathen.  They  despised  God,  and  they  were  ''  lightly  esteemed  " 
(1  Sam.  ii.  30).  ''  Their  own  way  have  I  recompensed  upon  their  heads  saith 
the  Lord  God  "(ver.  31). 

(Ver.  28). 

1.  Inhere  are  prophets  who  will  flatter  wicked  princes  and  rulers  in  their  enil 
ways.  The  princes  were  ravening  wolves,  shed  blood,  destroyed  souls,  to  get 
dishonest  gam,  and  Jerusalem's  prophets  daubed  them  with  untempered 
mortar.  They  applauded  their  practices,  justified  their  doings,  and  told  them 
that  God  did  approve  of  their  ways.  It  was  not  the  nobles,  citizens,  but  the 
prophets  of  Jerusalem  which  did  this.  Princes  and  great  ones  want  not  false 
and  lying  prophets  to  bolster  them  up,  and  to  bear  them  out  in  their  vile  and 
detestable  courses.  Ahab  was  a  wicked  king,  and  he  had  a  multitude  of  flatter- 
ing daubing  prophets  (2  Chron.  xviii,  10,  11).  There  were  "flattering  divina- 
tions" among  the  false  prophets  (Ezek.  xii.  24) ;  and  with  these  they  bedaubed 
the  wicked  princes,  and  strengthened  the  hands  of  evil-doers  (Jer.  xxiii.  14). 
Flattery  is  evil  in  any,  but  worst  of  all  in  prophets^  and  especially  when  they 
have  to  do  with  wicked  princes,  whom  they  harden  in  their  wickedness  thereby, 
and  ripen  for  destruction.  Reproof  is  a  precious  balm  (Psa.  cxli.  5)  ;  but 
flattery  is  a  destructive  net  (Prov.  xxix.  5).  Let  the  true  prophets  abhor  it ; 
l^nd  so  speak  the  truth,  that  they  may  appeal  to  the  consciences  of  great  and 

8  2  275 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xxn.  nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL. 


sroall,  as  Paul  doth  Tl  Thess.  ii.  5).  3.  What  false  prophets  give  out  is  t/it- 
savoury,  and  unsouna,  weak,  and  useless.  It  u  unteiupered  mortar :  it  may 
stick  in  men's  heads  a  little,  to  strengtlien  them  to  do  wickedly  ;  but  it  will 
not  fitick  in  their  hearts,  to  strengtlien  them  against  the  day  of  evil,  and  to  justify 
their  doings.  Wliat  is  there  in  vanity  and  lies  which  can  establish  ?  It  is  truth, 
and  divine  truth,  which  estaUisheth  (2  Pet.  i.  19) ;  the  vain  and  lying  imagina- 
tions of  men,  do  deceive  and  dibappoint.  Pashur  prophesied  lies,  the  things  of 
his  own  heart  and  spirit,  which  himself  and  others  trusted  in  ;  but  see  how  he 
and  they  who  believed  him,  were  deceived  and  disappointed  (Jer.  xx.  6).  'Fhe 
scornful  rulers  which  made  lies  their  refuge,  and  hid  themselves  ander  falsehood 
saying,  ''  the  over-flowing  scourge  shall  not  come  unto  us"  (Isa.  zxviii  14,  15). 
But,  see  what  the  Lord  saith  (ver  17).  The  hail  shall  sweep  away  the  refuge  of 
lies,  and  the  waters  shall  overflow  the  hidinff-place.  False  prophecies,  false 
opinions,  false  confidences  are  all  untempered  mortar.  8.  The  subtlety  and 
impudence  qf  false  prophets  makes  way  for  their  vanity  and  lies.  They  say, 
"  thus  baith  the  Lord  God,''  there  is  their  cunning  ;  and  to  make  God  author  of 
their  vanities  and  lies,  there  is  their  impudency.  They  knew  that  their  dreams, 
visions,  vanities,  and  lies  would  not  take  with  princes  or  people  if  not  presented 
unto  them  as  from  Gud.  They  did  not  only  abuse  men,  but  they  greatly  abused 
God.  "  They  have  belied  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  v,  12),  and  made  that  to  be  the  word 
of  God  which  was  not ;  they  walked  in  lies  and  strengthened  the  hands  of  evil- 
doers ;  which  provoked  God  so  bitterly  against  them,  that  He  saith  He  would 
"feed  them  with  wormwood  and  make  them  drink  the  water  of  ^^"  (Jer.  zziii 
14,  15).  Many  prophets  amongst  us  have  belied  the  Lord,  in  making  some 
Scriptures  speak  that  to  maintain  their  opiniooB  and  tenets  wUch  never  was  the 
mind  of  GkxL — (QreenhUl). 

(VersL  80.) 

L  God^s  protection  qf  them.  He  had  a  special  care  of  them,  being  His 
Church  and  people,  above  all  others ;  as  the  city  Jerusalem  had  a  wall  about  it 
(Neh.  i  3),  so  (jod  was  a  wall  to  the  citizens  thereof, ''  a  wall  of  fire  round  aboat 
them  "  (Zech.  ii.  5  ;  Cant.  iv.  12).  Lest  any  should  hurt  His  vineyard.  He  kept 
it  night  and  day,  watched  over  it  and  preserved  it. 

2.  Consider  those  things  which  God  had  given  them  to  be  a  hedge  or  watt  unto 
them.  (1.)  Sound  doctrine.  This  was  a  *'  hedge  "  to  keep  out  all  errors,  corrupt 
and  heathenish  opinions,  which  they  were  in  danger  of,  having  the  nations  round 
about  them.  But  God  had  given  them  good  doctrine  (Prov.  iv.  2) ;  risrht 
words  (Psa.  xxxiii.  4)  ;  lively  oracles  ^Acts  vii.  38^  ;  faithful  commands  (Pha. 
czix.  86) ;  sure  testimonies  (Ps.  xciii.  5;  ;  such  as  tney  were  to  try  all  doctrines 
and  opinions  bv  (Isa.  viii.  20).  (2.)  Pure  worship.  This  was  a  hedge  between 
them  and  the  heathen  (Deut.  vi.  13,  14).  God  had  appointed  them  a  pure  way 
of  worship,  which  hedged  them  in  from  all  false  ways  of  worship,  from  bringing 
in  aught  of  their  own  or  of  others.  (3.)  Good  laws.  No  nation  under  heaven 
had  such  laws  to  be  governed  by  as  the  Jews  had,  and  those  laws  were  hedges 
against  all  injustice ;  they  might  not  wrong  one  another,  nor  strangers. 
(4.)  God  had  given  them  good  prophets,  priests,  and  princes.  The  prophets  were 
to  preserve  the  doctrine  sound,  tlie  priests  to  keep  the  worship  pure,  and  the 

grinces  to  see  ju.^tice  impartially  executed.  Elijah,  a  good  prophet,  was  the 
orsemen  and  chariot  of  Israel  (2  Kings  ii.  12  ;  xiii.  14)  ;  the  priests  were 
mediators  between  God  and  the  people  (Joel  ii  17)^  the  princes  were  the 
strength  of  the  land  (Prov.  xxix.  4).  And  more  briefly,  it  was  the  covenant  made 
between  God  and  this  people :  He  had  promised  to  be  their  God  and  to  protect 
them  ;  they  had  promised  to  oe  His  people^  and  to  walk  in  His  ways.  But— 
276 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMTLETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xxn. 


8.  The  "  hedge  '*  which  God  had  given  them  was  broken^  and  gaps  were  made 
in  it,  (1),  I'he  doctrine  uas  coJTupted.  There  was  much  chaff  mingled  with 
the  wheat  (Jer.  xxiii.  28)  ;  false  prophets  gave  in  that  to  be  divine,  which  was 
fri>m  their  own  heaiis  and  heads  (Ezek.  xiii.  2,  3)  ;  they  prophesied  lies  (Jer^ 
xiv.  14) ;  the  providence  of  God  was  denied,  His  justice  and  omnipresence 
(Ezek.  viii.  12  ;  xviii.  2,  25).  They  taught  the  people  to  swear  by  a  fal^e  God, 
even  by  Baal  (Jer.  xii.  16).  (2).  7hs  worship  was  greatly  corrupted.  The 
sanctuary  was  defiled  with  detestable  things  (Ezek.  v.  11).  i'hey  tad  brought 
images  and  idols  into  the  temple  (Ezek.  viii),  they  had  high  places  and  altars  in 
every  street  (Ezek.  xvi.)  The  statutes  of  Omri  were  kept,  and  the  works  of  the 
house  of  Ahab  (Micah  vi.  16)  ;  and  the  fear  or  worship  of  God  was  taught  by 
the  precepts  ol  men  (Isa.  xxix  13).  (3).  Ths  laws  were  tvrested  and  peroerted, 
80  that  there  was  no  justice.  They  abhor  judgment,  and  pervert  all  equity 
([Micaii  iii.  9).  According  to  Isaiah,  judgment  was  turned  away  backviard,  and 
justice  stood  afar  off ;  they  thrust  them  out  of  doors,  out  of  their  gates  and 
cities,  and  when  they  pressed  hard  to  come  in  there  was  no  admission,  the  doors 
and  gates  were  locked  and  bolted  upon  them,  equity  could  not  enter  (Isa.  lix. 
14) ;  only  oppression  was  let  in  (Isa.  v.  7).  (4).  The  men  who  should  have  been 
as  strong  stakes  to  keep  up  the  ** hedge  "  were  rotten.  The  prophets  were  "lions" 
(Jer.  xxiii.  14) ;  the  priests  corrupters  and  wicked  (Lam.  iv.  13) ;  the  princes 
were  rebellious,  and  companions  of  thieves  (Isa.  i.  23) ;  and  all  of  them  make 
covenant  with  God  (Ezek.  xvi.  59). 

4.  flow  was  the  *'  hedge  "  to  be  made  up  f  (1.)  In  public  opposing  those 
corruptions  which  were  crept  in,  and  practised  amongst  them.  When  of  old  the 
Jews  had  broken  down  the  *'  hedge  "  by  making  a  calf,  Moses  appeared  for  God 
against  this  wickedess ;  he  seized  upon  the  calf,  burnt  it,  and  ground  it  into 
powder  (Ex.  xxxii.).  When  the  sons  of  Levi  came  to  him,  he  commissioned 
them  to  slay  the  idolators;  and  this  was  the  beginning  of  making  up  the  breach. 
So  when  Josiah  began  to  purge  Judah  and  Jerusalem  from  the  high  places,  the 
groves,  images,  and  altars  that  were  therein,  then  was  the  ''  hedge  "  making  up 
which  they  had  broken  down  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  3,  4).  In  Nehemiah's  days,  when 
the  '*  hedge  "  was  new-made  about  them,  there  were  some  who  began  to  tread 
down  the  "  hedge  "  and  to  make  a  ''  gap  **  therein,  by  doing  unlawful  things  on 
the  Lord's  dav.  The  zeal  of  Nehemiah  was  kindled,  so  that  he  contended  with 
the  nobles  of  Judah,  who  countenanced  them,  and  did  violence  to  the  Sabbath 
themselves  (Neh.  xiii.  15-18).  (2.)  In  mourning  for  such  breaches,  and 
deprecating  the  wrath  and  judgments  due  for  the  same.  Moses  was  affected 
much  with  what  the  people  had  done,  and  prays  and  intercedes  for  them 
(Ex.  xxxii.  10).  This  act  was  standing  in  the  breach,  and  making  up  the 
*'  hedge  "  (Psa.  cvi.  23) ;  it  kept  out  the  fury  of  the  Lord  from  breaking  in 
upon  them.  The  intercession  of  God's  servants  is  a  strong  "  hedge  "  and  wall 
to  prevent  judgments.  Therefore,  when  the  Lord  was  resolved  upon  the 
destruction  of  the  Jews,  He  forbade  Jeremiah  to  pray  for  them  (Jer.  vii.  16). 
(3.)  In  putting  things  into  their  primitive  condition.  When  Josiah  caused  the 
house  of  the  Lord  to  be  repaired,  the  covenant  with  God  to  be  renewed,  the  law 
to  be  read,  and  the  Passover  to  be  kept  according  to  the  institution,  and  all 
things  were  brought  to  their  primitive  condition  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  ;  xxxv.),  then 
was  the  *'  hedge  "  made  up — then  was  there  a  man  stood  in  the  gap  before  the 
Lord.  So,  when  Jehoshaphat  brought  back  the  people  from  false  doctrine,  and 
false  worship,  to  the  Lord  God  of  their  fathers,  then  was  the  ''  hedge"  made  up, 
and  God  protected  them  against  their  enemies, 

5.  None  were  found  to  make  uv  the  "  hedge,*'  Were  there  not  Jeremiah  and 
Ezekiel,  who  interceded  with  Goa  for  this  people  ?  Were  there  not  many  that 
mourned  for  the  abominations  that  were  among  them?  (Jer.  ix.  1  *  xiv.  11 ; 
Ezek.  ix.  4,  8).    It  is  true  Jeremiah  did  appear  for  God  :  he  opposed  the  false 

277 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xxiL  BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 

Eropliets,  tlie  iicrvertiug  of  justice,  the  iniquities  of  priests,  princes,  and  poo|<Ie  ; 
ut  they  would  not  hearken  to  him  (Jer.  xliv.  16).  'i'hey  sought  to  put  him 
to  death,  and  to  cast  him  into  prison.  And  three  times  God  had  forbidden 
him  to  pray  for  them.  He  could  prevail  with  none  of  them  towards  niakin<; 
up  the  **  hedge."  As  for  Ezekiel,  he  was  in  Babylon,  and  the  Lord  looked  for 
a  man  amongst  them  in  Jerusalem.  **  I  looked  for  a  man  among  them/'  not 
among  you.  For  the  sighers  and  mourners  that  were  in  Jerusalem  they  did  it 
in  secret.  They  had  not  spirits  to  contradict  the  wicked  prophets,  priests,  and 
princes ;  or,  if  they  had,  yet  they  saw  there  was  no  good  to  be  done.  The 
times  were  exceedingly  and  desperately  wicked  ;  a  man  was  made  an  offender 
for  a  word,  and  a  snare  was  laid  for  him  that  reproved  in  the  gate  (Isa.  xxix  21). 
It  was  an  evil  time,  and  the  time  for  the  prudent  to  keep  silence  (Amos  v. 
12,  13).  From  thissubiect  we  learn — (1)  ThcU  sin  makes  breaches  and  gaps. 
Their  sins  brake  down  the  hedge  and  made  those  gaps  (Isa.  xzz.  13).  Solomon's 
sins  made  such  a  breach  therein  that  ten  tribes  were  rent  therefrom  and  given 
to  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xi.  31).  Sin  made  the  breach  between  them  and  other 
nations,  the  breach  between  Qod  and  them.  Sin  makes  breaches  in  churches 
(1  Cor.  i.  11,  12),  in  cities  (Luke  xix.  14),  in  families  (Ezek.  xvi.  38),  in  men's 
names  (Proy.  vi.  33),  in  men's  estates  (Deut.  xxviii.  15, 16),  in  men's  consciences 
(Matt,  xxvii.  3,  4  ;  Prov.  xviiL  14,  xv.  4),  and  between  the  chiefest  friends 
(Proy.  xvi.  28).  There  are  some  sins  which  make  such  breaches  as  shake  the 
foundations  (Psa.  Ixxxii.  5).  The  laws  were  their  foundations,  but  the  iniquity 
of  the  judges  moved  those  foundations  out  of  place,  and  the  state  was  like  a 
bowing  wall  and  a  tottering  fence  (Psa.  Ixii.  8).  (2).  When  breaches  and  gaps 
are  made  by  sin,  the  Lord  lets  in  His  judgments  thereby.  When  they  made 
breaches  upon  the  worship,  statutes,  and  Sabbaths  of  the  Lord,  He 
resolved  to  pour  out  his  fury  upon  them  and  consume  them  (Isa.  L 
23,  24).  Such  is  the  lesson  of  the  parable  (Isa.  y.  6).  (3).  When 
the  hedge  is  domi,  and  gaps  are  made,  the  Lord  looks  /or  some 
one  to  appear,  so  as  to  prevent  thos6  judgments,  **  I  sought  for  a  man  to 
make  up  the  hedge,"  &c.  6  d  expected  that  they  should  have  repented,  and 
some  at  least  to  have  said,  What  have  I  dune?  God  was  dis[)leased,  and  now 
He  looked  that  one  or  other  should  have  showed  a  public  spirit,  opposed  the 
sinful  practices,  and  deprecated  judgments.  He  looxs  in  all  the  gaps  round 
about,  and  "  He  saw  that  there  was  no  man,  and  wondered  that  there  was  no 
intercessor  "  (Isa.  Ixx.  16),  none  to  meet  God,  to  set  upon  Him  by  prayer  and 
strong  arguinent8  to  withhold  His  judgments.  (4)  Making  up  the  hedge,  and 
standing  in  the  gap,  is  the  way  to  save  a  land  from  destruction.  Let  man  oppose 
the  sinful  practices  in  a  land  and  deprecate  the  judgments  of  God,  then  the 
Lord  will  spare  a  sinful  nation,  a  guilty  city  (Jer.  v.  i.)  In  such  a  case  one 
man  may  do  much.  Moses  stood  in  the  gap,  and  diverted  the  wrath  of  God 
(Psa.  cvi.  22) ;  Aaron,  also  (Num.  xvi.  47,  48).  We,  through  infinite  mercy, 
have  had  some  like  Moses  and  Aaron,  to  make  up  our  hedges,  raise  up  our 
foundations,  to  stop  some  gaps ;  but  all  our  gaps  are  not  yet  stopped.  Are 
there  not  gaps  in  the  hed^e  of  doctrine  ?  If  it  were  not  so,  how  came  in  such 
erroneous,  blasphemous,  and  wild  opinions  amongst  us  ?  Are  there  not  gaps  in 
the  worship  of  God  ?  Do  not  many  tread  down  all  churches,  all  ordinances  ; 
yea,  the  very  Scriptures?  Are  there  not  gaps  in  the  hedge  of  justice;  through 
which  the  bulls  ot  Bashan  enter,  which  oppress  the  poor,  and  crush  Uie  needy 
(Amos  iv.  1)  ?  Are  there  not  gaps  in  the  hedge  of  love  ;  is  not  that  bond  of 
perfection  broken  1  Are  there  not  gaps  in  the  hedge  of  conscience  ?  Is  not 
the  peace  broken  between  God  and  your  souls  ?  Doth  not  Satan  come  in  often 
at  the  gap  and  disturb  you  ?  (5)  In  times  of  general  corruption  in  Church  and 
State,  it  is  hard  to  find  a  man  of  public  spirit  to  oppose  those  corruptions,  and 
to  wrestle  with  God  for  mercy,  llie  Lord  "  sought  for  a  man  amongst  thenu" 
278 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  XXIII. 


The  judges  and  great  ones  did  oppress  the  people,  and  none  appeared  publicly 
for  them,  to  plead  their  cause  and  to  reprove  their  oppressors.  Many  di^iked 
the  carriage  of  things,  but  they  had  no  spirit  to  oppose:  they  were  "nut 
valiant  for  the  truth/'  as  Jeremiah  saith  (Jer.  ix.  8).  God  doth  not  say  that 
there  were  "  none,"  but  "none  to  help,  none  to  uphold."  In  common  corrup- 
tions and  calamities  few  have  hearts  to  appear  for  the  public  good,  against 
overspreading  evils.  Sinful  prudence,  or  fear  of  crushing,  makes  them  silent 
and  he  hid  (Eccles.  iv.  \\  The  oppressions  under  the  sun  were  great,  the  tears 
of  the  oppressed  many,  but  there  was  no  comforter,  none  pitied  them,  none 
used  any  means  to  relieve  them  {GreenhUt). 


The  Sms  of  Israel  akd  Judah  represented  under  the  fiqurb  of  Two 

HARLora     (Chap  xxiii.) 


EXEGETICAIi  NOTES.-^Samaria 
and  Jerusalem  are  the  capitak  and 
representations  of  the  two  kingdoms 
Israel  and  Judah.  These  two  cities 
are  presented  under  the  allegory  of 
two  harlots  who  are  sisters,  and  who 
have  practiced  whoredom  from  the 
days  of  Egypt  onwards.    (Vers.  2-4.) 


Vers.  1-4.    The  two 
are  briefly  described. 


harlot  sisters 


Ver.  2.  ''  Two  women,  the  daughters 
of  one  mother."  "  These  two  cities 
had  a  common  mother — ^the  Hebrew 
people ;  regard  being  had  to  what  they 
had  become  in  the  possession  of  that 
people." — (Henderson). 

Ver.  8.  ''  They  committed  whore- 
doms in  Egypt;  they  committed 
whoredoms  in  their  youth.'*  The 
prophet  regards  this  two-fold  divisions 
of  the  people  as  dating  long  before 
the  time  of  the  separation  of  the 
kingdoms.  The  two  kingdoms  existed 
virtually  in  E>;ypt  in  the  tribes  of 
Ephraim  and  Juoah.  The  origin  of 
their  idolatry  is  to  be  traced  to  Egypt, 
where  all  the  tribes  alike  fell  into  that 
sin.  It  was  in  the  very  **  youth  "  of 
the  people  that  they  had  become 
alienated  from  Gpd.  **  There  they 
bruised  the  teats  of  their  virginity." 
"At  that  time  Israel  was  still  unmar- 
ried. The  marriage  with  Jehovah 
took  place  when  the  covenant  was 
made  at  SinaL  But  she  was  even  at 
that  time  betrothed.  This  is  proved 
by  what  Qod  bad  done  to  the  Patri- 


archs, and  by  the  circumcision  to 
which  they  had  submitted  :  and  hence 
their  unchaste  conduct  fell  under  the 
judgment  of  (Deut  zxii.  23,  &c.). 
Their  business  w^'b  to  prepare  them- 
selves as  a  pure  virgin  for  marriage." 
—( Hengstenberg).  "On  account  of 
the  legitimate  relation  in  which  the 
nation  stood  to  Qod  from  its  very 
origin,  namely,  of  a  marriage  covenant, 
the  political  and  religious  departure  of 
both  kingdoms  from  the  principles  laid 
down  in  the  law,  appears  as  wanton- 
ness (Ezek.  xvi.  15).  IJgypt  was  the 
means  of  exciting  the  first  carnal  im- 
pulses of  the  youthful  people  to  a 
heathenish  mode  of  feeling  and  action, 
whereby  they  were  robl^  of  their 
virgin  purity." — (Lange,) 

Ver.  4.  ''Aholah  the  elder."  This 
name  signifies,  Her  (mm  tent  Thus  it 
is  implied  that  the  worship  of  the 
Samaritans  was  of  their  own  invention 
and  was  never  appointed  of  Jehovah. 
The  northern  kingdom  had  erected  an 
altar  of  her  own  will  (1  Kings  xii.  31- 
33).  "  Aholihah  her  sister."  The 
meaning  of  this  name  is.  My  tent  is 
in  her,  Jehovah  had  ordained  the 
temple-worship  at  Jerusalem.  He  had 
chosen  Zion  for  an  habitation  to  set 
His  name  there  (Psa.  cxxxii.  13,  14). 
"And  they  were  Mine."  ** Previous 
to  the  apostasy  under  Jeroboam, 
Samaria,  equally  with  Jerusalem, 
worshipped  the  true  God.  Their 
inhabitants  were  sons  and  daughters 
of  the  Lord  Almighty.  He  never 
renounced  His  right  to  the  Israelites 

879 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xnTtU  BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL, 

as  subjects  of  theocracy,  but  sent  nortbern  kinjjdora  was  the  sphere  of 
prophets  to  disclose  His  will  to  them  the  special  labours  of  Elijah  and 
and  wam  tliem  against  idolatry.    The     Elisha."— ^iftfrnfersofi^ 

H0M1LET108. 

Spiritual  Adultebt. 

L  It  oonsiits  in  forsaking  the  Creator  to  love  and  serve  the  creature.   The 

children,  of  Israel  committed  whoredoms  in  Egypt  by  worshipping  its  idols.  They 
forsook  their  Ood,  who  had  called  them  to  love  and  serve  Himself,  and  to  forsake 
all  other.  Idolatry  is  the  perversion  of  a  true  religious  instinct,  as  lust  is  the 
perverbion  of  a  passion  which  should  inspire  the  devotion  of  love  and  self  sacri- 
fice. The  worship  and  service  of  the  creature  is  unauthorised.  And  it  also 
debases. 

II.  The  iin  of  it  if  manifett  from  the  nature  of  the  relations  in  which  we 
stand  to  Ood.  "  There  were  two  women,  the  daughters  of  one  mother."  Gh>d 
was  a  Father  unto  Israel.  The  people  were  His  own  peculiar  heritage.  By 
their  idolatry  they  were  bringing  dishonour  upon  the  name  of  God.  Duties 
arise  out  of  our  relation  to  Qod  which  cannot  l>e  set  aside  without  bringing  upon 
ourdelves  the  stain  and  the  consequences  of  transgression. 

III.  In  the  yonth  of  a  people  they  are  especiallv  exposed  to  this  sin 
"  They  committed  whoredoms  in  their  youtL"  The  allurements  of  I^ptian 
idolatry  soon  corrupted  Israel  in  the  days  of  her  youth.  Their  feelings  were 
fresh,  their  experience  small,  and  the  pleasures  of  Egypt  were  novel  and  strange. 
Toung  societies  are  greatly  exposed  to  the  dangerous  fascinations  of  those  by 
whom  thev  are  surrounded  So  the  early  Christian  Church  was  soon  oorruptea 
by  false  philosophy ;  and  in  a  later  age,  by  the  seductions  of  wordly  power  and 
grandeur.  ^Iso,  in  the  youth  of  human  life,  the  lusts  and  pleasures  of  the 
world  are  most  powerful  to  seduce. 

IV.  This  sin  may  be  preyalent  amidst  all  the  refinements  of  ciyiliiation. 
The  Israelites  found  in  Egypt  an  advanced  civilization.  Yet  amidst  all  this  were 
to  be  found  the  coarsest  and  most  debasing  forms  of  idolatry.  How  much 
^oyelling  and  degrading  superstition  is  stiU  to  be  found  in  the  midst  of  the 
highest  civilization  I 

V.  This  sin  should  be  denounced  in  plain  terms.  The  fleshly  sins,  which 
are  here  used  as  a  figure  of  spiritual  sins,  are  described  in  plain  language. 
They  are  set  forth  in  all  their  naked  deformity  ;  spoken  of  exactly  as  they  are. 
Those  who  counsel  such  sins  would  like  (if  they  hear  of  them  at  all)  to  have 
their  loathsomeness  hidden  under  the  veil  of  elegant  speech.  ''  Plain  speaking 
is  not  attractive  ;  flowery  ambiguities  are  of  the  devil '  — (Lange).  Those  who 
blame  the  prophet  for  his  great  plainness  of  speech  should  rather  concern 
themselves  with  the  thought  of  the  baseness  of  those  sins  which  demanded  so 
faithful  a  narration  and  exposure.  The  whole  of  this  i>a  age  teaches  us  that 
true  religion  leads  to  fellowship  with  God,  His  love  ana  service.  And  all  love 
and  service  inconsistent  with  this  belongs  to  a  class  of  sins  which  can  best  be 
described  under  the  images  of  the  worst  and  most  degrading  of  fleshly  lusts. 


1.  7Ae  Lord  takes  notice  where  and  when  those  who  are  in  relation  to  Him 

do  sin,    "  In  Egypt,  and  in  their  youth."    They  sinned  amidst  the  grand  and 

bitter  enemies  of  (}od,  among  Egyptians,  and  then  when  thev  were  growing  up 

to  be  a  people.    They  should  have  considered  what  enemies  the  Egyptians  were 

880 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  xxriL 


to  their  God  and  His  worship,  how  odious  their  ways  and  worship  were  to  Him. 
'they  should  have  walked  circumspectly,  so  that  they  might  have  kept  His  name 
from  being  polluted  ;  and  likewise  they,  being  in  their  youth  under  bondages, 
should  have  minded  (jod's  kindnesses  in  preserying  them,  and  making  them  to 
prosper.  When  God  is  be^^inning  to  show  kindness  to  a  people  in  misery,  and 
raising  them  up  to  some  height  and  greatness,  and  then  for  them  to  turn  aside  to 
lewdness,  to  superstitions,  idolatrous,  and  heathenish  practices,  this  God  observes 
in  a  special  manner,  and  it  provokes  Him  greatly  (Psa.  cvi.  7).  When  states, 
cities,  families,  degenerate  in  their  youth,  it  sorely  displeases  God.  2.  Where* 
soever  a  devised  warship  is  brought  in,  there  man's  tabernacle  is  set  up;  where 
true  worship  is  advanced,  there  is  God's  tabernacle,  The  ten  tribes  had  a 
worsliip  of  Jereboam's  devising,  like  unto  the  wor^ihip  of  Jenisalem  in  many 
thin^ ;  but  this  was  Aholah,  their  own  tabernacle,  God  owned  it  not.  He  was 
not  m  their  assemblies,  He  accepted  not  their  sacri6ces,  their  incense  was  a 
stink  in  His  nostrila  But  Jerusalem  was  Aholibab,  My  tabernacle,  there  God's 
own  worship  was  set  up,  and  so  lon^;  as  His  worship  was  there.  He  acknow- 
ledged His  tabernacle  to  be  in  her.  Where  His  worship  is,  there  He  dwells 
(Psa.  Ixviii.  16) ;  and  is  to  be  seen  and  enquired  of  (Psa.  xxvii.  4). — OreenhilL 


(Vers. 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  — The 
spiritual  adultery  of  Samaria  with 
Assyria.  The  instrument  of  her  puni  h- 
ment  is  that  very  people  which  she 
had  made  the  object  of  her  impure 
luve. 

Ver.  5.  The  Assyrians  her  neigh- 
bours. The  word  refers  rather  to  kins- 
men, rather  than  to  those  dwelling 
near.  Asshur  was  brother  to  Arphaxad, 
Abraham's  ancestor  (Gen.  x  22,  24 ; 
xi.  16-26). 

Ver.  6.  Clothed  with  blue,  captains 
and  rulen,  all  of  them  desirable 
▼oung  men,  horsemen  riding  upon 
horses.  ''  This  description  given  of  the 
Assyrians  contains  the  thought  that 
Israel,  dazzled  by  Assyria's  splendour, 
and  overpowered  by  the  might  of  that 
kingdom,  had  been  drawn  into  inter- 
course with  the  Assyrians,  which  led 
her  astray  into  idolatry.  The  uredicate, 
clothed  in  nurple,  points  to  the  splen- 
dour and  glory  of  this  imperial  power ; 
the  other  predicates,  to  the  magnitude 
of  its  military  force."  (KM).  We 
have  here  the  ground  which  tempted 
Aholah  to  become  unfaithful  to  her 
God.  It  lay  in  this,  that  the  para- 
mour Assyria  came  into  her  neighbour- 
hood, and  placed  his  grandeur  before 
her.  Tlierein  lay  the  temptation  to 
sue  fur  his  favour  to  ward  off  injury. 


5-10). 

The  adultery  has  been  not  so  much  a 
religious  as  a  political  import  The 
paramour,  on  whose  account  Israel 
forsakes  his  God,  is  Assyria  itself,  not 
its  god,  though  they  endeavoured,  no 
doubt  from  fear  of  the  people,  to  make 
friends  of  its  gods  fuso.  (Beng- 
stenberg). 


Ver.  8.  ''Heither  left  she  her 
whoredoms  brought  from  Egypt.'* 
This  was  the  Apis-worship  of  which 
Israel  was  guilty  while  in  Horeb. 
Jeroboam  instituted  it,  thus  reviving 
the  former  iniquity  of  the  nation.  The 
people  never  wholly  got  rid  of  this 
source  of  unfaithfulness  brought  from 
E^ypt.  Even  Jehu  tolerated  it 
(2  Kings  X.  31). 

Ver.  10.  "These  disoovered  her 
nakedness.*'  "  This  denotes  the  igno- 
minious treatment  which  Israel  must 
suffer  from  Assyria,  as  a  punishment  for 
her  revolt  to  Egypt.  Aholah  is  slain 
with  the  sword  :  the  proper  substance 
of  the  neople,  the  men  fit  for  service, 
fell  in  tne  war,  while  the  weaker  portion 
wascarriediutoexile."  {Hengstenberg.) 
Tamous  among  women.**  "  She  was 
rendered  as  notorious  by  her  punish- 
ment as  she  had  been  by  her  crimes. 
She  was  made  an  example  to  which  an 
api>eal  could  be  made  by  other  states  " 
Henderson. 

281 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  xxiTL  nOMIlETIC  COMMENTARY :  EZSKIBL. 


EOMILiaiCS. 
Thb  Sin  of  Samaria. 

I.  It  showed  the  bai est  ingratitade.  '*  Played  the  harlot  when  she  was  Mine.** 
God  had  united  her  to  Himself,  she  was  in  living  and  tender  relationship  with 
Him  when  she  basely  deserted  His  worship  and  service.  She  was  taught  tlie 
true  doctrine,  and  the  rigiit  way  of  duty,  and  was  supplied  wiUi  means  to  observe 
both.    Tet  she  sinned  against  light  and  privilege. 

II.  It  showed  the  dangerous  power  of  the  imagination.  The  military  organiza- 
tion of  Assyria  dazzled  their  imagination.  The  glory  of  the  world  seduces  the 
worldly  mind.  "  Clothed  with  blue,  captains  and  rulers,  all  of  them  desirable 
young  men,  horsemen  riding  upon  horses."  Such  was  the  power  and  grandeur 
of  Assyria.  In  accordance  with  the  figure  employed,  those  things  are  named 
which  would  be  likely  to  strike  the  eye  of  a  wordly  minded  young  woman. 
Israel  admired  the  political  and  worldly  grandeur  of  the  Assyrians,  and  so  were 
seduced  into  idolatry.  They  first  worshipped  the  power  and  ma^uiticence  of  the 
nation,  and  then  it  was  an  easy  matter  to  adopt  the  worship  of  meir  gods.  The 
fascinations  of  the  world  is  still  the  standing  danger  to  purity  in  doctrine  and 
worship.  In  all  sensuous  forms  of  religious  worship  there  lurks  this  great  danger, 
that  men  through  admiration  of  the  outward  are  led  to  adopt  the  false  doctrines 
of  which  it  is  the  vehicle. 

in.  It  showed  how  inyeterate  are  old  evils.  ''Brought  from  'Egwt**  (ver. 
8).  The  old  idolatry  which  they  had  learned  in  Egypt  clung  to  the  nation, 
every  now  and  then  breaking  out.  The  nation  was  never  clearly  delivered  from 
it  till  after  their  captivity  in  Babylon. 

IT.  It  was  visited  with  exemplary  punishment.  1.  Those  who  had  seduced 
htr  by  their  power  and  gra/ndeur  were  made  the  very  instruments  of  her  punish" 
ment.  She  had  doted  on  the  Assyrians,  and  she  was  delivered  into  their  bands 
(ver.  9).  2.  iShe  was  made  a  warning  example  to  all,  "  Famous  among 
women."  An  example  to  all  the  other  nations.  They  would  talk  of  her ;  some 
of  her  abominable  wickedness^  others  of  her  miseries,  previous  judgments^  and 
calamities. 


1.  When  people  embrace  false  worship  they  are  violent  and  strong  in  their 
affections  towards  it.  Aholah  doted  upon  her  lovers,  her  heart  was  fired  with 
Babylonish  gods,  and  confidences  in  them.  2.  What  evil  persons  have  practised 
in  their  youth  that  they  affect  in  their  age,  Aholah  had  loved  the  Egyptian 
idols  in  her  minority,  and  after  she  was  grown  up,  those  idols  were  not  out  of 
her  thoughts.  Her  Egyptian  lovers  were  still  in  her  mind,  like  harlots  that 
mind  their  former  lovers  long  after  they  are  married.  What  corruption  gets  in 
youth,  grows  up  and  abides ;  an  unclean,  idolatrous  heart  in  youth,  will  be  so 
m  age.  8.  Idolatry  may  continue  long  in  a  nation,  but  shall  at  least  be  severely 
punished  by  the  Lord.  Aholah  had  been  an  idolatress  from  her  youth,  and  when 
she  was  grown  up  to  some  greatness,  then  she  broke  out  into  gross,  notorious 
idolatry  (1  Eing:^  xii.)  ;  in  which  she  continued  for  upwards  of  two  hundred  and 
sixty  yearsy  and  then  the  Lord  pla-ued,  yea,  destroyed  her,  her  sons  and 
daughters.  It  is  wisdom  to  cleave  to  the  Lord  and  His  worship,  not  to  follow 
or  confide  in  other  nations,  or  their  ways.  4.  God  makes  places  and  persons 
remarkable  by  thejuagments  Be  executeth  upon  them,  Aholah  was  made  famous 
among  women  by  those  judgments  He  brought  upon  her.  Aholah  was  Samaria, 
which  Shahiiane-er  besieged  three  years,  and  then  took  it ;  and  afterwards  burnt 
it  (2  Ein^s  xvii.  5,  0).—GreenhilL 
282 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIC  OOMMSNTAnT:    EZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  xxm. 


(Vers.  11-21.) 


EXEGETICAIi  NOTES.-The 
spiritual  adultery  of  Judi^  nvith 
Assyria,  ^  in  which  she  surpasses 
Samaria  in  her  iniquity. 

Yer.  11.  "She  was  more  corrupt 
in  her  inordinate  love."  '*  Judahwent 
much  further  than  Samaria.  It  not 
only  indulged  in  sinful  intercourse  with 
Assyria,  which  led  on  to  idolatry  as  the 
latter  had  done,  but  it  also  allowed 
itself  to  be  led  astray  by  the  splendour 
of  Chaldea  to  form  alliances  with  that 
imperial  power,  and  to  defile  itself 
with  her  idolatry.  And  when  it 
became  tired  of  the  Chaldeans  it  formed 
impure  connections  with  the  Egyptians 
as  It  had  done  once  before  during  its 
sojourn  in  ^[ypt "  {Kelt), 

Ver.  12.  *'  Doted  upon  the  Assyrians, 
her  neighbours."  "  The  reference  here 
is  to  the  application  made  by  Ahaz  to 
'i'iglath-pileser  for  his  assistance  against 
the  Syrians  and  Israelites  (recorded 
2  Kings  xvi.  7-9;,  which  led  to  the 
idolatrous  transaction  at  Damascus, 
and  the  introduction  of  the  Syrian 
idolatry  into  Jern^alem  (2  Chron. 
xxviii.  16)"  {Henderson).  "Clothed 
most  gorgeously."  The  word  means 
perfections  and  the  thought  intended 
is,  perfect  beauty  of  clothing.  "  The 
costume  of  the  Assyrian  cavalry  may 
be  seen  in  the  sculptures  brought  by 
Layard  from  Nineveh,  which  display 
all  the  magnificence  of  Oriental 
finery  "  {Henderson), 

Ver.  14.  ''  She  saw  men  portrayed 
upon  the  wall,  the  images  of  the 
Chaldeans  portrayed  with  yermilion." 
''In  regard  to  the  Chaldeans,  the 
relation  to  them  was  brought  about  by 
means  of  likenessett,  which  Judah  saw. 
The  word  means,  something  engraven 
or  sketched,  painted.  Tliese  were,  pro- 
bably, coloured  bas-reliefs,  in  vermilion, 
which  would  be  all  the  more  appropriate 
for  warriors.  The  representation  here 
may  probably  be  the  mere  drapery  of  the 
thought,  that  the  bare  report  of  the 
military  prowess  of  the  Chaldeans  had 


inflamed  the  imagination  and  the  senses 
of  Judah.  Owing  to  the  undeniable 
intercourse  between  nations  in  the  Old 
World,  which  certainly  obtained  be- 
tween Palestine  and  Babylon,  it  is  not 
in  itself  unimaginable  that  such  wall- 
pictures  of  representatives  of  foreign 
nations  may  have  existed  in  the  royal 
palaces  of  Judah."— fiai?^^/ 

Ver.  15.  "  Exceeding  in  dyed  attire 
upon  their  heads."  The  reference  is 
to  the  lofty  turbans,  such  as  may  be 
seen  on  the  monuments  of  ancient 
Nineveh. 

Ver.  18.  ''Hy  mind  was  alienated 
from  her."  "The  though  tin  these  verses 
(vers.  16-18)  is  the  following  :— the 
acquaintance  made  by  Israel  (Judah) 
with  the  imperial  splendour  of  the 
Chaldeans,  as  exhibited  in  the  sculp- 
tures of  their  palaces,  incited  Judah  to 
cultivate  political  and  mercantile  inter- 
course with  this  imperial  power,  which 
led  to  its  becoming  entangled  in  the 
heathen  wajrs  and  idolatry  of  the  Chal- 
deans. The  Chaldeans  tliemselves  came 
and  laid  the  foundation  for  an  inter- 
course which  led  to  the  pollution  of 
Judah  with  heathenism,  ana  afterwards 
filled  it  with  disgust,  because  it  was 
bro\ight  thereby  into  dependence  upon 
the  Chaldeans.  The  consequence  of 
all  this  was,  that  the  Lord  became 
tired  of  Judah.  For  instead  of  return- 
ing to  the  Lord,  Judah  turned  to  the 
other  power  of  the  world,  namely,  to 
E^pt ;  and  in  the  time  of  Zedekiah 
renewed  its  ancient  coquetry  with  that 
nation."    (Keil). 

Ver.  19.  "  In  calling  to  remem- 
brance the  days  of  her  youth."  She 
had  grown  disgusted  with  Babylon  ; 
yet  she  repented  not,  but  turned  back 
again  to  the  old  ws^s  which  she  had 
learned  in  Egypt  (2  Kings  xxiil  29-35). 

Ver.  20.  "  Whose  flesh  is  as  the 
flesh  of  asses,  and  whose  issue  is  like 
the  issue  of  horses."  ''This  representa- 
tion is  sufficiently  explained  by  the 

283 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xxiiL  EomLETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL 


particularly  lecherous  character  of  the  is  paid  to  that  which  ought  to  be  hated 

auimald  meutioDed,  and  describes  the  aud  avoided.    The  words,   '  When  a 

obsceie  character  of   the   Egyptians  man  of  Egjrpt  handled/  etc.,  refer  to 

(Ezek.  xvi.  26y—(Lange.)  the  attempt  of  the  Egyptians  to  draw 

the  people  in  their  lirst   beginnings 

Ver.  21.    '' Calledst  to  remembranoe  into  the  Egyptian  unity,  and  so  to 

the  lewdness  of  thy  youth''  (Heb.).  nationalize  them — ^an  attempt  to  which 

"  Aud  thou  didst  visit  the  lewdness  of  the  youth  of  the  people  furnished  the 

thy  youth."    " The  falling  back  into  ocemoiu' ^(Uengstenberg.) 
the  old  siu  is^  as  it  were,  a  visit  which 

H0MILETI08. 
Thb  Sin  of  Judah. 

The  sin  of  Judah  was  one  of  special  aggravation.  Her  sin  surpassed  that 
of  Samaria.  "  She  was  more  corrupt  in  her  inordinate  love  than  she,  and  in 
her  whoredoms  more  than  her  sister  in  her  whoredoms."  1.  She  had  greater 
jrivileges.  A  purer  knowledge  of  the  true  way  of  worship.  Greater  grace  to 
resist  temptation,  and  to  keep  in  the  right  way.  2.  She  had  the  warning 
examj^le  of  Samaria* 8  punishment.  She  saw  how  God  punished  them  by  the 
very  instruments  of  their  inordinate  love,  and  yet  took  not  warning.  ''They 
both  took  one  way,"  not  reflecting  that  they  wlio  take  the  same  way  also  reach 
the  same  end.  8.  She  used  special  devices  to  increase  her  sinful  desires.  "  She 
increased  her  whoredoms."  She  stimulated  her  lustful  imagination  by  pictures 
and  representations  of  forbidden  objects.  The  sight  of  these  would  set  her 
longing  after  the  seductive  idolatry  of  the  nations,  and  draw  her  away  from  her 
lawful  love  and  home.  The  lust  of  the  eye  is  one  of  the  great  dangers  of  the 
world.  She  also  suffered  herself  to  be  ensnared  by  the  memory  of  her  old  sins 
(vers.  19,  21).  It  is  sad  when  nations  and  individuals  go  back  again  to  the 
sins  of  their  early  life.  4  She  brought  sad  judgment  upon  herself,  yet  repented 
not  When  she  had  obtained  her  desire  and  embraced  the  idolatry  of  Babylon, 
she  was  still  unsatisfied  and  even  learned  to  loathe  that  which  she  once  so 
eagerly  sought.  "  Her  mind  was  alienated  from  them."  Israel  could  not  find 
rest  in  the  idolatry  of  the  nations,  for  she  still  retained  some  memory  of  better 
things.  Tlie  people  could  not  become  as  the  heathen  in  all  respects,  for  their 
glorious  past  was  still  a  fact  and  could  not  be  separated  firom  their  history. 
The  idolatry  of  Babylon  could  not  satisfy  the  sinful  longings  of  the  chosen 
people.  AU  impure  lust,  when  it  has  spent  its  passion,  becomes  hatred.  For 
all  such  lust  is  selfish  and  will  turn,  at  length,  into  aversion  to  its  object. 
Fellowship  with  sin  must  only  be  of  short  duration.  There  is  no  true  binding 
principle  in  it.  But  it  was  the  sliame  and  misery  of  Israel  that  the  judgments 
of  God,  and  her  disgust  of  Babylon,  failed  to  bring  her  to  repentance. 

1.  When  God  executes  severe  judgments  uffon  cities  He  looks  that  others  should 
take  warning  thereby,  God  destroyed  Samaria  for  her  idolatry  and  confederating 
with  heathenish  nations.  When  Jerusalem  saw  this  she  reformed  not,  but  was 
more  corrupt.  God  ex|)ected  that  Jerusalem  should  hereupon  have  purged  out 
all  idolatry,  and  cleaved  wholly  to  Him,  so  that  she  might  have  been  spared, 
but  she  made  no  good  use  of  His  dealings  with  Samaria.  2.  Progress  in 
the  same  sins,  cfier  judgments  executed  upon  others  is  a  fearful  aggravation  qf 
sin,  "  Wlien  she  saw  this  she  was  more  corrupt'*  When  God's  hand  is  lifted, 
judgment  executed,  men  should  fear  and  learn  righteousness  ;  but  to  go  on  in 
wickedness  is  a  horrible  slighting,  yea,  despising  of  God  and  His  judgments. 
3.  Sif{ful  cities  usually  grow  worse  irhaievtr  judgments  they  see  executed  upon 
284 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  CMap.  xxiiu 


Others.  Jerusalem  was  more  corrupt  than  Samaria.  So  corrupt  is  the  nature 
of  roan  that  it  is  not  only  worse  after  mercies  but  even  after  judgments. 
4.  The  ei/es  are  instruments  and  occasions  0/ great  evil.  When  she  saw  the 
image-t  of  the  Chaldeans  in  their  dresses,  with  their  belts  and  aspects, she  was  taken 
with  them.  The  images  affected  her  eyes,  and  they  couveyed  corruption  to  her 
heart,  or  that  which  stirred  the  corruption  pre-existent  in  her  heart.  Adultery  and 
idolatry  have  their  chief  entrance  by  the  eye,  and  mauy  other  sins  likewise. 
What  a  sad  thing  was  it,  that  Jerusalem's  eyes  should  be  taken  with  the  painted 
images  of  Babylonians !  Some  confess  there  is  danger  by  gazing  upon  living 
objects,  the  beauties  of  men  and  women,  but  they  fear  none  from  dead  objects  ; 
but  Achan  saw  a  wedge  of  gold  and^  a  Babylonish  garment,  and  they  snared 
him  ;  Aholibah  here  saw  Babylonish  pictures,  and  they  ensnared  him.  5.  For 
GoSs  people  to  admit  any  part  qf  Babylonish  worship  is  to  deJUe  the  bed  ijfhve. 
God  is  a  jealous  God,  His  worship  must  be  pure,  and  the  heart  must  be  pure. 
If  the  worship  be  mixed,  or  heart  lean  upon  an  arm  of  flesh,  the  bed  of  love  is 
defiled.  Id  His  worship  and  ordinances  God  lets  out  His  love  to  the  souL 
When  they  are  pure,  by  the  heart  being  pure  and  confiding  in  God,  He  lets  out 
Himself  and  His  love.  Let  us  look  to  our  hearts,  that  tliey  may  be  disengaged 
from  all  creature  confidences,  and  to  our  worship  that  it  be  according  to  God, 
and  then  we  shall  have  communion  with  and  comfort  from  our  Beloved. 
6.  Wickedness  is  inconstant.  **  Her  mind  was  alienated  from  them."  She  was 
taken  with  the  very  images  of  the  Babylonians ;  now  she  cares  not  for  the  men 
themselves,  her  soul  is  disjointed  from  them  ;  but  it  was  to  fall  in  with  some 
others,  and  they  were  the  Egyptians  (ver.  19).  But  she  held  not  there  long  ; 
which  made  the  Lord  to  say,  "  w  hy  ffaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change  thy 
way  ?  thou  also  shalt  be  ashamed  of  Egypt,  as  thou  wert  ashamed  of  Assyria  " 
(Jer.  ii.  36).  7.  Impudence  and  open  sinning  cause  God  to  disown  and  renounce 
them  that  do  so.  Aholibah  discovered  her  whoredoms  and  nakedness  ;  she  talked 
openly  what  she  had  done  with  the  Babylonians, she  set  up  altars  and  idols  in  every 
street,  was  openly  and  impudently  wicked,  prostituting  herself  to  all  in  the  streets. 
Now  it  being  so,  saith  the  Lord,  'Uhenmy  mind  was  alienated  from  her,"  seeing 
she  is  become  so  audaciously  wicked,  I  can  affect  her  no  longer.  Jerusalem's 
wickedness  alienated  God*s  heart  from  her,  made  Him  renounce  her  tor  a  harlot. 
It  is  sad  when  God  renounces  ([Hos.  i.  9).  If  we  would  not  have  God's  heart 
alienated  from  us,  and  so  be  downed,  renounced  by  Him,  let  us  take  heed  of  all 
sins,  especially  of  impudency  in  any  sin.  8.  Fresh  sins  bring  to  mind  former  old 
sins.  Ahqjibah's  latter  trudging  with  the  Egyptians  minded  God  of  her  primitive 
whoredoms  and  abominations,  when  she  lived  in  E^ypt,  which  was  one  thousand 
years  before :  there  she  had  her  lovers;  there  she  defiled  herself  **  with  the  idols 
of  Egypt "  (Exek.  xx.  17);  and  her  affection  now  to  Egypt,  and  Egypt's  paramours, 
caused  God  to  mind  those  sins  of  her  youth.  He  had  no  pleasure  in  doing  so, 
but  Aholibah  called  them  to  remembrance^  by  actipg  the  same  or  the  like  things 
again,  she  called  them  out  of  darkness,  and  presented  them  to  the  view  of  GKxi. 
(GreenhiU). 

(Verses  22-85.) 

EXEGETICAL      NOTES.  —  The  Chaldeans,  and  Assyrians,  and  farther 

transgression  of  Jerusalem  is  followed  that  Pekod  is  used  by  Jeremiah  (ch.  I. 

by  her  punishment  21)  as  a  descriptive  name  of  Babylon, 

it  may  be  inferred  that  all  three  are  to 

Ver.  23.    "Pekod,  and  Shea,  and  be  so  interpreted  in  this  pla^e.    No 

Koa."    **  From  the  circumstance  that  such  geographical  names  as  Shoa  and 

these  names  occur  in  immediate  con-  Eoa  occur  either  in  sacred  or  profane 

nection   with   the    Babylonians,    the  writers.    The  former,  however,  signify- 


Digitized  by 


285 

Google 


CHAP.  xxm. 


B0M1LETW  COMMSyTARY:  EZEKTEL. 


ing  wealth  or  opulence,  and  the  latter, 
princely,  noble,  are  aptly  descriptive  of 
the  state  of  BaUylon  iu  the  days  of  her 
prosperity,  as  Pekod,  is  of  her  antici- 
pated punishment."  {Hendereon), 

Ver.  24.  ''Bnekler,  and  shield*  and 
helmet"  These  are  all  defenaiye  ar- 
mour. The  Chaldeans  had  only  to 
lay  siege  to  the  city  and  bide  their 
time.  Qod's  arrows  would  do  the 
rest.  "And  they  shall  judge  fhee 
according  to  their  judgments.*'  Israel 
was  to  be  judged  on  the  ground  of 
natural  iustice.  The  unfaithful  city 
was  condemned  by  man  for  an  offence 
against  human  law.  Their  judgments 
were  brought  about  by  God's  righteous 
law  of  retribution,  though  Nebuchad- 
nezzar was  the  instrument  raised  up  to 
administer  it. 

Ver.  25.  "  They  shall  take  away 
thy  nose  and  thine  ears."  "What 
nose  and  ears  are  for  a  woman,  that 
for  a  neople  is  their  military  strength, 
the  bloom  of  the  nation.  When  this 
is  annihilated,  a  people  has  lost  its 
beau^.  That  the  words  must  refer  to 
tl)is  is  shown  by  those  immediately 
adjoining,  and  giving  the  explanation, 
*•  Thy  remnant  shall  fall  by  the  sword." 
Zion  has  various  forms  of  existence, 
and,  therefore,  a  manifold  remnant. 
Tiie  first  remnant  refers  to  the  fighting 
men,  who,  so  to  speak,  shall  fall  by  the 
sword  to  the  last  man — the  falling  of 
the  remnant  pre-supposes  the  faUing 
of  all  the  rest ;  the  second  remnant 
refers  to  Zion  as  a  city,  the  houses,  all 
of  which  shall  be  destroyed  by  fire " 
(Hengstenberg),  **  Punishment  by 
cutting  off  tne  nose  and  ears  was 
infiicted  for  adultery,  not  only  the 
Chaldeans,  but  also  among  the 
Egyptians,  Qreeks,  and  Romans.  It 
was,  therefore,  to  represent  that 
which  adulterous  Judah  was  to  suffer 
under  the  image  of  such  ignominious 
and  cruel  ^  treatment.  They  were  also 
to  be  stripped  of  what  lewd  females 
set  most  value  upon — their  rich  dresses 
and  costly  jewels,  by  which  they  attract 
the  notice  of  their  paramours"  (ver.  26). 
'-^Hendereon, 
286 


Ver.  27.  **Thns  will  I  make  thy 
lewdness  to  cease  from  thee."    Tne 

punishment  inflicted  by  the  Chaldeans 
would  be  effectual  in  curing  them  of 
idolatry.  After  the  captivity  the  Jews 
never  fell  again  into  this  sin. 

Ver.  29.  *'  Shall  take  away  aU  thy 
labour."  They  were  to  be  deprived  of 
the  fruits  of  tlleir  labours.  **  The  naked- 
ness of  thy  whoredoms  shall  be  dis- 
covered." "  As  long  as  all  went  well 
this  nakedness  was  covered.  The 
shamefulness  of  her  conduct  did  not 
come  to  the  licht  In  that  which  she 
suffers,  what  she  has  done  will  be  mani- 
fest to  all  the  world." — Hengttenberg. 

Ver.  32.  ''Then  shalt  drink  of  thy 
sister  s  cup  deep  and  large."  "  'i'his 
cup  is  the  figure  of  the  destiny.  The 
mockery  of  large  measure  corresponds 
to  the  cup  of  wide  compass,  the  great- 
ness of  the  mockery  to  the  greatness  of 
the  calamity,  that  called  forth  the 
mockery  so  much  the  more,  the  greater 
the  pretensions  of  the  Jews,  who  con- 
ducted themselves  as  the  people  to 
whom  was  secured  the  univei^  supre- 
macy, who  had  always  in  their  mouth 
the  saying, '  My  enemies  shall  fall,  but 
I  shall  tread  on  their  high  places.'" 
— (Hengstenberg).  "By  a  change  of 
metaphor  the  juagments  to  be  inflicted 
upon  Judah  are  represented  as  the  con- 
tents of  a  cup  which  she  was  to  drink. 
This  metaphor  is  of  frequent  occurrence 
both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testaments 
(Pta.  Ixxv.  8 ;  Jer.  xxv.  15 ;  Rev.  xiv.  10; 
xvi.  19 ;  xviii.  6.)  The  force  of  the 
metaphor  lies  in  the  idea  that  the  in- 

Jredientswerenauseous  and  deleterious, 
udah  was  to  be  treated  as  Israel  had 
been,  only  more  severely  in  proportion 
to  the  greater  guilt  she  bad  contracted. 
— {Henderson). 

Ver.  34.  "  And  thon  shalt  break  the 
sherds  thereof,  and  pluck  off  thine 
own  breasts."  This  expresses  most 
forcibly  the  desperation  to  which  the 
Jews  should  be  reduced,  when  com- 
pelled to  undergo  the  extreme  inflic- 
tion of  their  punishment.  By  a  bold 
hyperbole,  not  satisfied  with  having 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTW  COMMENTARY :  SZBKm.  chap.  xxm. 


sucked  out  the  last  drop  that  was  in  means  of  the  sherd-fragments.     Or  it 

the   cup,    they   are   represented    as  may  have  been  done  in  frenzy  by  her 

crunching  the  very  sherds  of  it  with  own  nails.    We  find  a  historical  illus- 

their  teeth,  and  tearing  their  breasts  tration  of  tliis  in  the  treatment  they 

which  they  had  prostituted  in  adul-  gave  Gedaliah,  the  Chaldean  governor, 

tery "  {Henderson),    "  The  tearing  of  for  which    they   were    compelled  to 

the  breasts  is  placed  beside  the  break-  suffer  (Jer.  xli/*  (Lange). 
ing  of  the  sherds  as  if  it  were  done  by 

HOMILETIOB. 
(Verses  22-85.) 

Thb  Punishment  of  Jbrusalbii. 

I.  The  people  are  to  be  punished  by  those  with  whom  they  sinned.  ''  Be- 
hold I  will  raise  up  thy  lovers  against  tliee"  (ver.  22).  Tho^e  with  whom 
she  had  pleasurable  sin,  by  a  natural  retribution  become  the  instruments  of 
her  chastisement  Thus  sinners  are  punished  by  means  of  other  sinners.  Wiiat- 
ever  pleasures  may  have  been  found  in  sin  when  it  was  followed,  the  memory  of 
it,  at  last,  will  bear  a  sting. 

II.  The  people  are  to  be  punished  in  the  ordinary  course  of  human  justice. 
**  And  they  shall  judge  thee  according  to  their  judgments"  Tver.  24).  They  had 
offended  against  the  sense  of  natural  justice  which  was  founa  among  the  nations. 
And  they  are  punished  by  men  for  an  offence  against  human  law.  Yet,  thou;;h 
men  were  the  instruments,  they  were  punished  by  God.  The  punishment  of  sin 
in  human  society  is  natural,  yet  it  is  surely  the  moral  law  of  God  taking  effect 
as  far  as  is  possible  in  this  present  life.  "  From  the  natural  course  of  things, 
vicious  actions  are,  to  a  great  degree,  actually  punished  as  mischievous  to  society ; 
and  besides  punishment  actually  inflicted  upon  this  account,  there  is  also  tiie 
fear  and  apprehension  of  it  in  those  persons  whose  crimes  have  rendered  them 
obnoxious  to  it,  in  case  of  a  discovery ;  this  state  of  fear  itself  often  a  very 
considerable  punishment.  The  natural  fear  and  apprehension  of  it,  too,  which 
restrains  from  such  crimes,  is  a  declaration  of  x)^ature  against  them.  It  is 
necessary  to  the  very  being  of  society,  that  vices  destructive  to  it  should 
be  punished  as  being  so;  the  vices  of  falsehood,  injustice,  cruelty:  which 
punishment  therefore  is  as  natural  as  society ;  and  so  is  an  instance  of 
a    kind  of  moral    government,    naturally    established,   and  actually  taking 

flace.  And,  since  the  certain  natural  course  of  things  is  the  conduct  of 
^rovidence  or  the  government  of  God,  though  carried  on  by  the  instrumentality 
of  men ;  the  observation  here  made  amounts  to  this,  that  mankind  find  them- 
selves placed  by  him  in  such  circumstances,  as  that  they  are  unavoidably 
accountable  ior  their  behaviour,  and  are  often  punished,  and  sometimes 
rewarded  under  his  government,  in  the  view  of  their  being  mischievous,  or 
eminently  beneficial  to  society.  The  Author  of  Nature  has  as  truly  directed 
that  vicious  actions,  considered  as  mischievous  to  society,  should  be  punished, 
and  put  mankind  under  a  necessity  of  thus  punishing  them  ;  as  He  has  directed 
and  necessitated  us  to  preserve  our  lives  by  food  '  (Butler's  Analogy,  Part  I, 
Chap.  III).  The  goodness  and  patience  of  God  had  failed  to  bring  Jerusalem 
to  repentance,  and  the  people,  therefore,  were  given  up  to  punishment  by  means 
of  man. 

III.  The  people  are  to  be  punished  by  the  violent  taking  away  of  that 
which  led  them  into  the  snares  of  sin.  "  They  shall  deal  furiously  with  thee: 
they  shall  take  away  thy  nose  and  thine  ears  **  (ver.  25;.     *'  They  shall  also 

287 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  xxm.  BOMILETIC  COMMKNTARY:  EZEKTEL 


strip  tl  ce  of  thy  clothes,  and  take  away  thy  fair  jewels"  (ver.  26\  Personal 
attractions,  beautiful  garmeDts,  adornments  and  jewellery  make  lewd  wuinen 
attractive,  and  lead  them  into  snares.  God  will  remove  from  IHh  people,  even 
by  means  of  the  wrath  of  a  strange' nation,  all  those  things  which  tonipted 
their  hearts  from  Him.  They  had  left  their  first  and  lawful  love,  and  they 
are  to  have  the  punishment  of  adulterers. 

IV.  The  punishment  was  to  be  terrible.  1.  A  complete  eccposure  of  thrir 
iniquity,  '*  The  nakedness  of  thy  whoredoms  shall  be  discovered,  both  thy 
lewdness  and  thy  whoredoms "  (ver.  29).  Punishment  exposes.  Their  moral 
loathesomeness  would  be  laid  bare  before  the  sight  of  all.  2.  7ke  rich  heritage 
of  the  past  was  to  be  wasted.  ''  They  shall  deal  with  thee  hatefully,  and  shall 
take  away  all  thy  labour  "  (ver.  29).  All  the  results  of  their  labour  in  the  p.ist 
under  the  guidance  of  Ghxl.  How  often,  among  nations,  is  destroyed,  as  in  a 
moment,  the  slow  work  of  long  ages, — the  precious  heritage  of  the  past  1  "  The 
city  where  David  dwelt "  (Isa.  xxix  1),  and  all  which  in  their  history  led  up  to 
David  and  from  him,  is  doomed  to  be  destroyed.  3.  IT^ey  would  have  to  drink  of  a 
bitter  cup.  Their  cup  was  to  be  "  filled  with  drunkeness  and  sorrow,"  the  "  cup  of 
astonishment  and  desolation"  (ver.  33).  And  the  very  greatness  of  their  sorrow, 
their  abject  humiliation  would  occasion  derision  among  their  enemies,  ''Thou 
shalt  be  laughed  to  scorn,  and  had  in  derision ;  it  containeth  much  "  (ver.  32). 
The  nations  would  look  upon  them  swallowing  the  nauseous  draught,  and  make 
merriment  over  their  sorrow*  They  would  have  to  drain  this  cup  of  sorrow 
to  the  last  drop,  "  Thou  shalt  even  drink  of  it  and  suck  it  out,  and 
thou  shalt  break  the  sherds  thereof"  (ver.  34).  4.  They  would  be  driven  to  the 
frenzy  of  madness.  "And  pluck  off  thine  own  breasts"  (ver.  34).  Jerusalem 
is  represented  as  a  woman  seized  with  madness  in  her  great  suffering,  who 
gnaws  the  very  sherds  of  the  earthen  cup  and  tears  out  her  own  breasts.  Her 
insatiable  lust,  which  had  gone  to  the  length  of  mad  desire»  is  now  met  by  a 
punishment  which  is  furious,  and  which  drives  her  to  madness.  How  often  are 
sinners  punished  in  those  members  of  the  body  in  which  they  have  sinned ! 

V.  This  punishment  would  prove  an  effectual  remedy  for  their  sin.  "  Thus 
will  I  make  thy  lewdness  to  cease  from  thee,  and  th^  whoredom  brought  from 
the  laud  of  Egypt "  (ver.  27).  By  the  afilictions  which  they  suffered  in  Babylon 
they  were  completely  cured  of  idolatry.  They  never  fell  into  that  evil  after 
the  Captivity.  This  was  an  old-rooted  sin,  but  it  was  entirely  plucked  from 
them.  So  God  educates  nations,  and  brings  home  to  them,  at  last,  the  lessons 
of  His  providence  and  grace.  And  it  is  often  necessary  that,  as  with  individual 
men,  they  should  be  educated  through  punishment.  It  took  a  long  time  to 
deliver  Israel  entirely  from  Egypt,  tneir  house  of  bondage.  Their  physical 
slavery  was  soon  destroyed,  but  their  spiritual  slavery  still  held  them  to  Egypt 
thiough  many  ages  of  their  history. 

1.  God  makes  them  instruments  qfwoe  and  misery  with  whom  we  have  sinned. 
The  Babylonians,  Chaldeans,  the  Assyrians,  her  lovers,  were  to  be  brought 
against  her.  Jerusalem  had  doted  upon  and  trusted  in  them,  and  by  them 
would  Ood  plague  Jerusalem.  She  had  often  sinned  by  her  confidence  in 
Egypt  (Isa.  XXX.  2 ;  xxxi.  1) ;  and  Gk>d  by  the  Egyptians  scourged  her 
(2  Chron.  xxxvi.  3).  Parents  dote  upon  their  children,  and  oft  God  makes 
them  rods  to  whip  them,  yea,  clubs  to  break  their  hearts  and  bones.  2.  When 
people  go  from  God  to  false  worship,  and  put  conAdence  in  arms  cf  fleshy  God 
wiU  deal  severely  by  them.  God  would  put  Ahc>lii.ah  into  the  Babylonian 
hands.  He  would  set  His  jealousy  against  her,  thrust  her  out  of  doors ;  and 
whattlien?  The  Babylonian  would  deal  furiously  with  her,  ahuse  her  body, 
destroy  her  children,  bum  her  habitation,  strip  her  of  her  vestments  and  jewels, 
take  away  all  she  had  gotten,  lay  open  her  shame,  and  do  hatefully  by  her ; 
^88 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL. 


CHiP.  xxnr. 


she  should  be  punished  with  the  same  punishments  Aholah  was.  3.  Judgments 
and  afflictions  are  cups  which  the  Lord  gives  nnners  to  drink  of,  some  more 
some  less.  Sometimes  Ood's  judgments  are  called  a  **  cup  of  trembling " 
(Isa.  11  22);  sometimes  a  ''  cup  of  fury  "  TJer.  xxv.  15),  and  sometimes  "a  cup  of 
astonishment/' as  here.  And  Aholibah  haa  all  these  cups  given  her  to  drink :  tney 
were  "  deep,  large/'  containing  much,  and  she  was  made  to  drink  them  all  ofl', 
yea  to  the  very  dregs.  As  men  fill  up  the  measure  of  their  sins,  so  God  fills  up 
the  cups  of  His  judgments.  '*  Fill  to  her  double  "  (Rev.  xviii  6).  Babylon's  sins 
were  come  to  the  full,  and  the  cup  of  the  Lord's  fury  was  full.  4.  Neglect  and 
contempt  of  God,  and  His  word,  causes  Him  to  execute  judgment.  **  Because 
thou  hast  forgotten  Me,  and  cast  Me  behind  thy  back."  Thou  hast  made  Me 
bear  thy  sins,  and  thou  shalt  bear  My  punishments.  As  the  fear  of  Ood  is 
the  beginning  of  wisdom,  so  the  forgetting  of  God  is  the  beginning  of  folly  and 
all  evil  Then  God  is  out  of  sight,  behind  the  back  ;  and  what  will  not  men 
do  when  no  awe  of  God  or  His  word  is  upon  them  ?  Then,  like  Ab  ilibah,  they 
will  cpmmit  any  lewdness  God  had  done  much  for  Abolibah,  dealt  by  her  like 
a  loving  husband ;  but  she  slighted  Him,  went  out  a  whoring  from  Him,  did 
those  things  which  greatly  dishonoured  Him,  and  so  provoked  Him  to  mind 
her  that  forgot  Him.  He  fell  upon  her  with  His  judgments,  and  destroyed  her. 
And  80  will  the  Lord  do  by  all  that  forget  Him  (P^a.  ix.  17).  Whatever  sins 
the  nations  commit,  they  are  comprehended  in  their  forgetting  God^  that  is  the 
root  of  all  evil — (GreenhiU). 


(Vers.  36-49). 

EXEGETIGAL  NOTES.  —  Judah  the  true  God  in  eonnection  with  their 
and  Samaria  are  considered  as  joined  idols.  Thus  they  placed  Jehovah  on 
together  in  their  sin  and  punishment,     a  par  with  Moloch. 


Ver.  37.  "They  have  committed 
adultery,  and  blood  is  in  their  hands.** 
'*  The  actual  subject  matter  of  these 
verses  is  closely  connected  with  ver.  16, 
more  especially  in  the  designation  of 
the  sins  as  adultery  and  bloodshed 
(compare  vers.  37  and  45  with  Ch. 
xvi.  38).  They  committed  adultery 
with  the  idols  thus  niacing  the  idols 
on  a  par  with  Jehovah  as  the  husband 
of  Israel  (compare  Jer.  iii.  8  and  ii.  27. 
For  the  Molocli- worship  compare  Ch. 
xvi.  20,  21,  and  Ch.  xx.  31  'y—Keil. 

Ver.  39.  '*Then  they  came  the  same 
day  into  My  sanctuary  to  profane  it" 
*'  So  callous  and  daring  were  the  Jews 
in  their  idolatry  that  on  the  very  day 
on  which  they  had  burned  their 
children  to  Moloch  in  the  valley  of 
Gehenna,  they  hypocritically  presented 
themselves  as  worshippers  in  the  temple 
of  Jehovah.  Compare  Jer.  vii.  9, 10." 
(Henderson).  The  profanation  con- 
sisted, not  simply  in  idol-worship 
considered  by  itself,  but  in  worshipping 


Ver.  40.  "  Ye  have  tent  for  men  to 
come  from  far.*'  The  Heb.  verb 
being  in  the  imperfect  tense  shows 
that  the  action  was  continuous.  Not 
that  they  merely  sent  once  and  again, 
but  that  they  were  wont  to  do  so. 
"  For  whom  fnon  didst  wash  thyself, 
paintedst  thy  eyes,  and  deckedst  thy- 
self with  ornaments."  ''  They  spread 
fine  paint  of  a  black  colour  on  the 
eyelids  so  as  to  produce  a  black 
margin,  and  thns  make  the  white  of 
the  eye  look  more  beautiful  and 
seducing.  It  is  a  custom  still  practised 
by  Oriental  females.  Jerusalem  is 
represented  as  so  doing  to  entice  her 
lovers.  She  left  nothing  untried  by 
which  this  might  be  efifected  "  (/Ie?i' 
derson).  "  The  eyelashes  and  eyebrows 
were  stained  with  a  powder,  so  as  to 
make  the  glance  of  the  eye  moro 
brilliant." — Lange. 

Ver.  41.  "Satest  upon  a  stately 
bed*  and  a  table  prepared  before  it.* 
'*She  seated  lier:self  upon  a  cn»)<ion  (not 

889 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CUAP.  XXUL 


HOMILETIC  COMMBNTART:  BZEKIBL. 


lay  down  upon  a  bed),  and  in  front  of 
this  there  was  a  table,  spread  with 
different  kinds  of  food,  upon  which 
she  placed  incense  and  oil" — (KeiL) 
'*  Tlie  board  or  table  is  furnished  with 
meats  and  drinks.  Eating  and  drink- 
ing play  an  important  part  in  adultery, 
either  in  the  usual  or  in  the  spiritud 
sense."  —  fflengstenberg).  "  Where- 
UDon  thou  hast  set  Hine  incense  and 
Mine  oil*"  The  force  of  this  charge 
lies  in  the  fact  that  she  devoted  the 
offerings  which  belonged  to  Jehovah 
to  the  gratification  of  her  lovers. 
'*  Religious  ceremonies  are  not  here 
spoken  of.  We  find  ourselves  in  the 
region  of  political  idolatry,  which  in 
the  latest  times  of  the  people,  from 
the  days  of  Ahas  and  Hezekiah,  far 
outweighed  that  of  reli*;ion.  The  cor- 
responding reality  consists  in  the  rich 
gifts  by  which  Judah  endeavoured  to 
purchase  the  favour  of  the  heathen 
sovereigns  (Isa.  xxx.  6)"-~(iJengS' 
teuberg,)  Some  understand  this  pass- 
age as  describing  the  lascivious  worship 
of  tlie  Babylonish  Mylitta.  The  wan- 
ton Israel  is  described  as  preparing 
her^^elf  for  one  of  the  high  festivals  of 
this  goddess,  and  as  abandoning  her- 
self to  strangers  like  the  young  women 
of  Babylon. 

Ver.  42.  **  A  voice  of  a  multitude 
being  at  ease  was  with  her.*'  They  are 
at  ease,  in  careless,  undisturbed  pros- 
perity. "  Sabeans  from  the  Wilder- 
ness." 


Instead  of  receiving  the 
warnings  given  them  by  the  prophets, 
and  humbling  themselves  on  account 
of  their  idolatries,  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  indulged  in  rioting  and 
drunkenness — Ibringing  even  the  vulgar 
Ariibs  from  the  desert  to  keep  them 
company." — (Henderson.)  The  phrase 
*'  from  the  desert,"  cannot  indicate  the 
home  of  these  men,  but  simply  the 
place  from  which  they  came  to  Judah, 
namely,  from  the  desert  of  Syria  and 
Arabia,  which  separated  Palestine  from 
Bahylon.  Tliese  peoples  decorated  the 
arms  of  the  harlots  with  clasps,  and 
their  heads  with  splendid  wreatlis 
(crowns).  The  thought  is  simply  that 
Samaria  and  Judah  had  attained  to 
290 


wealth  and  earthly  glory  through  their 
intercourse  wiih  these  nations;  the 
▼ery  gifts  with  which,  according  to 
Gh.  xvi.  11,  &c,  Jehovah  Himself  had 
adorned  IIis  people."— ^fdt/  ) 

Ver.  43.  "Oldinadulteries.*'  2ii#. 
who  was  debilitated  fair  aduJUry, 
"  The  Heb.  word  does  not  indicate  the 
means  by  which  the  strength  has  been 
exhausted,  but  is  an  accusation  of 
direction  or  reference,  debilitated  with 
regard  to  adultery,  so  as  no  longer  to 
be  capable  of  practising  it.'' — (KM,) 
'*Will  they  now  commit  whoredoms 
with  her  t  '"^  "  Disgusting  as  was  her 
character  as  an  old  adulteress,  Jerosa- 
lem  fonnd  those  who  encouraged  her 
in  her  wickedness.  Taken  in  connec- 
tion with  the  next  verse,  the  two 
sisters  are  agam  presented  to  view, 
tl\ongh  Aholibah  is  specially  singled 
out,  being  the  more  guilty  of  the 
two." — (tiendersan.) 

Ver.  45.  ''The  righteous  men-** 
Men  who  had  the  ri^ht  on  their  side. 
Such^  were  the  Chaldeans,  who  were 
the  instruments  of  Qod's  righteous 
anger.  ''  The  Chaldeans  are  righteous 
according  to  their  mission  as  ministers 
of  the  Divine  vengeance.  The  heathen 
tyrant  also,  in  Isa.  xlix.  24,  is  desig- 
nated as  Tig\iteovLH."'^Hengstenberg.) 
"A  moral  comparison  between  the 
Chaldeans  and  the  Jews  is  not  in- 
tended, nor  are  prophets  and  righteous 
men  among  the  people  themselves  to 
be  imagincSa."— ^ian^^.^ 

Ver.  46.  '^Iwillbring  up  a  company 
upon  them."  "  Here  the  prophet  is 
first  addressed.  What  shall  happen  is, 
as  it  were,  wrought  by  him,  as  the  power 
whicli  gave  the  prophecy  produces  ako 
the  fulfilment ;  in  the  prophecy  also, 
ideallv  considered,  the  fulfilment  is 
alreaay  present.  The  community  de- 
notes usuallv  the  congregation  of 
Israel.  As  this  has  faileid  to  do  its 
duty,  reacting  against  the  crime,  as 
once  hap{ened  in  the  war  against 
Benjamin  (Judg.  xx.),  so  stands  here 
tlie  community  of  the  heathen,  which 
God  summons  to  execute  His  ven- 
geaiice." — (  Uengstenberg.) 


Digitized  by 


Googlf 


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  xxiii. 


Ver.  48.     "  All  women."    All  the  are  represented  as  being  sisters  of  oue 

nations,  to  whom  Israel  would  serve  as  mother  ;  and  it  may  also  be  defended 

a  warning  and  deterring  example.  on  the  ground  that  the  approaching 

,  destruction    of    Jerusalem    and    the 

Ver.  49.  "They  shall  recompense  kingdom  of  Judah  aflFected  the  rem- 
yonr  lewdness  npon  you."  "  The  nants  of  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes, 
punishment  is  announced  to  both  the  which  were  still  to  be  found  in  Pales- 
women,  Ibiael  and  Judah,  as  still  in  tine ;  whilst,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
the  future,  although  Aholah  (Samaria)  judgment  was  not  restricted  to  the 
bad  been  overtaken  by  the  judgment  destruction  of  the  two  kingdoms,  but 
a  considerable  time  before.  The  ex-  also  embraced  the  latter  judgments 
planation  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  which  fell  upon  the  entire  nation."— 
allegory  itself,  in  which  both  kingdoms  {Keii.) 

H0MILETIC8. 

AnOTHEB  SuMMABT  07  THB  SiNS  AND    PUNISHlfBNT  OF  JuDAH  AND  SaICABIA 

L  Their  Sins*  1.  Idolatry.  *'  With  their  idols  have  they  committed 
adultery  "  (yet,  37).  Jehovah  was  to  Israel  as  a  husband.  To  serve  other  ^oda 
was  to  forsake  and  forfeit  His  favour  and  protection.  It  was  a  fearful  crime, 
such  as  adultery  would  be  in  the  judgment  of  all  nations.  2.  Cruelty. 
**  Blood  is  in  their  hands."  They  ottered  their  children  to  the  cruelties  of 
Moloch  worship.  Idolatry  leads  to  perverted  and  unnatural  views  of  human 
duty  and  of  the  requirements  of  religion.  Hence  the  cruelty  of  its  rites. 
3.  Impurity.  She  sought  to  make  herself  attractive  to  her  lovers,  using  every 
art  to  pander  to  her  lust  (ver,  41,  42).  Israel  made  herself  attractive  to  the 
surrounding  nations,  "  For  whom  thou  didst  wash  thyself,  paintedst  thy  eyes, 
and  decke^t  thyself  with  ornaments."  They  washed  themselves  before  men, 
but  were  unclean  before  God — the  way  of  hypocrites.  Israel  sought  for 
occasions  of  sin.  "  Ye  have  sent  for  men  "  fver.  40).  They  tried  to  excite  a 
jaded  appetite  (ver.  43).  They  were  old  and  worn  out  in  the  service  of  sin, 
but  tried  hard  to  awaken  the  impulses  of  it,  to  stir  up  the  embers  of  a 
smouldering  fire.  Even  in  Christian  lands,  how  many  serve  buch  impure  and 
cruel  gods  and  even  use  infamous  arts  to  plunge  into  the  lowest  depths  of 
iniquity  I  "  He  who  serves  Venus  and  Bacchus  ofifers  to  them  also  his 
children." — (Lange).  And  how  many,  also,  become  more  shameless  as  they 
grow  old  in  sin !  4.  Profanity.  They  profaned  the  Sabbath  and  the  sanctury 
(ver.  38).  They  employe*!  in  the  service  of  idolatry  the  "  incense  "  and  "  oil," 
God's  own  property,  which  He  had  reserved  for  sacred  uses  (Exod.  xxx.  23-33). 
More  than  this,  they  dared  to  combine  the  service  of  Jehovah  with  that  of 
idols,  thus  adding  to  their  sins  the  boldest  and  most  wicked  hypocracy.  After 
they  had  indulged  in  the  most  cruel  rites  of  idolatry,  they  came  '*  in  the  same 
day"  into  God's  sanctuary  to  defile  it  "To  run  from  the  harlot-house  to 
God's  house,  from  murder  to  the  place  of  prayer,  from  sin  to  sinning,  is  not 
pleasing  to  God." — Lange, 

n.  Their  punlshmt^nt.  1.  It  would  be  feU  to  be  just  even  by  the  heathen 
nation  who  inflicted  it,  "  And  the  righteous  men,  they  shall  judge  them." 
(ver.  4«')).  The  Chaldeans  had  right  on  their  side.  They  were  the  righteous 
instruments  of  God  to  execute  His  vengeance.  Even  heathen  nations  looked 
upon  perjury  and  breach  of  covenant  as  fearful  crimes.  (Ezek.  zvii.  15,  16). 
2.  It  would  be  a  severe,  and  yet  a  most  fitting  punishment,  (vers.  46,  47).  Tlie 
Judgment  hour  had  come,  and  God's  army  was  ready.    '*  They  shall  stone 

T  2  291 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP  xxin,  HOMTLBTIO  COMMENTARY :  BZEKIBL. 


them  with  stones/' — the  puDishment  of  those  who  comnut  adultery  and  shed 
blood  (St.  John  viii.  5).  B.  It  would  be  effectual.  The  puuL^hment  would 
completely  cure  the  evil  (ver.  48).  It  would  be  a  warniDf?  example  to  all 
(ver.  48).  It  would  brinK  them  to  the  true  knowledge  of  God  fver.  49).  The 
whole  of  this  chapter  illustrates  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  that ''  toe  Law  entered 
that  the  offence  might  abound"  (Rom.  y.  20).  It  would  seem  as  if  the 
presence  of  God's  holy  Law  served  to  stir  up  the  proud  will  of  the  chosen 
people  to  more  desperate  self-assertion.  They  sought  those  sinful  alliances 
with  the  powers  of  the  world,  which  seemed  to  have  all  the  more  attraction 
because  they  were  forbidden.  ''Te  adulterers  and  adulteresses,  know  ye  not 
that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  (}od  ?  whosoever  therefore  will 
be  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  God."    (St.  James  iv.  4). 

(Verses  36-44) 

1.  Sinners  male  little  or  no  conscience  of  htrrible  sins,  or  holy  duties  ;  they 
pass  from  one  to  the  other  immediafeli/.  When  they  had  slain  their  children 
to  their  idols,  that  ^ame  day  they  came  into  the  Sanctuary.  From  ^heddingof 
blood  and  sacrificing  to  idoU,  they  step  into  the  temple  and  worship  of  Gbd. 
Had  not  their  consciences  be^n  seared,  they  would  have  accused  them  and  told 
them  that  they  were  unclean,  not  fit  to  meddle  with  holy  things.  But  they 
go  boldly  and  impudently  into  God's  presence.  So  Jeremiah  tells  us,  they  did 
steal,  murder,  commit  adultery,  swear  falsely,  burn  incense  to  Baal,  walk  after 
other  gods,  and  then  come  presently  and  stand  before  Him  in  His  house,  and 
say :  "  We  are  delivered."  (Jer.  vii  9,  10.)  They  passed  from  wicked  practices 
to  holy  duties,  making  no  conscience  of  the  one  or  the  other.  2.  7'he  Lord 
takes  notice  how  men  draw  near  to  Him  in  the  duties  qf  His  worshp.  They 
thrust  themselves  into  the  temple  worship  and  into  the  presence  of  God,  as  if 
they  had  been  innocent  and  as  acceptable  to  (}od  as  any.  Men  may  deceive 
others  and  themselves,  but  they  cannot  deceive  the  Lord.  He  sees  their  spirits, 
and  whether  they  come  unprepared  in  the  guilt  of  former  or  present  sins.  3. 
Profaning  of  holy  things  is  wronging  God.  "  This  have  they  done  unto  Me. 
Lo,  thus  have  they  done  in  the  midst  of  Mine  house."  God  had 
instituted  their  worship,  and  had  stamped  holiness  upon  them ;  and 
therefore  the  defiling  and  profaning  of  them  He  counted  the  defiling  and 
profaning  of  His  name  and  of  Himself.  Three  ways,  eq)ecially,  are  holy 
things  defiled,  profaned  :  (1.)  When  men  come  in  their  sins,  without  purging 
thems^hts.  (St.  James,  iv.  8.)  If  men  draw  near  to  God  without  cleansing 
their  hands,  and  purifying  their  hearts,  God  will  not  draw  near  them.  He  will  not 
touch  unclean  things.  (2.)  When  we  mingle  aught  of  us  therewith.  Additions  of 
human  things  are  pollutions  of  divine  things.  When  they  brought  aught  into  the 
Temple  which  God  appointed  not,  tiien  was  God's  worship  defiled.  When 
^^a(lab  and  Abihu  put  strange  fire  into  the  censers,  they  defiled  Gbd's  worship 
and  provoked  Him  to  their  destruction  (Lev.  x.) ;  and  when  they  set  tlieir 
thresliold  with  God's  threshold,  they  defiled  His  name  and  worsh'p  (Ezc^.  xhii. 
7,  8).  3.  When  holy  things  are  handled  irreverently.  The  Bethshemites  in 
a  rude  manner  peeped  into  the  ark  and  profaned  it,  which  caused  the  Lord  to 
smite  them  with  sudden  death  (1  Sara.  vi«  19).  S(»lomon  gives  counsel  that 
men  should  keep  their  feet  when  they  go  into  the  house  of  God  (Eccl.  v.  1). 
For  if  they  look  not  well  to  their  aflections,  they  will  play  the  fool,  and  profane 
those  holy  things,  and  procure  a  curse  instead  of  a  blessing.  4.  Sinners  will 
show  great  activity  in  drawing  others  to   themselves  and  their  wicked  ways, 

[)lher8  to  come  unto  them, 
not  for  any  cost  whereby 
2^2 


These  harlots  sent  to  Assyria,  to  E.ynt,  and  lo  ol 
They  trimmed  and  decked  themselves,  they  spared  i 

/Google 


Digitized  by  ^ 


HOMILBTIO  COMMBNTART:  BZBKIEL.  ohap.  xxnr. 


they  might  please  and  satisfy  them.  Thus  did  the  harlot  (Prov.  vil).  She 
perfumes  her  bed,  trims  up  herself,  goes  forth,  and  diligently  seeks,  finds,  and 
brings  in  the  prey.  Some  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  proselytes.  Shall 
wicked  ones  and  wickedness  be  aciive,  expensive  to  draw  and  ruin  otiiers,  and 
shall  not  godly  ones  and  godliness  be  as  active  and  expensive  to  win  and  save 
sinners  ?  5.  Those  who  are  given  to  corporeal  or  spiritttal  uncleanneas  are 
seldom  recovered,  but  go  on  and  arow  old  in  those  sins.  These  women  had 
many  reproofs  and  threateuings,  out  none  prevailed  Tver.  44).  Such  sins  are 
bewitching,  and  hold  men  captive.  "  None  that  go  unto  her  return  again  "  (Prov. 
ii.  19).  6.  The  Lord  takes  notice  of  sinners,  as  to  the  beginning,  progress,  and 
continuance  of  their  sin.  He  observed  when  Aholah  began  her  whoredoms, 
when  the  calves  were  set  up  at  Dan  and  Bethel,  how  she  grew  up  and  grew  old 
in  adulteries.  God's  eye  goes  along  with  sinners,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end. 
7.  God's  judgments  are  teaching  things.  He  brought  these  judgments  upon 
tlie  two  harlots,  that  all  women  might  be  taught  thereby.  Gideon  by  thorns 
and  briars  taught  the  men  of  Succoth  (Judg.  viiL  16).  There  is  no  judgment 
of  God  upon  any  city,  nation,  or  people,  but  it  speaks  and  teaches  :  **  Hear  ye 
the  rod"  (Micah.  vi.  9) ;  it  hath  a  voice,  a  teaching  voice.  1.  It  teaches  all 
who  are  guilty  of  the  same  sins,  and  not  visited  with  the  same  judgments  to 
admire  the  goodnevss  and  long  suffering  of  God  towards  them.  2.  it  teaches 
those  who  are  guilty  of  such  sins  to  repent  and  turn  to  the  Lord,  lest  the  Lord, 
being  now  in  the  way  of  judgment,  should  break  out  also  upon  them,  and  make 
them  examples  of  His  justice.  3.  It  teaches  others  to  fear  and  to  flee  from  such 
practices,  as  being  such  destructive  judgments.  When  Samaria  and  Jerusalem 
shall  be  destroyed  for  their  confidence  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  will  not  every  other 
city  learn  what  is  the  reward  of  wickedness,  and  fear  to  do  the  like  ?  8.  God*s 
ways  tvith  sinners  in  judging  them  righteously  brings  them  to  acknowledge  the 
equity  of  His  dealing  mth  them.  When  the  ju8t  punishment  of  your  lewdness 
and  idolatry  shall  be  upon  you,  ''  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord,"  who 
observed  all  your  ways,  who  waited  long  for  your  repentance,  who  have  dealt 
justly  with  you  in  all  the  evik  I  have  broucfht  upon  you ;  you  cannot  but 
justify  Me,  and  condemn  yourselves. — (Greenhill). 

Thb  Complbtb  Destruotion  of  Jerusalem  predicted,  both  nr  Pabablb 
AUD  BT  Sign  (Chap.  xxiv). 

(Vers.  1,  2). 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.—'*  On  the  to  them  that  what  he  was  doing  was 

day  on  which  the  King  of  Babylon  symbolical  of  the  way  in  which  they 

commenced  the  siege  and  blockade  of  were  to  act  when  Jerusalem  fell  (vers. 

Jerusalem,  this  event  was  revealed  by  15 — 24).   The  fall  would  be  announced 

God  to  Ezekiel  on  the  Ghaboras  (vers,  to  tlie  prophet  by  a  fugitive,  and  then 

1.   2) ;    and  he  was  commanded  to  he  would  no  longer  remain  mute,  but 

predict  to  the  people    through    the  would  speak  to  the  people  again  (vers, 

medium  of  a  parable  the  fate  of  the  25 — 27).    Apart,  therefore,  from  the 

city  and  its  inhabitants  (vers.  3 — 14).  last  three  verses,  this  chapter  contains 

God  then  foretold  to  him  the  death  of  the  words  of  God,  the  first  of  which 

his  own  wife,  and  commanded  him  to  unfolds  in  a  parable  the  approaching 

show  no  sign  of  mourning  on  account  calamities  and  the  result  of  the  siege 

of  it.     His  wife   died   the  following  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans  (vers, 

evening,  and  he  did  as  he  was  coui-  1 — 14)  ;  whilst  the  second  tvpifies  by 

manded.    When  he  was  asked  by  the  means  of  a  sign  the  pain  and  mourn- 

people  the  reason  of  this  he  explained  ing  of  Israel,  namely,  of  the  exiles  at 

293 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OHAP.  XXT7. 


HOMILBTW  COMMBmUtT:  BZBKIEL. 


the  destruction  of  the  city  with  its 
sanotnary  and  its  inhabitants.  These 
two  words  of  God,  being  connected 
together  by  their  contents,  were  ad- 
dressed to  the  prophet  on  the  same 
day,  and  tliat,  as  the  introduction 
(vera  1,  2)  expressly  observes,  the  day 
on  which  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the 
King  of  Babylon  began." — (KeiL) 

Ver.  1.    "The  ninth  year.'*     The 

dateis  taken  from  the  commencement  ot 
of  Jehoiachin's  captivity,  which  would 
fix  the  time  when  the  word  of  the 
Lord  came  to  the  prophet  as  B.C.  590." 
'  In  the  tenth  month,  in  the  tenth  day 
of  the  month.**  This  day  was  after- 
wards kept  as  a  fast,  and  is  still 
observed  as  such  by  the  synagogue. 

Ver.  2.  "Write  thee  the  name  of 
the  day."  "  The  prophet  is  to  write 
down  the  day,  as  a  man  does  with 
remarkable  days,  in  order  not  to 
forget  the  date.  The  object,  to  make 
use  of  this  afterwards  in  proof  of -his 
prophetic  office,  neede<l  to  be  more 
definitely  noticed"— (Hengstenberg J. 
**  The  prophet  is  specially  charged  to 


write  down  the  particular  day  on 
which  he  delivered  his  message,  and 
to  announce  it  as  that  on  which 
Nebuchadnezzar  had  commenced  his 
attack  on  Jeru^ialem.  As  he  was  at 
the  time  at  the  distance  of  more  than 
four  hundred  miles  from  that  city, 
it  was  not  to  be  supposed  that  the 
intelligence  could  have  reached  him 
by  any  human  means.  When,  there- 
fore, the  captives  afterwards  received 
the  information,  they  had,  on  com- 
paring the  dates,  an  infallible  proof  of 
the  Divine  inspirntion  of  the  prophet." 
—(Henderson).  "  Set  himself  against 
Jerusalem."  The  Hebrew  word  Mini- 
fies to  lie  hard  upon  (Psa.  Ixxxvii.  7). 
It  is  sometimes  used  to  describe  the 
investing  of  a  city  with  an  army.  In 
the  affl  ctions  of  the  righteous  Ood 
is  said  to  lay  on  a  heavy  hand 
(Psa.  xxxii.  4).  The  sacrificer  laid 
his  hand  upon  the  victim  (Exodus 
xxix.  19);  and  the  witnesses  were 
ordered  to  lay  their  hand  on  a 
blasphemer  before  he  was  stoned 
(Lev.  xxiv.  4),  so  in  great  judgments 
God  lays  on  His  hand. 


HOMILETICa. 


Thb  Last  Warkdiq  of  Judoment, 


Ezekiel  bad  uttered  poany  warnings  before,  and  he  still  goes  on 
to  the  very  moment  of  judgment    This  illustrates  : — 


speaking  up 


I.  The  Prophet's  faithfulness.  Amidst  every  discouragement  he  is  still 
resolved  to  deliver  the  message  of  God.  He  will  utter  God's  last  word, 
though  it  comes  too  late  to  arrest  judgment.  The  true  prophet  must  speak 
the  word  which  is  given  him,  and  leave  the  results  with  Him  who  sent  him. 

II.  The  Prophet's  inspiration.  Ezekiel  was  four  hundred  miles  from 
Jerusalem,  and  yet  be  tells  his  fellow-captives  that  the  siege  was  begun  at 
that  very  moment  at  which  he  was  speakii^g.  This  was  a  clear  proof  that 
the  prophet's  mind  was  enlightenrd  by  that  Sovereign  Intelh'gence  which  sees 
and  Knows  all  things.  He  could  not  possibly  know  this  event  by  human  means. 
Therefore  his  as&ertion,  that  the  siege  was  then  commencing  while  he  was 
speaking,  must  have  been  the  result  of  supernatural  knowledge.  If  any  one 
maintains  that  this  was  a  pro]  hecy  qfter  the  event,  he  must  be  prepared  to 
accept  the  conclusion  that  Doth  Ezekiel's  prophetic  and  moral  characters  fall  to 
the  ground. 

S94 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL.  CBAP.  zxiT. 


Ill*  The  solemnity  of  the  prophet's  last  word-  In  this  chapter  he  takes 
his  farewell  of  his  nation.  We  are  reminded  of  Our  Lord's  parting  words  to 
Jerusalem,  "  Behold  your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate  "  (St.  Matt,  xxiii.  88). 
When  the  prophets  of  God  speak  no  more  to  nations,  or  to  individual  men, 
then  the  day  of  their  visitation  is  over  and  the  time  of  judgment  has  come. 

17.  The  solemn  importance  of  Ood^s  notes  of  time»  in  the  life  of  nationst 
and  of  men*  There  are  times  and  events  in  the  lives  of  nations  which  historians 
may  note  down  as  the  most  important.  But  what  different  rates  of  importance 
are  to  be  assigned  to  these  as  God  views  them  !  And  so  it  is  in  regard  to  the 
lives  of  individual  men.  How  different  would  be  the  calendar  of  our  lives  if 
we  marked  the  times  and  events  of  it  at  God's  bidding  !  '*  We  are  generally 
ignorant  of  the  real  significance  of  events,  which  we  think  we  understand.  * 
Almost  every  person  can  recollect  one  or  more  instances,  where  the  whole  after- 
current of  his  life  was  turned  by  some  single  word,  or  some  incident  so  trivial 
as  scarcely  to  fix  his  notice  at  the  time.  On  the  other  hand,  many  great  crises 
of  danger,  many  high  and  stirring  occasions,  in  which,  at  the  time,  his  total 
being  was  absorbed,  imve  passed  by,  leaving  no  trace  of  effect  on  his  permanent 
interests,  and  have  wellnigh  vanished  from  his  memory.  The  conversation  of 
the  stage-coach  is  often  preparing  results  which  the  solemn  assembly  and  the 
most  imposing  and  eloquent  rites  will  fail  to  produce.  What  countryman, 
knowing  the  dairyman's  danjijhter,  could  have  suspected  that  she  was  living  to 
a  mightier  purpose  and  result  than  almost  any  person  in  the  church  of  God, 
however  eminent  ?  The  outward  of  occasions  and  duties  is,  in  fact,  almost  no 
index  of  their  importance  ;  and  our  judgments  concerning  what  is  great  and 
small  are  without  any  certain  validity.  These  terms,  as  we  use  them,  are,  in 
fact,  only  words  of  outward  description,  not  words  of  definite  measurement."— 
{BushweU).  • 

1.  The  Lord  can  male  knoun  what  men  do,  to  whom  He  pleases  and  at 
what  distance  soever,  Nebiichadnezzir  and  his  forces  were  in  Judea,  sitting 
down  before  Jerusalem,  and  this  the  Lord  revealed  to  Ezekiel,  being  in  Babylon. 
It  was  declaretl  to  Elisha,  whither  the  king  of  Syria  would  march,  and  where 
he  would  pitch  his  camp.  (2  Kings,  vi.  9,  10.)  The  death  of  Herod,  in  Judea, 
was  discovered  to  Joseph,  being  in  Egypt.  (St.  Matt.  ii.  19,  20.)  And  when 
Moees  was  in  Midian,  the  Lord  told  him  that  all  the  men  were  dead  in  Egypt, 
which  sought  his  life.  (Exod.  iv.  19.)  2.  There  are  some  things  and  times 
the  Lord  would  have  his  people  take  special  notice  of^  and  keep  the  chronology 
thereof,  Ezt^kiel  must  write  the  year,  the  month,  and  day  of  Jerusalem  s 
beseiging.  When  God  hath  been  upon  executing  great  judgments,  or  showing 
great  mercies,  the  days  and  months  have  been  recorded.  The  day  and  month 
of  Noah's  entrance  into  the  ark,  and  of  his  coming  out  again,  are  mentioned. 
((Jen.  vii.  11  ,  viii.  14,  16.)  The  time  of  the  Jews  going  out  of  Egypt  jfou  have 
punctually  set  down.  (Exod.  xii.  41,  42)  ;  so  the  time  of  their  passing  over 
Jordan  (Josh.  iv.  19) ;  of  Solomon's  building  the  temple  (2  Chron.  iil  2)  ;  of 
Haman's  plot  to  destroy  the  Jews  (Esth.  iii.  8, 13.)  This  shows  that  these 
events  were  not  casual,  that  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  were  interested  in 
them,  whoever  were  the  instruments."— ^Gr^^wAi//.^ 

(Verses  3-14.) 

EXEGETICAL      NOTES.  —  The  therein  choice  pieces  of  meat  (vers, 

rophet  illustrates  the  destruction  of  3-5).       Then    he    follows    with    an 

eiusalem  by  the  allegory  of  a  cauldron  application   of  the  allegory  to  Jeru' 

which  he  was  to  set  on  the  hre,  and  salem,  as  describing   her  irrevocable 

having  put  water   into   it,  to    boil  doom.  295 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


j; 


CBAP.  XXIT. 


EOMILETIO  COMMBNTAMTt  BZBKIBL. 


Ver.  8.  "Utter  a  parable."  **The 

contents  of  these  verses  are  called  a 
proverb  or  parable.  It  follows  from 
this  that  the  ensuing  act  which  the 
prophet  is  commanded  to  perform  is 
not  to  be  regarded  as  a  symbolical  act 
which  he  really  carried  out,  but  that 
the  act  forms  the  substance  of  the 
parable — in  otlier  words,  belongs  to 
the  parable  itself;  consequently  the 
interpretation  of  the  parable  (ver. 
10,  etc.)  is  clothed  in  the  form  of  a 
thing  actually  done"  [Keil)  "Set 
on  a  pot  .  .  .  pour  water  into  it." 
Tlie  repeated  demand  expresses  urgent 
liaste.  The  pot  is  Jerusalem,  which 
had  become  so  foul  as  to  poison  all 
meats  which  were  put  into  it. 

Ver.  4.  •*  The  pieces."  The  pieces 
represent  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem. 
By  the  "thigh,  the  shcmlder,  choice 
bones,"  we  are  to  understand  the 
wealthy,  the  nobles,  and  chiefs  of  the 
people. 

Ver.  5.  ''Bum  also  the  bones 
under  it,  and  make  it  boil  welL*' 
"  The  bones  that  had  been  stripped  of 
their  flesh  were  to  be  used  for  fuel : 
those  to  which  it  still  adhered  were 
to  be  thrown  into  the  pot,  that  it 
might  be  boiled  "  {.Henderson),  "  The 
fire  with  which  they  are  boiled  is  the 
fire  of  war7  and  the  setting  of  the  pot 
upon  the  fire  is  the  commencement  of 
the  siege,  by  which  the  population  of 
the  city  is  to  be  boiled  away  like  the 
flesh  and  bones  in  a  put." — KeU. 

Ver.  6.  "  Whose  scum  is  therein." 
"We  are  not  to  understand  such  scum 
as  gathers  on  the  surface  of  the  con- 
tents of  a  pot,  but  the  rust  or  verdigris 
Contracted  by  copper.  The  moral 
impurity  of  the  city  is  intended.  The 
prophet  begins  here  to  give  the 
explanation  of  the  parable.  The  Jews, 
indeed,  could  be  at  little  loss  to  know 
what  was  intended  by  it.  They  had 
alreadv  themselves  bandied  the 
metaphor  about  as  a  taunt,  boasting 
that  they  should  dwell  securely  in 
Jerusalem." — (Henderson),  •*  Piece  by 
fiieoe***    The  pieces  were  the  various 


members  of  the  body  corporate.  They 
were  all  to  be  brought  out,  no  favour 
was  to  be  shown,  but  all  without  dis- 
crimination were  to  be  put  into  the 
cauldron.  'let  no  lot  fall  upon  it." 
No  lot  was  to  be  cast  in  order  to 
decide  what  part  should  be  taken,  and 
what  should  be  spared  (Nahum  iii.  10). 
^ff  are  doomed  to  be  carried  ofi*,  by 
death  or  by  captivity. 

Ver.  7.  **  She  set  it  upon  the  top  of 
a  rock."  "  Here  we  have  the  cause  of 
this  jud;,'ment :  deeds  of  murder  are 
done  in  Jerusalem  boldly  and  without 
abhorrence,  by  which  we  are  to  under 
stand  the  numerous  judicial  murders 
which  were  perpetrated  by  the  party 
who  had  at  that  time  seized  the  helm 
of  the  state,  the  party  of  the  external 
alliances,  against  which  all  were 
indignant,  ¥mo  in  the  name  of  the 
God  of  Israel  raised  a  protest  against 
this  adulterous  movement.  An  example 
of  such  judicial  murder  is  the  prophet 
Urijah  (Jer.  xxvi.  20.  &c.)"  {Heng- 
Btenberg).  ''Poured  it  not  upon  the 
Srround.'*  It  was  commanded  in  the 
Law,  that  the  blood  of  animals  slain 
for  food  should  be  poured  on  the  earth 
and  covered  up  with  dust  (Lev.  xvii. 
13).  Idolatrous  Jerusalem  recklessly 
poured  out  even  human  blood  under 
the  open  sky,  and  covered  it  not  up. 
She  sinned  shamelessly,  and  before  the 
face  of  all.  Therefore  the  Lord  will 
not  cover  up  her  sin,  but  her  blood 
shall  be  ruthlessly  poured  out  in  the 
sight  of  all  nations. 

Ver.  8.    **  Upon  the  top  of  a  rook." 

"  The  Hebrew  word  signifies  a  sunny 
rock,  the  highest  part  of  a  bare  rock 
exposed  to  the  rays  of  the  sun.  In 
just  retribution,  Jehovah  declares  that 
He  would  expose  them  with  equal 
publicity,  that  the  blood  might  call 
for  vengeance." — (Henderson). 

Ver.  10.  "Spice  it  well."  ^•There 
are  differences  of  opinion  as  to  the 
meaning  of  this  word.  The  renf'erinff 
sometinjes  given,  namely  *  to  spice, 
is  at  all  events  un>uitable,  and  can- 
not   be   sustamed  by  the  usage  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY  :  SZEKIEL.  chap,  xxit 


language.    It  is  true  tliat  in  Ex.  xxx.  Thus  God's  judgments  fek  not  upon 

25,  &c.,  the  verb  is  used  for  the  pre-  men  only,butalsouponcities  and  lands, 
paration  of  the  anointing  oil,  but  it  is 

not  the  mixing  of  the  different  in-  Ver.  12.      **  She   wearied    herself 

gredients  that  is  referred  to,  but  in  all  with  lies."    The  idea  is,  that  the  pot 

probabilitythe  thorough* boiling  of  the  wearied  and  exhausted  men  in  their 

spices,  for  the  purpose  of  extracting  exertions   to   cleanse   it       All   the 

their    essence,    so    that    'thorough  labours  spent  upon  the  devoted  city 

boiling '  is  no  doubt  the  true  meaning  were  of  no  avail, 
of  the  word."— (Eeil). 

Ver.  14.      "I  will  not  go  back, 

Ver.  11.    "That  the  fllthiness  of  it  neither  will  I  spare,  neither  will  I 

may  be  molten  in  it."     The  unclean-  repent.'*    "  The  impurity  of  the  in- 

ness  of  the  pot  is  the  rust  upon  it  habitants  of  Jerusalem   was   of  the 

The  impurity  and  rust  of  the    pot  most    atrocious    character.      It   was 

itself  must  be  consumed  by  the  fire,  crimey  delihereLte  wickedness,    Jehovah 

Thus  when  the  guilty  inhabitants  are  had   used   a   variety  of  means,  both 

slain,  the  city  itself  will  be  destroyed,  physical  and  moral,  to  restore  them 

In  the  Old  Testament,  impurity  is  to  purity,  but  they  had  produced  no 

considered  as  being  attached  to  things  eff<  ct    It  remained  now  only  for  the 

as   well   as  persons  (Lev.    xviii.  25  ;  Chaldeans    to  do  their  work.      The 

xxvii.  28).    Leprosy  not  only  polluted  decree  was  irrevocable,  and  the  execu- 

men,  but  clothes   also  and    houses,  tion  inevitable." — (Henderson). 


H0MILETIC8. 
Thb  Final  Judgments  of  God  tpON  Jerusalem. 

I.  They  would  be  severe.  The  judgments  coming  npon  Jerusalem  are  set 
forth  under  the  parable  of  a  boiling  pot,  filled  with  fla>h  and  bones  and  set  over 
a  fierce  fiie.  Hot  only  are  the  contents  to  te  comj>letely  destroyed  by  fire,  but 
also  the  rust  of  the  pot  itself.  This  declares  that  God's  purpose  is  to  destroy 
Jerusalem  itself  as  well  as  the  guilty  inhabitants  (ver.  11).  They  are  to  be 
bumfd  well  until  the  whole  is  consumed  (ver.  10).  The  blood  Jerusalem  had 
shed  must  now  be  avenged  upon  her  before  the  eyes  of  all  nations  (ver.  8). 

II.  They  would  be  a  just  retribution.  For  corruption  had  spread  to  all 
ranks  and  conditions  of  the  people  (ver.  4).  Sin,  like  rust,  had  eaten  into  the 
very  substance  of  the  nation.  The  "  scum  "  had  cleaved  to  the  vessel  (ver.  6). 
So  universal  was  the  corruption  that  there  was  no  need  for  the  "lot"  to  be  cast  in 
order  to  decide  what  part  should  be  taken  for  destniction,  and  what  spared.  A  U 
were  doomed  to  be  carried  off, by  death,or  by  captivity.  Nor  were  these  judgments 
a  sudden  thought,  or  expedient — a  desperate  remedy  applied  at  the  last  moment 
They  had  often  been  warned  and  corrected  before.  God  by  the  ministry  of  His 
prophets  had  efi'ected  some  reformations,  but  the  effect  of  these  soon  wore  off 
and  the  nation  refused  to  be  purged  of  her  iniquity  (ver.  13).  Holy  men  were 
wearied  with  toil  to  cleanse  the  sinful  city,  but  their  labours  were  in  vain 
(ver.  13).  She  had  sinned  in  the  most  open  and  shamless  manner,  had  done 
nothing  to  cover  her  sin,  had  shown  no  signs  of  repentance,  and  had  resisted 
all  the  instruments  which  God  had  used  to  restore  her.  There  was  nothing 
arbitrary  or  vindictive  in  her  punishmeiit,  which  was  but  a  just  recompense  for 
her  sin.  The  city  with  her  sinful  population  were  left  to  share  the  inevitable 
consequences  which  arise  from  the  persistent  breach  of  moral  laws.    ''Accord- 

297 


Digitized  by 


Google 


eBAP.  zxiT.  BOMILETIO  COMMSNTART:  BZBKIBL. 


ing  to  thy  ways,  and  according  to  thy  doings,  shall  they  judge  thee,  saith  the 
Lord  Ghxl "  (ver.  14).  The  judgments  were  to  fall  upon  the  city  itself  as  well  as 
upon  the  inhabitants.  The  works  of  man  are  turned  by  his  sin  iuto  the  instru- 
ments of  his  punishment.  The  blood  of  Christ  was  shed  at  Jerusalem,  and 
retribution  came,  at  length,  when  Titus  burned  the  city.  Divine  grace  abused 
will  bring  sure  vengeance.  Sin  must  be  put  away  out  of  God's  sight,  either 
by  cleansing:  it  away,  or  by  overwhelming  it  under  His  dire  judgments. 
When  God  Himself  has  done  all  that  could  be  done,  consistent  with  man's 
moral  liberty,  then  judgment  must  take  it  course.  ''  Thus  also  it  was  not 
cleansed  by  Christ,  who  had  wearied  Himself  in  labours  for  Jerusalem  even 
to  hot  tears." — {Jerome). 

III.  They  would  be  irrevocable-   The  Lord  had  spoken,  and  He  would 
not  repent  of  His  word  (ver.  14).    Their  time  of  grace  hail  ran  out. 


"As  to  the  principle  of  dealing,  there  is  no  essential  difference  between 
what  God  did  then  with  Israel,  and  what  He  still  doOi  with  those  who  stand  in 
a  similar  relation  to  Him,  and  pursue  a  similar  course.     Where  there  is  the 
profession  of  a  belief  in  God's  word,  and  a  regard  to  God's  authority,  though 
intermingled  with  much  that  is  fake  in  sentiment,  or  unrighteous  in  conduct, 
there  must  still  be  dealings  of  severity  and  rebuke,  to  bring  the  professor,  if 
possible,  to  a  sense  of  his  sinfulness,  and  lead  him  to  renounce  it ;  but,  failing 
this,  to  vindicate  concerning  him  the  righteousness  of  God,  and  leave  him 
without  excuse  if  iniquity  should  prove  his  ruin.     In  the  case  of  sincere^  God- 
fearing people,  the  severity  exercised  will  always  be  attended  with  salutary 
results ;  for  they  have  the  root  of  the  matter  in  them,  and  are  sure  to  profit  by 
the  chastening  of  the  Lord.     But  with  those  who  have  the  profession  only, 
without  the  principle  of  true  godliness,  the  iniquity  is  clung  to  in  spite  of  all 
the  severity  that  is  exercised,  until  the  wrath  falls  on  them  to  the  uttermost. 
There  may  be  signs  of  the  Divine  displeasure  sufficient  to  startle  the  tender 
conscience,  and  call  for  deep  humiliativ>n  of  spirit,  while  nothing  appears  out- 
wardly wrong,  and  all  may  even  wear  a  smiling  aspect  as  far  as  regards  social 
and  public  relations.     Should  there  be  a  restraining  of  Divine  grace  within,  an 
absence  of  spiritual  refreshment,  a  felt  discomfort  of  mind,  or  an  obvious  with- 
drawal of  spiritual  privileges,  there  is  beyond  doubt  the  couimenciment  of  a 
work  of  judgment ;  and  if  such  marks  of  God's  displeasure  are  slighted,  others 
of  a  more  severe  and  alarming  kind  may  assuredly  be  looked  for.   But  as  men's 
tempers  and  circumstances  in  life  are  inGnitely  varied,  so  there  is  a  correspond- 
ing variety  in  the  methods  employed  by  God  to  check  the  risings  of  sin,  and 
expel  its  poison  from  the  heart.     And  it  is  the  part  of  spiritual  wisdom  to  seek 
for  the  wakeful  ear  and  the  discerning  eye,  which  may  enable  one  to  catch  even 
the  earliest  intimations  of  God's  displeasure,  and  so  improve  these  as  to  render 
unnecessary  the  heavier  visitations  of  wrath." — {taiibairiL) 

(Vers.  15-27.) 

EXEGETICAL  NOTES.—"  With  a  loved  wife  was  to  be  effected  bya  siroke, 

view  to  affect  more  deeply  the  minds  t.^.,  in  so  sudden  and  striking  a  manner 

of  his  fellow-captives  Ezekiel  had  an-  as  to  show  that  it  was  an  immediate 

nounced   to  him  the  di>severance  of  visitation  of  God.     Distressing,  how- 

the  tenderest  of  all  earthly  ties — the  ever,  as    this  event    would    be,  the 

removal  of  her  on  whom  he  had  ever  prophet  is  conimantled  to  exhibit  no 

been  accustomed  to  look  with  affection  t(»kens  of   grief  on  the  occasion." — 

and  delight.    This  removal  of  his  be-  ( Henderson, ) 
S98 


Digitized  by 


Googlf 


EOMtLEfta  COMMBSTAnY:  EZSKIEL 


OHA^.  XXIV. 


Ver.  16.  ''The  desire  of  thine  eyes." 
Heb.  **  The  delight  of  thine  eyes,"— 
thus  describing  the  prophet's  wife.  A 
stroke,  A  sudden  death  inflicted  by 
God.  The  word  is  the  same  as  that 
which  is  rendered  "plague"  (Num. 
xiv.  37  ;  xvii.  13  ;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  21, 25). 

Ver.  17.  "Forbear  to  cry."  Heb. 
"Be  silent."  The  prophet  was  to 
check  the  emotions  which  he  would 
naturally  feel.  They  are  to  be  re- 
pressed by  a  solemn  sense  of  God's 
having  interposed  (Lev.  x  7  ;  xxi.  10, 
12  ;  Psa.  xxxix.  9).  **  Make  no  mourn- 
ing for  the  dead."  "Though  the 
High  Priest  was  interdicted  mourning 
for  any  person  whatever  (Lev.  xxi.  10), 
the  ordinary  priests  were  permitted  to 
mourn  for  near  relatives  (Lev.  xxi.  2, 
'3).  Ezekiel,  therefore,  though  of 
))rie8tly  descent,  would  have  been 
under  no  restriction  in  this  respect. 
He  was,  however,  on  the  present  occa- 
sion, though  of  the  most  trying  nature, 
to  appear  as  usual,  not  laying  aside 
his  turban  and  in&tead  of  it  casting 
ashes  on  his  head,  nor  going  barefooted, 
nor  covering  the  upper  lip  together 
with  its  moustachio  (Lev.  xiii.  45  ; 
Mic.  iii.  7).  Neither  was  he  to  par- 
take of  the  food  which  it  was  customary 
for  friends  to  bring  in  token  of  their 
sympathy  with  the  monniers.  This 
in  tlie  original  is  called  bread  of  men, 
i.e.,  what  men  usually  furnish  on  such 
occasions." — (neaderson,)  "By  the 
bread  of  men  is  meant  that  bread 
which  the  people  were  accustomed  to 
send  to  the  house  of  mourning  in  cases 
of  death,  to  manifest  their  sympathy 
and  to  consoleand  refresh  the  mourners, 
a  custom  which  gave  rise  in  the  course 
of  time  to  that  of  formal  funeral  meals. 
These  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Old 
Testament ;  but  the  sending  of  bread 
or  food  to  the  house  of  mourning  is 
clearly  referred  to  in  Deut.  xxvi.  14  ; 
Hos.  ix.  4 ;  Jer.  xvi.  7. — (Keil) 

Ver.  18.  ''I  did  in  the  morning  as 
I  was  commanded."  On  the  morning 
following  the  death  of  his  wife. 

Ver.    21.    '^I  will  pro&ne  My 


sanctuary."  The  profanation  of  the 
temple  would  be  accomplished  by 
its  destruction.  "  The  excellency  of 
your  strength*"  "Israel  based  its 
might  and  strength  upon  the  temple 
as  the  scene  of  the  gracious  presence 
of  (}od,  living  in  the  ho^  tnat  the 
Lord  would  not  give  up  his  sanctuary 
to  the  heathen  to  be  destroyed,  but 
would  defend  the  temple,  and  there- 
with Jerusalem  and  its  inhabitants 
(Jer.  vii.  4) "  (Keil).  "  Tonr  sons  and 
your  daughters."  "Many  parents 
might,  when  they  were  carried  away 
from  Jerusalem,  have  been  under  the 
necessity  of  leaving  their  children  of 
tender  age  behind  them.  These  the 
Chaldeans  should  mercilessly  put  to 
the  sword." — Henderson. 

Ver.  23.  "  Ye  shall  pine  away  for 
your  iniquities.**  The  thought  of 
thtsir  personal  guilt  would  swallow  up 
all  the  sorrows  of  bereavement.  They 
would  be^made  to  feel  that  their  own 
sins  had  brought  all  this  overwiielming 
trouble  upon  them.  "Mourn  one 
toward  another."  "Though  prevented, 
by  the  circumstances  in  which  they 
were  placed  in  the  land  of  their 
conq^uerors,  from  making  any  public 
manifestation  of  their  sorrow,  they 
would  privately  one  to  another  give 
expression  to  their  feelings  of  grief." 
— JJenderson. 

Ver.  24.  "Thus  Esekiel  ia  a  sign 
nnt3  you.*"  "  It  is  not  an  unexampled 
thing  for  the  sacred  writers  to  intro- 
duce their  own  names  into  their 
firoductions  (Ex.  ii.  11 ;  Num.  xii.  3 ; 
9.  XX.  3  ;  Dan.  viii.  27).  Ezekiel  was 
a  sign  or  significant  typical  representa- 
tion, foreshadowing  what  was  to  take 
place  in  the  experience  of  his  country- 
men. When  the  thing  signified  should 
happen,  it  would  be  an  indubitable 
proof  that  Jehovah  had  revealed  the 
event  beforeliand  to  his  servant" — 
(Henderson). 

Ver.  25.  Their  strength.  The 
word  means  rather  "stronghold"  or 
"fortress,"     This  was  the  temple  in 

299 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIV.  HOMILETW  COyfMESTA  R  Y :  EZEKTEL. 


which  they  trusted,  forgetting  their     on  wliich  the  fugitive  arrived  at  the 
true  "fortress-rock"  (Is.  xvii.  10).  Chebar  with   the    melancholy    news. 

From  the  time  of  the  temple's  actual 

Ver.  26.  "In  that  day."  This,  like  destruction  until  this  messenger  should 
tiieexpjession ''in  theday,"  inver.  25,  arrive  the  prophet  ceased  from  his 
refers  to  that  day  in  which  the  temple  public  labours,  meanwhile  leaving  his 
was  destroyed  and  the  fugitive  made  predictions  to  produce  their  natural 
his  escape.  effect ;  but  then  he  was  again  to  stand 

forth,   and    pointedly  appeal   to  the 

Ver.  27.    "In  that  day  sliall  thy     issue  in   proof   of  his  divine   com- 
mouth  be  opened  to  him  which  is     m\monJ*— (Henderson). 
escaped."      ''The  dav  is  referred  to 


HOMILETIOS. 
Jerusalem's  Destruction  typified  by  the  Death  op  Ezekiel's  Wife. 

Ezekiel  himself  is  now  to  be  a  "sign "  unto  them  by  his  personal  calamities 
and  sorrows.  He  was  a  highly  gifted  man,  and  called  to  an  honourable  office, 
but  corresponding  to  this  height  of  privilege  is  a  depth  of  sorrow.  The  chosen 
symbol  of  Jerusalem's  destruction  was  to  be  the  occasion  of  pain  and  grief  to 
him.  But  he  is  taught  to  set  the  claims  of  his  duty  and  of  his  office  higher 
than  those  of  natural  affection.  His  bereavement  is  here  regarded  rather  in 
its  bearing  on  public  utility  than  on  his  domestic  happiness.  It  is  as  a  man  of 
sorrows  that  he  shall  accomplish  his  prophetic  mission.  In  his  deepest  afflictions 
he  shall  be  powerful,  as  never  before,  to  arouse  the  people  to  repentance.  Plis 
ministry,  like  that  of  a  greater  Prophet,  exemplifies  the  power  of  the  Cross. 
The  death  of  Ezekiers  wife  is  here  regarded  as  a  type  ot  the  destruction  of 
the  city. 

J.  It  would  be  a  manifest  visitation  of  God.  "  Son  of  man,  behold  I  take 
away  from  thee  the  desire  of  thine  eyes  with  a  stroke  "  (ver.  16.)  The  hand 
of  God  was  to  be  specially  evident.  "A  stroke/'  implying  an  action  directed 
by  an  intelligent  will ;  a  calamity  also  sudden,  like  that  of  the  pestilence  which 
walketh  in  darkness.  "In  the  day"  (ver.  25),  the  time  of  judgment  was 
fixed.  The  destruction  of  the  devoted  city  would  be  brought  about,  not  by 
the  accidents  of  history  as  men  count  them,  but  by  the  evident  working  of 
God's  will  The  prophet  had  long  known  of  the  Divine  purpose.  For  five 
years  he  had  propnesied  in  dumb  show,  by  parable,  and  by  allegory  of  the  final 
destruction  of  Jerusalem.  Everything  possible  had  been  done  to  show  the 
hand  of  God  plainly  revealed  in  this  solemn  work  of  judgment  Tiius  all  will 
be  forced  at  length  to  acknowledge  the  prophet's  Divine  mission. 

II.  It  would  be  an  overwhelming  sorrow.  ''  Neither  shalt  thou  mourn  nor 
weep,  neither  shall  thy  tears  run  down"  (ver.  16).  The  prophet  is  also 
forbidden  to  observe  the  sad  customs  of  the  house  of  mourning  (ver.  17).  The 
"  sign  "  was  to  be  the  most  solemn  and  expressive  of  all, — the  sign  of  a  silent 
sorrow.  The  grief  would  prove  too  deep  tor  teare,  too  serious  for  the  outward 
trappings  of  woe.  It  is  a  common  saying,  that  '*  there  is  no  sorrow  like  a  dry 
sorrow."  It  is  saddest  of  all  when  the  burden  of  the  heart  can  find  no  relief 
in  teara. 

II.    It  would  bring  home  to  them  the  greatness  of  their  sin.    The  prophet's 
silent  sorrow  was  a  type  of  the  fact  that  his  guilty  nation  would  be  brought 
800 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL  OHaP.  XXIV. 


solemnly  to  acknowledge  that  Gkxi  bad  interposed.  When  His  hand  is  made 
bare  in  judgment,  the  confession  must  be,  *'  I  was  dumb,  I  opened  not  my 
mouth  ;  because  Thou  did.st  it "  (Psa.  xxxix.  9).  The  inhabitants  of  the  city 
would  be  overcome  with  suck  a  sense  of  guilt  that  it  would  swallow  up  every 
thought  of  bereavenient  (ver.  23).  'I'hey  would  now  begin  to  receive  tlie 
prophet's  message  seriously,  asking  the  question  in  snlenui  earnestness,  *'Wilt 
thou  not  tell  us  what  these  things  are  to  us  ? "  (ver.  19).  They  now  begin  to 
learn  that  the  prophet  is  a  **  sign  "  unto  them.  Not  only  his  words,  but  the 
stem  realities  of  his  life  bear  witness  for  God.  The  ruin  of  their  city,  now 
plainly  seen  to  be  a  just  judgment  of  God,  would  be  au  all-absorbing  topic  of 
conversation,  ^fhey  would  be  able  to  talk  of  nothing  else,  but  "mourn  one 
towards  another  "  (ver.  23).  They  would  believe  a  human  messenger  when  he 
comes  to  tell  them  a  disastrous  piece  of  news  (ver.  26).  Thus  they  are 
compelled  by  stem  facts  to  accept  the  prophet's  message,  thongh  they  had  long 
refused  to  believe  him. 

17*  It  would  bring  them  to  the  true  knowledge  of  Ood  (ver.  27).  The 
prophet  had  revealed  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  but  he  was  not  believed.  Now 
he  shall  speak  with  a  power  of  instant  conviction,  for  the  messenger  of  evil 
tidings  has  arrived  with  news  of  the  judgments  which  he  had  so  long  threatened 
in  vain.  He  had  laid  before  them  the  principles  of  righteousness,  but  now 
these  are  wrought  out  in  bX&txi  facts  to  which  they  must  listt^n.  His  words  are 
now  corroborated  by  a  human  mea<enger  (ver.  27).  Thus  the  solemn  realities 
of  things,  the  solemnities  of  judgment  must,  sooner  or  later,  be  brought  home 
to  impenitent  sinners,  "  Thou  shait  be  a  sign  unto  them,  and  they  shall  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord." 

(Vers.  19—24.) 

1.  The  resting  in  holy  things,  causes  God  to  remove  them,  how  dear  soever 
they  be  unto  us.  "  I  will  profane  My  sanctnary."  You  confide  in  the  outward 
means^  yon  are  taken  with  the  on t ward  splendour  of  the  ceremonies  and  pomp 
of  the  Temple,  but  the  spiritual  true  worship  ye  mind  not  The  temple,  city 
and  state  are  dearer  to  you  than  I  am.  Why  is  the  Temple,  and  not  My.-eU, 
"  the  excellency  of  your  strength?  "  Why  is  that  "  the  desire  of  your  eyes," 
and  not  Myself,  who  fill  the  Temple  with  My  glory?  Why  are  you  troubled 
that  it  should  be  laid  in  the  dust,  and  care  not  that  My  honour,  My  glory.  My 
name  are  profaned  amongst  you  !  2.  Men's  sins  sometimes  bring  them  into  such 
straits  that  though  they  have  lost  their  dearest  comforts,  yet  they  dare  not 
outwardly  manifest  sorrow  for  them.  It  was  sad  to  lose  their  dearest  comforts, 
and  more  sad  that  they  might  not  ease  their  hearts  by  tears  or  sighings,  and 
most  sad  that  they  must  show  no  respect  to  their  Head  friends  by  any  funeral 
rites.  Jeremiah  had  predicted  this  sad  condition  (Jer.  xvi.  6, 7\  3.  God  may 
put  His  ownfaitlful  servants  upon  hard  and  unwonted  things,  thereby  to  declare 
what  shall  be  the  condition  of  the  wicked.  **  Thus  Ezekiel  is  unto  you  a  sign." 
He  hath  not  been  sufiered  to  mourn  or  weep ;  and  why  so  ?  that  he  may  be  a 
sign  unto  yon.  You  would  not  be  taught  by  his  doctrine,  now  you  must  be  taught 
by  his  example ;  "  according  to  all  that  he  hath  done  shall  ye  do."  The  things 
are  hsktsh  and  unnatural  that  I  (Ezekiel)  have  done,  but  it  is  for  your  sakes 
that  I  am  put  upon  them  ;  and  ye  shall  do  as  I  have  done.  Thus  Isaiah  was 
a  sign  (Isa.  xx.  3).  4.  JSigns  accomplished  convince  men  of  the  truth  and  just 
proceedings  qf  God.  By  the  fulfilling  of  this  sign  foretold,  ye  shall  be  so 
convinced  as  to  acknowledge  Eztkiel  was  a  true  sign,  made  so  by  Me,  and  that 
I  have  dealt  justly  with  you  for  your  iniquities,  in  bringing  you  into  such 
straits,  as  not  to  dare  to  mourn  openly  for  your  miseries.     If  Ezekiel  have 

801 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OftAP.  ZXV. 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL 


nothing  to  object  against  Me,  from  whom,  being  innocent,  I  took  away  the 
desire  of  liis  eyes,  and  forbade  him  to  mourn  for  lier ;  what  can  you  object 
against  Me,  being  so  guilty  as  none  more,  if  I  send  away  your  desirable  things, 
and  hem  you  ab  mt  with  myjudgmouts  and  euemieSy  that  you  shall  not  dfure 
to  mourn  ? — Greenhill. 


Pbediotions  op  Judgments  upon  thb  Ammonites,  Moabites,  Edomitbs,  ahd 
Philistines.    (Chap,  xxv.) 


EXEQETICAL  NOTES.— In  chs. 
zxY.-xxxii,  we  come  to  a  new  group 
of  prophecies.  They  are  predictions  of 
judgment  upon  the  heathen  nations. 

"  While  the  propliet's  mouth  was 
to  be  mute  to  Israel,  the  Lord  directed 
him  to  speak  against  the  heathen 
nations,  and  to  foretell  to  them  the 
judgment  of  destruction,  that  they 
mi^nt  not  be  lifted  up  by  the  fall  of 
the  people  and  kingdom  of  God,  but 
might  recognise  in  the  judgment  upon 
Israel  a  work  of  the  Omnipotence  and 
righteousness  of  the  Lord,  the  Judge  of 
the  whole  earth.  There  are  seven 
heathen  nations  whose  destruction 
Ezekiel  foretells  in  this  section  of  his 
book,  vi«.,  (1)  Ammon  ;  (2)  Moab  ;  (3) 
Edom  ;  (4)  the  Philistines  (ch.  xxv) ; 
(5)  Tyre ;  (6)  Sidon  (ch.  xxvi.-xxviii) ; 
and  (7)  Egypt  (ch.  xxix.-xxxii).  These 
prophecies  are  divided  into  thirteen 
words  of  Qod  by  the  introductory 
formula,  'the  word  of  Jehovah  came 
to  me,'  the  utterances  against  Ammon, 
Moab,  Edom,  and  the  Philistines, 
being  all  comprehended  in  one  word 
of  God  whereas  there  are  four  separate 
words  of  God  directed  against  Tyre, 
one  against  Sidon,  and  seven  against 
Egypt.  In  the  seven  nations 
and  the  seven  words  of  God  directed 
against  Egypt  we  cannot  fail  to  dis- 
cover an  allusion  to  the  symbolical 
significance  of  the  number.  And  in 
order  to  make  it  the  more  apparent 
that  the  number  has  been  chosen  on 
account  of  its  significance,  Ezekiel 
divides  his  announcement  of  the 
judgment  upou  the  seventh  people 
into  seven  words  of  Gh)d.  On  the 
basis  of  Gen.  i.,  seven  is  the  number 
denoting  the  completion  of  the  works 
of  God.  When  therefore,  Ezekiel 
803 


selects  seven  nations  and  utters  seven 
words  of  God  concerning  the  principal 
nation,  namely  Egypt,  he  evidently 
intends  to  indicate  tliereby  that  the 
judgment  predicted  will  be  executed 
and  completed  upon  the  heathen 
world  and  its  peoples  throu^^h  the 
word  and  acts  of  God." — (Keil). 

(Vers.  1-17). 

Ver.  8.  ''The  Ammonites  •  •  • 
Because  thou  taidsty  Aha^  against  My 
sanctoarji  when  it  was  profaned*"  etc. 
"  They  were  the  descendants  of  Lot, 
and  occupied  the  territory  to  the  east 
of  the  Jordan,  beyond  that  pertaining 
to  the  tribes  of  Aeuben  and  Gad. 
Tiiey  formed  one  of  the  most  powerful 
of  the  minor  neighbouring  states, 
and  were  frequently  at  war  with  the 
Hebrews.  They  were  gross  idolaters, 
and  had  for  their  national  God  Moloch 
or  Milcom.  On  the  fall  of  Jerusalem, 
to  which  as  auxiliaries  they  contri- 
buted, and  the  transportation  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Judea  to  Babylon,  they 
insolently  triumphed  over  them,  on 
whicli  account  the  present  threaten- 
ing is  denounced  against  them," — 
— (Henderson), 

Ver.  4.  **  I  will  deliver  thee  to  the 
men  of  the  East  for  a  possession**'  "  The 
men  of  the  East  are  the  inhabitants  of 
Arabia  Deserta,  east  of  the  territories 
immediately  bordering  on  the  Jordan 
and  the  Dead  Sea.  On  the  destruction 
of  the  Jewish  state  by  Nebuchadnezzar, 
the  country  was  to  be  taken  possession 
of  by  the  nomadic  tribes,  who  should 
there  form  their  encampments  and 
dwell  in  their  tents,  leading  the  same 
pastoral   life    to    which    they    had 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :   BZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  XX?. 


been  accustomed/*  —  (Henderson.) 
"Palaces."  The  Heb.  word  never 
means  "  palaces,"  but  only  "  villages," 
or  **  folds."  These  were  nomadic 
encampments,  surrounded  by  mud 
walls,  as  is  common  in  the  East. 
"Thy  fruit  .  .  .  thy  milk."  Besides 
the  produce  of  the  soil,  the  milk  is 
also  mentioned  as  one  of  the  products 
of  a  pastoral  life,  and  the  principal 
food  of  nomads. 

Ver.  5.  **Eabbah."  This  was  the 
metropolis  of  the  Ammonites.  It  is 
elgewbere  called  Rabbah  of  Amnion 
to  distin^xuish  it  from  a  city  of  that 
name  in  the  trihe  of  Judah.  Piolemy 
rebuilt  it  and  gave  it  the  name  of 
Philadelphia.  "  A  stable  for  camels." 
The  city  rebuilt  by  Ptolemy  was  in 
ruins  in  the  fourteenth  century.  These 
have  been  visited  by  modern  travellers, 
who  have  found  remains  of  a  palace,  a 
mausoleum,  an  ampitlieatre,  a  temple, 
a  church,  and  a  castle,  but  they  could 
not  discover  a  single  inhabited  dwell- 
ing. Burckhardt  found  a  party  of 
Arahs  there,  who  had  btabled  their 
camels  among  the  ruins. 

Ver.  7.  **  I  will  cause  thee  to  perish 
out  of  tJie  countries:  I  will  destroy 
thee."  "This  desolate  state  of  Rabbah 
must  be  referred  to  the  three  hundred 
years  which  intervened  between  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  time 
of  Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  after  which 
it  became  celebiated  among  the 
Greeks  and  Romans,  by  whom,  no 
doubt,  the  splendid  buildings,  the  ruins 
of  which  still  remain,  were  erected." 
— (Henderson.) 

Ver.  8.  "Moab  and  Seir  do  say, 
Behold  the  house  of  Judah  is  like  unto 
all  the  heathen."  They  had  forgotten 
that  nine  centuries  before  this  a  king 
of  Moab  had  been  told  by  a  Qeniile 
seer,  that  Israel  should  "  dwell  alone, 
and  not  be  reckoned  among  the 
nations."     (Num.  xxiiL  9.) 

Ver.  9.  "I  will  open  the  side  of 
Moab*"  The  mountain  passes  would  be 
cleared,  which  were  otherwise  closed  and 


fortified.    Thus  the  enemv  could  easily 
enter  the  country  and  take  possession. 

Ver.  1 2.  "  Bevenged  himself  upon 
them."  "  The  old  spirit  of  revenge, 
in  which  he  had  acted  from  the  olden 
time,  still  keeps  by  his  side.  While 
in  tlie  more  distant  relationship  of 
Ammon  and  Moab,  malignant  joy  is 
the  expression  of  hostile  feeling,  with 
Edom,  in  his  much  nearer  relationship, 
the  same  feeling  vents  itself  in  actions 
of  revenge.  Hence  the  charjg;e  of 
sinful  procedure  as  the  incurring  of 
giii\i"^(Lange.) 

Ver.  15.  "Because  the  Philistines 
have  dealt  by  revenge."  "  The  Phil- 
istines are  in  ver.  15  joined  by  Edom 
on  the  side  of  their  doing  (ver.  12,  &c.) ; 
to  Ammon-Moab  on  account  of  their 
contempt  of  the  people  of  (3od.  The 
latter  was  the  inmost  feeling,  hostility 
the  impelling  force,  wherein  the  dis- 
tinction from  Edi»m  lay.  "  To  destroy 
it  for  the  old  hatred."  This  is  the 
design,  the  abiding  tendency.  The 
everlasting  enmity  reached  back  to 
the  earliest  days.  A  perpetually  en- 
during war  is  the  standing  feature  of 
the  relation,  while  fixod  hostility  was 
the  root  of  it."^(  Lange.) 

Ver.  16.  **  I  will  cut  off  the  Chere- 
thims."  "  The  name  Philistines  sig- 
nifies probably  the  emigrants,  in 
acct>rdance  with  the  accounts  of  the 
bouks  of  Moses  concerning  their  mi- 
g  ation  from  the  regions  on  the  Black 
Sea  By  the  side  of  this  name  goes, 
of  substantially  like  signification  for 
the  same  pe«»ple,  Kerethim..  extirpated 
—those  who  were  forced  to  leave  their 
native  land.  These  Kerethim  are  now 
become  Kerttbim  a  second  time  ;  their 
name  shall  verify  itself  anew.  The 
destruction  of  the  remnant  points  to 
this,  that  they  shall  be  destroyed  to 
the  last  man,  as  in  fact  the  Philistines 
have  utterly  disajipeared.  It  is  the 
great  privilege  of  the  people  of  God, 
that  how  heavy  soever  the  judgments 
of  God  may  be  upon  them,  never  will 
it  be  said  of  them,  I  will  deetroy  the 
iemnmt.'*—(  Hengstenberg.) 

303 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  xxr.  HOMtLETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL 

BOMILETIOS. 
Thb  Propheoibs  against  Heathbn  Nations. 

I.    Heathen  nations  formed  the  dark  backgronnd  to  Israel*      In   the 

spiritual  darkness  in  which  they  dwelt,  we  may  trace  different  shades.  Amraon, 
Moab,  Edom,  in  their  order,  represent  increa^ins^  blackness  of  darkness, 
until  we  come  to  the  full  depths  of  it  in  the  Philistines.  These  heathen 
nations  were  a  source  of  continual  danger  to  the  people  of  God.  The  Church 
of  God  is  ever  surrounded  by  the  world  ;  a  world  which  exhibits  every  grada- 
tion of  evil,  coarse,  refined  ;  the  devil  rough  and  blustering,  or  as  an  angel  of 
light  In  the  case  of  the  three  first  nations  mentioned  by  the  prophet,  their 
guilt  was  enhanced  by  their  relationship  to  Israel.  "  The  people  of  God  must 
undergo  the  experience  which  the  man  of  God  undergoes  (Matt.  x.  36,  Mic. 
vii.  6).  Out  of  his  blood-relationships  there  springs  a  hostility  even  to  blood. 
While  this  revolves  around  the  Spirit  that  wrought  in  Israel,  it  could  not  but 
finally  array  itself  against  the  M&ssiah,  as  He  has  Himself  said  that  we  shall  be 
hated  for  His  name's  sakQ."—( Lange). 

n.  Heathen  nations  had  sinned  against  Israel,  ^mmon,  by  profane  mock- 
ing at  their  calamities  (vers.  3-6).  Mojb,  by  a  false  estimate  of  Idraels 
spiritual  position.  "  The  house  of  Israel  is  like  unto  all  the  heathen  *'  (ver.  8). 
They  could  not  understand  that  it  was  impossible  that  Israel  should  ever 
become  as  the  heathen  (Ez.  xx,  32).  Israel  would  have  more  r  sponsibility 
than  the  rest  of  the  nations,  as  she  would  sin  against  the  light.  Adorn,  "  by 
taking  vengeance"  (ver.  12).  7 he  Philistines,  by  an  old  and  deeply-rootel 
hatred  towards  Israel  (ver  15). 

III.  Heathen  nations  have  responsibilities  towards  God*  They  were  not 
held  so  strictly  responsible  as  those  who  had  more  light  and  privilege,  yet  they 
were  not  in  such  total  and  unrelieved  darkue&s  as  to  render  them  inexcusable. 
1.  Thetf  were  capable  cf  hearing  and  receiving  God's  message.  **Hear  the  word 
of  the  Lord"  (ver.  3).  They  had  some  knowledge  of  what  righteousness  was. 
They  had  a  conscience  to  which  an  appeal  might  be  made.  2.  They  were 
capable  of  forming  judgments  on  the  subject  of  religion.  We  mean  religion  in 
the  sense  of  Godliness,  and  including  all  duty.  The  heathen  nations  knew  that 
Israel  was  punished  for  her  sins  against  God.  They  rejoiced  over  her  fall 
(ver.  3).  They  thought  that  all  these  calamities  disproved  their  claim  to  be 
the  people  of  God.  A  Gentile  seer  (probably  of  Edomite  extraction)  was,  long 
ago,  struck  with  the  conviction  that  the  nation  was  holy  (Num.  xxiiL  10). 
The  surrounding  heathen  nations  felt  that  they  were  not  as  Israel  when  Israel 
was  right  with  God.  8.  They  were  capable  of  the  knowledae  of  God.  **  And 
thev  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord  '*  (ver.  17).  They  would  be  made  to  know 
God  through  His  manifest  judgments. 

17.  God's  treatment  of  heathen  nations  shows  His  purpose  of  salvation 
conoeming  all  mankind.  It  was  no  true  victory  that  the  heathen  nations 
obtained  over  Israel.  Though  to  all  outward  seeming  Israel  was  about  to  be 
numbered  with  dead  empires,  yet  she  would  rise  again  in  a  more  glorious  form, 
and  become  the  life  and  light  of  the  nations.  Her  disasters  and  failures  would 
serve  but  to  prepare  the  way  for  God's  kingdom.  The  Gentile  nations  would, 
in  the  course  of  Providence,  be  made  to  see  that  the  chosen  people  were 
preserved  for  ihe  salvation  of  the  world. 
804 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL 


OHAP.  XXVL 


Thb  Fall  of  Tyrr    (Chap,  xxvi.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.-"  In  four 
sections,  commencing  with  the  formula, 
'  Thus  saith  the  Lord/  Tyre,  the  mis- 
tress of  the  sea  is  threatened  with 
destruction.  In  the  fii^t  strophe 
(vers.  2-6)  there  is  a  general  threat  of 
its  destruction  by  a  host  of  nations. 
In  the  second  (vers,  7-14),  the  enemy 
is  mentioned  by  name,  and  designated 
as  a  powerful  one ;  and  the  conquest 
and  destruction  emanating  from  him 
are  circumstantially  described.  In  the 
third  (vers.  15-18),  the  impression 
which  this  event  would  produce  upon 
the  inhabitants  of  the  islands  and 
coast- lands  is  depicted.  And  in  the 
fouitli  (vers.  19-21),  the  threat  is 
repeated  in  an  energetic  manner,  and 
the  prophecy  is  thereby  rounded  oflF." 

Ver.  1.  **  In  the  eleventh  year,  in 
the  first  day  of  the  month.'*  The 
year  is  that  of  Jerusalem's  capture, 
B.C.  588.  The  month  is  not  named. 
Probablv  it  was  the  woeful  "fourth" 
month  (2  Kings  xxv.  3  ;  Ezek.  iii.  15). 

Ver.  2.  "  The  gates  of  the  people." 
The  plural  noun  denotes  one  gate,  as 
the  verb  is  in  the  singular.  Jerusalem 
was  named  "  the  gate  of  the  peoples  " 
on  account  of  the  many  nations  whidi 
would  flow  into  it  (Isa.  ii.  2  ;  Mic.  iv. 
1).  Jerusalem  was  also  to  Tyre  the 
gate  of  communication  with  the  East. 
*'She  is  turned  unto  me."  The  ren- 
dering should  be,  "  it  is  turned  unto 
me,"  f.tf.,  the  gate  of  the  peoples. 
**  Tyre  considers  herself  the  heiress  of 
Jerusalem.  The  fall  of  the  spiritual 
centre  presents  to  view  the  enhanced 
importance  of  the  secular." — (IJeng- 
stenberg.) 

Ver.  3.  ''As  the  sea  canseth  his 
waves."  Tyre  suffered  from  succes- 
sive waves  of  invasion,  chiefly  those 
of  Nebuchadnezz  tr  and  Alexander,  the 
C  rusaders  and  the  Saracens.  It  was 
nut  finally  overthrown  till  the  thir- 
teenth century,  yet  it  never  recovered 
from  the  blow  which  the  King  of 
Babylon  inflicted  upon  it. 


Ver.  4.  '*  I  will  also  scrape  the 
dust  from  her."  ''The  destruction 
here  referred  to  was  that  of  the 
towers,  walls,  and  other  edifices, 
destroyed  by  the  besiegers.  Not  a 
vestige  was  to  remain.  In  place  of 
splendid  edifices  and  impregnable 
bulwarks  nothing  was  to  be  seen  but 
hare  rocks,  fit  only  for  fishermen  to 
spread  their  nets  on." — (Henderson,) 

Ver.  5.  "The  spreading  of  nets." 
According  to  Dr.  Kobinson,  the 
southern  side  of  the  rock  of  Tyre  is 
still  used  by  fishermen  for  this  pur- 
pose. 

Ver.  6.  "Her  daughters."  Her 
daughter-cities,  such  as  Qebal,  Bey- 
rout,  &c.  "  By  the  *  field '  we  are  to 
understand  the  open  country,  i.e.,  the 
towns  and  villages  dependent  upon 
h^r  and  lying  back  from  and  along 
the  coast.  These  were  to  be  involved 
in  the  same  catastrophe  with  the 
mother-city,  their  fate  was  bound  up 
in  hers." — (Henderson,) 

Ver.  8.  "  The  buckler."  "  Here  ob- 
viously denotes  the  testudo,  or  vaulted 
roof  of  large  united  shields  employed 
by  an  attacking  enemy  for  protection 
in  siege-operations." — Henderson, 

Ver.  11.  "  Strong  garrisons."  The 
proper  meaning  of  the  word  is  **  pillars/' 
such  as  were  erected  in  honour  of  the 
idol-gods.  In  the  temple  of  Melkarth 
at  Tyre,  there  were  two  famous  pillars ; 
one  of  topaz,  the  other  of  emerald. 

Ver.  U,  "Thou  shalt  be  built  no 
more."  "This  was  literally  fulfilled 
with  respect  to  the  continental  city. 
That  part  which  lay  on  the  island 
recovered  itself  after  the  lapse  of 
seventy  years,  as  predicted  bv  the 
prophet  Isaiah  (Ch.  xxiii.  17,  18),  and 
was  in  a  very  flourishing  condition  in  the 
time  of  Alexander,  by  whom  a  causeway 
was  constructed  between  the  shore  and 
it,  by  uieans  of  which  he  reached  the 
city,  liud  took  it  by  storm  after  a  siege 
of  seven  months." — Henderson, 

805 


Digitized  by 


Google 


0HA7  ZXTL 


UOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


Ver.  15.  "The isles."  "This  term 
is  frequently  used  so  as  to  embrace 
the  coast  lands  of  the  Mediterranean 
Sea  ;  we  have  therefore  to  understand 
it  here  as  applied  to  the  Phoenician 
colonies  on  tlie  islands  and  coabts  of 
that  sea." — {Kelt).  Her  numerous 
maritime  colonies  looked  up  to  Tyre 
as  the  mother  city.  Even  Carthage 
sent  her  a  yearly  offering. 

Ver.  16.  '"  The  princes  of  the  sea* 
''  These  are  not  kings  of  the  islands, 
but,  according  to  Isa.  xiiii.  8,  the 
merchants  presiding  over  the  colonies 
of  Tyre,  who  resembled  princes. 
'Their  thrones/  not  royal  thrones, 
but  chairs,  as  in  1  Sam.  iv.  13,  etc. 
The  pisture  of  their  mourning  recalls 
the  description  in  Jonah  iii.  6.  The 
antithesis  introduced  isa  very  striking 
one :  clothing  themselves  in  terrors, 
putting  on  terrors  in  the  place  of  the 
robes  of  state  which  they  have  laid 
aside.  The  thonght  is  rendered  ^till 
more  forcible  by  tlie  closing  sentences 
of  the  verse.  They  tremble  *by 
moments,'  Le,,  as  the  moments 
return — act" ally,  therefore,  *  every 
moment*  (Isa.  xxvii.  3)." — (Keil). 

Ver.  17.  "Strong  in  the  sea." 
"  This  feature  of  the  description  must 
be  referred  to  the  insular  part  of  the 
city,  which  had  been  strongly  fortified 
as  the  port  for  the  protection  of  the 


warehouses  and  the  shipping.  The 
concluding  clause  is  descriptive  of  the 
d(spotic  rule  which  the  merchant- 
princes  of  Tyre  exercised  over  the 
inhabitants,  whether  regular  citiEens 
or  those  who  \^ere  there  temporarily 
on  business." — Henderson. 

Ver.  20.  "  With  them  that  descend 
into  the  pit."  "The  disappearance 
of  Tyre  is  compared  to  that  of  the 
dead,  who,  placed  in  their  sepulchre, 
are  no  more  seen  among  the  living. 
While  this  was  to  be  the  fate  of  that 
renowned  city,  Jehovah  promises  to 
set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living. 
Some  refer  this  to  the  restoration 
of  the  Jewish  polity.  And  if  this  is 
meant  to  include  the  Messiah  and 
His  spiritual  kingdom,  for  whose 
introduction  that  re'>toration  was 
designed  to  be  preparatory,  the  inter- 
pretation may  readily  be  admitted."— 
Henderson. 

Ver.  21.  "I  will  make  thee  a  terror, 
and  thou  shalt  be  no  more."  **  The 
desolation  of  Tyre  was  to  be  so  com- 
plete that  it  should  be  an  object  of 
terror  to  all  who  approached  the  spot 
where  it  had  stood.  Not  a  vestige  of  it 
was  to  remain  :  a  prophecy  which  was 
literally  fulfilled,  for  though  insular 
Tyre  afterwards  rose  into  notice,  the 
ancient  continental  city  never  recovered 
from  her  ruin." — Uendej'sotk 


nOMILETICS. 

Ttrb  threatened  with  Judgment. 

Tyre  rose  to  her  greatest  eminence  under  the  reigu  of  Hiram,  the  friend  of 
David  and  of  Solomon.  The  time,  therefore,  of  her  highest  prosperity  cor- 
responded with  that  of  Jerusalem.  If  each  of  these  two  cities  had  been  faith- 
ful to  its  high  calling,  the  issue  would  have  been  glorious.  The  Bride  of  the 
Messiah  would  have  been  worthy  of  her  Lord,  and  the  daughter  of  Tyre  would 
have  brought  her  gifts  sincere  and  acceptable.  But  both  cities  fell.  Jerusalem 
by  aspiring  after  worldly  splendour,  and  Tyre  by  pride  gendered  by  her  com- 
mercial greatness.  In  this  Chapter,  the  overthrow  of  Tyre  is  foretold,  and  in 
the  two  following  chapters,  her  world-wide  commerce  and  the  nature  of  her  sin 
are  mor^  particularly  described.    As  de^c^ibed  in  this  chapter,  we  consider : — 

1.    Her  crowning  gin.    The  judgment  of  Tyre  was  the  result  of  many  forms 
of  sin,  but  there  were  two  leading  sins  on  which  the  prophet  here  dwells.    L  The 
806 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEL,  chap.  xxfT. 


sin  of  insulting  the  chosen  people.  Tyre  rejoiced  over  the  fall  of  Jerusalem, 
iustead  of  reading  the  lessons  of  a  warning  example.  2.  The  sin  of  intense 
Selfishness.  Tyre  glories  in  the  prospect  of  becoming  great  tiirough  the  down- 
fall of  Jerusalem,  **  I  shall  be  replenished,  now  she  is  laid  waste  "  (verse  2).  To 
feast  upon  the  prospect  of  becoming  rich  through  the  ruin  of  others,  is  the 
vilest  form  of  selfishness. 

II.   Her  judgment.    God  was  against  Tyre  (ver.  3),  and  whatsoever  He 
opposes  must  come  to  nought.     Mark  the  special  features  of  her  judgment. 

1.  She  is  taken  at  her  own  word.  Tyre  expected  that  the  nations  would  come 
to  her,  now  that  the  gateway  of  her  communication  with  the  East  is  thrown 
open.  But  they  shall,  indeed,  come  to  her,  yet  in  a  way  in  which  she  least 
expected.     "  I  will  cause  many  nations  to  come  up  against  thee "  (ver.  3). 

2.  2 hat  in  which  she  most  trusted  becomes  the  chief  source  qfher  terror.  The 
sea  was  the  great  source  of  her  wealth,  and  to  it  she  looked  for  her  future 
stability  and  prosperity.  Yet  on  the  sea  would  God  work  His  wonders  of 
judgment  for  her  destruction  (vers.  5,  14).  3.  The  judgment  on  her 
would  be  awful  in  its  completeness.^  Tyre  would  become  like  the  bare 
rock  upon  which  nothing  was  left  (vers.  4,  5),  like  dead  cities  and  nations 
of  the  earth  (ver.  20V  She  was  to  be  "  no  more,"  but  the  memory  of  her 
would  be  a  "terror  '  to  after  ages  (ver.  21).  Her  destruction  would  not  be 
the  work  of  one  sharp  moment,  but  would  be  like  the  successive  waves  of 
the  sea,  slow  but  irresistible,  which  would  be  a  lengthening  of  her  calamity 
(ver.  3).  Tyre  had  mocked  Jerusalem,  but  she  herself  shall  be  mocked  in 
turn  (ver.  17).  Qod*s  retribution  is  visited  often  in  kind  as  well  as  in  degree. 
Her  goods  are  to  be  destroyed,  and  her  pleasures,  and  all  her  glory  laid  in  the 
dust  (vers.  12.  13).  What  a  picture  of  the  end  of  all  things  on  earth  1  The 
believer  has  the  enduring  substance,  which  cannot  9be  taken  by  the  spoiler 
nor  corroded  by  the  tooth  of  tima  4.  The  instrument- of  the  judgment. 
Nebuchadnezzar,  who  for  this  purpose  was  the  servant  of  God.  And  God  can 
use  what  instruments  He  pleases  in  His  works  of  judgment  or  of  mercy. 
6.  Yet  God  would  bring  glory  out  of  the  judgment,  "1  shdl  set  glory  in 
the  land  of  the  living"  (ver.  20).  The  "  beauty"  of  Tyre  should  disappear 
like  that  of  Moab  (Ezek.  xxv.  9),  like  that  of  ancient  Israel  (Ezek.  xx.  6,  15), 
like  that  of  Babylon  fisa.  xiii.  19)  ;  yet  from  their  ashes  a  higher  and  a  better 
life  should  spring.  The  Redeemer  of  the  world  came  upon  the  wreck  of  the 
world's  hopes.  Human  history  is  a  continued  example  of  growth  out  of 
corruption  and  decay.  When  p^^an  Rome  was  destroyed,  then  Christian 
Rome  arose ;  and  when  Christian  Rome  became  corrupt,  then  God  raised  His 
church  out  of  it,  once  more  investing  her  with  the  glorj  of  that  liberty 
wherewith  Chribt  hath  made  her  free. 


(Vers.  15-21.) 

1,  Cfod,  by  His  destructive  judgments  upon  great  states  makes  others  to 
tremble  that  were  secure.  When  tlie  Lord  drowned  the  Egyptians  in  the  Red 
Sea,  it  caused  the  nations  to  fear.  (Ex.  xv.  14).  And  when  he  brought 
destruction  upon  Babylon,  it  made  all  hearts  melt,  and  they  were  full  of  fears 
and  pains,  as  a  woman  in  travail  (Isa.  xiii.  6-8.)  2.  Great  cities  have  their 
periods,  they  abide  not  for  ever.  As  they  iiave  a  time  to  come  into  the  world, 
so  a  time  to  go  out  of  it ;  e^  they  have  a  time  to  get  up  on  high,  so  a  time  to 
descend  low.  Tyre  had  her  day  to  fall,  her  day  of  departure  (ver.  18),  she 
descended  into  the  pit  with  the  people  of  old  time  (ver.  20.)  Bftbylon  had 
its  time  to  begin  (tien.  xi.  8),  and  its  time  to  cease  (Isa.  xiv.  4.)      i  on  may 

V  2  307 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  XXVIL 


EOMILETW  OOMMSNTARY:  hZBKlBL. 


read  of  Nineveh's  raising  (Qen.  x.  11.),  and  of  her  desoktion  (Nah.  iii.  7 ; 
Zeph.  il  13.)  Hence  we  may  see  the  instability  of  human  things.  Learn  not 
to  trust  in  strong  holds,  neither  think  it  any  great  privilege  to  be  citizen?, 
of  f^uch  perishing  cities,  but  labour  to  be  citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem, 
which  is  the  city  prepared  of  God,  and  hath  foundations  which  shall  never  be 
razed  (Heb.  xi.  10 — 16).  3.  God's  ])eople  are  glorious,  and  the  ghry  of  tlie 
land.  They  are  His  glory  (Isa.  iv.  5  ;  Zech.  ii,  8).  The  g«>dly  ones  were  the 
glory  of  Zion  (Isa.  vi.  13).  The  saints  are  a  holy  seed,  the  substance  and  the 
glory  of  any  nation.  4.  There  is  a  dijference  of  lands  in  the  worlds  all  are  not 
alike.  There  is  '*  the  land  of  tlie  living."  In  Canaan  there  were  the  living 
waters,  the  ordinances  and  means  of  grace  and  salvation  which  other  lands  had 
not.  David  judged  himself  even  among  the  dead  when  he  was  shut  out  from 
the  people,  the  worship,  and  the  ordinances  of  God ;  his  soul  fainted  and  he 
was  almost  gone  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  2).  5.  God^s  people  may  be  deprived  of  their 
privileges  arid  comforts  for  a  season^  but  He  wilt  in  due  time  restore  them  to 
the  enjoyment  of  the  same.  '*  I  shall  set  glory  in  the  land  of  the  living." 
God's  glory,  His  people  were  in  Babylon,  but  He  would  uoc  lose  nor  leave  His 
glory  there,  He  brought  them  hack  again,  and  "  set  them  in  the  land  of  the 
living."  He  gave  them  another  temple,  all  those  ordinances  and  privities 
they  had  before.  *'  I  will  place  salvation  in  Zion  for  Israel  my  glory  "  (ba. 
xlvi.  n).—(GreenhiU.) 


Ttbe's  Former  Greatness,  suoGEsriKa  a  Lamentation  over  Hxe 
Sad  Downfall  (Chap,  zzvil). 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— "The 
lamentation  commences  with  a  picture 
of  the  glory  of  the  city  of  Tyre,  its 
situation,  its  architectural  beautv,  its 
military  strength  and  defences  (vera. 
3-11),  and  its  wide  commercial  rela* 
tions  (vers.  12-25) ;  and  then  passes 
into  mournful  lamentation  over  the 
ruin  of  all  this  glory  (vers.  26-86)." — 
Keil. 

Vers.  1-11.  Introduction  and  des- 
cription of  the  glory  and  might  of 
Tyre. 

Ver.  8.  **  At  the  entry  of  the  sea." 
This  should  be  rendered,  "by  the 
entrances  of  the  sea."  The  description 
is  that  of  insular  Tvre  with  her  two 
harbours,  one  on  the  north  and  the 
other  on  the  south.  The  f  )rmer  was 
ciilled  the  Sidonian  harbour,  because 
it  was  on  the  Sidtmian  side  ;  and  the 
latter  the  Egyptian,  because  of  the 
direction  in  wliich  it  pointed.  "A 
merohajit  of  the  people  for  many  isles.*' 
Eather,  "  the  peoples  unto."  T)  re  is 
thus  described  as  the  mercantile  em- 
808 


porium  of  the  peoples  of  many  sea 
coasts,  both  from  the  East  and  from 
the  West  Thus  Isaiah  describes  her 
as,  **  a  mart  of  nations  "  (Isa.  zxiii.  8). 

Ver.  6.  "They  have  made  aU  thy 
ship  boards  of  fir  trees."  In  vers.  4-8, 
Tyre  is  described  as  a  stately  ship  built 
of  the  best  material,  manned  with  tho 
best  marines  and  most  t^kilful  pilots. 
The  allegory  is  broken  ofif  in  the  middle 
of  ver.  9,  but  it  is  resumed  in  ver.  26, 
where  this  noble  ship  so  well  furnished 
and  managed  by  able  hands  is  at  last 
wrecked  in  tempestuous  seas. 

Ver.  7,  "  Broidered  work.'*  Devices 
were  worked  in  the  t^ail8,  so  that  they 
served  also  for  the  purpose  of  ensigns. 

Ver.  10.  "  They  set  forth  thy  come- 
liness."  The  meaning  is,  that  Tj^re 
must  feel  herself  honoured  in  having 
so  many  nations  to  supply  her  with 
hired  soldiers.  The  commercial  gfeat- 
ness  of  the  city  rested  upon  a  military 
basisL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY'.  EZEKIBL. 


OHAP.  XXVli. 


Vers.  12-25.  A  description  of  the 
commerce  of  Tyre  wiih  all  nations 
who  delivered  tlieir  productions  in 
the  market  of  this  metropolis  of  the 
commerce  of  the  world,  and  received 
the  wares  and  manufactures  of  this 
city  in  return. 

Ver.  12.  "TarsMsh."  This  was 
**  Trtrtessus,"  in  Spain,  famed  for  its 
various  raeta^,  which  were  mostly 
exported  to  'I'y^^-  I*  ^  probable  that 
most  of  the  "  tin  "  was  conveyed  by 
the  Phoenicians  from  Cornwall  to 
Tarshish.  '*  The  enumeration  of  the 
different  peoples,  lands,  and  cities 
which  carried  on  trade  with  Tyre 
commences  with  Tarshish  in  the 
extreme  west,  then  turns  to  the  north, 
passes  through  the  different  lands  of 
Anterior  Asia  and  the  Mediterranean 
to  the  remotest  north-east,  and  ends 
by  mentioning  Tarshish  again,  to 
round  off  the  fist" — Keil 

Ver.  13.  "Traded  in  the  persons 
of  men.*'  They  were  addicted  to  the 
slave-trade.  T«)  this  day  the  Turkish 
harems  are  supplied  with  female  slaves 
fr^m  Circassia  and  Georgia,  such  being 
remarkable  for  their  beauty.  Com- 
pare Joel.  iii.  6. 

Ver.  14.  "House  of  Togarmah." 
"Tlie  northern  Armenians,  who  call 
themselves  the  house  of  Torgom,  and 
claim  Torgom,  or  Togarmah,  the  son 
of  Gomer,  as  their  founder.  fGen. 
X.  8;  LChron.  i.  6.)  They  inhabit 
the  rough  mountainous  regions  on  the 
south  side  of  the  Caucasus.  The 
country  was  celebrated  for  its  breed 
of  horses,  which  w^re  in  great  request 
by  the  Persian  kings." — (Henderson), 

Ver.  16.  "Denda."  "An  island. 
or  commercial  town  in  the  Persian 
Gulf,  established  by  the  Tyrians  to 
secure  the  trade  of  India,  which 
abounded  in  ivory.  The  tusks  re- 
sembling horns  will  account  for  the 
term  being  here  employed."  "  Ebony." 
"  Geseuius  thinks  the  reason  why  this 
word  is  plural  in  the  Hebrew,  is  that 


it  was  obtained  only  in  planks  split 
into  pieces  for  transportation.  Its 
great  hardness  made  it  an  article  of 
value. " — (Henderson.) 

Ver.  25.  "  The  ships  of  Tarshish." 
"The  prophet  now  returns  from  his 
enumeration  of  the  various  articles  of 
commerce  with  which  Tyre  enriched 
herself,  and  the  various  countries  with 
which  she  traded,  to  commemorate 
her  fall.  But  just  before  entering 
upon  that  part  of  his  subject,  he 
stops  for  a  moment  to  advert  to  her 
navy,  by  which  her  wares  were  con- 
veyed to  Spain  and  other  coasts  of 
the  Mediterranean.  The  ships  of 
Tarshish  were,  comparatively  speak- 
ing, like  our  old  Indiamen.  They  are 
called  the  walls  of  Tyre,  for  the  same 
reason  that  we  speak  of  our  ships  of 
war  as  the  wooden  walls  of  Old 
England.  Tliey  were  the  glory 
and  defence  of  the  merchant  city." 
— (Henderson). 

Ver.  26.  "The  east  wind  hath 
broken  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  seas.'' 
This  wind,  blowing  from  the  direction 
of  Lebanon,  is  the  most  violent  of  all 
in  the  Mediterranean  (Psa.  xlviiL  8) 
Nebuchadnezzar  is  represented  under 
this  figure. 

Ver.  81.  "They  shaU  make  them- 
selves utterly  bald  for  thee."  Alluding 
to  the  Phoenician  custom  in  mourning, 
which,  on  account  of  its  connection 
with  heathenish  superbtitions,  was  for- 
bidden to  Israel  (Deut.  xiv.  1), 

Ver.  32.  "  In  the  midst  of  the  sea." 
Thus  showing  that  the  prophecy  is  to 
be  understood  of  insular  Tyre. 

Ver.  33.  "  Thou  didst  enrich  the 
kings  of  the  earth."  The  custom 
dues  levied  on  her  wares  were  a 
source  of  wealth  to  the  surrounding 
nations. 

Ver.  36.  "  The  people  shall  hiss  at 
thee."  With  the  hiss  of  astionishment, 
as  in  1  Kings  ix.  8. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVII.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTAMY:  EZEKIBL. 


H0MILETI08. 

(Vera.  1-10). 

When  Tyre  rejoicee  over  Jerusalem,  then  the  prophet  rejoices  orer  Tyre : 
this  is  the  recompense  of  the  pious.  If  we  must  not  repay  evil  with  evil,  there 
still  is  with  God  a  recompensing  of  evil  with  evil.  All  human  and  earthly 
thingH  go  out  at  last  in  lamentation.  Tliis  is  the  lamentation  of  the  spirit,  that 
the  world  sows  to  the  flesh,  and  of  the  flesh  reaps  corruption.  With  kettle- 
drums and  flutes  the  world  begins,  but  it  ends  with  wailing  and  misery.  "  We 
must  profoundly  know  the  gkria  mundi,  if  we  are  to  take  to  heart  the  sic 
transit  gloria  mundi" — ( Hengstehberg),  Let  no  one  boast  of  his  strength  or 
worldly  elevation ;  how  soon  can  the  Lord,  if  His  judgment  should  break  forth, 
bring  all  to  the  dust  of  desolation  I  (Vers.  3,  4  ;  Jer.  ix.  23,  25).  ^  There  is 
a  perfection  of  beauty  which  is  nothing  else  than  ripeness  for  judgment 
Beauty  is  a  transient  splendour,  but  the  knowledge  of  the  eternal,  leads 
from  glory  to  glory.  In  boasting  one  sees  what  things  the  heart  is  fall  of. 
Mark  the  contrast  between  Tyre  and  the  daughter  of  the  king,  who  is  all 
beautiful  within  (Psa.  xlv.).  The  security  is  very  difiierent :  one^  is  of  faith, 
since  we  know  that  we  are  reconciled  through  Christy  and,  even  if  the  world 
should  fall  in  ruin,  can  remain  in  peace ;  the  other  proceeds  from  unbelief, 
which  has  respect  to  men,  walls,  etc.,  and  relies  upon  these.  The  buildings  of 
men,  and  the  building  of  God,  namely.  His  church,  against  which  not  even  the 
gates  of  hell  can  prevail.  When  people  once  surrender  themselves  to  pride, 
pomp,  and  dissipation,  they  can  hardly  lay  them  aside  again  ;  nay,  they  often 
know  not,  from  inconsideration  and  wantonness,  what  they  should  do  (Deut. 
xxxii.  15,  etc.).  Every  land  has  its  peculiar  gift  from  God,  and  the  gifts  of 
God  must  thus  shamefully  minister  to  the  vanity  of  men.  It  is  quite  right  to 
take  into  one's  service  and  pay  qualifled  persons,  but  woe  to  him  who  makes 
flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart  departs  from  the  Lord  I 

(Vers.  12-25). 

Men  run  through  the  wide  world  for  the  sake  of  merchandise,  while  the  word 
of  God,  which  makes  rich  without  trouble,  and^  imparts  treasure  which  neither 
moth  nor  rust  corrupts,  nor  can  thieves  steal,  is  so  near  us  !  The  one  pearl  of 
great  price  Tyre  did  not  make  an  article  of  traffic.  What  advantages  it  to  gain 
the  whole  world  if  the  soul  suff^ers  damage.  Oh,  how  many  gifts  of  God  are  in 
the  service  of  sin  ?  Great  merchant-cities,  great  cities  of  sin.  How  often,  and 
how  many  ways  are  men's  souls  the  objects  of  buying  and  selling  (ver.  13). 
With  things  perfectly  beautiful  man  was  certainly  to  occupy  himself.  But 
where  are  they  to  be  found  in  the  earthly  sphere  ?  (Col.  iii.  2).  That  Tyre  was 
so  full  and  honoured,  while  Zion  became  always  poorer  and  poorer,  and  sunk 
miiserable — this  formed  a  stumbling-block  to  the  people  of  God,  But  what  has 
become  of  all  the  fulness  and  glory  of  Tyre  ?  Mou^  on  the  other  hand,  has 
gloriously  blossomed  anew. 

(Vers.  26-36). 

The  glory  of  the  earth  shall  become  dust  and  ashes.    The  higher  we  reach,  so 

much  the  more  precipitous,  and  so  much  the  deeper  will  be  the  fall.    The 

element  of  our  security  can  so  easily  become  the  element  of  our  misery  :  here 

the  sea,  elsewhere  gold,  one's  position,  &c.    A  person  of  high  estate  when  cast 

dlO 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILETW  COMMEMA&Y:  E2EK1EL. 


ouAF.  xxvin. 


down  18  lower  than  one  who  has  always  been  in  a  humble  position.  The  wind 
does  not  always  fill  our  sails;  it  often  also,  and  suddenly,  tears  them  short  and 
small.  In  prosperity  men  so  rarely  consider  how  vain  it  is,  that  in  adversity 
they  cry  out  the  more  loudly ;  but,  alas  1  only  upon  the  vanity  of  earthly 
things,  and  not  upon  the  vanity  of  their  earthly  hearts.  Remember  that  thou 
art  dust,  and  bethink  thyself  that  thou  ha^t  a  soul.  Fear  is  salutary,  but  there 
ia  also  a  fear  which  we  again  shake  off,  and  which  we  do  not  suffer  to  warn  ua 
The  loss  of  earthly  things  gives  such  trouble  and  for  the  loss  of  heavenly  things 
men  will  laugh  !  A  Christian  should  not  so  mourn,  but  should  smite  his  breast 
alike  in  prosperity  and  in  adversity.  Michael  and  Tyre  (ver.  32).  Who  is  as 
thou  ?  This  it  is  proper  to  say  only  of  God  in  reference  to  glory.  In  respect 
to  nothingness,  on  the  other  hand,  one  of  us  is  as  another.  Mournful  times 
should  be  times  of  repentance. — The  holy  sense  of  the  nil  mirari.  From  ver. 
34  we  learn,  the  end  of  earthly  things,  their  scale  value,  and  true  estimation* 
All  this  world  is  nothing  ;  how  surely  must  there  be  what  is  something !  But 
faith  cries  out  of  the  depths  to  God.  Contrast  the  ^lory  of  the  children  of  God 
with  the  world's  glory. — (Lanye), 


Prophetical  Dirqb  on  the  King  op  Tyre,  as  the  Embodiment  op  the 
Spirit  op  Carnal  Piide  and  Self-Supfioiency  op  the  whole  Statr  The 
Fall  op  Zidon,    ti  b    Mother- City.      The  Restoration  op    Israel  in 

CONTllAST  with  TyRE  AND  ZlDON   (Chap    XXviii.). 


EXEGETICAL  notes.— "In  this 
chapter  we  have  a  sublime  threnody 
on  the  prince  of  Tyre,  couched  in 
language  of  the  keenest  irony.  His 
fall  is  first  of  all  traced  to  his  in* 
sufferable  pride,  which  is  described  in 
the  most  glowing  terms  (vers.  2-6J. 
His  merited  punishment  is  next 
announced  (7-10).  The  prophet,  in 
obedience  to  the  divine  command, 
then  proceeds  to  deliver  the  funeral 
dirge,  exaggerating  the  dignity  and 
magnificence  of  the  fallen  monarch, 
with  which  he  contrasts  his  utter 
degradation  (11-19).  Then  follows  a 
prediction  announcing  the  fall  of  the 
mother-city,  Zidon  (20-23).  And  the 
chapter  concludes  with  promises  of 
deliverance  to  the  Jews,  and  their 
restoration  to  prosperity  in  their  own 
land." — Henderson. 

Ver,  2.  **The  prince  of  Tyrus." 
The  monarch  of  Tyre,  at  the  time  of 
Ezekiel's  prophecy,  was  Ithbaal  II. 
The  latter  part  of  this  compound 
name  implies  his  close  connection  with 
Baal,  the  Phoenician  supreme  God, 
whose  representative  he  was.  "I  am 
aGodtlsitintbeseatofOod."   "The 


seat  of  God  is  a  seat  which,  in  its 
absolute  inaccessibleness,  is  like  the 
seat  of  God  in  heaven.  He  sets  or 
makes  his  mind  like  the  mind  of  God ; 
he  has  so  pushed  himself  into  the 
height  that  in  his  folly  he  arrogates 
to  himself  what  God  claims  to  Himself 
by  right.  It  belongs  to  the  nature  of 
God,  to  be  and  to  have  all  from  Him- 
self ;  to  the  nature  of  man,  to  derive 
all  from  the  fulness  of  God.  If  man 
imagines  himself  to  subsist  as  God  in 
himself,  this  is  the  greatest  of  all 
perversities,  which  cannot  remain  un- 
punished, because  God  does  not  give 
His  glory  to  another.  The  funda- 
mental passage  is  Isa.  xiv.  14,  where 
the  king  of  Babylon  compares  himself 
with  the  Most  Hij^'h.  The  general 
divine  name,  Elohim,  the  Godhead, 
stands  as  usual,  where  there  is  a  con- 
trast of  man  and  God,  of  earth  and 
heaven." — (  Hengstenberg.) 

Ver.  3.     "Wiser   than    Daniel.** 

Daniel  had,  at  this  time  (B.a  588), 
been  chief  of  the  wise  men  of  Babylon 
for  about  foui-teen  years.  **  Daniel's 
wisdom  must  have  been  generally 
known  and  acknowledged,  especially 

8U 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXVUI. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


mmong  the  Jews  in  the  Chaldean  exile ; 
for  Ezekiel  presupposes  that  the  Einfi^ 
of  Tjnre  knew  of  Daniel,  and  certainly 
as  one  wliuni  no  other  but  himself 
excelled  in  wisdom  ;  so  that  Dnniel 
can  be  no  mere  Jewish  celebrity,  but 
must  have  proved  his  wihdom  on  the 
theatre  of  the  world.  To  Daniel  is 
ascribed  not  merely  wisdom,  but  even 
a  special  kind  of  it,  that  to  which 
nothing  hidden  was  dark.  The  Ein<^ 
of  Babylon  says  of  Daniel  in  ch.  iv. 
6,  •*  I  know  that  the  spirit  of  the  holy 
gods  is  in  thee,  and  no  secret  troubleth 
thee."  Daniel  had  appeared  as  one 
from  whom  no  secret  was  hidden  in  the 
very  beginning  of  his  career,  and 
thereby  laid  the  foundation  of  his 
prominent  position/' —^ //^n^5^^ft^r^.y 

Ver.  7.  "The  terrible  of  the 
nations"  The  foreigners,  barbarians, 
the  terrible  ones  of  the  nations.  These 
W(  re  the  Chaldean  foreigners,  noted  for 
their  ferocity  (Isa.  i.  1 1,  xxv.  2  ;  Ezek. 
xxxi.  12). 

Ver.  8.  "  Thou  shalt  die  the 
deaths-"  "  Deaths,  a  peculiar  form  in 
the  plural,  to  indicate  emphatically 
the  most  violent  death.  The  death  of 
the  king  of  Tyre  is  compared  to  that 
of  those  slain  in  a  sea-engagement, 
and  cast  into  the  deep." — (Henderson). 
**  The  plural  here  and  Jer.  xvi.  4.  is  a 
pluraUs  exaggerativus,  a  death  so 
painful  as  to  be  equivalent  to  dying 
many  times." — (Keil), 

Ver.  12.  "Thou  sealest  up  the 
sum.'*  The  literal  rendering  is,  "  Thou 
art  the  one  sealing  the  sun  of  perfec- 
tion." Seals  were  used  for  the  purpose 
of  authenticating  or  securing  anything. 
When  it  is  said,  therefore,  that  the 
King  was  the  seal  of  perfection,  the 
meaning  is,  that  he  could  not  be  sur- 
passed m  riches,  splendour,  or  power. 
The  sum-total  of  all  that  was  il- 
lustrious concentrated  in  him.  He 
vindicated  to  himself  all  that  mortal 
could  pretend  io,**-^ Henderson). 

Ver.  13.  "Thou  hast  been  in  Eden, 
the  garden  of  God."     **  The  prophet 
8X2 


places  the  monarch  in  the  primitive 
abode  of  man,  with  which  was  associated 
every  idea  of  pleasure  and  delight. 
It  is  quite  a  lowering  of  the  subje-t 
to  fiuggest  with  MicJiaelis  that  he 
nnVht  have  had  a  summer  residence 
in  the  beautiful  valley  of  the  cedars 
of  Lebanon,  whither  he  retired  during 
the  hot  season  of  the  year.  Eden 
was  called  the  garden  of  God  because 
it  was  of  His  plantation,  and  formed 
the  delightful  Miene  of  His  Divine 
manifestations  to  the  first  pair  To 
have  b^en  there  conveys  the  idet*  of 
the  most  distinguished  honour  ami 
felicity.  Taking  occasion  from  his 
reference  to  £dcn,  with  which  the 
Bible  history  connects  the  existence 
of  bdellium  and  onyx-stones,  Esekiel, 
with  his  usual  minuteness,  gives  a 
detailed  account  of  the  precious  gems 
which  adorned  the  regal  state.  The 
nine  precious  stones  here  specified 
correspond  to  those  with  the  same 
names  in  the  description  of  the  high 
priest's  breastplate  (Ex.xxxix.  10-13V' 
— Henderson. 

Ver.  14.  ''The  anointed  cherub 
that  covereth.'*  Ezekiel,  as  a  priest, 
employs  imagery  drawn  from  the 
Jewish  temple.  Like  the  cherubim 
overshad  iwing  the  mercy  seat,  the 
King  of  Tyre— a  demi-god  in  his  own 
esteem — ^spread  his  protecting  wings 
over  his  dominions.  "The  holy 
mountain  of  God."  **To  this  his 
illimitable  ambition  aspired.  In 
imagination  he  occupied  Mount  Zion, 
the  dwelling  place  of  the  Most  High." 
— (Henderson),  "Thou  halt  waUced 
up  and  down."  As  priest  (1  Sam. 
ii.  30,  36). 

Ver.  15.  "Thou  wast  perfect  in  thy 
ways  •  •  .  till  iniquity  was  found 
in  thee."  "  The  rectitude  with  which 
the  monarch  commenced  his  reign 
may  be  illustrated  by  a  reference  to 
the  history  of  Hiram  (1  Kings  v.  7)  \ 
but  having  in  process  of  time  become 
corrupt  through  the  uninterrupted 
commert'.ial  prosperity  of  the  Tyrian 
state,  he  indulged  in  unscrupulous 
acts   of   ii^ustioe    and   cruelty,   on 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZ BEJEL 


OHAp.  xznn. 


accoiiDt  of  which  merited  punishment 
18  here  denounceA" — (Henderson). 

Ver.  18.  "Thy  sanctuaries."  The 
king  is  said  to  possess  sanctuaries  in 
regard  to  the  ideal  position  ascribed  to 
him  (ver.  14).  "Any  greatness  con- 
secrated by  Ood,  any  gloiy  imparted 
by  Him,  may  be  regarded  as  a  sanc- 
tuary, the  desecration  of  which  by  the 
foeffee  is  followed  by  desecration  by 
the  feudal  lord.  The  idea  of  the 
sanctuary  is  that  of  separation  from 
the  world,  which  exerts  all  its  destruc- 
tive powers  in  vain  against  the  gift 
imparted  by  GM,  so  long  as  the 
possessor  remains  in  the  right  posi- 
tion towards  God." — (ifengstenherg.) 
''  From  the  midst  of  thee."  The  king 
is  here  regarded  as  comprehending  in 
himself  the  city  and  the  people. 

Ver.  20.  "  Against  Zidon.".  '^Zidon 
was  a  very  ancient  Phoenician  city, 
otherwise  famous  for  its  fishery,  (hence 
its  name  from  Zud  *  to  fish '),  and 
afterwards  for  its  extended  and  flourish- 
ing commerce  both  by  sea  and  land. 
It  became  so  noted  for  the  manufacture 
of  glass  and  other  articles  of  luxury, 
that  the  epithet  SIdonia  ars  was  used 
by  the  ancients  to  denote  whatever  was 
elegant  or  magnii^cent.  According  to 
Strabo,  the  Zidonians  were  celebrated 
for  their  skill  in  astronomy,  philosophy, 
navigation,  and  all  the  Iil>eral  arts. 
Zidon  was  founded  by  the  first-born  of 
Canaan  (Gen.  x,  15);  and  wassilunted, 
according    to   Straoo^    two    hundred 


stadia  to  the  north  of  Tyre.  Favoured 
by  its  position  on  the  coast  of  the 
Mediterranean,  it  early  became 
celebrated  for  its  commerce.  In  the 
time  of  Jacob,  it  is  mentioned  in  con- 
nexion with  shipping  (Gen.  xlix.  13) ; 
and  in  that  of  Joshua,  it  is  celebrated 
as  a  'Great'  city  (Josh.  xi.  8;  xix.  28). 
It  lay  within  the  boundary  of  the  land 
ai^signed  to  the  tribe  of  Asher ;  but  was 
never  conquered  by  the  Israelites 
(Judg.  i,  3l).  At  the  present  day,  the 
town  of  Saida,  a  little  to  the  west; 
occupies  its  site.  It  has  a  fine  old 
ruined  tower  projecting  far  into  tho 
sea,  with  a  bridge  of  many  arches  that 
was  built  to  reach  it.  In  Matt.  xi.  22, 
Tyre  and  Zidon  are  coupled  together." 
(Uendenon), 

Ver.  24.  "A  priddng/'  The  word 
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Lev.  xiii.  51, 
52 ;  xiv.  44,  and  is  used  of  the 
''fretting  leprosy."  The  Sidonian 
briar  had  wounded  Israel. 

Ver.  25.  "  And  shall  be  sanctified 
in  them  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen." 
**  Tiiese  cities,  which  had  been  a  con- 
stant source  of  annoyance  to  their 
neiglibour:^,  and  to  none  more  than  to 
the  Jews,  being  rendered  powerless, 
the  people  of  God,  restored  from 
Babylon  to  their  own  land,  should 
enjoy  all  their  ancient  privileges,  and 
all  around  them  be  conipt^lled  to 
ascribe  to  Jehovah,  as  their  covenant 
God,  the  glory  due  to  His  name."— 
{Henderson.) 


H0MILETIC8. 


Ver.  1-19. 
The  King  op  Tyrb. 
Consider  the  prophet's  df  scrlption  of  this  King. 

I.  As  the  incar  ation  of  earthly  pride  and  self-suflSoiency.  The  pride  and  vain 
j-lory  of  the  nation,  the  history  of  its  prosperity  and  of  tlie  corruptions  that 
led  to  its  fall,  are,  by  the  imagination  ot  the  prophet,  supposed  to  be  embodied 
in  an  ideal  Prince  of  Tyre.  This  prince  is  rej^arded  as  tlie  incarnation  of  the 
carnal  pride,  self-sufficiency,  and  wickedness  of  the  xvhole  state.  He  is  the  sum- 
total  of  the  wickedness  of  the  entire  nation,  but  bis  chief  offence  is  pride ;  or 

818 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  xxvm.  EOMILETIO  COMMBNTARYt  BZEKIEL 


rather  pride  is  the  spring  and  fountain  oT  all  his  iniquities.    His  pride  mani- 
fest^ itself  in  two  forms : — 1.  In  assuming  to  be  God.-  **  Thou  hast  said,  I  am 
God,  I  sit  in  the  seat  of  God"  (ver.  2).    Beyond  this,  it  is  not  possible  for 
human  arrogance  to  go.     Not  content  with  adopting  tlie  title  of  God,  he  must 
needs  seize  uphon  the  functions  of  the  Divine  government.     Many  will  not  state 
this  pretence  in  words,  but  they  act  as  if  neither  God  nor  man  had  a  right  to 
say  anything  to  them.     Not  to  acknowledge  God's  rights  over  us  is  to  throw 
off  His  authority,  and  to  become  a  God  unto  ourselves.    In  such  a  spirit  as 
this   to  sit  in  judgment  on   His   dealings,  as  if  we  could  correct  Him,  is 
to  commit  a  daring  iniquity*    It  is  ''to  snatch  from  His  hand  the  balance  and 
the  rod."  His  pride  also  showed  itself  : — 2.    In  the  conceit  of  wisdom,    (ver.  3). 
As  he  thought  that  he  possessed  all  wisdom  in  himself,  so  he  would  pray  for 
none.    In  his  own  imagination  he  was  wiser  than  Daniel,  who  was  the  wisest 
man  of  whose  fame  he  had  heard.     The  Giialdeans  confessed  Daniel's  wisdom 
(Dan.  ii   10,   11\     He  had  done  what  they  admitted  was  beyond  human 
power.    He  stooa  upon  the  highest  stage  of  wisdom  attainable  by  man.    For 
this  prince  to  declare  himself  wiser  than  Daniel  was  to  transcend  the  stage 
of  humanity,  and   to   make   himself  equal  with  God.    And  further,  Daniel 
had  predicted  the  cx>ming  of  God's  universal  king<lom  (Dan.  ii.  44).    This 
prince  proudly  thought  that  he  could  convict  Daniel  of  error,  seeing  he  had 
established  himself  as  the  God  of  this  world.    The  prophet  ascribes  to  Daniel 
a  special  kind  of  wisdom, — that  to  which  nothing  was  dark  or  hidden  (Dan.  iv.  9). 
"  There  is  no  secret  that  they  can  hide  from  thee,"  says  the  prophet  when 
interpreting  the  thoughts  of  this  proud  prince  (ver.  3).    The  prince  of  Tyre 
also   boasted   of  his  wisdom  to  get  riches, — of  that  practical  wisdom  wliich 
can  show  material  results  that  dazzle  and  impress  the  minds  of  men  (vers.  5, 6). 
And  Daniel  also  was  remarkable  for  this  kind  of   wisdom.     He  was  a  great 
public  man,  and  not  merely  a  solitary  thinker.     He  was  the  statesman  among 
the  prophets.    But  we  are  not  to   regard   the  prophet  as  merely  making  a 
comparison  between  one  wise  man  and  another,  as  this  world  counts  wisdom. 
Daniel  ascribed  all  his  wisdom  to  God  above.    Therefore  the  wisdom  of  these 
two  men  could  not  be  compared  by  the  same  scale  (Dan.  ii.  20,  28,  29,  30,  45). 

n.  His  punishment.  1.  Great  humiliation.  The  Chaldean  foreigners, 
noted  for  their  great  ferocity,  would  descend  upon  tlie  nation  (ver.  7).  All  the 
beautiful  possessions  acquired  by  this  prince's  boasted  wisdom  would  be 
spoiled.  The  oblivion  and  dishonour  of  the  grave  would  be  tlie  fittest  natural 
image  of  his  humiliation.  "They  shall  bring  thee  down  to  the  pit"  (ver.  8). 
He  would  die  many  "deaths,"  for  as  the  king  he  would  die  in  each  of  his  slam 
subjects.  2.  His  great  pretentions  would  not  save  him  from  destruction. 
"  Wilt  thou  yet  say  before  him  that  slayeth  thee,  lam  God? "  (ver.  9).  The 
hope  that  he  cherished  in  the  day  of  his  prosperity  will  fail  him  before  the 
enemy.  Then  will  it  be  manifest  that  he  is  man  and  not  God.  In  the  day  of 
adversity  he  shall  have  to  learn  another  language.  3.  He  shall  have  punish* 
ftient  in  kind.  He  defiled  the  nation  by  his  pride,  and  now  he  is  desecrated  in 
turn.  His  *'  brightness  "  was  to  be  "  defile  d/'  his  person  to  be  profaned  (ver.  9). 
[The  second  "  slayeth  "  in  this  verse  should  be  rendered  "  profaneth."]  4  His 
punishment  demands  a  sad  lamentation.  C«»iisider  what  he  once  was.  He  was 
nighly  endowed  (ver  12).  He  enjoyed  as  it  were,  a  glory  like  unto  the  first  man 
in  raradise  (ver.  13).  He  once  had  the  beauty  of  youth,  and  was  in  a  state  ot 
comparative  innocence  (ver.  15).  Nations  degenerate  towards  their  old  age. 
Now  he  had  gone  the  way  of  old-world  nations,  who  were  all  wrecked  by  pride 
(ver.  17).  It  was  sad  to  think  of  all  his  labours  and  pains  coming  to  nought. 
AH  that  exalts  itselt  against  God  is  nothing,  and  will  come  to  nothing.  He 
only  that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever. 
814 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETtC  COMMENTARY :  E2EKIEL  chap,  xxvin. 


Consider  this  Prince  of  Tyre  ^— 

in.  As  a  prelude  of  Antichrist*  Antichrist  is  one  who  being  only  man 
claims  to  be  God.  The  King  of  Tyre  was  a  type  of  this  man  of  sin 
(2  Thes.  ii.  3,  4).  In  our  own  age  there  are  various  forms  of  this  spirit 
of  Antichrist.  1.  He  spirit  of  lawlessness.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  this  in 
2  Thess.  7,  8,  where  "  the  mystery  of  iniquity  *'  is  literally  **  the  mystery  of 
lawlessness/'  and  "  that  Wicked, '  that  lawless  one.  The  growing  spirit  of 
disregard  to  all  authority,  human  and  divine,  is  an  instance  of  this  apostaov. 
It  is  a  state  of  things  in  which  every  man  is  a  law  unto  himself.  2.  **  The 
religion  of  humanity.'*  This  a^e  in  its  pride  of  knowledge  has  produced 
some  bold  enough  to  make  the  blasphemous  assertion  that  there  is  no  Qod 
save  humanity.  And  Unitarianism  also  has  a  natural  tendency  to  drift  into 
the  same  form  of  blasphemy.  It  shrinks  from  saving  "  Christ  is  God,"  yet 
cannot  rest  in  this  denial,  but  boldly  says  ''Man  is  God."  8.  Popery, 
When  men  lost  tlteir  faith  in  Christ  as  the  real,  though  invisible  Head  of 
His  Church ;  when  the  God-man,  because  he  could  be  no  longer  seen  or 
touched  or  handled,  appeared  to  be  far  off,  they  yearned  for  a  substitute. 
They  lent  questionable  honours  and  ambiguous  titles  to  a  P<»pe.  They 
invested  with  the  powers  of  Christ  the  man  who  had  placed  himself  in  the 
seat  of  Christ.  All  such  blasphemies  as  these  spring  from  one  bitter  root  in 
human  nature — the  tendency  in  man  to  yield  to  the  tyranny  of  the  visible. 
The  truth  is  forgotten,  that  "  the  Head  of  every  man  is  Christ."  Wherever 
by  the  speculations  or  actions  of  men  Christ  is  dethroned^  there  will  not 
fail  many  to  arise  to  claim  the  vacant  seat. 


(Verses  20-23.) 

ThB  PrOPHEGT   A.GAINST  ZlDOV. 

1.  God^B  aim  in  Bis  judgments.  It  is  to  make  Himself  known  what  a 
dreadful,  just,  and  holy  God  He  is,  and  that  He  may  be  declared  by  men  to  be 
so.  God  would  destroy  Zidon  by  pestilence  and  war,  that  He  might  be 
glorified  and  sanctified  in  her.  She  would  not  give  glorjr  to  God  before ;  the 
Lord  would  therefore  fetch  His  glory  out  of  her  by  His  judgments,  and  make 
others  see  the  same,  so  that  they  might  confess  Him  to  be  a  God  of  power, 
justice,  and  holinees.  (Ps.  iz.  16.)  2.  It  is  the  Lard  that  sends  judgments 
upon  cities  and  persons.  **  1  will  send  into  her  pestilence,  and  blood  into  her 
streets."  It  is  the  Lord  gives  commissions  as  to  the  prophets  to  prophecy 
judgments  against  a  city,  so  to  the  judgments  themselves,  to  come  to  and  upon 
them.  Let  none  stumble  by  looking  at  the  instruments,  they  are  the  sword  in 
God's  hand.  He  causes  it  to  wound  and  to  kiM^ Or eenhilk) 


(Ver.  24). 

I.  Some  general  observations  from  hence*  that  wicked  men  are  thorns. 
1.  Their  acquaintance  is  not  desirable.  Familiarity  with  them  is  dangerous 
(Prov.  xxiv.  1).  They  may  be  honourable  or  eminent,  yet  we  should  neither 
envy  them  nor  aflFect  their  company:  and  why?  "For  their  heart  studieth 
destruction,  and  their  lips  talk  of  mischief."  They  are  the  "seed  of  the 
serpent/'  and  cannot  cordially  close  wiUi  the  **  seed  of  the  woman."    There  is 

815 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  xxvra.  EOMILBTIC  COMMENTAliY:  EZEKISL. 


enmity  between  their  seecia,  "  The  best  of  them  is  as  a  briar;  tlie  most  uprij^ht 
is  sharper  than  a  thorn  Ledge."  2.  Answerable  fruit  is  to  be  expected  from 
them.  Thorns  and  briers  must  bring  fortli  fruit  Miital»le  for  their  uaiured.  A 
corrupt  tree  cannot  bring  forth  good  fruit.  Wickedness  proceeds  from  the 
wicked,  it  is  natural  to  them  to  do  wickedly,  and  nothing  else  :  fire  comes  out 
of  brambles,  and  devours  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  (Jud.  ix.  15).  The  Lord's 
servants  should  see  to  it,  that  briers  and  brambles  overrun  not  all  tJie  field  and 
vineyard  of  God,  'I'hey  do  grow  hiijh,  great,  spread,  and  are  like  to  endanger 
mucn  if  they  be  not  dealt  with.  There  are  thorns  and  briers  in  all  places; 
there  are  state  brambles,  city  thorns,  and  church  briers :  such  were  in  the  church 
of  Ghilatia,  which  Paul  wisheth  were  cut  oflF  (GaL  v.  12),  because  they  scratched 
and  troubled  them  :  and  David's  resolution  was.  to  tlirubt  away  as  thorns  all 
the  sons  of  Belial  who  troubled  the  state  and  city  of  Jerusalem  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  6). 
And  in  Psa.  ci.  8,  he  saith,  "  I  will  early  destroy  all  the  wicked  of  the  Land  ; 
that  I  may  cut  off  all  wicked  doers  from  the  city  of  the  Lord."  Here  was  a 
man  after  Qod's  own  heart,  that  would  not  suffer  pricking  thorns  and  grieving 
briers. 

IL  Some  more  general  obserrationB  from  the  words  of  the  vene.  1.  The 
church  and  people  of  Ood  live  amongst  thorns.  The  church  is  a  lily  among 
thorns  (Cant.  ii.  2^.  Jerusalem  was  anii<Ut  heat  hen  i>h  nations.  Christ  and 
His  apostles  were  among  scribes  and  Pharisees,  whose  spirits  were  thorny. 
Hence  we  ought  to  infer — (1.)  That  God's  people  ought  to  take  heed  how  they 
walk.  Men  who  live  and  walk  among  briers  and  thorns  had  need  have  their 
eyes  in  their  heads;  they  may  otherwise  be  entangled  in  tlie  briers  and 
miserably  scratched.  (2.)  Tlien  it  is  not  strange  if  God* s  people  be  scratchtd 
sometimes  by  wicked  men  They  will  tear  and  rend  their  names,  states, 
comforts,  peace,  privileges.  (3.)  7 hen  see  a  reason  why  God's  people  cannot 
carry  on  His  work  with  more  speed.  When  thorns  are  in  the  way,  things 
move  slowly.  When  good  seed  was  sown,  the  thorns  hindered  the  growth 
of  it  When  Joshua  went  about  taking  Ai,  there  was  Achan,  a  great  thorn, 
in  the  way ;  when  Nehemiah  was  in  the  work  of  the  Temple,  Tobias  and 
Sanballat  were  thorns  in  the  way,  2.  The  church  and  people  of  God  shall  not 
always  be  among  briers  and  thorns.  They  shall  have  a  time  of  freedom. 
**  There  shall  be  no  more  a  pricking  brier  and  a  piercing  thorn."  This  was 
made  good  to  the  Jews  in  the  letter  after  their  return.  The  nations  which 
had  been  thorns  to  them  the  Lord  destroyed.  This  promise  refers  also  to  the 
Gospel  times ;  the  Lord  is  making  way  for  it  now.  This  sliould  draw  out  our 
spirits  in  prayer  unto  the  Lord  to  hasten  the  time,  and  that  He  would  make 
good  what  he  hath  promised  (Isa.  Iv.  13).  3.  Wicked  men  have  ill  thoughts 
of  GodHs  people.  They  slight  them.  The  briers  and  thorns  round  about  the 
house  of  Israel  despised  them  and  scorned  them  (P&  Ixxix.  4). — Greenhill 


(Ver.  25> 

The  Jews  were  scattered  into  the  Eastern  countries,  over  several  provinces  of 
the  King  of  Babylon,  and  here  the  Lord  promiseth  to  gather  them  out  thereof, 
and  to  return  them  to  their  own  land.  1.  God's  people  have  no  fixed,  certain 
habitation  in  this  world,  but  are  subject  to  scatterings  The  Church  was  "scat- 
tered throughout  all  tlie  regions  ot  Judea  and  Sanmria"  (Acts  viii.  1  ;  Heb. 
xi.  37).  2.  God  hatha  care  of  His  scattered pe(^le*  He  will  sanctify  His 
name  in  bringing  them  into  a  safe  and  happy  condition.  They  shall  be  brought 
into  Canaan,  that  is  into  the  Church,  which  Canaan  represents.  As  the  Jews 
were  gathered  out  of  Babylon,  and  the  provinces  thereof,  into  their  own  land, 
816 


Digitized  by 


Googlf 


HOMILBTW  COMMBNTARY:  BZBKISU 


CBAV,  XXIX. 


80  shall  all  the  elect  be  brought  into  the  Clnircli  of  God,  where  is  peace,  safety, 
and  coiilidence,  where  they  shall  find  God  a  liabitation.  a  vineyard.  (Isa.  xi.  10). 
Tne  Lord  Christ  was  a  great  gatherer  (Luke  xi.  23 ;  xiv.  16,  17,  21,  23).  3. 
God*s  end  in  gathering  His  people.  That  they  may  sanctify  Him,  and  that  He 
may  be  Fanctiried  by  them.  God's  power,  faithfulness,  and  goodness,  appear  in 
His  gathering  them  and  bringing  them  out  of  their  enemies'  liands;  and  so 
way  is  made  for  His  praise  and  honour,  and  that  before  their  enemies. — 
{GreenhiU). 

(Vers.  24-26.) 

God's  judgments  on  the  ungodly  tend  to  the  good  of  His  Church.  God 
pets  His  own  free  at  length.  The  promise  has  been  fully  made  good  through 
Christ,  as  Zacharias  says,  that  we  are  **  rerleeiued  from  the  hand  of  our  enemies 
to  serve  Him  without  fear."  (Luke  i.  74.)  Then  do  believers  first  come  to 
their  true  and  perfect  rest,  when  all  their  bodily  and  spiritual  enemies  have 
been  rooted  out.  This  prophecy  is  fulfilled  in  the  Cnristian  Church,  which  is 
the  true  seed  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob.  Those  born  under  the  Old 
Covenant  were  in  bondage,  while  believers  under  the  New  Testament  are  free, 
--(Langg.) 


Thb  First  of  Four  Cfiapters  Directed  Aoainst  Egtfp  (Chap,  xxix.^ 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  — 
"  Pharaoh,  a  monarch  with  whom 
the  Hebrews  were  frequently  in  con- 
tact, is  represented  as  vaunting  in  the 
s<  curity  of  his  position,  when  the 
prophet  is  commissioned  to  announce 
the  Diyine  interposition  to  efi'ect  the 
desolation  of  his  country  throughout 
its  whole  extent  (vers.  1-12).  Though 
after  the  lapse  of  forty  years  the 
Egyptian  people  were  to  be  restored 
to  their  country,  the  kingdom  was 
never  to  emerge  from  that  state  of 
degradation  to  which  it  should  be  re- 
duced (18-16).  The  following  verses 
(17-20),  distinctly  announce  the 
conquest  of  the  country  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar; and  the  chapter  concludes 
with  a  promise  of  future  prosperity  to 
the  Jews  (ver.  21)**  —(Henderson). 

Ver.  8.  "  Pharaoh  ....  the  great 
dragon."  ^^  Pharaoh  was  a  general 
name  of  the  kings  of  Egypt  down  to 
the  time  of  the  Persian  conquest.  A 
nore  appropriate  emblem  of  these 
kings  could  not  have  leen  selected 
than  that  of  the  Heb,  word  tanim,  by 
which  we  are  to  understand  the 
crocodile,  the  terrible  sea-monster  in- 
habiting the  Nile,  whose  usual  size  is 
about   eighteen   or   twenty  feet   in 


length,  but  sometimes  from  thirty  to 
forty.  This  animal  occurs  on  Roman 
coins  as  emblematical  of  Egypt.  The 
*  rivers '  were  the  branches  into  which 
the  Nile  was  divided,  and  to  which 
the  country  was  indebted  for  its  fer- 
tility."— (Uenderson,) 

Ver.  4.  "  I  will  put  hooks  in  thy 
jaws."  According  to  Herodotus  croco- 
diles were  taken  with  hooks  (Job  xli. 
1,  2).  In  the  Assyrian  sculptures 
prisoners  are  represented  with  a  hook 
in  the  under  lip,  and  a  cord  from  it 
held  by  the  king.  ''AM  the  fish  of 
thy  rivers  shall  stick  unto  thy  scales." 
**  If  the  Nile  denotes  the  prosperity  of 
Egypt,  the  fish  are  its  inhabitants 
living  in  prosperity,  that  feel  them- 
selves as  fish  when  they  are  in  the 
water,  but  now  are  placed  on  the  drv 
ground.  They  are  drawn  out  with 
the  drrfgon  ;  the  subjects  fall  with  the 
king,  and  in  consequence  of  his  fall."— 
Hengstenberg. 

Ver.  5.  "  I  will  have  thee  thrown 
into  the  wilderness."  **  The  wihler- 
ness,  in  contrast  with  the  Nile, 
denotes  the  state  of  weakness  without 
help  or  means.    The  contrast  is  taken 

317 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXIX. 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL, 


from  the  natural  conditions  of  Eg3rpt, 
where  the  waste,  awful  wilderness 
borders  on  the  fertile  banks  of  the  Nile. 
The  '  field '  is  the  open  field,  in  con- 
trast with  the  splendid  mausoleums  in 
which  the  Egyptian  Pharaohs  were 
buried  in  the  times  of  their  glory.  He 
comes  down  so  low,  that  he  does  not 
even  receive  an  honourable  buriaL 
Who  would  trust  in  a  deliverer,  and 
make  him  an  idol,  who  cannot  provide 
this  fur  himself,  who  is  destined  to  feed 
the  ravens,  and  will  very  soon  be 
carrion  I  The  king  is,  so  to  speak,  an 
ideal  person,  who  comprises  in  himself 
a  great  numerical  multiplicity.  Thus 
the  statement  is  appropriate :  '  Thou 
shalt  not  be  brought  together,  nor 
gathered.'  Each  of  his  deceased  sub- 
jects was,  as  it  were,  a  part  of  Pharaoh, 
as  in  the  re  treat  from  Moscow  Napoleon 
was  seen  in  every  dead  Frenchman." 
— (Eengatenberg.) 

Ver.  6.  •*  A  staff  of  reed  to  the 
house  of  Israel-"  There  is  an  allusion 
to  the  reeds  on  the  banks  of  the  Nile, 
which  broke  if  one  attempted  to  lean 
upon  them.  (Isa.  xxxvi.  6.)  Israel 
had  trusted  in  Egypt,  in  many  alli- 
ances, but  found  to  her  sorrow  that 
she  had  leaned  upon  a  broken  reed. 

Ver.  7.  "At  a  stand."  This  describes 
the  contraction  of  the  muscles  by  the 
sudden  pain.  "It  pierced  through 
their  shoulders,  and  made  these,  l»y 
injuring  their  muscles,  ligaments,  and 
joints,  stiff  and  rigid,  so  that  they 
could  but  stand  and  naove  no  more. 
So  fared  it  with  the  kingdom  of  the 
ten  tribes  under  Hosea  in  connection 
with  Egypt,  and  likewise  with  the 
kingdom  of  Judah  under  Z^dekiah."— 
Lange. 

Ver.  10.  "From  the  tower  of  Syene." 
Some  translate,  "From  Migdol  to 
Syene."  Migdol  signifies  a  "  fortress," 
and  was  the.  name  of  a  city  lying  to 
the  north  of  Su  z.  Syene  was  situated 
in  the  remote  south* 

Ver.  11.  "Ho  foot  of  man . . .  neither 
shall  it  be  inhabited  forty  years*'' 
318 


There  would  be  no  settled  inhabitants. 
It  this  period  began  the  year  after  the 
capture  of  Tyre,  B.  C.  572.  it  would 
end  in  the  fifth  year  of  Gyrus  (B.  G.532) 
Jerome  remaiks,  the  nvun^^T  forty  is 
one  often  connected  with  affliction  and 
judgment.  The  rain^  of  the  Flood  in 
forty  days  brought  destruction  on  the 
world.  Moses,  Elias,  and  the  Saviour 
fasted  forty  days.  The  interval  between 
Egypt's  overthrow  by  Nebuchadnezzar, 
and  the  deliverance  by  Gyrus,  was  about 
forty  years.  This  prophecy  is  not  to  be 
understood  to  mean  that  literally  no 
foot  of  man  nor  beast  should  pass 
through  the  land.  The  meaning 
rather  is,  that  for  forty  years  the  land 
would  be  in  the  wilderness -state 
of  social  and  political  degradation 
(Isa.  xix.  2,  11). 

Ver.  14.  "Pathros.-  Upper  Egypt> 
being  the  oldest  part  of  Egynt^  and 
from  whence  civilization  and  the  arts 
had  sprung.  "  A  base  kingdom."  It 
was  to  remain  in  a  state  ot  vassalage. 
Amasis  made  it  dependent  on  Babylon, 
and  under  Cambyses  it  was  bumbled 
still  more. 

Ver.  16.  "Which  bringeth  their 
iniquity  to  remembrance."  The 
offered  help  of  Egypt  was  a  tempta- 
tion which  developed  the  iniquity  of 
Israel,  and  made  it  manifest  before 
the  world.  "  Whosoever  beguiles  into 
iniquity,  brings  iniquity  to  remem- 
brance, or  to  the  knowledge  of  I  im  to 
whom  the  iniquity  refers.  For  existing 
iniquity  canuot  remain  unmarked  or 
unpunished  by  the  '  Judge  of  all  the 
earth.'  "—(IJengstenbergJ 

Ver.  17.  "  In  the  seven  and  twen- 
tieth year.*'  There  is  a  departure  here 
from  strict  chronogical  order.  This  is 
the  last  of  Ezekiel's  prophecies,  and  ia 
dated  two  years  later  than  the  vision 
in  Gh.  xl.  It  would  thus  appear  that 
the  prophecies  concerning  foreign  na- 
tions are  grouped  together  in  order  to 
secure  greater  unity  of  subject. 

Ver.  18.  **  Every  head  was  made 
bald,  and  ever  shoi^der  was  peeled^* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ffOMTLETIC  COM ME:^ TAR  Y :  EZEKlEL  chap.  XXiX. 


With  carrying  baskets  of  earth  and  made  himself  master   of  the  whole 

stones  for  the  siege-works.     "  Yet  had  land." — (Henderson). 

ho  no  wages"    He  failed  to  secure  ,,      ^^     ,,-,     «r   »»    xt  i.    t.  j 

results  in  proportion  to  the  time  and  ^er.  20.     "  For  Me.      Nebuchad- 

labour  which  he  expended  on  the  siege  ^^F^\  ^^  ^^^.  servant  of  G.>d,  uncon- 

of  Tyre.     The  Tjrians  had  carried  sciously  carrying  out  the  purposes  of 

awav  the  greater  part  of  their  treasures  *"«  ^^^^^^  ^^^  ^  er.  xxv.  9). 

in  ships,  so  that  little  was  left  for  the  Ver.   21.      "  The  opening   of  the 

invader.     The  siege  lasted  thirteen  mouth  in  the  midst  of  them."  "While 

y®*'**  Egypt  was  subject  to  eastern  rule,  the 

Jews  were  to  be  restored  to  their  own 

Ver.  19.    "It  shall  be  the  wages  land,  and  full  liberty  was  to  be  given 

for  his  army."    "  Jehovah,  whose  work  to  the  prophet  to  exercise  his  ministry 

he  had  performed,  here  promises  to  among  them.    Sacred  history  is  silent 

recompense  him  with  the  conquest  of  relative  to  the  last  days  of  Ezekiel,  bnt 

Egypt     On  breaking  up  from  IV^e  he  there  is  nothing  that  militates  against 

proceeded  to  that  country,  which  he  the  supposition  that  he  returned  with 

found  so  distracted  by  internal  com-  his  fellow-countrymen  from  JBabylon  " 

motionsi  that  he  easily  devastated  and  '^Henderson.) 


E0MILETI08. 
(Vers.  17—20.) 

1.  Men  in  misery  hep  account  exactly  of  their  svjfferings.  Ezekiel  was  in 
captivity,  and  many  other  Jews,  who  diligently  heeded  how  the  years  passed. 
"  In  the  seven  and  twentieth  year,"  that  was  of  the  captivity.  Men  are  best 
chronologers  in  adversity.  2.  When  God  is  about  to  do  great  things.  He  usually 
makes  His  purpose  known  unto  some  of  His  servants.  When  He  was  upon 
destroying  Sudom,  He  made  it  known  unto  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.  17)  ;  when 
about  to  destroy  Eli's  house.  He  revealed  it  to  Samuel  (1  Sam.  iil  11,  12)  : 
the  strange  things  which  befel  the  King  of  Babylon  were  revealed  to  Daniel 
(Dan.  iv.)  ;  and  the  Lord  showed  John  things  to  come  (Rev.  i.  1).  /.nd  here 
He  hides  not  His  purpose  from  Ezekiel.  This  was  so  frequent  of  old,  that 
Amos  said,  "  Surely  the  Lord  will  do  nothing,  but  He  revealeth  His  secret  to 
His  servants  the  prophets"  (Amos  iii.  17).  3.  Heathenish  soldiers  have 
hazarded  their  lives  to  please  their  lieathenish  commanders^  and  all  for  a 
temporal  reward.  The  King  of  Babylon's  army  served  a  great  service  thirteen 
years  together ;  to  lie  before  a  city  was  hard,  their  heads  were  made  bald,  their 
shoulders  were  peeled,  they  laboured  hard,  carried  heavy  burdens,  they 
watched,  they  suffered  heat  and  cold,  and  all  this  f  )r  hope  of  good  plunder  in 
Tyre.  If  heathens  would  do  and  endure  so  much  for  their  commander,  who 
was  an  idolator,  an  enemy  to  God  and  His  people,  how  much  more  should 
Christians  do  and  endure  anything  for  Christ,  their  King,  and  heavenly 
Commander.  If  He  say  Go,  we  should  go  ;  if  Come,  we  should  coma  If  He 
calls  us  to  endure  affliction,  and  suffer  hard  things,  we  should  not  stick  at  them, 
no,  though  it  be  the  jeoparding  of  our  lives,  knowing  He  hath  a  spiritual  and 
eternal  reward  for  us.  4,  Armies  may  serve  long  and  suffer  hard  things,  and 
after  all  he  disappointed  of  their  expectations.  The  King  of  Babylon  and  his 
army  had  no  "wages."  They  expected  great  matters  in  Tyrus,  which  was  so 
rich,  and  full  of  all  sorts  of  commodities,  but  found  nothing  considerable, 
nothing  answering  their  ex[)ectation,  or  sufficient  to  recompense  their  chargn 
and  suffering.    6«  Nations,  lands,  kingdoms,  are  the  Lord's,  and  lie  disposes  of 

819 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHA».  xxa.  BOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL 


them  io  whom  He  pleases.  "I  will  give  the  land  of  E^')pt,"  et  .  (ver.  19;. 
[le  would  take  it  from  Pharaoh  and  give  it  to  another.  Neither  did  ihe  Lord 
o  any  wrong  unto  Pharaoh,  because  be  was  tenant  at  w  II,  and  held  upon  these 
terms  to  be  king  while  he  carried  himself  well ;  but  he  grew  proud,  insolent, 
and  like  a  dragon  lay  in  the  midst  of  his  rivers,  saying,  "  My  river  is  mine, and 
I  have  marie  it  for  myself."  God  therefore  took  his  kingdom  from  him. 
6.  Ood,  in  IJis  holu  and  nise  procuhnce,  makes  use  of  any  instruments  to  do 
Hi$  work.  The  King  of  Babylon  and  his  army  were  working  for  God.  They 
were  His  servants,  though  they  knew  it  not  God  can  make  use  of  the  worst 
of  men  as  well  as  of  the  best  He  can  promote  bis  interests  by  an  army  of 
heathens,  as  well  as  by  an  army  of  Christians.  It  is  good,  therefore,  not  to 
stick  upon  the  instruments  whicii  work  ;  but  to  consider  in  whose  hands  they 
are,  and  who  regulates  tliem.  7.  The  Lord  suffers  not  any  to  labour  Jot  Him 
in  fkiin.  No  even  heathens  and  infidels.  He  gave  the  land  of  Egypt  to 
Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  army,  who  were  the  worst  of  tlie  heathen  (Ez.  vii.  24), 
because  they  served  and  wrought  for  Him.  When  the  midwives  would  not 
destroy  the  male  cliildren  of  the  Jews,  but  save  them  alive,  because  they  feared 
God,  He  dealt  witii  them  and  gave  them  houses  (Ex.  i.  17 — 21).  Jehu  was 
wicked,  yet  because  he  did  the  work  of  the  Lord  in  rooting  out  Ahab's  family, 
in  destroying  Baal  with  all  his  priests  and  temple,  therefore  the  Lord  largely 
rewarded  him  (2  Kings,  x.  30).  If  heathens  shall  not  labour  for  God  in  vain, 
much  less  shall  ("hristians,  who  know  how  to  act  from  a  right  principle,  in  a 
right  manner,  and  for  a  right  end.  If  they  meet  with  hardship  in  His  service. 
He  will  remember  and  reward  it  fully,  not  with  a  temporal  kingdom,  but  with 
an  eternal.  The  Kingdoui  of  Heaven  shall  be  given  to  them  (Lidce  xii.  32).  A 
cup  of  cold  water,  two  mites  cast  into  the  treasury,  a  sigh,  a  tear,  laid  out  for 
God  and  His  interest  shall  not  he  forgotteu.  He  deals  bountifully  with  Hia 
servants  (Psa.  cvi.  7. — (GreenJiill.) 

(Ver.  21). 

"  I  will  give  thee  the  opening  of  the  mouth  in  the  midst  of  them.**  Ezekiel 
had  been  silent  and  dumb  twice  before  (Ez.  iii.  24  ;  xxiv.  27).  And  here,  God 
would  give  Him  the  opening  of  the  moutli ;  by  which  we  are  to  understand. — 
1.  Freedoin  of  speech.  Thou  speakest  things  darkly  now,  with  a  trembling 
voice,  but  when  these  prophecies  are  fulfilled,  and  the  horn  of  the  house  of  Israel 
begins  to  bud,  then  shah  thou  have  more  freedom  of  speech,  and  be  txoubled 
no  more  with  the  false  prophets,  which  sought  to  disparage  thee.  2.  Matter  of 
speaking.  When  Jeconiah,  or  Jehoiachin,  sliould  have  his  prison  garments 
changed,  and  be  set  above  other  princes,  some  freedom  granted  to  the  Jews  ; 
here  would  be  matter  for  praise  and  rejoicing.  3.  Opportunity  for  speaking. 
When  an  occasion  is  given  unto  man  to  speak,  the  rabbins  call  that  the  opening 
of  the  mouth.  Thou  shalt  come  openly  into  the  a^^semblies,  having  matter, 
freedom,  and  opportunity  to  praise  Me.  ''They  shall  know  that  I  am  the 
Lord."  "  They  "  refers  not  only  to  the  house  of  Israel,  but  to  the  Babylonians 
also ;  when  they  should  see  the  things  prophesied  come  to  pass,  then  they 
should  acknowledge  the  Lord.  The  horn  of  Israel  budded  in  the  midst  of  the 
Babylonians,  and  the  prophet's  mouth  was  opened  in  the  midst  of  them. 
Therefore  they  should  know  the  Lord  as  well  as  the  Jews.  (1.)  How  low,  weak, 
afflicted  soever  the  Church  be,  God  is  able  to  raise  it  up  and  to  bring  it  to  a 
flourishing  condition.  The  house  of  I>rael  was  low,  the  horn  of  it  weak  and 
hardly  visible  ;  yet  God  caused  the  iiorn  thereof  bud.  When  we  look  upon 
some  beasts,  they  iiave  no  horns  ;  but  in  a  short  time  their  heads  do  bud  and 
bring  forth  horns,  which  are  their  strength  ;  so  God  in  a  little  time  would  cause 
880 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  XZZ. 


Israel  to  put  forth  strength  and  be  once  more  prosperous.  (2.)  Howewr 
much  the  Church  suffers  from  the  calumny  of  othersy  God  can  raise  up  efficient 
advocates  from  the  midst  of  His  awn  people,  Israel  shall  not  be  for  ever  crushed 
by  the  heel  of  the  oppressor,  or  lashed  by  the  toni^ue  of  the  slanderer.  She 
shall  have  power  to  plead  her  own  cause.  The  sense  of  former  injustice  from 
her  enemies  and  the  knowledge  that  God  is  helping  her  will  fill  her  mouth 
with  eloquence.  God  opens  the  mouths  of  His  servants  that  they  may  comfort 
His  people,  give  praise  to  His  name,  and  make  Him  known  to  the  uationa. 


The  Doom  of  Egypt.    (Chap,  xxx.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.  —  This 
chapter  contains  two  distinct  mes- 
sages :  vers.  1-19  being  an  extension, 
with  more  life-like  detail,  of  the  pro- 
phecy announced  in  chap.  xxix.  1-16 
relating  to  Egypt;  the  second  mes- 
sage, vers,  20-26,  referring  directly  to 
Pharaoh  and  the  downfall  of  his 
dynasty. 

Ver.  1.  "Woe  worth  the  day!" 
Alas  for  the  day  1 

Ver.  2.  **The  time  of  the  heathen." 
Wherein  they  shall  be  punished.  The 
judgment  on  Egypt  is  the  beginning 
of  a  world-wide  judgment  on  all  the 
heathen  enemies  of  God  (Joel  L  15; 
ii  1,  2 ;  iii  ;  Obad.  15). 

Ver.  4.  **  Her  fonndations  shall  he 
broken  dowiL"  Referring  to  the  state 
under  the  figure  of  a  house  destroyed 
from  the  foundation  —  government, 
laws,  strongholds,  and  all  the  defences 
of  the  commonwealth. 

Ver.  5.  "Ethiopia,  Libya,  and  Lydla." 

Cush,  Phut,  and  Lud,  allies  of  the 
Egyptians  mentioned  Jer.  xlvi.  9. 
«  The  mingled  people."  Hired  soldiers 
of  various  nationalities.  "Ohuh."  This 
is  the  only  place  in  the  Old  Testament 
where  this  people  is  named.  Sup- 
posed to  be  the  Kufa  mentioned  on 
the  monuments — a  nation  north  of 
Palestine.  "Men  of  the  land  in 
league."  Not  only  the  Jews  —  the 
people  of  the  covenant — resident  in 
Egypt,  but  all  the  confederates  who 
entered  into  a  league  with  the  Egyp- 
tian king. 


Ver.  9.  "  Messengers  go  forth  firom 
Me  in  ships  to  make  the  careless 
Ethiopians  afraid."  The  cataracts  on 
the  Nile  interposing  between  them  and 
Egypt  siiall  be  no  barrier.  Ill  news 
travels  fast  when  the  feet  of  the  mes- 
sengers are  quickened  with  the  fear  of 
Divinely  outpoured  vengeance. 

Ver.  13.  "  I  will  destroy  the  idols  of 
Noph"  Memphis,  the  capitid  of  Middle 
Egypt  and  tlie  chief  seat  of  idol-wor- 
ship. "  Pathros  " — Upper  Egypt,  with 
No,  or  Thebes,  its  capital,  famed  for  its 
magnificent  buildings,  of  which  colos- 
sal ruins  still  remain,  in  antithesis  to 
Zoan,  or  Tanis,  a  chief  city  in  Lower 
Egypt  within  the  Delta, 

Ver.  15.  "Sin,  the  strength  of 
Egypt."  Pelusium,  the  frontier  for- 
tress on  the  north-east,  called  by 
Hirtius  the  Lock  of  Egypt,  and  by 
Suidas  the  Key  of  Egypt. 

Ver.  17.  "Aven" — meaning  wnfty  or 
iniquity.  The  famous  Heliopolis,  or 
City  of  the  Sun — the  religious  centre, 
the  spiritual  capital.  "Phi-heseth" — 
Bubastis  in  Lower  Egypt,  near  the 
Pelusiac  branch  of  the  Nile,  a  chief 
place  of  idolatry,  and  notorious  for  the 
Cat-worship  established  there. 

Ver.  18.  "Tehaphnehes."  The  same 
as  Daphne,  near  Pelusium,  a  royal  re- 
sidence of  the  Pharaohs  (Jer.  xliii.  7, 
9).  Called  Hanes  (Isa.  xxx.  4).  It 
was  said  that  with  its  capture  the  pride 
or  glory  of  Egypt's  strength  would 
cease.  "  The  yokes  of  Egypt."  The 
Z  S31 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  XXX. 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


sceptres  —  the  tyrannical  supremacy 
exercised  over  other  nations.  Nebu- 
chadnezzar broke  the  sceptre  of  Egypt 
when  he  confirmed  tlie  kingdom  to 
Araasis,  who  rebelled  against  Apries 
(Pharaoh-Hophra). 

Yer.  21.  "I  have  broken  the  arm  of 
Fharaoh.**  Alluding  to  the  defeat  of 
Pharaoh-Hophra  at  Carchemish.  By 
this  battle  the  fate  of  Egypt  was  de- 
cided for  ever.  It  never  rallied  from 
the  defeat  there  sustained :  it  was  the 
beginning  of  the  end.  The  practical 
design  of  the  prophecy  was  to  extin- 
guish all  hope  of  any  aid  from  Egypt, 
and  to  direct  the  expectation  of  the 
exiles  to  God  alone  for  succour. 

Yer.  22.  *<  And  will  break  his  arms, 
the  strong,  and  that  which  was 
broken."  The  military  and  govern- 
mental power  of  Pharaoh  shall  be 
shattered.  The  one  arm  of  Egypt 
already  broken  was  all  the  region  from 
the  Nile  to  the  Euphrates  which  Ne- 
buchadnezzar had  already  taken  from 


him  (2  Kings  xxiy.  7);  the  arm  still 
strong,  but  soon  to  be  broken,  was 
Egypt  proper,  over  which  he  still  held 
a  resemblance  of  authority. 

Yer.  25.  "I  will  strengthen  the  arms 
of  the  king  of  Babylon."  The  Lord 
seizes  the  arms  of  the  king  of  Babylon, 
and  they  are  thereby  kept  strong,  as 
it  is  said  of  Joseph  in  Gen.  xlix.  24, 
''  Strong  are  the  arms  of  his  hands  by 
the  hands  of  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob," 
while  the  arms  of  the  king  of  Egypt, 
left  to  himself,  hang  down  powerless. 

Yer.  26.  "  I  will  scatter  the  Egyp- 
tians." Several  fled  with  Apries  to 
Upper  Egypt,  and  when  Nebuchad- 
nezzar wasied  the  country  he  carried 
many  of  them  to  Babylon,  As  Israel 
and  Judah  had  been  scattered  among 
the  nations,  owing  to  the  corrupting 
influence  of  Egypt,  which  brought  God's 
wrath  upon  the  elect  nation,  so  the 
Egyptians  themselves,  in  righteous  re- 
tribution, were  to  be  scattered  among 
the  nations. 


HOMILETICS. 

The  Overthrow  of  a  Great  Natiok. 

(YersL  1-19.) 

There  is  a  fine  piece  of  military  music  that  represents  the  movements  of  a 
battalion  in  the  distance  ;  faintly  but  unmistakably  the  strains  fall  upon  the  ear, 
growing  more  distinct  and  loud  in  the  steady  advance,  until,  having  reached  the 
scene  of  action  and  begun  operations,  the  music  breaks  into  a  crash  of  wild, 
stirring  melody,  that  strangely  mingles  with  the  noise  and  confusion  of  the 
dreadful  conflict.  Similar  to  this  is  the  voice  of  the  prophet  which,  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapter  faintly  indicates  the  approach  of  calamity,  rises  in  the  present 
chapter  into  shrill,  piercing  tones  of  agony,  as  if  already  in  the  midst  of  the 
destruction  he  prophesies.  In  this  paragraph  we  learn  that  the  overthrow  of  a 
great  nation — 

I.  Is  the  occasion  of  widespread  suffering  and  soirow  (vers.  1-4).  Egypt^ 
which  had  grown  into  the  magnificence  of  a  first-rate  power  and  become  renowned 
in  commerce,  art,  literature,  and  science,  was  doomed  to  falh  It  was  to  experi- 
ence the  crushing  vengeance  of  the  Divine  power  it  had  so  often  resisted  and 
defied,  and  to  sufler  for  its  cruel  treatment  of  the  people  of  Jehovah,  whom  it 
had  so  often  deceived  and  oppressed.  Great  was  the  consternation  of  its  proud 
rulers,  and  loud  and  heartrending  the  wails  of  its  stricken  people,  as  the 
sword  of  the  destroyer  passed  through  the  land.  It  was  indeed  "a  cloudy 
day ;  ^  the  dreariness  of  havoc  and  desolation  Was  intensified  by  the  darkness 
833 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  chpa.  xxx. 


of  despair  that  filled  the  minds  of  the  routed  sujfferers.  It  was  worse  than  that 
night  of  horror  in  the  past  history  of  Egypt  when  the  first-born  were  slain  and 
when  "  there  was  not  a  house  where  there  was  not  jone  dead."  It  is  a  painful 
humiliation  to  a  great  people  to  see  how  suddenly  their  power  is  crushed, 
government  disorganised,  institutions  scattered,  buildings,  the  slow  growth  of 
generations,  prone  in  ruins,  and  the  unsuspecting  citizens  one  day  lulled  into  a 
false  security,  the  next  paralysed  with  fear.  The  refinement  and  luxury  to 
which  they  were  accustomed  render  their  privations  and  distresses  the  more 
acute. 

IL  Involves  the  min  of  its  allies  and  abettors  (vers.  5-9.)  ''Ethiopia, 
Libya,  Lydia,  all  tlie  mingle* I  people,  and  Chub,"  represented  smaller  nation- 
alities who  had  been  either  conquered  by  Egypt,  or  who,  while  retaining  their 
nationality  and  a  certain  degree  of  autonomy,  linked  their  fortunes  with  Egypt 
and  contributed  to  her  advancement  and  aggrandisement.  In  return  for  their 
support  they  claimed  the  protection  of  the  overshadowing  power.  But  when 
Egypt  fell,  they  fell.  When  the  volcano  shatters  the  mountain,  all  the  little 
knolls  and  rocks  that  cling  to  it  are  buried  in  the  general  ruin.  When  the  hurricane 
uproots  the  giant  tree,  the  parasites  that  fed  and  lived  upon  it  are  hurled  to 
the  dust.  The  adulators  who  fan  the  national  pride  with  their  fulsome  flattery, 
and  the  shameless  debauchees  who  employ  their  vilest  ingenuities  in  augment- 
ing the  national  wickedness,  will  be  inevitably  involved  in  the  righteous  judg- 
ment which  is  sure  to  come. 

III.  Is  accomplished  by  an  agent  specially  equipped  for  the  work  (vers. 

10-12).  The  power  that  was  to  crush  Egypt  was  already  hovering  over  the 
fated  nation.  The  vast  populations  of  the  Nile  were  to  be  o])posed  by  a  multi- 
tude of  strangers  whose  warlike  exploits  had  made  them  "  the  terrible  of  the 
nations;"  the  military  genius  of  Pharaoh-Hophra  was  to  come  into  conflict 
with  Nebuchadnezzar,  a  still  more  able  and  victorious  warrior.  It  was  not  the 
first  time  the  great  Babylonish  monarch  had  come  in  contact  with  the  arms  of 
Egypt.  Before  his  accession,  while  Crown  Prince,  he  had  fought  the  great 
battle  of  Carchemish,  which  expelled  Pharaoh-Necho  from  Western  Asia. 
During  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  he  had  been  disturbed  by  the  attempt  of 
Pharaoh-Necho  to  relieve  that  city,  and  during  the  siege  of  Troy,  Egypt  again 
interfered  to  help  the  Phoenicians.  Nebuchadnezzar  chafed  under  these  annoy- 
ances ;  the  proud  prestige  and  pretensions  of  Egypt  roused  his  envy  and  wrath, 
and  he  vowed  to  be  revenged.  All  the  time  Jehovah  was  preparing  him  to  be 
the  agent  to  punish  Egypt,  and  a  rebellion  against  Pharaoh-Hophra  by  Amasis, 
one  of  his  officers,  presented  a  favourable  opportunity.  Gathering  his  army  of 
veterans,  inured  to  warfare  and  flushed  with  recent  victories,  Nebuchadnezzar 
invaded  Egypt  and  utterly  subduetl  it  from  Migdol  to  Syene,  the  extreme 
frontiers  of  the  kingdom,  creating  a  horrible  devastation,  from  which  it  did  not 
recover  for  forty  years.  The  Babylonish  king  knew  not  that  he  was  simply 
the  instrument  of  Jehovah  in  inflicting  well-merited  punishment,  and  thus 
fulfilling  the  words  of  the  Divinely -inspired  prophet.  Whenever  a  nation 
reaches  the  crisis  of  its  infamy.  Divine  justice  fails  not  to  provide  the  means  of 
adequate  retribution. 

lY.  May  be  traced  to  the  enervating  influence  of  its  idolatry  (vers.  13-18). 
The  prime  ofience  of  Egypt  was  its  idolatry.  This  was  the  ground  of  its 
indictment  before  High  Heaven.  Not  only  had  it  debased  its  own  people,  but 
it  had  invaded  the  land  of  the  chosen  people  and  destroyed  their  loyalty  to 
Jehovah  by  the  introduction  of  idolatrous  rites.  Idolatry  is  not  only  a  foe  to 
virtue,  but  a  supreme  insult  to  the  One  only  true  (}od,  whose  nature  cannot 

323 


Digitized  by 


Google 


<nuF.  zxz. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


tolerate  a  riyaL  Where  idolatry  predominates  the  formation  of  a  robust  moral 
character  is  impossible ;  it  is  the  canker  at  the  root  of  national  life,  and  can 
only  end  in  disintegration. and  decay.  It  is  significant  that  the  places  men- 
tioned in  these  verses — Noph,  Pathros,  Zoan,  No,  Sin,  Tehapbnehes — the  cities 
where  idolatry  was  most  gross  and  rampant,  are  especially  singled  out  for 
punishment  No  nation  can  maintain  itself  in  the  front  rank  where  God  is 
persistently  i^'nored. 

V.  Is  the  expression  of  the  Divine  Judgment  on  its  iniquities.  "  Thus  will 
I  execute  judgments,  and  they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord"  (ver.  19).  The 
history  of  the  downfall  of  great  nations  is  the  voice  of  God  speaking  to  the 
nations  of  to-day,  and  saying  that  sin  shall  not  go  unpuni:shed.  "  Tlie  time  of 
the  heathen"  (ver.  3)  plainly  indicates  that  a  period  comes  in  the  history  of 
sinful  nations  when  the  forbearance  of  God  is  withdrawn  and  wrong-doing  is 
allowed  to  reap  its  legitimate  harvest.  Hardened  indeed  is  the  heart  that 
is  insensible  to  the  enormity  of  sin  until  it  is  smitten  with  the  thunderbolt  of 
Divine  wrath.  It  is  wise,  before  it  be  too  late,  to  turn  in  penitence  to  Him 
who  "  retaineth  not  His  anger  for  ever,  because  He  delighteth  in  mercy." 

LESSONa — 1.  National  grea'ness  is  an  opportunity  for  maintaining  the  righl. 
2.  The  greatest  nation,  if  unfaithful  to  Ood^  is  doomed  to  fall,  3.  The  destiny  of 
ail  nations  is  in  the  liunds  of  God. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  2.  "Woe  worth  the  day!" 
A  Pathetic  Lament,  as  uttered — 1.  By 
one  who  foresees  the  nearness  and 
awful ness  of  the  calamity.  2.  By  the 
patriot  distressed  for  the  humiliation 
and  ruin  of  his  country.  3.  By  the 
suflferers  themselves  in  the  wild  tumult 
of  their  agony.  4.  By  neighbouring 
nations  left  defenceless  by  the  fall  of 
their  powerful  patron.  5.  By  those 
who  have  obstinately  neglected  the 
day  of  salvation. 

Ver.  3.  "The  day  is  near."  "In  some 
two  years  you  shall  be  miserably  routed 
in  the  deserts  of  Libya ;  immediately 
after,  the  civil  war  for  eleven  years 
together  shall  waste  you,  and  then 
Nebuchadnezzar's  forces  will  be  upon 
you.  So  that,  whereas  there  may  be 
sixteen  or  eighteen  years  between  the 
prophecy  and  its  fulfilling,  here  are 
thirteen  or  fourteen  of  them  taken 
up  with  sorrows  and  afflictions,  fore- 
runners of  the  rest." — Matthew  Pool, 

— "  The  time  of  the  lieathen."  Ven- 
geance on  idolatry.  1.  Is  mercifully 
delayed  to  give  space  for  repentance 
and  reform.  2.  Will  be  inflicted  with 
324 


unerring  certainty.  8.  Will  fill  the 
victims  with  terror  and  dismay — "  a 
cloudy  day — the  day  shall  be  dark- 
ened" (vers.  3,  18).  4.  Will  be  com- 
plete and  universal  (compare  Ps.  ixxix. 
with  ezegetical  note  on  this  verse). 

Vers.  4-18.  The  Horrors  of  War.  L 

Revolting  scenes  of  human  carnage.  **The 
sword  shall  take  away  her  multitude" 
(ver.  4)  'y  '*  All  helpers  destroyed " 
(ver.  8) ;  "  Fill  the  land  with  the 
slain"  (ver.  11).  II.  Unspeakable  physi- 
cal and  mental  suffering,  "  Great  pain 
— distresses  daily"  (vers.  4,  9,  16); 
"To  make  the  careless  afraid — I  will 
put  fear  in  the  land"  fvers.  9,  13). 
III.  Reckless  toasts  ana  destruction. 
"Countries  desolate — cities  wasted" 
f  ver.  7) ;  "A  fire  in  Egypt — all  helpers 
destroyed"  (vera  8,  14,  16);  "I  will 
make  rivers  dry  and  the  land  waste " 
(ver.  12).  IV.  Loss  and  degradation 
of  youthful  life,  "The  young  men 
fall  by  the  sword — daughters  go  into 
captivity"  (vers.  17,  18).  V.  The 
overthrow  of  established  govemmenL 
"Her  foundations  shall  be  broken 
down  "  (ver.  4) ;  "  There  siM  be  no 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL 


OHAP.  ZO. 


more  a  prince  of  tlie  land  "  (ver.  13); 
'*  I  shall  break  the  yokes  (sceptres)  of 
Egypt"  (ver.  18).  Lessons.— War. 
1.  Unjustifiable  when  ii  is  a  mere  thirst 
for  conquest,  2.  May  he  a  scourge  to 
punish  national  sins,  3.  Arouses  the 
worst  human  passions. 

Yer.  5.  Unlioly  Oonfederadas.    1. 

May  seem  formidable  iii  numbers  and 
strength.  2.  Have  no  principle  of 
cohesion  to  ensure  permanency.  3. 
Are  involved  in  general  ruin.  4.  Their 
fate  a  beacon-warning  to  the  good. 

Ver.  6.  "See  the  justice  of  (Sod: 
Egypt  pretended  to  uphold  Jerusalem 
when  that  was  tottering,  but  proved  a 
deceitful  reed ;  and  now  they  that  pre- 
tend to  uphold  Egypt  shall  prove  no 
better.  Those  that  deceive  others  are 
oommonly  paid  in  their  own  coin ;  they 
are  themselves  deceived.** — M.  Henry. 

Ver,  8.  "As  sinners  perversely  re- 
fuse to  know  God  as  a  God  of  love, 
they  shall  know  Him  as  a  God  that 
hates  sin  and  takes  vengeance  on  the 
sinner  for  all  uuatoned  guilt.  Severe 
as  were  the  temporal  judgments  on 
Pharaoh  and  his  people,  what  are  they 
when  compared  with  the  eternal  judg- 
ments which  shall  descend  on  the 
\GB,iV'—Fau8set. 

Vers.  10-12.  "God  punishes  one 
knave  by  the  other,  who  does  not 
escape  His  judgment,  but  is  only  re- 
served for  the  same ;  as  in  Jer.  zzv., 
the  king  of  Babylon  has  no  other 
advantage  over  those  punished  by  him 
but  this,  that  he  drinks  last.  Wicked- 
ness and  judgment  go  hand  in  hand. 
Power  can  only  be  given  to  the  wicked 
for  a  short  time." — Hengstenberg. 

Vers.  11,  12.  "They  are  the  terribh 
of  the  nations  both  in  respect  of  force 
and  of  fierceness,  and  being  terrible, 
shall  make  terrible  work.  They  are 
the  toickedf  who  will  not  be  restrained 
by  reason  ai^d  conscience,  the  laws  of 
nature,  or  the  laws  of  nations,  for  they 
are  without  law.  They  are  strangers^ 
who  therefore  shall  show  no  compas- 


sion for  old-acquaintance*  sake." — Jf. 
Henry. 

Ver.  13.  The  DelnsivenesB  of  Idola- 
try. 1.  Its  temples  and  worship  a 
standing  insult  to  the  only  true  God. 
2.  Debases  its  votaries.  3.  Powerless 
to  help  in  the  day  of  trouble. 

—  "  The  wrath  of  God  is  especially 
directed  against  the  idols  of  a  land, 
of  whatever  kind  they  be,  whether 
they  be  images  directly  worshipped 
as  gods,  or  riches  which  steal  away 
from  God  the  hearts  of  those  who 
would  repudiate  the  charge  of  idola- 
try, though  guilty  of  it  before  the 
God  who  calls  covetousness  idola- 
try. As  the  Egyptian  On,  the  seat 
of  the  idolatrous  sun -worship,  was 
doomed  by  God  to  become  Aven,  or 
vanity,  so  all  creature-confidences  shall 
at  last  prove  vain  to  those  who  have 
trusted  in  them  rather  than  in  GU)d.*' — 
Fausset. 

—  "There  shall  be  no  more  a 
prince  of  the  land  of  Egypt  "^ — no 
native  or  independent  prince,  ruling 
the  whole  country.  The  dynasties  of 
Egypt  had  subsisted  from  Menes,  her 
fijret  king,  who  is  said  to  have  reigned 
in  the  year  of  the  world  2251,  to  the 
destruction  of  the  Pharaohs  by  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, which  terminated  the  reign 
of  the  Egyptian  princes,  and  showed 
the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  and  the 
judgments  of  God  upon  the  oppressors 
of  His  people. 

Ver.  19. :  comp.  ver.  8,  "  And  they 
shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  God 
revealed  in  Judgment.  1.  When  all 
other  modes  of  revelation  are  per- 
sistently ignored.  2.  Shows  He  is 
not  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  of  the 
oppressed.  3.  Cruelty  and  injustice 
shall  not  go  unpunished.  4.  The  im- 
partial justice  of  the  Divine  procedures 
shall  be  universally  acknowledged  and 
adored. 

—  "  The  true  God,  whom  they  do 
not  mean  to  worship  willingly,  must 
come  to  His  rights  in  the  punishment 
inflicted  on  them.  This  is  not  merely 
an  alarming  but  also  a  comforting 
point  of  view.    The  most  ctMufortloss 

825 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XXX.  HOMILETIC  gOMMBNTARY :  BZEKIBL, 


of  all  thoughts  is  to  have  no  part  in  sword  in  the  conviction  that  by  the 
God.  How  many  transgressors  have  punishment  they  come  to  have  %  pari 
joyfully    devoted   themselves   to  the     in  God  1  ** — HengsUnberg. 

H0MILETIC8. 

A  Proud  Monarch  HuMBLEa 

(Vers.  2a-2«.) 

Pharaoh-Hopbra,  the  king  of  Egypt  referred  to  in  this  paragraph,  was 
a  man  of  considerable  capacity  and  enterprise.  He  displayed  great  mUitary 
genius  and  activity.  During  the  first  years  of  his  reiga  he  subdued  the  island 
of  Cyprus,  besieged  the  city  of  Sidon  by  land  and  sea,  and  took  it  and  made 
him^aelf  master  of  Plicenicia  and  Palestine.  Elated  with  success,  his  pride  knew 
no  bounds,  and  he  insanely  boasted  that  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  the  gods  to 
dethrone  him.  His  illusions  were  destined  to  receive  a  rude  awakening.  Libya, 
harassed  by  the  Greeks,  appealed  to  Hophra  for  assistance.  He  despatched 
an  army  for  their  deliverance,  but  the  Egyptians  were  disastrously  defeated, 
and  very  few  of  the  soldiers  returned  to  their  native  land.  The  sight  of  the 
straggling  and  wretched  survivors  filled  the  land  with  mourning,  ana  indigna- 
tion against  Hophra  was  loud  and  threatening.  It  was  whispered  he  had  sent 
the  Egyptian  army  into  Libya  to  destroy  it,  and  by  surrounding  himself  with 
Greek  mercenaries,  for  whom  he  showed  great  partiality,  he  was  seeking  to  rule 
Egypt  as  a  tyrant  His  subjects  rose  in  rebellion.  Hophra  sent  Amasis,  one 
of  his  officers,  to  quell  the  revolt ;  but  the  soldiers  crowned  him  with  a  helmet 
and  made  him  king.  He  accepted  the  honour,  and  made  common  cause  with 
the  mutineers.  Exasperated  with  the  news,  Hophra  sent  Patarbemis,  another 
of  his  great  officers  and  one  of  the  principal  lords  of  his  court,  to  arrest  Amasis ; 
and  returning  unsuccessful,  the  angry  king  caused  the  nose  and  ears  of  Patar- 
bemis to  be  cut  off.  So  barbarous  an  outrage,  committed  upon  a  person  of 
such  high  distinction,  roused  the  E.:yptians  into  more  violent  opposition,  and 
the  insurrection  became  general  Hophra  was  compelled  to  retire  into  Upper 
Egypt,  where  he  defended  himself  for  some  years,  and  Amasis  made  himself 
master  of  the  rest  of  his  dominions.  The  army  of  Nebuchadnezaar,  taking 
advantage  of  these  intestine  troubles,  swept  down  upon  Egypt  and  wrecked  it 
from  end  to  end.  Egypt  was  made  tributary  to  Babylon,  and  Nebuchadnezzar, 
having  appointed  Amasis  as  his  viceroy,  returned  to  his  capital  laden  with  the 
spoils  of  victory.  As  soon  as  the  great  king  had  departed  Hophra  emerged 
from  his  obscurity,  and  gathering  an  army  of  30,000  mercenaries,  made  war 
against  Amasis.  The  royal  army  was  routed,  Hophra  taken  prisoner,  and  shut 
up  in  his  royal  palace  at  Sais.  This,  however,  would  not  satisfy  the  excited 
populace.  They  clamoured  for  the  unfortunate  king  to  be  given  up  to  them, 
and  gaining  their  wish,  they  immediately  strangled  him.  In  this  paragraph 
the  prophet  presents  us  with  a  graphic  description  of  &  proud  monarch  humbhd — 

L  By  the  partial  loss  of  his  dominion.  "  I  have  broken  the  arm  of  Pharaolu'' 
(ver.  21).  The  loss  of  distant  dependencies  is  often  the  precursor  of  national 
downfall :  it  is  a  sign  of  weakness  at  the  centre  of  power.  It  is  a  loss  of 
prestige  and  influence.  It  is  a  deep  wound  to  a  proud  monarch  deluded  with 
the  notion  that  he  is  everywhere  invincible.  The  bitterness  of  his  resentment 
blinds  him  to  the  lessons  that  the  curtailment  of  his  Empire  should  suggest. 

II.  By  provoking  the  active  opposition  of  Jehovah.     ''  Thus  saith  the  Lord 
Ood,  Behold,  I  am  a^ain^t  riiaiagli.     But  I  will  strengthen  the  arms  of  the 
326 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKJEL,  ohaf.  xxx. 

king  of  Babylon  *^  (vers.  22,  25).  Behind  the  might  of  Nebuchadnezzar  was 
the  invincible  power  of  Jehovah,  who  had  determined  to  punish  Pharaoh  for 
his  iniquity.  The  strongest  monarch  is  powerless  before  the  vengeance  of 
Heaven  ;  the  justice  he  has  outraged  ensures  his  humiliation  and  pain.  In 
Retzch's  illustrations  of  Goethe's  "  Faust"  is  one  plate  where  angels  are  repre- 
sented as  dropping  roses  upon  the  demons  who  are  contending  for  the  soul  of 
Faust.  Every  rose  falls  like  molten  metal,  burning  and  blistering  where  it  touches. 
So  is  it  that  justice  acts  upon  those  who  have  wilfully  abused  its  claims.  It 
bewilders  where  it  ought  to  guide ;  it  scorches  where  it  ought  to  soothe  and 
comfort.     When  God  is  against  us  we  must  be  prepared  for  the  worst. 

IIL  By  shattering  his  military  strength.  '^  And  will  break  his  arms,  the 
strong " — the  portion  of  the  army  siill  remaining  faithful  to  him — "  and  that 
which  was  broken  "  —  the  portion  already  in  revolt.  "  And  the  arms  of 
Pharaoh  shall  fall  down" — he  shall  be  de]»rived  of  the  resources  for  making 
war  (vers.  22,  25).  Pharaoh  had  boasted  of  his  army  and  exulted  in  its 
brave  exploits.  Now  he  is  cast  down  by  the  power  in  which  he  had  trusted. 
Shorn  of  his  military  aggrandisement  he  is  utterly  defenceless  and  weak.  *'  All 
they  that  take  the  sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword"  (Matt.  xxvi.  52)..  No 
nation  is  secure  when  the  military  is  in  the  ascendant.  Gibbon  traces  one  of 
the  potent  causes  for  the  decline  of  the  Roman  Empire  to  the  overwhelming 
influence  of  the  army. 

IV.  By  the  total  dismemberment  of  his  kingdom.  '^I  will  scatter  the 
Eiryptians  among  the  nations,  and  disperse  them  through  the  countries  "  (vera 
23,  26).  Tiie  kingdom  was  torn  in  pieces  by  civil  war,  and  though  Hophra 
made  a  brave  and  resolute  stand  for  some  years,  he  was  compelled  to  yield,  and 
he  himself  perished  by  the  hands  of  his  enraged  subjects.  The  process  of 
humbling  a  proud  spirit  is  sometimes  slow,  but  every  successive  defeat  intensi- 
fies the  suffering,  until  there  is  nothing  left  but  the  wild  helplessness  of  mad 


V.  By  making  him  utterly  dispirited.  *'  He  shall  groan  with  the  groan- 
ings  of  a  deadly  wounded  man"  (ver.  24).  There  is  a  defeat  that  involves  no 
loss  of  dignity  and  may  be  borne  with  fortitude.  In  the  Franco-German  war, 
after  the  loss  of  Sedan,  a  French  officer  came  up  to  the  then  Crown  Prince  and 
exclaimed,  ''Ah,  sir!  what  a  defeat!  what  a  misfortune!  I  am  ashamed  of 
being  a  prisoner.  I  have  lost  everything."  "  No,  indeed,"  was  the  magnani- 
mous reply;  "after  you  have  fought  like  a  brave  soldier,  you  have  not  lost 
your  honour."  But  there  is  a  defeat  that  is  wholly  ignoble  and  demoralis- 
ing. It  has  been  courted  by  a  proud  self-confidence  and  precipitated  by  an 
unreasoning  recklessness.  Self-induced,  it  is  the  bitterest  drop  in  the  cup  of 
the  vanquished  that  the  ruin  in  the  midst  of  which  he  moans  is  his  own  rash 
handiwork.  ''  The  spirit  of  a  man  will  sustain  his  infirmity,  but  a  wounded 
spirit  who  can  bear?"  (Prov.  xviii.  14). 

Lessons. — 1.  Pride  is  the  sure  precursor  of  a  fall.  2.  Military  genius  and  the 
strength  of  armies  are  impotent  when  opposed  to  Divine  vengeance.  3.  Humble  irusi 
in  God  gives  dignity  and  strength  to  the  kingly  office  even  in  disaster. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Ver.  21.   The  Lessons  of  Suffering,     our  suffering  has  been  brought  on  by 
L  Should  lead  us  to  reflect  how  far     our  wilful  sinfulness.   2.  Should  induce 

327 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  XXXL 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIEL, 


US  to  examine  the  principles  on  which 
oar  conduct  has  been  based.  3.  May 
lead  to  salatary  repentance.  4.  Are  un- 
noticed by  the  soul  blinded  with  pride. 
—  "It  is  in  vain  that  men  try  to 
bind  up  and  heal  the  wound  that  God 
inflicts.  Stroke  shall  fall  upon  stroke 
in  rapid  succession  whensoever  (}od  is 
against  men.  The  very  weakest  in- 
struments are  sufficient,  when  strength- 
ened by  Him,  to  execute  God's  ven- 
geance ;  and  He  has  at  His  disposal  all 
tlie  powers  that  are  in  heaven  and 
earth.  How  foolish,  then,  it  is  for  any 
to  remain  in  a  state  of  enmity  with 
God  V'—Fanmt. 

Ver.  22.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God, 
Beliold,  I  am  against  Pharaoh."  The 
Opposition  of  Jehorah.  1.  Is  terribly 
real  and  active.  2.  Must  convince 
us  we  are  wrong,  and  that  we  must 
change  our  attitude  towards  Him.  3. 
Cannot  be  successfully  resisted  by  the 
mightiest  human  combinations.  4.  Can 
be  propitiated  only  by  humble  and 
penitent  submission. 

Vers.  23,  26.   National  Unity.     1. 

Unreal  when  based  only  on  kingly 
and  military  supremacy.  2.  Must  be 
founded  in  the  righteousness  of  the 
individual  life.  3.  Is  broken  into 
fragments  and  scattered  when  God  is 
ignored  and  openly  defied. 

Vers.  24,  25.  **I  will  strengthen  the 
arms  of  the  king  of  Babylon."  The 
Agent  of  Divine  Vengeance.  1.  Is  pre- 
pared and  strengthened  for  the  work. 
2.  May  be  unconscious  of  the  signifi- 
cance of  the  punishment  he  inflicts. 


3.  Can  do  nq  ^otq  than  he  \b  per- 
mitted. 4.  May  himself  become  the 
victim  of  a  similar  vengeance. 

Ver.  24.  **He  shall  groan  with  the 
groanings  of  a  deadly  wounded  man." 
The  Moan  of  the  Defeated.  1.  A 
familiar  experience  of  baffled  huma- 
nity. 2.  Those  who  are  most  elated  in 
the  pridd  of  prosperity  are  most  abject 
and  disheartened  in  adversity.  3.  Ap- 
peals to  the  compassion  of  the  sternest 
conqueror. 

Ver.  26.  "The  true  God,  despised 
by  Egypt  from  ancient  times,  is  thereby 
to  come  by  His  rights  regarding  them. 
If  He  be  the  true  Jehovah,  the  per- 
sonal Being,  the  absolute  Essence,  He 
must  necessarily  be  glorified,  if  not  by 
their  action,  yet  by  their  passion." — 
Hengstenberg. 

—  "They  would  hardly  believe  it, 
and  therefore  are  so  oft  assured  it"  (cf. 
ver.  23).—Trapp. 

—  "We  are  here  struck  with  the 
exact  accomplishment  of  the  prophecies 
against  Egypt,  against  its  cities  and  its 
princes,  by  the  wars  of  Assyria  and  sur- 
rounding nations.  When  the  measure 
was  full  the  visitation  came.  Therefore 
Isaiah,  Nahum,  Jeremiah,  and  Ese- 
kiel  must  have  been  inspired  by  Him 
to  whom  futurity  is  without  a  veil 
What  instruction,  then,  should  the 
ruins  of  ancient  cities,  where  powerful 
kings  once  reigned,  suggest  to  the 
flourishing  cities  of  Europe  who  imi- 
tate them  in  every  species  of  crime 
and  forget  the  Lord,  who  does  what 
He  pleases  in  the  heavens  above  and 
in  the  earth  below )  ^—Sutdiffe. 


The  Dbstruotion  of  Assyru  jl  Typb  of  thb  Destruohon  oy 
Egypt.    (Chap,  xxxl) 

(Vers.  1-18.) 


EXE6ETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1. 
^In  the  eleventh  year,  in  the  third 
month."  Two  months  later  than  the 
prophecy  delivered  in  chap.  xxx.  20. 

Ver.  2.  "  Whom  art  thou  like  in  thy 
328 


greatness?"  The  already  accomplished 
fall  of  Assyria  is  held  before  the  eyes 
of  the  king  of  Egypt  as  a  mirror  of  his 
future.  Twenty-four  years  before  the 
delivery  of  this  prophecy  the  Assyrian 
Empire  was  destroyed  by  Nebuchad- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMlLBTW  OOMMBNTART:  BZBKIBL. 


OHAP.  XXZL 


iiezzar,  who  twenty  years  later  was  to 
conquer  Egypt  The  practical  purpose 
is  the  same  as  in  previous  prophecies, 
to  quench  any  lingering  hope  in  Judah 
of  help  from  doomed  Egypt. 

Yer.  3.  ''Behold  the  Assyrian  was 
%  cedar  in  Lebanon"  Ewald  translates 
the  word  Asshur  as  meaning  the  high- 
est cedar ;  but  Hitzig  shows  that  this 
is  a  mistake,  and  that  the  prophet 
speaks  of  Assyria.  Smcnd  and  M 'Far- 
Ian  apply  the  passage  to  Egypt,  but 
without  sufficient  grounds.  The  total 
destruction  of  Assyria  depicted  in  this 
chapter  was  not  true  with  regard  to 
Egypt.  The  phrase  is  an  answer  to 
the  question  in  ver.  2,  "Whom  art 
thou  like  in  thy  greatness  1"  Thou 
an  like  the  haughty  king  of  Assyria. 
The  cedar  in  Lebanon  was  often  eighty 
feet  high,  and  the  diameter  of  the  space 
covered  by  its  boughs  still  greater,  the 
f^vranietry  perfect  (cf.the  similar  image, 
chap.  xvii.  3 ;  Dim.  iv.  20-22).  "His 
top  was  among  the  thick  bonghs'' 
— '^  among  the  doitds**  (HengsUnberg). 
"The  lop,  or  topmost  shoot,  represents 
the  king;  the  thick  boughs  the  large 
resources  of  the  empire." — Faussei. 

Yer.  4.  "Thewaters  made  him  great" 
— the  deep  sent  out  lur  little  rivers.  "  The 
Tigris,  with  its  branches  and  rivulets,  or 
conduits  for  irrigation,  was  the  source 
of  Assyria's  fertility.  The  deep  is  the 
overflowing  water,  never  dry.  Meta- 
phorically, for  Assyria's  resources,  as  the 
conduits  are  her  colonies." — Fausset, 

Yer.  8.  **  The  cedars  in  the  garden 
of  GKkL  could  not  hide  him  " — could  not 
out-top  liim.  "  No  other  king  eclipsed 
him.  The  total  of  the  great  men  of 
the  earth  Ezekiel  denotes  as  the  gar- 
den of  God,  in  which  he  regards  them 
as  the  counterpart  of  the  garden  which 
Ood  once  planted  in  Eden— of  Paradise 
with  its  glorious  treea  The  compari- 
son is  the  more  suitable  because,  as 
Paradise  was  planted  by  God,  so  all 
human  neatness  has  its  origin  from 
God." — Uengstenberg. 

Yer.  10.  "  Because  thou  hast  lifted 


np  thyself  in  height"  The  greatness 
bestowed  by  God,  being  abased,  is  the 
cause  of  his  fall. 

Yer.  11.  "He  shall  rardy  deal  with 
him" — according  to  his  own  pleasure 
and  according  to  the  Assyrian's  desert. 
"  The  last  Assyrian  king  has  been  ascer- 
tained by  the  inscriptions  to  have  been 
Assiiur-ebid-ilut,  the  second  in  succes- 
sion from  Sennacherib's  son  Esar-had- 
don,  who  planted  the  settlement  in 
Samaria  from  Babylon,  Guthah,  Ava, 
Hamath,  and  Sepharvaim  (2  Kings 
xvii.  24).  The  final  destruction  of 
Nineveh  was  by  the  Medo-Babylonian 
army  under  Cyaxeres  and  Nabopolas- 
sar.  To  either  of  these  the  expression 
'  the  mighty  one  of  the  heathen '  refers. 
The  destroyer  of  Nineveh  is  called 
*  the  mighty  one '  (£1,  a  name  of  God), 
because  he  was  God's  representative  and 
instrument  of  judgment."  —  Faussei. 
"For  his  wickedness" — the  pride  and 
the  conduct  flowing  from  it,  "Where 
pride  has  first  occupied  the  heart, 
there  all  divine  and  hnman  rights  are 
trampled  under  foot." — Hengstenberg, 

Yer.  12.  "All  the  people  are  gone 
down  nnder  his  shadow."  They  had 
formerly,  like  birds,  perched  upon  the 
branches  of  the  tree  in  its  shade 
(ver.  5). 

Yer.  13.  "Upon  his  ruin."  "The  ruin 
stands  for  the  fallen  tree,  as  if  it  were 
a  living  ruin.  The  fowls  of  heaven 
and  the  beasts  of  the  field,  the  wild 
beasts  that  formerly  sought  protection 
under  this  tree,  assemble  now  for  an- 
other object — to  peck  and  gnaw  and 
take  what  they  please  of  its  fruits." — 
Hengstenberg, 

Yer.  14.  "That  none  of  the  trees 
exalt  themselves" — that  the  nations 
should  not  proudly  be  elated  because 
of  their  greatness  and  abundant  re- 
sources. "Neither  their  trees  stand  np 
in  their  height,  aU  that  drink  water" 
— **that  no  drinkers  of  water  may  stand 
upon  their  own  greatness"  (Fairbaim), 
"Forthey  are  all  delivered  unto  death" 
— "  those  proud  trees,  the  grandees  of 

329 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OiUF.  XXXI.  '    HOMILBTIC  COMMBNTARY:  SZEKIML. 


the  earthy  who  were  tempted  to  haugh-  solatiou  to  the  wretched  to  have  oom- 

tinessby  their  greatness,  go  down  into  panious  in  misery/ — FausseL 
the  kingdom  of  the  dead,  where  they 

are  nothing  else  than  ordinary  sons  of  Yen  17.  ''They  that  were  his  arm" 

men  (of.  Job.  iiL  9)." — IJengstenberg.  — ^his  auxiliaries,  the  helpers  or  tools 

of  his  tyranny. 

Ver.  15.  **!  caused  a  monrning." 

The  deep  was  darkened,  the  babble  of  Ver.  18.    **  Thon   slialt  lie  in  tlie 

the  streams  was  hushed,  Lebanon  was  midst  of  the  undrcmncised.''   ''As  cir- 

saddened,  and  the  trees  of  the  field  cumcision  was  an  object  of  mocking  to 

were  faintuess  itself.      In  the  fall  of  thee,  thou  shalt  lie  in  the  midst  of  the 

Assyria  the  former  grandees  of  the  uncircumcised,  slain  by  their  swori* — 

earth  once  more  went  through  the  OroHus.     ''This  is  FharaolL''     "Pha- 

sorrow  of  their  own  fall.  raoh's  end  shall  be  the  same  humiliating 

one  as  I  have  depicted  the  Assyrian's 

Ver.  16.  "I  cast  him  down  to  hell  **  to  have  been.  This  is  demonstrative, 
— Sheol,  or  Hades,  the  unseen  world,  as  if  he  were  pointing  with  the  finger 
I  cast  him  into  oblivion  (cf.  Isa.  xiv.  to  Pharaoh  lying  prostrate,  a  spectacle 
9-11).  ''  All  the  trees  of  Eden  shaU  to  sW-^Fausset.  ''And  aU  his  nmlti- 
be  comforted" — because  so  great  a  king  tude."  His  tumult — the  noisy  mor- 
as the  Assyrian  is  brought  down  to  a  mur  of  multitudinous  life  is  for  ever 
level  with  them.    "  It  is  a  kind  of  con-  stilled. 


ffOMILETiaS. 

National  Greatness  no  Guarantee  of  PERMANENCKi 

(Vers,  1-18.) 

In  this  chapter  we  have  an  example  of  the  dramatic  genius  of  Esekiel,  the 
^schylus  of  the  Hebrews,  and  of  the  luzuriousness  of  his  poetic  fancy.  Seizing 
upon  the  similitude  of  the  cedar,  in  its  stately  magnificence,  its  many  resources, 
its  pre-eminence  in  stature  and  beauty  over  all  other  trees,  and  the  calamity 
occasioned  by  its  fall,  the  prophet  describes  the  overshadowing  greatness  and 
ignominious  downfall  of  Assyria,  and  with  one  vivid  master-stroke  applies  the 
whole  to  the  fate  of  Egypt.     From  the  whole  prophecy  we  learn — 

L  The  prominent  features  of  national  greatness  (vers.  1-9.)  1.  Pre- 
eminence over  all  other  nations.  "  Of  an  high  stature — exalted  above  all  the  trees 
of  the  field  "  (vers.  3,  5.)  Assyria,  though  more  recent  in  civilisation  and  more 
rapid  in  its  growth,  yet  outstripped  Egypt  in  extent  of  dominion  and  brilliance 
of  career.  Ninas,  its  most  illustrious  monarch,  subdued  Media,  Babylonia,  and 
several  other  kingdoms,  and  united  them  under  one  sceptre.  Nineveh,  its 
capital,  built  on  the  banks  of  the  Tigris,  was  one  of  the  most  celebrated  cities 
of  antiquity.  In  the  height  of  its  prosperity  Assyria  overshadowed  in  greatness 
and  power  every  other  contemporary  nation,  as  the  cedar  overtopped  every 
other  tree  of  the  forest.  2.  Enmmous  resources.  "  The  waters  made  him  great 
— his  root  was  by  great  waters''  (vers.  4,  5,  7).  Its  argosies  and  war^boats 
crowded  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  wealtli  flowed  into  its  coffers  in  a  perpetual 
stream,  trade  and  commerce  assumed  gigantic  proportions,  its  mineral  and 
agricultural  products  were  illimitable,  its  public  works  were  on  a  scale  of  un- 
surpassed grandeur,  its  arms  were  everywhere  triumphant.  S.  The  skengtk  and 
protection  o/  other  nations.  '*  His  top  was  among  the  thick  boughs — all  the  fowls 
of  heaven  made  their  nests  in  his  boughs — under  his  shadow  dwelt  all  great 
330 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENT  A  R  Y :  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  XXXL 


nations  *  (vers.  3-6.)  The  nations  conquered  by  Assyria  dreaded  while  they 
hated  its  power,  and  neiglibouring  kingdoms  were  proud  to  be  its  allies.  They 
felt  secure  under  the  guardianship  of  its  shield,  and  shone  in  the  reflected 
splendour  of  its  greatness  and  prestige.  4.  The  envy  of  less  /avowed  nations. 
"  The  cedars  in  the  garden  of  God  could  not  hide  him — all  the  trees  envied 
him  **  (ver.  8,  9.)  For  warlike  courage  and  prowess,  for  majesty  of  bearing,  for 
vigour  of  government,  for  symmetry  and  beauty  of  national  unity,  for  opulence 
and  display,  Assyria  was  the  admiration  and  envy  of  all  nationsdities.  It  out- 
distanced all  competitors ;  it  stood  alone  in  the  shining  brilliance  of  its  own 
star-like  splendour. 

II.  The  unmistakable  ssrmptoins  of  national  decay  (ver^  10-17).  1. 
Vaunting  pride,  "  Because  thou  hast  lifted  up  thyselt  "  (ver.  10).  It  is  difficult 
to  be  at  once  great  and  humble,  and  yet  greatness  is  stable  only  as  it  rests  on  a 
firm  foundation  of  humility.  "  The  greatest  man,"  says  Seneca,  "  is  he  who 
chooses  right  with  the  most  invincible  resolution,  who  resists  the  sorest  temp- 
tations from  within  and  without,  who  bears  the  heaviest  burdens  cheerfully, 
who  is  calmest  in  storms  and  most  fearless  under  menaces  and  frowns,  whose 
reliance  on  truth,  on  virtue,  and  on  God  is  most  unfaltering."  Prosperity 
breeds  self-confidence,  self-confidence  pride,  pride  recklessness,  and  recklessness 
ruin.  The  greatest  peril  to  the  individual  or  the  nation  is  found  at  the  highest 
point  in  the  delirium  of  success.  When  pride  overleaps  sound  judgment  just 
government  receives  its  death-blow,  decay  sets  in,  and  the  end  is  not  far  off. 
2.  Prevailing  vice,  "I  have  driven  him  out  for  his  wickedness"  (ver.  11). 
The  ancient  monarchies — Sodom,  the  Hittites,  Canaanites,  Amalekites,  &a — 
were  ruined  by  their  iniquities.  So  was  it  with  Assyria.  Amid  the  glitter  of  a 
refined  civilisation  we  detect  the  dark  destructive  elements  of  immorality  and 
vice.  "  Righteousness  exalteth  a  nation  ;  but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people  " 
(Prov.  xiv.  34).  "  The  seeds  of  our  own  punishment,"  says  Hesiod,  "  are  sown 
at  the  same  time  we  commit  sin."  3.  Loss  of  allegiance  and  territory,  "  Strangers 
have  cut  him  off — upon  the  mountains  and  in  the  valleys  his  branches  are 
fallen — the  people  have  left  him"  (vers.  12,  13,  17).  The  break-up  of  a 
great  empire  may  be  gradual,  but  it  is  not  less  evident  and  certain.  Distant 
dependencies  are  quick  to  discover  the  weakening  of  the  power  that  so  long 
overawed  them,  and  eagerly  watch  for  the  opportunity  to  fling  off  their  alleffi- 
ance.  The  rebellion  of  one  province  is  the  signal  for  a  general  revolt,  and  the 
mighty  empire  that  has  filled  so  large  a  space  in  the  history  of  the  world 
crumbles  into  ruins.  4.  Sorrow  and  consternation,  "  In  the  day  he  went  down  I 
caused  a  mourning — the  nations  shake  at  the  sound  of  his  fall"  (vers.  15,  16). 
The  struggle  for  freedom  of  revolted  states  and  the  desperate  efforts  of  the 
ruling  power  to  retain  the  broken  remnants  of  authority  is  the  occasion  of 
wide  suffering  and  misery.  The  fall  of  a  throne  that  seemed  impregnable  fills 
neighbouring  nations  with  grief  and  alarm.  If  the  mighty  Assyria  is  over- 
thrown, what  throne  can  be  secure  t  The  foundations  of  national  life  are 
upheaved,  and  the  confidence  of  the  most  astute  rulers  is  shaken. 

IIL  That  national  greatness  is  no  guarantee  of  pexmanence  (vers.  2, 14, 18). 
This  was  the  solemn  and  emphatic  lesson  the  prophet  sought  to  enforce.  If 
Assyria,  the  magnificent,  was  destroyed,  there  was  no  hope  that  Egypt  would 
escape  a  similar  fate.  After  having  ruled  for  more  than  600  years,  with  great 
tyranny  and  violence,  from  the  Caucasus  and  the  Caspian  to  the  Persian  Gulf, 
and  from  beyond  the  Tigris  to  Asia  Minor  and  Egypt,  the  Assyrian  Empire 
vanished  like  a  dream,  and  the  very  site  of  its  vast  capital  was  a  doubtful 
question  for  twenty-four  centuries.  There  have  been  greater  nations  than 
Assyria,  but  their  greatness  did  not  save  them  from  extinction.    They  have 

331 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JHAF.  XXXL 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL 


been  overbalanced  and  crushed  by  the  weight  of  their  own  immensity.  Cen- 
turies slowly  crept  along,  and  it  seemed  as  if  they  would  endure  for  eyer; 
but  tlie  catastrophe  came,  and  filled  the  world  with  horrified  wonder.  The 
mightiest  and  proudest  nation  has  no  room  to  boast.  The  loftier  its  eminence 
the  more  ignominious  its  fall  The  true  greatness  of  a  nation  consists  not  in 
material  prosperity,  but  in  the  virtue  and  uprightness  of  its  people.  Genuine 
religion  alone  can  give  permanence  to  a  throne,  and  only  so  long  as  its  genuine- 
ness is  maintained. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  rise  arid  fall  of  nations  a  suggestive  study.  2.  Moral  great- 
ness not  always  commensuraie  with  material  jpro^feiHy.  3.  Kingly  authority  may  be 
abused  to  a  nation's  ruin. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  2.  "  Whom  art  thou  like  in  thy 
greatness  t "  The  Perils  of  Greatness. 
1.  Apt  to  breed  a  proud,  self-suflS- 
ciency.  2.  May  use  power  tyrannically. 
3.  Under-estimates  the  significance  of 
events  which  threaten  to  undermine 
the  foundation  on  which  it  rests.  4. 
May  grow  beyond  the  control  of  the 
most  successful. 

Vers.  3,  6.  "  His  top  was  among  the 
thick  boughs  —  the  fowls  of  heaven 
made  their  nests  in  his  boughs — ^under 
his  shadow  dwelt  all  great  nations." 
The  Inter-dependence  of  Nations.  1.  A 
great  nation  protects  the  lesser,  and 
they  in  turn  strengthen  and  increase 
their  protector.  2.  A  strong  nation 
is  an  amalgam  of  many  nationalities. 
3.  Nations  help  each  other,  not  by 
jealousies  and  strife,  but  by  commerce 
and  friendly  intercourse.  4.  No  nation 
can  long  remain  independent  that  does 
not  cultivate  the  patriotic  spirit. 

Ver.  6.  "  How  diflferent  the  security 
afforded  by  the  Gk)8pel-tree  I  The 
Gospel -kingdom  gathers  all  under  its 
saving  covert  for  their  present  and 
eternal  good,  and  for  the  glory  of  God, 
and  not  for  self-aggrandisement  and  to 
the  hurt  of  men,  as  is  the  way  of  the 
kingdoms  of  this  world.  Therefore  it 
shall  never  fall,  nor  shall  those  who  trust 
in  its  shadow  (chap.  xvii.  23;  Matt. 
xiii,  32)  ever  be  confounded,  for  it  is  a 
kingdom  that  is  established  on  the  ever- 
lasting principles  of  the  Divine  truth, 
righteousness,  and  love." — FausseL 
332 


Vers.  4,  7.  "  The  waters  made  him 
great — his  root  was  by  great  waters." 
The  River  the  natural  source  of  Em- 
pire. 1.  Affording  a  bulwark  of  pro- 
tection. 2.  A  necessary  element  of  sus- 
tenance. 3.  An  important  highway  of 
commerce.  4.  Giving  fertility  to  the 
soil.  5.  Favourable  for  the  massing 
together  of  great  populations. 

Ver.  4.  "Little  rivers."  "Beneficence, 
justice,  protection,  encouragements 
that  subjects  need  and  good  princes 
disperse  among  them.  So  the  deep 
filled  this  king,  and  he  sent  out  his 
streams  to  all  his  subjects  in  his  king- 
dom."—Poo/. 

Yer.  9.  "Envy  has  an  aspect  in  which 
it  may  be  regarded  as  a  good  for  him 
whom  it  affects.  Let  us  only  reflect 
on  the  proverb,  <  Better  envied  than 
pitied.' " — Hengstenberg, 

—  "The  tallest  trees  are  weakest 
in  the  tops,  and  envy  always  aimeth 
at  the  highest" — Trapp. 

Vers.  10-15.  Fallen  Qreatness.  1.  Oc- 
easioned  by  the  indulgence  of  an  arrogant 
^nriL  "Because  thou  hast  lifted  up 
thyself  m  height"  (ver.  10).  2.  The 
ineritable  result  of  a  life  of  iniquity.  "  I 
have  driven  him  out  for  his  wicked- 
ness" (ver.  11).  3.  The  victim  of  forces 
whofie  grounng  power  was  unnoticed  or 
despised,  "  1  have  delivered  him  into 
the  hand  of  the  mighty  one  of  the 
heathen — strangers,  the  terrible  of  the 
nations,  have  cut  him  off"  (vers.  1 1, 12). 
4.  Abandoned  alike  by  allies  and  depend 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  SZSKIBL. 


OHAP.  XXXt. 


denU.  "All  the  people  of  the  earth  are 
gone  down  from  his  shadow,  and  have 
left  him"  ^ver.  12).  5.  An  object  of 
insuliing  ridicule  by  those  who  had  been 
benefited  in  better  days.  "Upon  his 
ruin  shall  all  the  fowls  of  the  heaven 
remain,  and  all  the  beasts  of  the  field 
shall  be  upon  his  branches  **  (ver.  13, 
compared  with  vers.  6, 18).  6.  A  sug- 
gestive warning  to  the  proud  of  all  nations, 
"  To  the  end  that  none  of  all  the  trees 
exalt  themselves  for  their  height" 
(ver.  14,  comp.  ver.  16).  7.  A  subject 
for  profound  and  widespread  grief  "I 
caused  a  mourning — covered  the  deep 
— ^all  the  trees  fainted  for  him  "(ver.  15.) 

Ver.  11.  "He  shall  surely  deal  with 
him."  "  Heb.,  '  In  doing  ho  shall  do 
for  him — he  shall  do  what  he  list  with 
him,'  as  Tamerlane  since  did  with  6a- 
jazet,  whom  he  carried  about  in  an  iron 
cage,  using  him  on  festival  days  for  a 
footstool,  and  feeding  him  like  a  dog 
with  crumbs  fallen  from  his  table. 
All  which  Tamerlane  did,  not  so  much 
for  hatred  to  the  man,  says  the  his- 


torian, as  to  manifest  the  just  judg- 
ment of  God  against  the  arrogant  folfy 
of  the  proud." — Trapp. 

Ver.  14.  "  To  the  end  that  none  of 
all  the  trees."  "This  is  the  use  men 
should  make  of  God's  heavy  judgments 
upon  others.  Tliis  man's  forefather, 
Sennacherib,  had  a  statue  set  up  in 
Egypt,  says  Herodotus,  with  this  in- 
inscription,  'Let  him  that  looketh  upon 
my  misery  learn  to  be  modest  and  to 
fear  God.'"— TVop^?. 

—  "Genuine  humility  brings  to  ele- 
vation its  only  corrective.  It  fixes  the 
eye  on  the  lowliness  which  in  all  human 
greatness  is  present  with  the  great- 
ness."— Hengstenberg. 

Ver.  18.  "Thou  shalt  lie  in  the 
midst  of  the  uncircumcised."   Death — 

1.  Reduces  all  ranks  to  the  same  level. 

2.  Is  indifferent  to  the  contempt  of 
fancied  superiority.  3.  Reveals  the 
artificiality  of  social  distinctions.  4. 
Its  uncertainty  should  lead  to  a  moral 
preparednesiL 


**  Transferred  to  the  king  of  Assyria,  whom  the  cedar  represented,  this  parar 
bolical  history  tells  us  in  the  first  instance  of  his  unparalleled  greatness.  He 
was  the  head  and  centre  of  a  vast  monarchy  which  was  fed  by  the  tributary 
streams  of  surrounding  nations,  and  gathered  within  its  ample  bosom  the 
resources  of  the  civilised  world.  But  its  peerless  grandeur  proved  the  occasion 
of  its  overthrow,  for  it  only  served  to  nurse  into  fatal  maturity  that  pride  which 
goeth  before  a  fall  How  thoroughly  the  loftiness  of  spirit  in  the  head  of  that 
monarchy  kept  pace  with  the  growth  and  magnitude  of  his  dominion  may  be 
seen  from  the  Heaven-daring  language  of  Sennacherib  to  Hezekiah,  when, 
before  the  gates  of  Jerusalem,  his  servants  openly  blasphemed  and  defied  the 
God  of  Israel.  Most  truly  was  his  heart  lifted  up  in  his  greatness,  and  the 
hand  of  a  righteous  GU)d  must  cast  him  down.  In  an  amazingly  brief  period 
the  mighty  fabric  of  Assyrian  glory  fell,  an  irrevocable  ruin.  It  was  a  lesson, 
on  a  gigantic  scale,  to  the  world  that  then  was,  how  God  in  His  providence 
abases  the  proud  and  scatters  the  mighty  fi'om  their  seats ;  how  all  power  and 
glory  that  is  of  the  world  is  destined  to  vanish  away  as  a  dream  of  the  night 
And  connected  as  it  here  is  with  the  guilt  and  the  doom  of  Pharaoh,  it  was 
to  him,  and  to  those  who  knew  the  will  of  G^  concerning  him,  an  instructive 
warning  and  example  of  that  which  certainly  awaited  him  1 " — Favrbaim, 

"  How  dreadfully  do  the  wicked  scourge  one  another  t  Israel  must  be  the  first 
to  fall;  .then  Egypt,  her  ally;  then  Babylon,  then  Persia,  then  Greece,  and 
lastly  the  iron  power  of  Rome.  These  empires  sank  in  succession,  like  the 
mighty  swells  of  the  ocean,  and  but  faintly  left  their  traces  behind.  They  fell 
by  the  overflo¥ring  scourge  which  came  suddenly  upon  them  and  involved  the 
rich  and  the  poor  in  one  common  ruin.    But  Uie  poor  who  may  survive  have 

ass 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  xzxn. 


nOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  EZSKISL. 


some  resources  in  the  labour  of  their  hands.  Lay  not  up,  then,  0  my  soul, 
thy  treasures  in  earthly  banks ;  build  not  thy  mansion  on  the  sand.  Blessed 
is  the  man  who  has  the  Lord  for  his  rook  and  trusts  alone  in  His  saltation." — 
Sutdiffe. 

Prophetic  Dirges  over  Egypt's  Fall.    (Chap,  xzzil) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  L 
••  In  the  twelffeh  year  " — in  the  twelfth 
year  from  the  carrying  away  of  Jehoia- 
kin  :  Jerusalem  was  by  this  time  over- 
thrown, and  Amasis  was  beginning  to 
revolt  against  Pharaoh-Hophra. 

Ver.  2.  ^  Like  ft  young  lion  and  as 
a  whale  " — any  monster  of  the  waters : 
here  the  crocodile  of  the  Nile.  As  a 
lion  on  dry  land  and  a  crocodile  in  the 
waters,  Pharaoh  is  terrible  alike  by 
land  and  sea. 

Ver.  3.  "  I  will  spread  my  net  *• — 

the  Chaldeans  (chap.  xxix.  3,  4 ;  Hos. 
viL  12.)  "  Jehovah  spreads  His  net  in 
the  congregation  of  many  nations,  and 
gives  it  over  to  them  that  they  may 
draw  it  out." — Hengsknberg. 

Ver.  4.  ^^Then  I  will  leave  thee 
npon  the  land  " — it  will  fare  no  better 
with  thee  than  with  a  fish,  which  must 
perish  miserably  because  it  is  taken 
out  of  its  element. 

Ver.  5.  '<  I  wiUilU  the  valleys  with 
thy  height  *• — "  thy  hugeness  "  (Fair- 
b<tim),  "  The  multitude  of  thy  forces, 
on  which  thou  pridest  thyself,  shall 
only  be  a  great  heap  of  corpses  to  fill 
the  valleys  up  to  the  sides  of  the 
mountains." — Faussei, 

Vers.  7,  8.  "  I  will  put  thee  ont  "— 

extinguish  thy  light  in  the  political  sky. 
In  great  political  catastrophes  and 
the  endless  woe  connected  with  them, 
the  heavenly  luminaries  appear  to  be 
extinguished  (Isa.  xiii.  10 ;  Amos  viil 
9, 10 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  29 ;  Eev.  vi.  12). 

Ver.  9.  '*  When  I  shall  bring  thy 
destruction  among  the  nations" — 
*'  the  tidings  of  thy  destruction  {break- 
age) carried  by  captive  and  dispersed 
Egyptians  among  the  nations"  {Orotius); 
334 


or,  "  When  I  bring  thy  ruins  among 
the  nations — thy  broken  people,  re- 
sembling one  great  fracture,  the  ruins 
of  what  they  had  been.'* — Fairbaim, 

Ver.  14.  <<Then  will  I  make  their 
waters  deep" — *'to  subside  into  the 
deep,  to  sink,  or  decrease  "  (Fairbaim\ 
**  To  settle  and  grow  clear.  Tlie  Nile 
fertilises  Egypt  by  its  black  mud, 
whence  it  is  called  '  the  black.'  Ece- 
kiel  poetically  saw  it  become  a  clear- 
flowing  stream  in  the  Messianic  times." 
— Oeikie.  "  Their  rivers  to  mn  like 
oil" — their  canals  flow  like  oil — em- 
blem of  quietness,  or  sluggish  action. 

Ver.  16.  ^This  is  the  lamentation 
wherewith  they  shall  lament  her  " — 
frequently  repeated.  "  This  is  a  pro- 
phetical lamentation;  yet  so  shall  it 
come  to  pass.** — Orotilus. 

Ver.  18.  "The  daughters  of  the 
famons  nations  " — the  glorious  nations 
themselves,  some  of  whom  are  enume- 
rated in  the  succeeding  verses.  They 
were  as  virgins,  or  daughters,  once 
splendid  in  tJ^e  bloom  of  youth,  lovely 
to  behold. 

Ver.  19.  **  Whom  dost  then  pass  in 

beauty?"  '* Beyond  whom  art  thou 
lovely  1 " — Hengsknberg. — "  Art  thou 
any  fairer  than  others  1 " — OeUde,  •*  (Jo 
down" — ^to  Sheol,  the  under- world, 
where  all  beauty  is  speedily  marred. 

Ver.  20.  ^'Draw  her  and  all  her 
multitudes" — to  the  shades  of  the 
grave,  ye  powers  of  the  under-world. 
As  if  addressing  her  executioners — 
drag  her  forth  to  aeaOk 

Ver.  21.  "The  strong  am<mg  the 
mighty  shall  speak  to  him  " — with  a 
taunting  welcome,  as  now  one  of  them- 
selves. 


Digitized  by 


Googlf 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL 


oHAP.  xxxn. 


Ver.  22.  "Asshar  is  there,  and  all 
her  company — Ms  graves  are  about 
him."  "Tiie  abrupt  change  of  gender 
is  because  Ezekiel  has  in  view  at  one 
time  the  kingdom  (feminine),  at  an- 
other the  monarch.  Assyria  is  placed 
first  in  punishment  as  being  first  in 
guilt." — FausseU  "The  brightest  ex- 
ample of  greatness  going  to  destruc- 
tion.** — Hengstenberg, 

Ver.  23.  "Whose  graves  are  set  in 
the  Bides  of  the  pit."  "  In  the  depths 
of  Sheol." — Geikie,  "  Deepest  in  guilt, 
they  occupy  the  lowest  depths." — Fair- 
baim,  "The  g!*ave  is  deep  even  if, 
materially  taken,  it  be  only  a  few  feet, 
as  a  stream  is  very  deep  if  it  be  only 
six  feet.  The  grave  is  deep  enough  to 
cover  all  glory," — Hengstenberg. 

Ver.  24.  "  There  is  Elam."  "  Placed 
next  as  having  been  the  auxiliary  of 
Assyria.  Its  territory  lay  in  Persia. 
In  Abraham's  time  an  independent 
kingdom  (Qen.  xiv.  1).  Famous  for 
its  bowmen  (Isa.  xxii.  6)." — Faussd. 

Ver.  25.  "Slain  by  the  sword.''  The 
very  monotony  of  the  same  phraseo- 
logy so  often  repeated  gives  to  the 
dirge  an  awe-inspiring  effect. 

Ver.  26.  "Meshech,  Tubal,  and  her 
multitude" — the  Moschi  and  Tibareni 
on  tiie  Pontic  Mountains,  between  the 
Black  and  Caspian  Seas. 

Ver.  27.  "With  their  weapons  of 
war."  "  The  custom,  regarded  as  signi- 
ficant by  the  prophet,  prevailed  among 
them,  to  bury  their  fallen  warriors 
with  their  death- weapons,  in  which 
they  have  their  misdeeds  with  them, 
so  that  guilt  and  punishment  are  united 
in  the  grave." — Hengstenberg.  "But 
their  iniquities  shall  be  upon  their 
bone&"  "Their  iniquities  shall  come 
upon  their  very  bones."— fftftifcitf.  Their 
swords  buried  with  them  bear  witness 


of  their  violence,  and  of  the  retribu- 
tive cause  of  their  own  humiliation. 

Ver.  29.  "  Edom  and  all  her  princes." 
Edom  was  not  only  governed  by  kings, 
but  by  subordinate  princes  or  dukes 
(Gen.  xxxvii.  40).  This  people  had 
shown  a  malicious  joy  in  the  downfall 
of  Judah.  "  They  shall  lie  with  the  un- 
drcumcised."  Though  Edom  was  cir- 
cumcised, being  descended  from  Isaac, 
he  shall  lie  with  the  uncircumcised. 

Ver.  30.  "There  be  the  princes  of 
the  north."  "Syria,  which  is  still 
called  by  the  Arabs  the  north ;  or  the 
Tynans,  north  of  Palestine,  conquered 
by  Nebuchadnezzar  (chaps,  xxvi.- 
xxviii.)  ''—Ghotius.  "And  all  the  Zi- 
donians  "—who  shared  the  fate  of  Tyre 
(chap,  xxviii.  21). 

Ver.  31.  "Pharaoh  shall  be  com- 
forted." "  He  sighs,  is  troubled.  Others 
explain.  He  comforts  himseH  But 
Pharaoh  could  so  much  the  less  derive 
comfort  from  the  view  of  the  others,  as 
they  had  been  not  his  foes  but  his  con- 
federates on  earth,  and  their  defeat 
was  at  the  same  time  his  own." — 
Hengstenberg.  Pharaoh's  comfort  was 
but  a  sigh. 

Ver.  32.  "  I  have  caused  my  terrors.* 

Pharaoh  was  a  long  time  terrible,  not 
by  his  own  power,  but  by  the  opera- 
tion of  God,  who  made  use  of  him  as 
His  instrument.  The  terror  he  had 
been  to  others  shall  be  experienced  by 
himself  and  his  ])eople.  '*  He  shall  be 
laid  in  the  midst  of  the  uncircum- 
cised." "  Used  up,  Pharaoh  is  now  de- 
stroyed by  the  same  power  which  em- 
ployed him  before  for  its  own  ends. 
He  has  in  the  time  of  the  power  vouch- 
safed to  him  proved  himself  unclean 
and  uncircumcised,  and  hence  must 
share  the  fate  of  the  uncircumcised."— 
HengsUnberg. 


335 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ciAF.  xxxn.  BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIEL. 

nOMILETICS. 

The  Tbrbiblenbss  of  ths  Dnmne  Yknoeancdl 

(Vers.  1-16.) 

L  Ptovoked  \tj  the  reddesft  abnae  of  power  (rer.  2\  Egypt  is  here 
represented  as  a. young  lion,  or  enraged  crocodile  working  havoc  by  land  and 
sea  in  sheer  wantonness  and  prodigality  of  strength.  The  needs  and  enjoy- 
mentSy  the  rights  and  privileges,  of  others  are  utterly  disregarded  in  the  reck- 
less and  excessive  exercise  of  absolute  power.  Egypt  had  oppressed  the  people 
of  Oody  and  this  was  not  forgotten.  It  had  already  measured  its  strength 
against  the  Asiatic  forces,  and  had  been  checked  in  its  ambitious  projects.  Its 
defeat  abroad  tended  to  intensify  its  tyranny  at  home,  until  its  oppression 
and  viciousness  became  unbearable.  The  day  of  retribution  was  at  hand.  It 
had  roused  the  righteous  anger  of  Heaven,  and  the  fiat  had  gone  forth — ''  Shall 
I  not  visit  for  these  things!  saith  the  Lord;  shall  not  My  soul  be  avenged  on 
such  a  nation  as  thisf*  (Jer.  v.  9). 

11.  Seen  in  the  ntter  min  of  a  mighty  nation.  1.  Its  potoer  to  harm  ofhen 
shall  he  crippled  (vers.  3-6.)  In  the  graphic  style  of  Ezekiel,  Egypt  is  repre- 
sented  as  a  huge  crocodile  caught  in  a  net,  dragged  from  the  waters,  slung  oat 
upon  the  open  field,  and  left  stranded  in  the  valley,  its  vast  bulk  spreading  on 
the  mountain-sides,  the  land  soaked  and  the  torrent-beds  filled  with  the  gushing- 
out  of  its  blood,  the  birds  and  beasts  of  prey  gorging  themselves  on  its  distended 
carcass.  The  great  tyrant  is  now  powerless  to  oppress,  and  is  in  the  death-grip 
of  the  avenger.  2.  Its  glory  is  quenched  (ver.  7,  8).  The  sun  is  veiled  with 
clouds  and  the  moon  gives  no  light,  the  stars  and  all  the  shining  lights  of 
heaven  become  black,  and  darkness  is  poured  over  the  land.  The  plague  of 
darkness  in  a  former  age  (Exod.  x.  21-23),  filling  the  people  with  awe  while  it 
lasted,  was  temporary ;  but  the  dense  gloom  that  now  settled  upon  the  nation 
meant  the  permanent  extinction  of  its  brilliant  career.  3.  Its  desolation  is  eom* 
plete  (vers.  11-15).  The  sword  of  the  mighty  will  beat  down  the  proud  pomp 
of  Egypt  and  destroy  its  people.  The  cattle  that  browsed  beside  its  rivers 
shall  be  swept  away,  so  that  no  foot  of  man  or  hoof  of  beast  shall  trouble  these 
waters  more.  The  waters  shall  then  settle  and  grow  clear  and  the  canab  flow 
like  oil ;  no  longer  shall  they  descend  violently,  as  the  overflowing  Nile,  on  other 
countries,  but  shall  become  still  and  sluggish  in  political  action.  The  land  shall 
be  stripped  of  its  abundance — ''destitute  of  that  whereof  it  was  full^ — and 
desolation  shall  reign  supreme. 

in  Fills  SQxronnding  nationfl  with  dread  (vers.  9,  10).  The  rehearsal  of 
Egypt's  tragic  fate  shall  paralyse  the  people  of  other  lands  with  fear.  Elings 
shall  shake  with  terror  and  tremble  continually,  as  if  apprehensive  that  a 
similar  punishment  is  impending  over  them.  It  shall  then  be  evident  that 
Egypt  had  a  greater  foe  than  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  one  who  could  not  be  insulted 
and  ignored  with  impunity.  ''Then  shall  they  know  that  I  am  the  Lord* 
(ver.  151  The  desolating  weapon  was  the  sword  of  Babylon ;  but  it  was  bran- 
dished oy  the  arm  of  the  invisible  Jehovah*  If  men  will  not  seek  to  know 
God  in  the  tenderness  of  His  mercy,  they  shall  know  Him  in  the  severity  of 
His  judgment  "Let  all  the  earth  fear  the  Lord :  let  all  the  inhabitants  of  the 
world  stand  in  awe  of  Hinu  He  bringeth  the  counsel  of  the  heathen  to  nought: 
He  maketh  the  devices  of  the  people  of  none  efifect*  (Pa.  Trriii.  8,  10)l 
336 


Digitized  by 


Googlf 


nOMlLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  obaf.  tttw, 

lY.  Is  the  occasion  of  national  sorrow.  "  This  is  the  lamentation  that  they 
will  raise  ;  the  daughters  of  the  nations  shall  chant  it :  they  will  sing  this  dirge 
for  Eg3'pt  and  for  all  her  multitude  "  (ver.  16).—Geikie,  London  witnessed  the 
other  day  a  remarkable  military  pageant,  when  the  remains  of  Field-Marshal  Lord 
Napier  of  Magdala,  the  hero  of  many  a  fierce  battle  fought  for  his  country,  were 
borne  in  funeral  procession  to  their  last  resting-place  in  St.  Paul's  Cathedral 
The  packed  masses  of  the  people  in  the  streets  silently  and  sorrowfully  saluting 
the  coffin  as  it  passed  ;  the  solemn,  melting  music  of  the  Grenadiers  and  Scots 
Greys,  the  best  musicians  of  the  British  army,  playing  the  funeral  march  ;  the 
long  lines  of  Guards  in  soldierly  array,  and  the  softened  sunshine  occasionally 
brightening  the  scene,  made  up  a  wonderfully  imposing  and  impressive  spec- 
tacle. In  the  presence  of  royalty  and  the  highest  magnates  of  the  realm,  and 
amid  the  tears  of  an  appreciative  people,  the  body  of  the  great  warrior  was 
reverently  placed  alongside  the  tombs  of  heroes  who  had  won  distinction  in 
many  a  hwi-fought  battle  by  land  and  sea.  A  nation  may  well  mourn  the 
loss  of  its  brave  defenders ;  but  who  can  fathom  the  depths  of  grief  of  a  people 
wildly  lamenting  over  national  disaster — the  throne  overturned,  government 
disorganised,  homes  wrecked,  the  land  ravaged  by  the  ruthless  destroyer,  and 
chaos  everywhere ! 

Lessons. — 1.  Divine  vengeance  is  never  inflicted  wUhoul  ample  warning,  2.  Is 
hosed  on  the  highesi  principles  of  justice  and  equity.  3.  JFUl  be  a  terriUe  awakening 
to  the  impenitent  widced. 


GEBM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  2-16.   «*  With  the  Chaldean  ness  (vers.  7,  8).     4.   Conquered  diffi- 

conquest  the  political  ascendancy  of  cutties  the  admiration  and  the  fear  of 

Egypt  began  finally   to   decline;  the  others. 
arm  of  its  power  was  for  ever  broken  ; 

its  monarch  could  no  more  move  about         Ver.  2.  "  Take  up  a  lamentation." 

as  he  pleased  and  trouble  the  nations ;  '*  Ministers  that  would  affect  others 

he  was  henceforth  to  reside  in  com-  with   the  things  of  God  must  make 

paratively  still  and  peaceful  waters,  it  appear  that  they  are  themselves 

himself  on  every  hand  restrained  and  affected  with  the  miseries  that  sinners 

hemmed  in  by  superior  force,  and  all  bring  upon  themselves  by  their  sins, 

his  pride  and  glory,  as  the  head  of  It  becomes  us  to  weep  and  tremble  for 

empire,  reduced  to  perpetual  desola-  those  that  will  not  weep  and  tremble 

tion.    It  is  Egypt's  doom  as  a  kingdom,  for  themselves,  to  try  if  thereby  we 

not  the  mere  condition  of  its  soil  and  may  set  them  weeping,  set  them  a- 

surface,  that  the  prophet  throughout  trembling." — M.  Henry. 
has  in  view." — Favrhaim.  —  "Lie  a  young  lion  and  crocodile  " 

— "for  pride,  fierceness,  and  cruelty. 

Vers.  2-10.  Diffictdties  and  their  Thou  domineerest  over  sea  and  land, 

Ck>nq,ueBt.      1.    Difficulties   terrify    the  far  and   wide;  thou  playest  r«SK." — 

weak  and  indolent.    "  Like  a  young  lion  Trapp. 

— as  a  whale  in  the  seas"  (ver.  2).     2.         —  "  Troubledst  the  waters."     "  A 

Dijficidties  are  resolutely  encountered  by  great  deal  of  disquiet  is  often  given  to 

the  brave  and  strong,     "I  will  spread  the    world  by  the  restless  ambition 

My  net  over  thee  "  (ver.  3).     3.  GrecU  and  implacable  resentments  of  proud 

difficulties  are  not  conquered  without  great  princes,      Ahab  is  he  that  troubles 

havoc      (L)  Their  hugeness  evident  Israel,  and  not  Elijah.     The  princes 

in  their  ruins  (vers.  4-6^     (2.)  Their  and  conquerors  of  this  earth,  who,  like 

dazzling  glamour  quenched  in  dark-  Pharaoh,  gain  a  great  name  by  aggres- 

Y  837 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ouAy.xxxn. 


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY ;  EZEKIEU 


sion  and  violence,  are  no  better  in 
God'»5  eyes  than  beasts  which  live  by 
making  the  weaker  their  prey,  or 
monsters  of  the  deep  which  *  trouble 
the  waters  and  foul  the  rivers '  in  pur- 
suit of  their  victims." — Fat^sset. 

Ver.  3.  "A  large,  long,  and  wide  net 
drawn  out  to  full  extent,  with  which 
both  lions  and  crocodiles  might  be 
taken,  and  in  which  this  lion  and 
crocodile  should  certainly  be  taken, 
for  God,  whose  hand  never  errs,  will 
spread  tlie  net.  In  brief,  war  by  land 
and  sea,  by  a  confederacy  of  many 
people  against  Hophra,  shall  be  God's 
net,  wherein  he  shall  be  taken,  kept 
a  prisoner  as  he  was,  and  at  last 
strangled." — Pool. 

—  **He  will  repay  them  in  their 
own  coin.  'All  they  that  take  the 
sword  shall  perish  with  the  sword' 
(Matt,  xxvl  22).  As  they  had  spread 
their  net  over  weaker  peoples,  with 
a  company  of  many  peoples,  so  God 
will  spread  out  His  net  over  them 
with  a  company  of  stronger  people,  the 
Chaldeans,  who  should  bring  them  up 
as  fishes  caught  in  His  net  (Hab.  i 
U-I7y—Faiisset. 

Vers.  7, 8.  Darkne8&  1.  A  symbol  of 
destruction  and  mourning.  2.  A  proof 
of  the  awfulness  and  completeness  of 
the  destruciion.  3.  Suggests  how  all 
the  forces  of  nature  are  subservient  to 
the  purpose  of  an  avenging  Deity. 

—  "  As  a  torch  is  extinguished.  A 
description  of  great  sorrows,  fears, 
troubles,  and  perplexities.  Or  it  may 
intimate  particularly  the  total  ruin  of 
the  whole  kingdom,  in  which  the  best, 
greatest,  and  noblest  parts  are:  for 
heaven  suppose  the  government,  the 
sun  the  king,  the  moon  the  queen,  the 
stars  the  princes  and  nobles,  the  bright 
lights  the  most  eminent  of  the  subjects 
for  wisdom  and  understanding,  and  the 
land  the  common  people.  All  shall  be 
covered  with  clouds  and  darkness  of 
misery  and  sorrow." — Pool. 

Ver.  8. 1  will  involve  thee,  thy  house, 
thy  people,  and  the  whole  land  in 
desolation  and  woe. 
338 


Ver.   10.    Beasons   for   Fear.      1. 

When  conscious  of  personal  sin.  2. 
When  the  sword  of  vengeance  is  bran- 
dished before  our  eyes.  3.  When  we 
witness  the  fall  of  the  proud  and  great 
4.  When  in  trembling  uncertainty  as 
to  the  nearness  and  manner  of  our 
approaching  fate. 

—  "All  they  who  had  admired 
the  grandeur  and  power  of  Egypt 
when  the  tidings  of  her  destruc- 
tion  should   be    brought,   would    be 

*  amazed  and  horribly  afraid.*  The 
kings,  whosoever  were  conscious  of 
similar  sins  to  those  of  Pharaoh,  would 

*  tremble,  every  man  for  his  own  life, 
when  the  Lord  should  brandish  His 
sword  before  them.'  Those  who  ad- 
mire the  pomp  of  worldly  greatness 
shall  necessarily  be  astonished  at  its 
downfall,  and  shall  tremble  for  them- 
selves as  involved  in  the  same  con- 
demnation as  the  world  which  they 
love.  But  the  fall  of  earthly  things 
will  not  take  by  surprise  nor  alarm 
the  children  of  God,  whose  portion  is 
not  in  this  world,  and  who  know  its 
real  emptiness." — FausseL 

Ver.  12.  "Spoil  the  pomp."— "Break 
her  strength,  rob  her  treasures,  sack 
her  cities,  captivate  her  people,  make 
the  kingdom  tributary,  and  so  stain 
all  her  glory." — Pool 

Vers.  11-16.  The  Desolation  of  the 
Sword.  1.  The  occasion  of  savage 
delight  to  the  warlike.  2.  Silences 
the  proud  boaster.  3.  Depreciates  the 
value  of  human  life.  4.  The  foe  of 
commerce  and  national  prosperity.  5. 
Is  the  theme  of  bitter  lamentation 
among  the  suffering  survivors. 

Vers.  11, 12.  "Those  that  delight  in 
war  and  are  on  all  occasions  entering 
into  contention  may  expect  some  time 
or  other  to  be  engaged  with  those  who 
may  prove  too  hard  for  them.  Pharaoh 
had  been  forward  to  quarrel  with  his 
neighbours,  and  to  come  forth  with 
his  rivers — his  armies.  God  will  now 
give  him  enough  of  it," — M.  Eenrg. 

Ver.  13.  "  There  should  be  so  few 
men  left  in  Egypt  that  they  should 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


not,  as  formerly,  disturb  the  waters  bj  that  talked  with  them  might  perceive 
digging,  swimming,  or  rowing  on  them;  how  much  it  filled  them.  But  God 
or  no  more  trouble  the  waters  with  the  can  soon  make  their  country  '  destitute 
passing  of  mighty  armies  over  them  to  of  that  whereof  it  is  full'  It  is,  there- 
invade  their  neighbours;  so  few  horses  fore,  our  wisdom  to  be  full  of  treasures 
or  cows  that  they  should  not  at  water-  in  heaven.'' — M,  Henry. 
ing  times,  or  in  the  heat  of  the  day,  —  "  Then  shall  they  know  that  I 
foul  the  waters  by  running  into  them  am  the  Lord.''  "  The  awful  and  de- 
and  stamping  or  trampling  in  them ;  structive  visitation  shall  be  sanctified 
but  the  waters  should  continue  pure  to  those  that  survive;  it  shall  yield 
and  undisturbed." — Pool,  them  important  instruction,  and  they 

shall  give  glory  to  My  power  and 

Ver.  15.  "  God  can  soon  empty  those  justice,  while  a  sensible  conviction  of 

of  this  world's  goods  that  have   the  the  vanity  of  the  world,  and  of  the 

greatest  fulness  of  those  things  and  fading  and   perishing    nature   of   all 

are  full  of  them  ;  that  enjoy  most,  and  things  in  it,  shall  draw  their  affections 

have  their  hearts  set  upon  those  en-  from  it  and  from  all  that  it  contains, 

joyments.    The  Egyptians  were  full  of  and  induce  them  to  seek  an  acquaint- 

their  pleasant  and  plentiful  country  ance  with  Me  as  their  portion  and 

and  its  rioh  productions.    Every  one  happiness." — Bemom. 


H0MILETIC8. 

A,  FuNSRAL  Ohakt  ovbb  thb  Graves  of  Fallbn  NATiomL 

(Vers.  17-32.) 

In  this  paragraph  Ezekiel,  the  prophet  of  the  captivity,  foresees  the  approach- 
ing downfdl  of  the  great  monarchies  who  had  oppressed  and  were  then  op- 
pressing his  beloved  Israel  He  sees  them  marching  to  the  grave  in  slow  and 
solemn  funeral  pomp,  and  as  if  standing  by  the  huge  sepulchre  into  which  they 
disappear,  chanted  over  them  a  sad,  pathetic  dirge  which  rises  here  and  there 
into  strains  of  the  wildest  and  weirdest  character.  "The  seers  of  Judah," 
writes  Milman,  "  uttered  their  sublime  funeral  anthems  over  the  greatness  of 
each  independent  tribe  or  monarchy  as  it  was  swallowed  up,  first  in  the  empire 
of  Assyria,  and  then  Chaldea.  They  were  like  the  tragic  chorus  of  the  awful 
drama  which  was  unfolding  itself  to  the  Eastern  world."  This  funeral  chant  of 
Ezekiel's  has  in  it  more  of  sorrow  than  exultation.  The  old>world  kingdoms, 
with  all  their  tyranny  and  oppression,  are  not  allowed  to  pass  away  without  a 
sigh.  He  is  friendless  indeed  who  does  not  leave  behind  a  solitary  mourner. 
Observe — 

I.  That  the  grave  brings  the  proudest  nationalities  to  a  common  level 
Egypt,  with  her  sedate  antiquity  and  stately  pride;  Assyria,  with  her  vast 
empire  and  riches;  Elam,  with  her  strong-armed  bowmen;  Edom,  with  her 
fierce  highlanders;  and  the  princes  and  kinglets  of  the  North — Meshech,  Tubal, 
and  the  Zidonians — are  all  buried  in  the  same  earth  over  which  their  mighty 
armies  tramped.  The  clash  of  arms,  the  flutter  of  banners,  the  noisy  pomp  of 
regal  magnificence,  the  shout  of  triumph,  and  the  groan  of  defeat  are  alike 
unheard  and  unheeded.  The  rules  of  etiquette,  the  rights  of  precedence  and 
supremacy,  about  which  so  many  bloody  battles  were  fought^  are  now  utterly 
meaningless. 

II.  Thi^t  the  grave  knows  no  distinction  of  persons.    Prince  and  peasant, 

839 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  xxxn.  BOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIKU 


the  general  and  the  humhlest  soldier^  the  great  in  wisdom,  wealth,  and  power, 
lie  side  by  side  with  the  common  multitude ;  rich  and  poor,  circumcised  and 
uncircumcised,  are  huddled  together  in  the  same  capacious  sepulchre.  The 
Egyptian,  with  bis  fastidious  notions  of  cleanliness,  shrank  from  the  contamina- 
tion of  tlie  uncircumcised,  but  the  grave  effectually  cured  all  such  scruples.  The 
reflective  Cyrus,  the  great  Persian  conqueror,  saw  how  completely  the  grave 
would  strip  him  of  his  imperial  glory  when  he  ordered  this  inscription  to  be 
engraven  on  his  tomb — "  0  man  t  whatsoever  thou  art,  and  whencesoever  thou 
comes t,  I  know  that  thou  wilt  come  to  the  same  condition  in  which  I  now  am. 
I  am  Cyrus,  who  brought  the  empire  to  the  Persians:  do  not  envy  me,  I 
beseech  thee,  this  little  piece  of  ground  which  covereth  my  body  1  ** 

III  That  the  grave  reveals  the  vanity  of  national  strife  and  ambition. 

Questions  of  boundaries,  official  privilege,  insulted  honour,  or  tarnished  fame 
dwindle  into  utter  insignificance.  Great  warriors  have  cherished  to  the  last 
the  memory  of  their  victories  and  parted  reluctantly  with  the  trophies  of  their 
ambition.  A  king  of  Prussia,  conscious  of  the  near  approach  of  death,  desired 
to  see  his  army  defile  before  him  for  the  last  time,  and  his  couch  was  moved  to 
a  window  where  by  reflection  in  a  mirror  he  was  able  to  take  a  last  adieu  of  his 
troops  as  they  marched  past ;  and  it  is  said  that  Napoleon  Bonaparte  ordered 
himself  to  be  seated  on  his  deathbed  and  arrayed  in  military  dress  that  he 
might  meet  the  King  of  Terrors  as  he  had  been  accustomed  to  meet  his  mortal 
foes.  In  the  grave  all  military  glory  is  for  ever  quenched.  Philip  IIL  of  Spain, 
who  strove  to  do  his  duty  as  king,  once  said  he  would  rather  lose  his  kingdom 
than  willingly  ofiend  God.  Convinced  of  the  vanity  of  all  imperial  ambitions 
in  comparison  with  the  claims  of  religion,  he  broke  forth  with  the  lament — 
<<  Would  to  God  I  had  never  reigned !  Oh  that  those  years  I  have  spent  in 
my  kingdom  I  had  lived  a  solitary  life  in  the  wilderness  I  Oh  that  I  had  lived 
a  life  alone  with  God  1  What  doth  all  my  glory  profit^  but  that  I  have  so  much 
the  more  torment  in  my  death  1 " 

lY.  That  it  is  but  meagre  comfort  to  the  fallen  that  in  the  grave  they 
share  the  same  fate  as  those  who  have  been  as  great  as  they  "  (ver.  31).  Tet 
this  is  all  the  comfort  some  will  have  :  it  was  all  that  proud  Egypt  found.  It 
is  no  satisfaction  and  but  little  relief  to  the  sufferer  to  know  that  many  others 
suffer  with  him.  In  this  verse  there  is  a  clear  indication  of  a  consciousness  after 
death.  This  indestructible  consciousness  will  be  the  vehicle  of  future  joy  or 
sorrow. 

Lessons. — 1.  National  reverses  evoke  synvpathy.  2.  The  ffraive  suggests  tnang 
salutary  reflections.  S.  The  highest  and  best  work  we  do  survives  the  tragedy  of  the 
grave. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vera    17-S2.    ^  Thus    closes    the  the  two  parties  steadily  kept  in  view ; 

Divine    word    against   Pharaoh    and  the  judgment  that  lights  on  Israel  is 

his  kingdom ;  they  go  down  to  the  only  partial  and  temporary,  the  power 

land  of  forgetfulness  in  common  with  and  dominion  again  return  to  him  and 

all  the  surrounding  heathen  who  stood  settle  in  everlasting  possession,  while 

in  a  position  of  rivalry  or  antagonism  the   neighbouring  kingdoms  tliat  in 

to    Israel.      Throughout    the    whole  turn  aspired  to  the  supremacy  fall  to 

series  of  the  predictions  we  find  the  rise  no  more.     The  question  virtually 

one  grand  point  of  difference  between  discussed  in  all  such  prediptions  is  thia 
340 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL. 


OBAP.  XXXU. 


— ^Who  shall  give  law  to  the  world; 
Israel,  or  the  rival  nations  of  heathen- 
dom t  And  the  answer  returned, 
though  with  manifold  variety  of  form, 
is  perpetually  the  same.  All  other 
dominions  are  destined  to  pass  away ; 
that  of  Israel  alone  becomes  perma- 
nent and  universal  This  is  to  be 
sought  only  in  Christ,  in  whom  all 
that  peculiarly  belonged  to  Israel  con- 
centrates itself  and  rises  to  its  proper 
perfection.  In  Him,  therefore,  it  is 
that  the  pre-eminence  destined  for 
Israel  has  its  accomplishment,  and  all 
the  external  victories  gained  over  the 
surrounding  heathen,  or  the  advan- 
tages granted  to  Israel  in  preference 
to  them,  were  but  the  sign  and  prelude 
of  that  glorious  ascendancy  over  the 
whole  earth  which  in  right  is  already 
Christ's,  and  in  due  time  shall  also  be 
His  in  actual  possession." — FaWhairn. 
—  **  The  prophet  in  this  funeral  song 
brings  Egypt  into  connection  with 
the  congeries  of  nations  on  which  the 
Chaldean  judgment  fell.  The  prac- 
tical aim  is  expressed  in  the  words  of 
the  Psalmist — '  Trust  not  in  oppression 
and  fraud ;  if  riches  increase,  set  not 
your  heart  on  them.'  The  prophecy 
is  fitted  to  call  forth  a  deep  feeling  of 
the  vanity  of  earthly  things ;  to  warn 
against  carnal  confidence  in  earthly 
power  and  its  abuse  by  violence  and 
wrong;  and,  what  comes  specially  into 
account  here,  'to  guard  against  envying 
those  who  enjoy  such  power  for  the 
moment.  Human  nature,  what  is  iti 
In  an  hour  it  faUs  to  the  ground  1" — 
Hengdenberg. 

Ver.  la  "The  Egyptians  affected  to 
be  buried  either  in  the  isle  Chemnis 
or  in  the  Pyramids.  Their  kings  and 
great  ones  thus  would  be  laid  by  them- 
selves, but  Ezekiel  provides  them  their 
grave  among  common  people — buries 
them  where  they  fall.  They  shall  not 
have  what  they  account  so  much  of  in 
their  funeral." — PooL 

**  Where  they  ao  equal  bonoor  thare^ 
Who  buried  or  onbnried  are ; 
Where  Agamemnon  knows  no  more 
Than  Ims,  be  oondemned  before ; 
Where  fair  Achilles  and  Thersites  lie. 
Equally  naked,  poor,  and  dry." 


Yer.  19.  Beauty.  1.  A  rare  endow- 
ment,  whether  national  or  personal 
2.  No  modem  type  that  has  not  been 
equalled  in  the  past.  3.  No  protection 
against  the  ravages  of  time.  4.  Un- 
distinguishable  when  the  grave  has 
done  its  work,  5.  Its  possession  no 
ground  for  vain  boasting. 

—  "  *  Art  thou  better  than  others 
that  thou  shouldst  not  die  and  be 
laid  in  dustt  Speak,  Hophra,  if  thou 
hast  any  privilege  to  plead,  what  hast 
thou  to  say  why  thou  shouldst  not  go 
down  to  the  pit  as  a  despised  mor- 
tal t '  The  prophet,  hearing  no  plea  of 
privilege,  says  sarcastically,  *  Oo  down  ; 
take  up  thy  lodging,  thy  long,  dark, 
dismal  recess,  where  thy  dust  and 
bones  shall  never  be  known  by  any 
royal  figure.'  "—Pool, 

— "How  little  does  it  signify  whether 
a  mummy  be  well  embalmed,  wrapped 
round  with  rich  stuff,  and  beautijfully 
painted  on  the  outside  or  not!  Go 
down  into  the  tombs,  examine  the 
niches,  and  see  whether  one  dead  car- 
cass be  preferable  to  another." — A. 
Clarke. 

Ver.  20.  "  Make  no  ceremony  more 
than  usually  is  made  when  common 
soldiers,  slain  in  the  field  where  the 
battle  is  fought,  are  dragged  by  scores 
into  mighty  pits  and  thrown  into  them 
promiscuously,  or,  suppose  any  of  them 
unwilling  to  stoop,  draw  them  to  it 
against  their  will." — PooL 

Vers.  21-32.  The  Grim  Waloome  of 
the  Dead.  A  welcome.  1.  To  the  great 
majority— *^  AH  her  multitude."  2.  To 
defeat— ''Siain  by  the  sword."  3.  To 
htmUiaiion  and  shame — *'  They  lie  with 
the  uncircumcised,  though  they  caused 
terror  in  the  land  of  the  living."  4. 
To  whatever  comfort  may  be  found  in 
sharing  ihe  same  fate  as  great  conquerors 
— "Pharaoh  shall  see  them  and  be 
comforted." 

Vers.  22-26.  "  His  graves  are  about 
him."     The  Gh»T6B  o/t  our  Kindred. 

1.  Recall  many  tender  memories  of 
affection,  acts  of  kindness,  and  words 
of  counsel  received  from  those  who 
sleep  so  peacefully  there,     i.  Arrest 

S41 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORAP.  XXXIIL 


UOMILETW  COMMEyTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


the  tendency  to  reproach  those  who 
are  gone  for  any  injustici;  they  may 
have  done  to  us  when  living.  3.  Re- 
mind us  we  shall  soon  be  culled  to 
share  their  resting  -  place,  and  how  . 
utterly  useless  all  worldly  gain,  power, 
and  reputation  will  be  to  us  there. 
4.  While  reverently  bending  over  them 
we  should  solemnly  resolve,  by  God's 
help,  to  seek  that  glorious  immortality 
which  the  grave  is  powerless  to  de- 
stroy. 

Ver.  23.  "  All  which  caused  terror  *' 
— "  where  a  terror  to  all  they  would  be 
enemies  to,  and  proudly  boasted  of 
and  inhumanly  used  their  power,  now 
lie  quiet,  their  dust  little  regarded,  less 
feared,  and  least  of  all  pitied." — Pool, 

Ver.  27.  "With  their  weapons  of 
war."  "  It  was  usual  in  former  times 
to  put  swords,  shields,  and  other  ar- 
mour in  the  graves  of  military  men,  as 
they  did  in  the  grave  of  Theseus  and 


on  the  bier  of  Alexander  the  Great. 
But  the  meaning  of  the  prophet  here 
is,  that  those  of  whom  he  speaks 
should  be  without  these  usual  martial 
solemnities  with  which  people  formerly 
honoured  their  dead.'' — Benson, 

Yer.  32.  "  It  is  God  who  speaks,  who 
had  punished  former  tvrants,  that  the 
world  might  see  His  just  judgments. 
They  were  a  terror  to  the  world  by 
their  cruelty,  oppression,  and  continued 
violence ;  by  their  covetousness,  ambi- 
tion, and  pride ;  and  God  had  made 
them  a  terror  by  His  just  severities  in 
their  punishment,"  — Fool. 

—  "  Surely  men  disquiet  themselves 
about  a  vain  thing  in  so  keenly  pursu- 
ing pleasure,  gain,  fame,  and  power,  at 
the  cost  of  their  immortal  souls.  What 
will  all  these  objects  of  worldly  men's 
pursuit  do  for  them  when  they  are  laid 
in  the  grave  1  Lord,  do  Thou  teach  us 
the  blessedness  of  having  Thee  as  our 
portion  for  ever  1 " — FausseL 


EzEKiEL's  Commission  Benbwed.    (Chap,  zzxiil) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  2. 
**  Speak  to  the  children  of  thy  people." 
"The  prophet  turns  from  foreign  na- 
tions to  Israel  again.  The  early  portion 
of  the  chapter  (vers.  2-20)  seems  to  have 
been  imparted  to  Ezekiel  on  the  even- 
ing previous  to  the  arrival  of  the  news 
of  the  downfall  of  Jerusalem  (ver.  22), 
and  was  a  preparation  for  the  latter  part 
(vers,  23-33)  imparted  after  the  mes- 
senger had  come.  This  accounts  for 
the  former  part  standing  without  date, 
which  was  properly  reserved  for  the 
latter  part.  <If  the  people  of  the 
land  take  a  man  of  their  coasts  and 
set  him  for  their  watchman.'  The 
men  were  themselves  to  appoint  the 
watchman,  whence,  in  case  they  did 
not  give  heed  to  him,  they  withstood 
and  strove  against  themselves,  and  so 
should  be  more  convicted  of  their  giult 
and  folly." — Lange. 

Yer.   3.    ^'If  when  he  seeth  the 
sword  come" — invaders.     An  appro- 
priate illustration  at  the  time  of  the 
342 


invasion  of  Judea  by  Nebuchadnezsar. 
— "  He  blow  the  trumpet " — a  horn, 
with  clear  resounding  tone  (Joshua  vi). 

Ver.  4.  "His  blood  shall  be  npon 
his  own  head."  "  He  will  be  to 
blame  for  his  own  fall.  The  head  is 
named  from  the  custom  of  carrying 
on  the  head.  Blood  often  stands  for 
blood-guilt." — Sengstenberg,  Accord- 
ing to  others,  the  image  is  derived 
from  sacrifice,  in  which  the  offerer 
transferred  his  guilt  to  his  victim  by 
laying  his  hand  on  the  victim's  head 
(Lev.  i.  4 ;  xxiv.  14  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  25). 

Yer.  5.  ''Bnt  he  that  taketh  warning 
shall  deliver  his  souL"  The  alone 
self-guiltiness  of  the  individual  is  here 
made  still  more  manifest. 

Yer.  6.  '<  He  is  taken  awi^  in  his 
iniquity."  ''Mishap  befalls  no  one 
undeserved,  even  if  under  the  circum- 
stances he  might  have  been  delivered. 
But  the  unfaithful  watchman  is  pun- 
ished for  his  neglect." — Rert^ttenberg, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  OOMMBNTART:  BZEKIBL, 


OHAP.  xxxnL 


Yer.  7.  "  I  liave  set  thee  a  watch- 
The  "I"  is  emphatia  Eze- 
kieFs  appointment  to  be  a  watchman 
spyiiiwdly  is  far  more  solemn,  as  it  is 
derived  from  God,  not  from  the  people. 
The  lesson  is,  that  the  relation  between 
the  prophet  (and  in  general  the  servant 
of  Gk>d  in  His  kingdom^  and  the  people 
is  one  full  of  responsibility.  "Thoa 
shalt  hear  the  word  at  My  month  and 
warn  them  firom  Me."  "  Safety  there- 
fore demanded  that  the  prophet  have 
free  speech.  That  God  should  have 
given  them  a  true  seer  in  their  midst 
was  a  sure  proof  of  His  favour,  which 
might  well  keep  off  despair.  Jehovah 
would  fain  save  the  wicked,  and 
threatens  wrath  through  His  prophet 
only  that  every  one  may  take  heed 
and  reform." — Geikie, 

Yer.  11.  ''Ihaye  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  wicked."  To  meet  the 
Jews'  cry  of  despair  in  ver.  10  £zekiel 
here  cheers  them  by  the  assurance  that 
God  has  no  pleasure  in  their  death,  but 
that  they  should  repentand  live  (2  Peter 
iii.  9).  "  A  veamiiig  tenderness  mani- 
fests itself  here,  notwithstanding  all 
their  past  sins;  yet  with  it  aholiness  that 
abates  nothing  of  its  demands  for  the 
honour  of  God's  authority." — Fausset. 

Yer.  12.  "  The  righteonsness  of  the 
righteous  shall  not  deliver  him  in 
the  day  of  his  transgression."  <'  Self- 
righteousness,  ever  disposed  to  justify 
itself,  had  adopted  among  the  exiles 
a  comfortable  theory  that  they  were 
punished  for  the  sins  of  their  fore- 
fathers rather  than  for  their  own. 
Ezekiel  again  exposes  this  deception, 
as  he  had  done  before  (chap.  iii.  20 ; 
xviii.  24,  26, 21):'— Geikie.  "The  heart 
that  in  distress  misunderstands  its  God 
will  not  tread  the  path  of  repentance, 
which  determines  the  return  of  salva^ 
tion ;  and  man  is  quite  prone  to  miti- 
gate his  guilt  and  to  think  that  God 
has  dealt  too  hardly  with  him." — Heng- 
sUnberg. 

Yer.  21.  <"  In  the  twelfth  year  of  onr 
captiTity,  in  the  tenth  month"— a 
year  and  a  half  after  the  capture  of 


the  city  (Jer.  xxxix.  2 ;  IL  5,  6),  which 
took  place  in  the  eleventh  year  and 
fourth  month.  "  The  one  who  escaped 
may  have  been  so  long  on  the  road 
through  fear  of  entering  the  enemy's 
country  "  (Henderson) ;  or,  the  singtdar 
is  used  for  the  plural  in  a  collective 
sense,  "Naturally  the  reopening  of 
the  prophet's  mouth  for  consolation 
would  be  deferred  till  the  number  of 
the  escaped  remnant  was  complete : 
the  removal  of  such  a  large  number 
would  easily  have  occupied  seventeen 
or  eighteen  months." — Faussei 

Yer.  22.  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord 
was  npon  me  in  the  evening."  Thus 
the  capture  of  Jerusalem  was  known 
to  Ezekiel  by  revelation,  before  the 
messenger  came.  "  My  month  was 
opened  and  I  was  no  more  dumb."  He 
spake  the  message  from  God  to  the 
people  contained  in  vers.  2-20  in  the 
evening  before  the  tidings  came. 

Yer.  24.  "  Those  wastes  of  the  land 
of  IsraeL"  "  Less  Jerusalem  itself  than 
the  other  cities  which  had  been  stripped 
of  their  inhabitants  (Jer.  xxxiii«  10, 
13),  in  which  those  who  were  with- 
out possessions  (Jer.  xxxix.  10)  shared 
with  the  returned  fugitives  (Jer. 
xL  12),  having  all  at  once  come  to 
great  wealth  of  land  and  were  puffed 
up." — HUzig.  "  That  there  were  such 
people  is  proved  by  the  revolt  in  which 
Gedaliah,  the  Chaldean  governor,  was 
slain." — Hengsienberg.  Compare  also 
the  representation  in  Neh.  i.  of  the 
desolate  condition  of  things,  though 
an  interval  of  upwards  of  a  century 
had  elapsed.  ^Abraham  was  one, 
and  he  inherited  the  land,  but  we  are 
many."  "Some  of  the  bands  of  fieliting- 
men  which  had  escaped  the  Chaldeans, 
not  improbably  stood  aloof,  keeping 
the  country  disturbed  by  harassing 
forays.  But,  like  true  Jews,  even 
their  robber  life  was  dignified  by  a 
religious  colouring.  Few  though  they 
were,  they  fancied  there  was  no  reason 
to  despair,  since  the  land  had  been 
given  to  Abraham  when  he  was  alone 
in  the  midst  of  the  whole  population,  a 
much  more  hopeless  position  than  theirs. 

313 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIEL. 


OBAF,  TTTIIT» 


Ezekielf  however,  predicted  a  terrible 
end  to  these  yisionaries." — Oeikie. 

Yer.  25.  "Ye  eat  with  the  Uood." 
^The  eating  of  the  blood  was  for- 
bidden in  Gen.  ix.  4  as  the  first  step 
to  the  prohibition  of  murder.  In  the 
blood  of  animals  was  to  be  seen  a  type 
of  the  blood  of  men.  The  prescription 
had  a  didactic  end.  It  was  to  call 
forth  an  abhorrence  of  sheddine  human 
blood.     Whosoever  disregarded  this 

Prohibition  showed,  under  the  Old 
'estament,  after  the  law  had  made 
the  horror  of  animal  blood  national, 
that  the  germ  of  the  murderous  spirit 
was  in  him." — Eengsienberg. 

Yer.  26.  '*Ye  work  abomination.'' 

The  abomination  is  adultery.  The  femi- 
nine form  of  the  verb  is  surprising. 

Yer.  28.  ''That  none  shall  paaa 
throui^"  Cleared  of  men,  even  of 
passing  travellers.  The  ravage  of  rob- 
bers and  wild  beasts  rendered  the 
ordinary  roads  unsafe. 

Yer.  30.  "The  chndren  of  tlij 
people  still  are  talking  against  thee." 
Though  going  to  the  prophet  to  hear 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  they  criticised, 
in  an  unfriendly  spirit,  his  peculiari- 
ties of  manner  and  enigmatical  style 
(chap.  zx.  49),  making  these  the  ex- 
cuse for  their  impenitence.  "  By  the 
walls  And  in  the  doors  of  the  housea* 
In  the  public  haunts  and  privately. 


Yer.  31.  «'A«  My  people."  "So 
respectful,  attentive,  and  apparently 
earnest  and  willing."  —  HengsUnberg. 
Ironically,  those  who  AoM  be  mine ; 
or,  as  if  they  would  be  My  people  and 
still  are  not  ''With  their  moutk  they 
show  much  Ioto.''  "They  deal  ten- 
derly with  their  mouth -^  they  show 
ardour ;  affect  in  words  an  ardent  love 
to  Qod  and  His  words,  while  the  real 
inclination  of  their  heart  goes  quite 
another  wav — ^is  turned  to  Mammon, 
the  god  of  the  Jewish  old  man." — 
Eengsienberg. 

Yer.  32.  "Thon  art  unto  th«m  as 
a  Tsry  lovely  song" — a  song  of  love, 
a  lover's  song.  "  They  praise  thy  elo- 
quence, but  care  not  for  the  subject'of 
it  as  a  real  and  personal  thing,  just  as 
many  do  in  the  modem  Church." — 
Jerome,  "One  that  hath  a  pleasant 
Toioe  and  can  play  well  on  an  in- 
strument." **  ^idst  the  national  im- 
poverishment they  amuse  themselves 
with  the  surpassing  rhetorical  gifts  of 
the  new  dassia'' — Eengstenberg. 

Yer.  33.  "  That  a  prophet  hath  been 
among  them."  "No  mere  orator.  The 
difference  they  discover  in  painful  ex- 
perience when  it  is  too  late.  The 
threatened  punishment  has  already 
overtaken  thenu  They  are  already 
excluded  from  the  promised  salvation 
which  can  be  gained  only  by  true 
repentance."— i^0fys(0fi(0f]^ 


EOMILSTIOS. 
Tee  QmoES  of  thjb  Oivil  and  Spiritual  Watghxan  Oompabid 

AND  Ck)NTRA8T£D. 

(Yers.  1-9.) 

Having  sung  in  strains  of  unequalled  sublimity  the  dirge  of  the  great 
monarchies,  E^kiel  returns  with  redoubled  intensity  to  the  duty  of  teacning. 
The  enthusiastic  disciple  of  Jeremiah,  he  carries  out  to  their  most  startling 
conse<|uences  the  principles  but  dimly  sketched  in  the  creed  of  his  loved  master. 
In  this  chapter  he  develops  in  increased  sharpness  of  definition  and  fulness 
of  detail  the  doctrine  which  is  the  prominent  feature  of  his  prophetic  mission — 
that  of  the  responsibility  of  the  individual  soul  separate  from  the  collective 
nation,  separate  from  the  good  or  ill  deserts  of  ancestry.  *'  Other  prophets^* 
3ii 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETW  OOMMENTART:  EZEKIEL,  ohaf.  xxxm. 


says  Stanley,  ''  have  more  of  poetical  beauty,  a  deeper  sense  of  Divine  things,  a 
tenderer  feeling  of  the  mercies  of  God  for  His  people.  None  teach  so  simply,  and 
with  a  simplicity  the  more  remarkable  from  the  elaborate  imagery  out  of  which 
it  emerges,  this  great  moral  lesson,  to  us  the  first  of  all  lessons.  On  this  narrow 
but  sohd  plank  of  the  doctrine  of  human  responsibility  Ezekiei  crosses  the 
chasm  which  divided  the  two  parts  of  his  eventful  life.  It  is  almost  the  last 
doctrine  which  we  hear  announced  before  his  country  fell.  It  is  the  first  that 
meets  us  as  he  recovers  from  the  shock  after  all  is  over."  Tliis  truth  we  shall 
find  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  teaching  of  the  present  and  succeeding  para- 
graphs of  this  chapter.  In  these  verses  we  have  the  offices  of  the  dvil  and  spiritual 
watchman  compared  and  contrasted — 

I.  In  the  maimer  of  their  appointment  1.  The  civil  watchman  is  appointed  by 
the  care/td  diserimination  of  his  fellow-countrymen,  ''  The  people  of  the  land  take 
a  man  of  their  coasts  and  set  him  for  their  watchman  "  Arer.  2}.  It  is  a  mutual 
arrangement.  The  rulers  of  the  state  see  the  need  ot  guarding  its  interests, 
and  after  due  inquiry  select  the  man  who  in  their  judgment  is  best  qualified  to 
discharge  the  duties  required,  and  the  man  willingly  accepts  the  post  It  is 
a  human  appointment,  and  the  fount  of  authority  is  human,  though  sanctioned 
by  the  aggregate  wisdom  of  the  governing  body.  The  government  may  be  mis- 
taken in  the  character  of  the  man  selected.  They  can  only  do  their  best  in 
providing  for  the  immediate  exigencies  of  the  state ;  or  they  may  err  in  their 
conception  of  the  trust  with  which  they  invest  their  officer.  Human  wisdom  is 
at  the  best  imperfect.  2.  The  spiritual  watchman  is  Divinely  appointed.  **  I  have 
set  thee  a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  Israel "  (ver.  7).  Here  the  authority  is 
supreme  and  infallible.  The  Divine  discernment  is  unerring.  God  never  calls 
and  commissions  the  wrong  man,  and  never  appoints  His  servant  to  a  work  that 
He  does  not  at  the  same  time  give  him  power  to  do,  however  unwilling  he  may 
be  to  accept  the  responsibility.  The  authority  thus  delegated  is  indisputable, 
because  backed  by  supreme  power,  and  from  which  there  is  no  appeal  The 
office  of  the  spiritual  watchman  is  superior  to  all  earthly  governmentS|  and  has 
often  to  be  exercised  above  and  in  opposition  to  their  worldly  policy. 

IL  In  the  duties  assigned  to  each.  1.  To  exercise  constant  vigilance.  **  When 
he  seeth  the  sword  come  upon  the  land  "  (ver.  3).  **  Thou  shalt  hear  the  word 
at  My  mouth  "  (ver.  7).  It  is  the  duty  of  each  to  be  ever  in  a  wakeful,  listening 
attitudei  The  look-out  on  board  the  ocean-steamer  and  the  advanced  night- 
picket  of  a  slumbering  army  has  each  a  responsible  post  The  safety  of  both 
vessel  and  army  depends  upon  their  keenness  of  vision  and  delicacy  of  hearing: 
It  is  their  duty  to  detect  the  first  indications  of  danger.  The  duties  of  the  dvil 
and  spiritual  watchman  are  alike  in  demanding  a  highly  sensitive  alertness  and 
heroic  fidelity.  The  excavations  at  Herculaneum,  buried  by  an  eruption  of 
Vesuvius  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years  ago,  revealed  the  figure  of  a 
sentinel  who  remained  immovable  at  the  post  of  duty  till  swathed  and  sufifo- 
cated  with  the  molten  lava.  2.  To  give  distinct  and  timely  warning,  "  Blow  the 
trumpet  and  warn  the  people  "  (ver.  3).  "  Warn  them  from  Me  "  (ver.  7).  It 
is  not  enough  to  keep  a  sharp  look-out  Every  threatened  movement  of  the 
enemy  must  be  faithfully  reported,  and  a  loud,  clear,  earnest  warning  sounded 
when  the  slightest  advance  is  made  by  the  attacking  force.  The  watchman 
should  be  every  moment  braced  up  to  duty,  and  no  indulgence  permitted  that 
will  impair  his  faculties.  The  greater  the  peril,  the  more  urgent  and  unmis- 
takable should  be  the  alarm. 

IIL  In  the  reality  and  limitation  of  the  responaibllity  of  each.  If  the 
watchman,  seeing  the  threatened  evil,  neglects  to  warn  tlie  people,  he  is  respon- 


Digitized  by 


Google  I 


OHAP.  xxxm. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZBEIBL 


nble  for  the  calamities  they  may  suffer ;  if  he  warns  the  people  and  thej  suffer 
by  not  giving  heed  to  the  warning,  he  himself  is  clear  of  blame  (vers.  4-6,  8,  9). 
Ezekiel,  while  explicit  in  teaching  what  in  his  day  was  the  noYel  doctrine 
of  personal  responsibility,  is  careful  to  define  its  limits.  Unlimited  responsibi- 
lity would  be  intolerable ;  it  would  tend  to  paralyse  rather  than  evoke  effort. 
Personal  responsibility  is  ever  limited  by  ability,  opportunity,  and  the  nature 
and  scope  of  the  trust  with  which  we  are  invested.  There  is  no  discharge  from 
responsibility  but  by  obedience  to  obvious  duty.  The  burden  is  then  transferred 
to  those  towards  whom  duty  has  been  faithfully  fulfilled. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  true  watchman  w  flaeed  in  a  position  of  great  honour  and 
responsibility,  2.  Should  preserve  all  his  faculties  in  the  highest  possible  state  of 
healthy  development  and  exercise,  3.  Is  faithful  in  the  degree  in  which  he  retains  the 
consciousness  of  his  Divine  call. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  1-9.  Individual  Responsi- 
bility— 1.  Recognised  by  ike  directness 
of  the  Divine  revelation,  "  The  word  of 
the  Lord  came  unto  me  "  (ver.  1).  2. 
Augmented  by  the  importance  of  the  office 
in  which  he  is  installed.  "The  people 
of  the  land  take  a  man  and  set  him 
for  their  watchman.  I  have  set  thee 
a  watchman  unto  the  house  of  Israel " 
(vers.  2,  7).  3.  Is  limited  to  the  faithful 
discharge  of  specific  duties.  To  be  on 
the  alert,  to  raise  the  alarm,  to  warn 
of  approaching  disaster  (vers.  3-5,  9). 
4.  Involves  serious  blame  when  obvious 
duty  is  neglected,  "  His  blood  will  I 
require  at  thine  hand"  (vers.  6,  8). 

—  "  The  duty  of  the  spiritual  watch- 
man is  to  warn  faithfully  the  impeni- 
tent of  their  imminent  danger,  and  of 
the  willingness  of  God  to  receive  them 
graciously  and  save  them  freely  if  they 
will  repent.  Whosoever  hears  the 
watchman's  warning  and  yet  takes  no 
heed  to  it  shall  perish,  and  his  blood 
shall  be  upon  his  own  head.  But  the 
minister  who  knows  the  danger  that 
is  before  sinners,  and  yet  neglects  to 
sound  the  faithful  note  of  warning, 
shall  not  only  be  in  part  the  cause  of 
their  >  ruin,  but  shall  also  bring  upon 
his  own  head  an  awful  condemnation. 
They  no  doubt  justly  perish  on  account 
of  their  neglect  to  watch  and  pray  con- 
tinually ;  but  he  incurs  at  once  the  guilt 
of  his  own  and  that  of  their  disobedi- 
ence to  God.  What  a  heavy  account 
they  shall  have  to  render  who  make 
excuses  for  sin,  flatter  sinners,  and  pro- 
346 


mise  them  pardon  and  peace  without 
penitence  and  faith  I  * — FausseL 

Yer.  2.  "  Take  a  man  of  their  coasts, 
and  set  him  for  their  watchman."  A 
National  Quardiaa.  1.  An  important 
officer  in  time  of  public  danger.  2. 
Is  selected  for  some  special  qualifica- 
tions he  possesses  above  other  of  his 
countrymen.  3.  The  safety  of  the 
country  is  entrusted  to  his  care.  4. 
Should  be  vigilant  and  faithful  in 
the  discharge  of  duty.  5.  Is  account- 
able for  his  conduct  to  those  who 
appoint  him. 

—  "  One  man  may  be  of  public  ser- 
vice to  a  whole  country.  Princes  and 
statesmen  are  the  watchmen  of  a  king- 
dom, that  are  continually  to  employ 
and,  if  occasion  be,  expose  themselves 
for  the  public  safety." — M,  Henry. 

—  ''The  calling  to  the  office  of 
preacher  is  twofold— one  immediate, 
the  other  mediate ;  the  former  is  from 
God,  the  latter  from  man  (Acts  xxvi. 
15,  16;  vi.  5^.  No  blind  man,  nor 
dreamer,  nor  orowsy  sleeper  is  fit  for 
an  office  that  takes  its  name  from 
wakefulness." — Lange. 

Vers.  4,  5.    Faithful  Warning — 

1.  Should  be  clearly  and  earnestly 
uttered.  2.  Secures  the  safety  of 
those  who  give  heed  to  it.  8.  Is 
uttered  in  vain  to  those  who  neglect 
it.  4.  Deprives  the  heedless  of  any 
ground  of  complaint  for  the  suffering 
he  refused  to  avoid. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nomiETlC  COMMENTinr:  ezekiel 


OBAK  xkxm. 


Ver.  6.  Neglect  of  Duty— 1.  In- 
excusable where  the  duty  is  clearly 
defined  and  publicly  proclaimed.  2. 
Au  unmistakable  evidence  of  moral 
deterioration.  3.  Always  involves 
calamity  and  sufferinff  to  somebody. 

—  "Of  the  watchmg  which  is  en- 
joined upon  ourselves  we  are  not 
relieved  by  the  obligation  which  lies 
upon  the  watchman.  Hence  he  who 
is  overtaken  unwarned  does  not  fall 
guiltless,  for  his  security  and  care- 
lessness were  the  occasion  of  his  fall. 
Contempt  of  danger  is  no  true  courage. 
Every  one  must  carry  his  soul  as  in 
his  hand.  What  a  mournful  condi- 
tion is  it  when  the  Church  does  not 
watch,  the  State  does  not  protect, 
the  house  does  not  admonish  1 " — 
Lange. 

Vers.  7-9.  The  Ministerial  OaU- 
ing — 1.  Divine  in  its  institution,  "I 
have  set  thee  a  watchman  unto  the 
house  of  Israel."    %  hio  interpret  the 


meaning  of  the  Divine  Message,  "  Tliou 
shalt  hear  the  word  at  My  mouth." 
3.  Should  be  faithful  in  warning  as  weU 
as  in  instruction,  "And  warn  them 
from  Me — speak  to  warn  the  wicked 
from  his  way."  4.  Involves  grave  re- 
sponsOMity,  "  That  wicked  man  shall 
die  in  his  iniquity  j  but  his  blood  will 
I  require  at  thine  hand."  6.  Retains 
the  Divine  approval  only  so  far  as  it  is 
strictly  faithful,  "  But  thou  hast  de- 
livered thy  souL" 

—  "With  a  spiritual  watchman  there 
must  be  found  a  spiritual  life,  a  spiri- 
tual light,  a  spiritual  wakefulness,  and 
dutiful  fidelity  in  all  parts  of  his  office." 
—Starke. 

—  Even  when  the  preacher's  con- 
science is  free  from  guilt  in  regard  to 
the  ungodly  who  perish  in  their  sins, 
what  a  sorrow  does  it  occasion  in  the 
life  of  the  preacher  when  he  has  to  see 
the  impenitent  die  in  their  sins  I  "  I 
would  not  willingly  be  saved,"  said 
Augustine,  "  without  you.* 


EOMILETiaS. 

Ths  Unswerving  Equiit  of  the  Divinib  OoYSBNioQm 


(Vers.  10-2a) 

L  Is  joined  with  the  most  tender  sdicitationB  for  the  best  welfiure  of  men. 

1.  Jehovah  has  no  satisfaction  in  the  ruin  of  the  sinner  (vers.  10,  11).  It  is  a  false 
conception  of  God  to  regard  Him  as  implacable  and  difficult  to  propitiate. 
Such  a  view  is  possible  only  to  the  mind  debased  by  sinful  indulgence  and 
hardened  by  unbelief.  Without  man's  solicitation,  and  without  his  daring  to 
hope  for  such  favour,  God  offers  him  life  and  salvation,  and  reveals  His  love 
in  the  wondrous  plan  which  His  spontaneous  mercy  has  provided  for  the 
redemption  of  the  sinning  race.  So  slow  is  man  to  comprehend,  and  so  little 
reason  had  he  to  expect  the  possibility  of  such  kindness  being  shown  to  him, 
that  Jehovah  solemnly  pledges  the  integrity  of  His  Divine  character  in  assuring 
him  of  the  fact — "  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord."  He  has  more  pleasure  in  pardon- 
ing than  punishing.  2.  Jehovah  condescends  to  plead  wUh  the  sinner  to  turn  from 
his  ini^Uies  and  accept  life,  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye,  from  your  evil  ways ;  for  why 
will  ye  die  1"  (ver.  11).  Amazing  spectacle  I  Incredulous  condescension  I  God 
pleading  with  man — the  highest  reason  expostulating  with  human  folly  and 
unreason  1  The  monarch  imploring  rebels  to  return  to  their  allegiance  and 
the  parent  entreating  the  prodigal  to  reform  may  seem  the  despair  of  baffled 
helplessness.  But  not  so  with  our  Heavenly  King  and  Father.  His  con- 
descension is  all  the  more  conspicuous  and  significant  because  He  is  so  strong, 
so  righteous,  and  so  unselfish  in  His  aim  to  rescue  man  from  his  self-delusion 
and  ruin.    A  greater  marvel  still  is,  that  in  the  presence  of  this  Divine  solicitude 

847 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ouA».  iiXiO.  BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL. 


man  remains  obdurate  and  indifTerent  Ho\r  deceitful  and  deadly  an  enemy  is 
fondly-cherished  sin  1 

n.  Recogxii86B  tha  responsibility  of  the  individnal  boqL  '*I  will  judge  you 
every  man  after  his  ways"  (ver.  20).  Life  or  death  depends  on  indiyidual 
action.  Israel  is  to  be  treated  uo  longer  as  a  collective  nation,  in  the  mass,  but 
as  individuals,  each  one  by  himself.  This  doctrine  was  so  novel  and  startling 
to  the  Jew,  and  so  opposed  to  his  notion  of  special  privileges  to  be  enjoyed  by 
the  aggregate  nation,  irrespective  of  the  moral  condition  of  individuals,  that 
the  masters  of  the  Synagogue  hesitated  to  receive  the  Book  of  Ezekiel  into  the 
sacred  canon,  and  when  it  was  adopted,  decreed  that  it  should  not  be  read  by 
any  Jew  who  was  not  above  thirty  years  of  age.  And  yet  thronghoat  the 
Bible  there  is  no  truth  more  clearly  taught  than  this.  It  is  this  responsibility 
that  gives  a  moral  character  to  each  man's  actions,  and  is  the  basis  on  which  he 
most  be  ultimately  judged. 

Ill  Distributes  with  exact  imiMrtiality  reward  and  ponidiment  according 
to  individual  conduct  (vers.  12-16,  18,  19).  The  seeming  righteous  will  not 
escape  punishment  if  they  sin  (vers.  12,  13,  18).  The  wicked  will  not  be 
denied  reward  if  they  reform  (vers.  12, 14-16, 19).  No  man  can  shelter  himself 
under  the  shadow  of  ancestral  piety,  or  under  the  reputation  of  a  blameless  life. 
Personal  virtue  can  make  no  atonement  for  a  single  sin.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  most  abandoned  need  not  despair.  The  Lord  '*pardoneth  and  absolveth 
all  those  who  truly  repent  and  unfeignedly  believe  His  holy  gospel."  The  final 
decisions  of  the  Divine  government  cannot  be  charged  wim  the  least  injustice, 
but  will  compel  universal  adoration. 

lY.  Is  the  Bubiect  of  guemloua  complaint  by  the  wrong-doer.    **  Yet  the 

people  say,  The  way  of  the  Lord  is  not  equal ;  but,  as  for  them,  their  way  is  not 
equal"  (vers.  17,  20).  Wrong-doing  blinds  the  mental  vision,  dulls  and  vitiates 
the  moral  sense,  ana  incapacitates  the  soul  from  exercising  righteous  judgment. 
Ignorance  is  always  obstinately  one-sided.  Reminds  one  of  the  Irish  jury- 
man who  had  never  met  eleven  such  obstinate  men  as  his  fellow-jurors ;  and  of 
the  recruit  who  maintained  he  was  the  only  man  of  his  company  who  was 
keeping  step.  The  sinner  is  ready  to  blame  any  one  but  hiniself,  and  even 
dares  to  impugn  the  equity  of  the  great  Judge  of  all  the  earth.  The  reckless 
audacity  of  such  a  charge  reveals  his  own  condemnation. 

Lessons. — 1.  Dimne  jusHce  and  mercy  are  inseparahle,  ±  If  we  embrace  fh$ 
principles  of  the  Divine  government  U  becomes  easy  to  do  right  and  d{fieuU  to  d^ 
wrong.    3.  The  destiny  of  every  man  w,  under  Ood^  in  his  own  hands^ 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEBSE3. 

Vers.  10, 11.  A  yearning  tenrlemess  people ;  no  return  to  life  possible  but 

here  manifests  itself,  still  seeking,  not-  through  a  return  to  righteousness, 
withstanding  all  that  has  taken  place, 

the  return  of  those  who  survived  to  the  Ver.  10.  Unrepented  Sin — 1.  Pro- 
way  of  peace.  But  with  that  tenderness  duces  a  sullen  disposition.  2.  Fosters 
what  a  stem  and  unflinching  holiness  I  the  mistaken  notion  that  we  are  pun* 
There  can  be  no  relaxation  or  abate-  ished  for  the  sins  of  others  rather  than 
ment  mentioned  in  respect  to  this,  not  for  our  owa  8.  Reflects  upon  the 
even  amid  the  moanings  of  pain  and  sincerity  of  the  Divine  promises.  4i 
cries  of  distress  which  arose  from  tlie  Fills  the  soul  with  despair. 


S48 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZERIEL 


OHAP.  XXXIII. 


—  "Thus  ye  speak."  "But  not 
well,  \rhilst  ye  have  hard  thoughts  of 
God  and  heavy  thoughts  of  yourselves, 
as  if  your  sins  were  unpardonable^  and 
that  ye  were  already  ruiued  beyond 
relief;  whereas  true  repentanoe  is  a 
ready  remedy,  a  plank  after  shipwreck 
that  would  set  you  safe  and  render  you 
right  again.  This  they  had  been  told 
before  (chap,  xviii,),  but  to  little  pur- 
pose. The  word  was  not  mingled  with 
faith  in  their  hearts,  and  did  therefore 
run  through  them  (Heb.  ii.  1)  as  water 
runs  through  a  riven  vessel," — Tra^. 

—  "  It  is  common  with  those  that 
have  been  hardened  with  presumption, 
when  they  were  warned  against  sin,  to 
sink  into  despair  when  they  are  called 
to  repent,  and  to  conclude  there  is  no 
hope  of  life  for  them." — M.  Henry. 

—  "All  in  the  end  feel  sin,  but  they 
hate  it  not. — The  way  of  the  uncon- 
verted in  this  respect  is  to  look  rather 
to  the  temporal  than  to  the  eternal 
life. — To  despair,  instead  of  turning  to 
God,  is  but  auother  form  of  the  pride 
that  is  in  the  human  heart. — ^Despair 
is  another  kind  of  impenitence. — How 
contrasts  touch  one  another! — ^The 
godly  also  are  sometimes  on  the  brink 
of  despair — David,  Ps.  xxxviiL,  and 
Cain,  Gen.  iv.  That  punishment 
should  always  be  heavier  to  us  than 
sin  I— He  who  would  justify  himself 
would  perhaps  throw  the  blame  even 
upon  God.— God  always  deals  unfairly 
with  the  wicked,  as  they  think" — 
Lange. 

Yer.  11.  The  PitlAilnefls  of  the 
Divine  Mercy — 1.  Finds  no  delight  in 
punishing.  "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the 
death  of  the  wicked."  2.  Yearns  for 
the  recovery  6f  those  ioho  have  abandoned 
the  way  of  obedience.  ''But  that  the 
wicked  turn  from  his  way  and  live." 
3.  Breaks  forth  in  tenderest  persuasive- 
ness. "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye ;  for  why  will 
ye  <lie1"  4.  Is  declared  wUh  the  most 
solemn  asseveration,  "  As  I  live,  saith 
the  Lord." 

—  "  This  is  one  of  those  precious 
places,  those  mellifluous  honeycombs 
which  we  should  go  on  sucking 
towards  heaven,  as  Samson  once  did 


towards  his  parents  (Judges  xiv.  9). 
Here,  if  anywhere,  we  may  find  strong 
consolation.  God  when  He  swears 
desires  certainly  to  be  credited.  0 
happy  we  for  whose  sakes  God  vouch- 
safeth  to  swear !  and  0  wretched  we 
if  we  believe  not  God,  no,  though  He 
swear  to  us  I " — I'rapp. 

—  "  The  living  God  wills  life,  and 
also  gives  it  to  those  who  will;  but 
unless  men  also  wish  it,  He  certainly 
does  not  give." — Lange. 

—  "Why  will  ye  diet"— "I  have 
been  to  you  a  nursing  Father,  Will 
ye  not  love  Met  I  have  opened  a 
bleeding  altar,  even  Calvary,  that  the 
foulest  of  sinners  may  approach.  Why 
will  ye  stay  at  a  distance  in  shame 
and   sini      I  have    borne    and    had 

Eatience.  I  have  stretched  out  My 
ands  all  the  day  long  to  a  gainsaying 
people.  My  prophets  have  laboured 
and  wept ;  they  aver,  being  filled  with 
My  Spirit,  that  their  hearts'  desire  and 
prayer  is,  that  Israel  might  be  saved. 
Why  will  you  resist  the  ministry  of 
grace  t  I  have  aided  the  ministry  with 
slow  and  gentle  corrections.  Why 
will  you  fight  against  Met  Ton  are 
beloved  for  your  fathers*  sake;  you 
have  been  to  Me  a  pleasant  vineyard. 
I  have  planted  you  with  the  choice 
vine  of  Sorek;  and  what  could  I  have 
done  for  My  vineyard  that  I  have  not 
donet  Why  then  will  ye  prefer  idols 
to  Me  t  Why  will  you  prefer  shame 
to  elorjy  death  to  eternal  lifet" — 
Sutdife. 

Yer.  13.  '^  It  was  a  widespread  de- 
lusion among  the  Jews  that  they 
possessed  a  hereditary  righteousness ; 
that  whatever  they  themselves  might 
be,  yet  the  righteousness  of  their  pious 
fathers,  from  Abraham  down,  would 
avail  them ;  and  if  they  experienced 
the  contrary  in  their  misfortunes  they 
held  themselves  iustified  in  murmuring 
against  God.  1  he  prophet  teaches,  on 
the  contrary,  that  the  fate  of  every 
generation  is  determined  by  its  own 
relation  to  Gk)d." — Hengstenberg. 

—  "  Many  eminent  professors  have 
been  mined  by  a  proud  conceitedness 
of  themselves  and  confidence  in  them- 

349 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OtAP.  IXXltL 


ttOMlLBfIC  COMMENTARY:  SZEKISL 


selves.  He  trusts  to  tlie  merit  of  his 
own  rigbU'Ousness,  and  thinks  he  has 
already  matie  God  so  much  his  debtor 
th:it  now  he  may  venture  to  commit 
iniquity,  for  he  has  righteousness 
enough  in  stock  to  make  amends  for 
it ;  he  fancies  that,  whatever  evil  deeds 
he  may  do  hereafter,  he  can  be  in  no 
danger  from  them,  having  so  many 
good  deeds  beforehand  to  balance 
them.  He  thinks  himself  so  well 
established  in  a  course  of  virtue  that 
he  may  thrust  himself  into  any  tempta- 
tion and  it  cannot  overcome  him,  and 
so  by  presuming  on  his  own  sufficiency 
he  is  brought  to  commit  iniquity.** — 
M,  Henry. 

—  "Not  that  we  are  evil  by  nature 
is  what  finally  condemns  us,  but  that 
we  remain  evil  in  spite  of  the  goodness 
of  God  which  seeks  our  conversion.* — 
Lange, 

Vers.  14, 15.  Oennlne  Repentance — 
1.  Is  not  only  sorrow  for  sin,  but  a 
turning  from  it.  2.  A  striving  to  do 
the  right  3.  Shown  in  the  restitution 
of  all  wrongfully  acquired  goods.  4. 
A  permanent  blessing  only  by  walking 
in  liarmony  with  the  living  Word. 

—  Conversion—"  1.  Of  heart.  2. 
Of  conduct.     3.  Of  life."— ion^tf. 

—  "  Penitency  is  almost  as  good  as 
innocency." — Trajpp. 

Ver.  15.  "Robbery  and  violence 
would  be  too  gainful  a  trade  if  a  man 
might  quit  all  scores  by  repentance 
and  detain  all  he  had  gotten  j  or  if  the 
father's  repentance  might  serve  the 
turn,  and  the  benefit  of  the  transgres- 
sion be  transmitted  as  an  inheritance 


to  the  son.  If  the  pledge  remained  it 
must  be  restored,  Tlie  retaining  it  is 
committing  a  new  iniquity,  and  for- 
feits any  benefit  of  the  promise.  If  he 
hath  it  notj  nor  is  able  to  procure  it, 
his  hearty  repentance  is  enough,  with 
reparation  ;  but  to  enjoy  the  spoil  and 
yet  to  profess  repentance  is  an  affront 
to  Almighty  God,  and  a  greater  sin 
than  the  first  act  of  violence,  when  he 
did  not  pretend  to  think  of  God,  and 
so  did  not  think  of  displeasing  EQm. 
Whereas  now  he  pretenas  to  reconcile 
himself  to  God  and  mocks  Him  with 
repentance,  while  he  retains  the  fruit 
of  his  wickedness.  He  who  is  troly 
penitent  restores  what  he  hath  left  to 
the  person  who  was  deprived  of  it,  and 
pays  the  rest  in  devout  sorrow  for  his 
trespass.*' — Lord  Clarendon. 

Vers.  17,  20.  False  Estimates— 1. 
Inevitable  when  Divine  things  are 
measured  by  a  human  standard.  2. 
The  product  of  a  mind  warped  with 
error  and  sin.  8.  Eecoil  in  punish- 
ment upon  those  who  are  blind  to 
their  own  falseness  and  injustice. 

Ver.  17.  "  When  men  find  fault  with 
the  ways  of  God  as  not  equal,  it  is 
because  their  own  ways  are  not  equaL 
On  the  other  hand,  God  says,  '  Do  not 
My  words  do  good  to  him  that  waiketh 
uprightly  1 '  (Micah  ii.  7).  God  *  meet- 
eth  him  that  worketh  righteousness ; 
those  that  remember  God  in  His  ways  * 
(Isa.  Ixiv.  5).  The  cause  of  sceptical 
cavils  at  the  ways  of  Divine  provi- 
dence and  grace  lies  in  the  unbeliever's 
faulty  state  of  heart  which  corrupts 
the  understanding." — FauueL 


EOMILETICa. 

The  Infatuation  of  UNssLnet. 

(Vers.  21-33.) 

L  Blinds  the  soul  to  the  significance  of  passing  events.     I.  The  greaJted 

calamiiy  is  not  understood,  "  The  city  is  smitten  "  (ver.  21).  No  greater  disaster 
could  happen  to  the  Jew.  The  impregnable,  the  invincible  Jerusalem  in  ruins, 
the  sacred  Temple  violated  and  destroyed — impossible !  Yet  the  impossible 
had  happened ;  and  the  people,  stupefied  by  the  greatness  of  the  calamity,  or  by 
350 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMSNTAUt:  EZEKIEL  Ohap.  xxxnt 


the  inveteracy  of  their  wickedaessy  failed  to  grasp  the  meaning.  In  their  unbe- 
lieving infatuation  they  could  not  see  that  the  Divine  guardianship  that  en- 
compassed the  city  with  a  shield  that  no  mortal  enemy  could  pierce  had  been 
withdrawn,  because  of  their  sins.  2.  The  plainest  evidences  of  faithful  warning  were 
ignored.  Ezekiel  predicted  that  he  would  be  silent  for  some  time  on  matters 
affecting  Israel  until  news  of  the  downfall  of  Jerusalem  came.  The  prediction 
was  exactly  fulfilled,  and  he  once  more  opens  his  mouth  concerning  Israel  (comp. 
chap.  xxiv.  27  with  xxxiii.  22) — another  proof  of  the  Divine  sanction  to  the 
warnings  of  His  servant ;  yet  this,  like  many  other  similar  evidences,  was  un- 
heeded. We  are  infatuated  indeed  when  passini:  events  cease  to  interest  us 
and  suggest  no  lessons  of  either  warning  or  counsel 

IL  Intensifies  the  practice  of  the  grossest  sins  (vers.  24-26).  1.  Covetous- 
ness  (yer,  24).  They  cling  in  a  spirit  of  desperate  covetousness  to  the  land 
already  lost,  and  which  now  belonged  to  their  conquerors.  The  savage  greed 
with  which  the  scattered  few  held  by  the  land  of  their  forefathers  might  excite 
compassion  did  we  not  know  how  hopeless  was  their  task  and  how  utterly 
selfish  their  aim.  They  wished  to  keep  the  land  not  to  reform  but  to  indulge 
abuses.  2.  Idolatry  (ver.  25).  The  sin  which  had  been  the  occasion  of  all  the 
distresses  that  now  affiicted  the  land,  instead  of  being  put  away,  was  carried 
on  with  aggravated  enormities,  3.  Tyranny.  **  Ye  stand  upon  your  sword  " 
(ver.  26).  They  do  not  seek  to  rule  on  principles  of  right  and  equity,  but  by 
tlie  tyranny  of  force  and  arms.  It  was  the  wild  anarchy  of  reckless  desperadoes. 
The  tyranny  was  all  the  more  cruel  because  of  the  unprotected  and  helpless  con- 
dition of  the  few  that  still  remained  in  the  land.  4.  The  worst  form  of  immorality 
(ver.  26).  Adultery.  How  deep  was  the  degradation  of  the  chosen  people  of 
God  when  they  descended  to  the  worst  practices  of  the  heathen,  and  veiled 
them  under  the  sacred  name  of  religion  I  Unbelief  is  immorality,  and  abandons 
man  to  the  tyranny  of  all  kinds  of  abominations. 

III.  Invokes  a  more  terrible  pnnishment  (vers.  27-29).  Buin  shall  be  piled 
on  ruin ;  the  wastes  shall  be  reduced  to  more  hopeless  wastes ;  desolation  shall 
reign  supreme.  By  an  inevitable  retribution,  the  sword  on  which  they  placed 
their  chief  dependence  and  with  which  they  had  oppressed  the  weak  shall  be 
the  instrument  of  their  own  destruction,  and  the  pestilence  shall  finish  the  work 
left  undone  by  the  sword.  The  desolating  ruin  shall  be  so  complete  that  the 
fields  and  vineyards,  once  so  peacefully  cultivated  and  so  abundantly  productive, 
shall  be  the  haunts  of  wild  beasts  and  the  terrified  inhabitants  become  their 
prey.  Travellers  will  be  careful  to  avoid  the  infested  region:  **  None  shall  pass 
through  "  (ver.  28).  Terrible  indeed  will  be  the  punishment  that  shall  overtake 
the  obstinately  unbelieving. 

lY.  Makes  mockery  of  the  most  earnest  utterances  of  the  Divine  message 
(vers.  30-32).  1.  There  is  the  sJiow  of  charmed  interest  in  the  messenger,  "  They 
come  unto  thee  as  the  people  cometh  ;  they  sit  before  thee  as  My  people.  With 
their  mouth  they  show  much  love.  Thou  art  unto  them  as  a  very  lovely  song 
of  one  that  hath  a  pleasant  voice  and  can  play  well  on  an  instrument "  (vers. 
31,  32).  Their  interest  in  the  preacher  is  superficial,  like  that  of  many  present- 
day  hearers.  They  are  pleased  with  a  rich,  musical  voice,  with  oratorical 
eloquence,  with  dramatic  posturin^^s,  with  ritualistic  display  and  full  choral 
effects ;  and  that  is  all.  It  is  the  same  kind  of  pleasure  they  have  in  listening 
to  a  well-rendered  song,  or  a  solo  on  the  violin  by  an  accomplished  performer. 
The  serious  meaning  of  the  message  and  its  application  to  their  practical  life 
they  have  no  desire  to  understand.  2.  They  make  sport  of  both  messenger  and 
message  in  public  and  private.     "  The  children  of  thy  people  still  are  talking 

861 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ciiAK  xxxiih  noMTLETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKtEL. 


Against  thee  by  the  walls  and  in  the  doon  of  the  honses,  and  speak  one  to 
another,  every  one  to  his  brother,  saying — (with  a  chuckling  contemptaousnen 
that  reveals  the  hollowness  and  baseness  of  their  hypocritical  concern) — dome, 
I  pray  yon,  and  hear  what  ia  the  word  that  cometh  forth  from  the  Lord  " 
(ver.  30).  An  invitation,  not  to  ponder  the  Diyine  message,  bat  to  listen  to 
their  garbled  version  of  it,  as  they  reproduce  it  with  flippant  sportiveness  and 
grotesque  caricature.  It  is  a  sad  evidence  how  completely  unbelief  has  degnMled 
and  infatuated  the  soul  when  the  message  that  deals  with  its  eternal  interests 
is  made  the  subject  of  fun  and  ridicule.  -3.  Thev  am  too  far  tUeped  in  infamy  to 
attempt  to  practise  what  they  hoar.  "They  hear  thy  words,  but  they  will  not  do 
them ;  their  heart  goeth  after  their  coretousness  ^  (vers.  31,  32).  They  loYe  sin 
more  than  godliness.  To  give  heed  to  the  Divine  message  would  break  in 
unpleasantly  on  the  round  of  self-indulgence  with  which  they  are  encircled  ms 
with  an  iron  band.  They  have  resisted  so  many  appeals  that  the  heart  has 
become  as  hard  as  adamant.  ''  How  dangerous  it  is,''  wrote  John  Foster,  the 
celebrated  essayist,  ^  to  defer  those  momentous  reformations  which  conscience 
is  solemnly  preaching  to  the  heart !  If  they  are  neglected,  the  diflSculty  and 
indisposition  are  increasing  every  month.  The  mind  is  receding  degree  after 
degree  from  the  warm  and  hoi)eful  sone,  till  at  last  it  will  enter  the  arotie  circle, 
and  become  fixed  in  relentless  and  eternal  ice.* 

y.  Will  one  day  receive  a  mde  and  palnftQ  awakening.  "  When  this  cometh 
to  pass  Ho,  it  will  come),  then  shall  they  know  that  a  prophet  hath  been  among 
them  "  (ver  33).  The  threatened  judgment  fell  on  Israel,  and,  when  it  was  too 
late,  they  saw  the  value  of  the  opportunities  they  had  despised.  Those  who  do 
not  know  the  preciousness  of  their  privileges  by  using  them  aright  shall  here- 
after be  made  to  know  by  being  deprived  of  those  privileges  for  ever.  It  is 
the  wail  of  many  that  they  did  not  know  the  value  of  their  blessings  nntil  they 
were  lost 

LBSS0N& — 1.  I%e  lowett  depth  of  unbelief  is  not  reached  wUhoni  many  faUkfyl 
warnings.  2.  Unbelief  is  subOe  and  deadly  in  its  progress.  8.  The  cure  of  unbelie/ 
is  a  merciful  act  of  Ood. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VER8E8. 

Yer.   21.   Bad  News — 1.    Always  threatening    and    meets   those   who, 

travels  fast.     2.  Its  lesson  should  be  still  giving  themselves  up  to  illusions, 

seriously  pondered.     3.  Is  disregarded  thought  that  the  judgment  would  not 

only  by  the  infatuated.  inexorably  ruu  its  course.     But  before 

the  seed  of  Divine  hope  could  be  sown, 

Yer.  22.  **  The  opened  mouth  of  a  the  last  thorns  and  thistles  of  false 

servant  of  Ood  is  his  frankness ;  the  human  hopes,  and  of  the  efforts  that 

contrary  is  trimming  and  flattery;  and  grew  out  of  them,  had  to  be  destroyed, 

it  is  also  distinguished  from  sarcastic  which  even  now,  although  against  all 

witticisms,  evil  speaking,  and  insult,  appearances,  were  convulsively  grasped 

The  servants  of  Gk)d  should  be  frank  by   those    who  avoided  the  passage 

in  speech,  yet  not  like  insolent  fellows  through  the  strait  gate  of  repentance 

who  believe  they  may  say  everything  which  is  the  condition  of  participating 

because  no  one  can  contradict  them,  in  the  Divine  hope,  and  did  not  wish 

at  least  when  in  the  pulpit." — Luther.  to  put  off*  the  spotted  garment  of  the 

flesh.** — Hengstenberg. 

Yers.  23-29.  "The  new  discourse 

here  first  takes  np  again  the  former  Yers.    24-29.   The  Inheritaiioe   eC 


352 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MOMILBTia  COMMENTARY:  EZEEIEL. 


OHAP.  xxxm. 


the  Wicked  —  \,  A  desolate  waste, 
"They  inhabit  those  wastes  of  tlie 
land  of  Israel  *'  (ver.  24).  2.  Yet  held 
with  a  dogged  pertinacity,  "  We  are 
many  :  the  land  is  given  us  for  inherit- 
ance "  (ver.  24).  3.  The  scene  of  un- 
restrained riot  and  wickedness,  *'  Ye 
shed  blood :  ye  work  abomination " 
(vera  25,  26).  4.  Defies  the  most  des- 
perate efforts  to  retain  it.  "  The  sword, 
devouring  beasts,  the  pestilence,''  are 
beyond  their  power  to  vanquish  (ver, 
27).  5.  IsfinaUy  swept  by  the  desolating 
vengeance  of  outraged  justice,  "  I  will 
lay  the  land  most  desolate — because  of 
their  abominations  *'  ^vers.  28,  29). 

—  **  Such  was  the  infatuation  of  the 
escaped  remnant  in  the  now  wasted 
lands  of  Judea  that  they  were  even 
still  full  of  self-sufficient  confidence. 
Had  this  confidence  been  resting  on 
the  restoration  of  Gk)d's  favour  through 
their  repentance,  it  would  have  been 
a  reasonable  confidence ;  but  it  rested 
on  utterly  false  reasonings  as  to  the 
relation  in  which  they  stood  to  Abra- 
ham. Abraham,  they  reasoned,  ob- 
tained from  Qod  the  inheritance  of 
Canaan,  and  we  are  his  children,  and 
therefore  are  entitled  to  succeed  to 
his  inheritance.  Abraham  was  but  one 
when  he  obtained  the  grant  of  the 
land;  much  more  shall  we  retain  it 
218  our  own  who  are  many.  But  they 
utterly  shut  their  eyes  to  the  fact  that 
Abraham  pleased  Gk)d  in  all  his  ways, 
and  was  therefore  called  the  friend  of 
God ;  they,  on  the  contrary,  displeased 
God  in  all  their  ways  by  *  working 
abominations  '  and  '  standing  upon 
their  sword/  as  if  might  made  right." 
— FausseL 

Ver.  24.  **  Strange  infatuation  I 
That  when  the  sign  of  God's  displea- 
sure  had  been  so  strikingly  displayed 
against  them  for  their  sins,  scattering 
all  their  vain  confidence  to  the  wind, 
they  should  still,  without  abandoning 
those  sins,  hope  for  the  peculiar  tokens 
of  the  Divine  favour  !  Yet  in  a  more 
subtle  and  retined  form  we  find  the 
Siime  flagrant  incoiisij»tence  practiced 
by  the  Jews  of  our  Lord's  time  wlio, 
in  like  manner,  reckoned   with   con- 


fidence on  being  children  of  Abraham, 
as  if  that  alone  were  enough  to  secure 
them  in  all  covenant  blessings,  while 
He  charged  them  with  being  in  spirit 
children  of  the  devil,  and  consequently 
entitled  only  to  look  for  the  portion 
of  the  lost  (John  viii.  33-44)."— i'air- 
haihk 

—  "  Walls,  cities,  go  to  ruin,  but 
a  fool  will  still  plant  himself  on  the 
ruins  (Prov.  xxvii.  22).  When  the 
mask  falls  from  the  hypocrite,  then 
will  the  beast  of  prey  which  lay  be- 
hind become  manifest;  and  we  shall 
all  be  made  manifest  before  the  judg- 
ment-seat of  Christ :  then  the  masque- 
rade will  be  out." — Lange, 

Ver.  27,  "  The  Divine  yengeance 
does  not  need  to  rush  upon  its  victim 
from  behind  in  order  to  lay  hold  of 
him,  nor  does  it  require  to  make  a 
long  and  laborious  search  after  him ; 
but  where  he  has  fled  to  and  fancies 
himself  hidden,  whether  it  be  in  the 
heights  or  in  the  depths,  there  the 
vengeance  of  Gk>d  lies  in  readiness, 
and  has  been  expecting  him  to  come  to 
it  In  the  end  we  all  come  to  God. 
Alas  that  so  few  should  fall  into  His 
arms,  while  so  many  fall  upon  His 
sword !  If  the  wild  beasts  of  passion 
do  not  tear  a  man,  the  pestilence  of 
his  natural  corruption  will  gradually 
consume  him." — Ibid, 

Vers.  27-29.  "The  small  remnant  in 
Judea  being  so  far  from  righteousness, 
the  prophet  could  only  speak  to  them 
as  a  minister  of  condemnation.  What 
they  had  to  expect  was  only  judgment 
still  more  severe  and  exterminating 
than  what  had  yet  been  appointed. 
For  them  the  desolations  of  the  land 
must  become  still  more  desolate,  and 
new  horrors  be  inflicted  by  the  sword, 
the  pestilence,  and  the  wild  beastw  All 
must  be  reduced  to  a  howling  wilder- 
ness, as  it  really  was,  tliat  the  new 
hope  for  Israel  might  spring  from  an- 
other and  better  root,  and  that  the 
people  might  know  how  impossible  it 
was  to  attain  to  blessing  from  Qod 
without  first  separating  from  sin." — 

FairJmm. 

353 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  XXXUI. 


UOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


Ver.  28.  "Desolate  shall  it  be  at 
last  about  every  ungodly  man  ;  for  as 
the  heart  i^,  so  is  the  lile.  First  of  all 
sin  desolates,  tiieu  come  desolations 
through  death ;  finally,  we  pass  into 
the  desolation  of  an  eternity  without 
God." — Lange, 

Ver.  29.  See  chap  xxx.  19. 

—  Those  are  intractable  and  un- 
teachable  indeed  that  are  not  made 
to  know  their  dependence  upon  God 
when  all  their  creature-comforts  fail 
them  and  they  are  made  desolate. 

Ver.  30-33.  The  Preacher'B  Critics 

— 1.  Use  every  oppoitunity  in  public  and 
jnivaie  to  hold  him  up  to  rtdicide,  "  Thy 
people  still  are  talking  against  thee 
by  the  walls,  and  in  the  doors  of 
the  houses  '*  (ver.  30).  2.  Are  eager 
to  give  tlieir  own  garbled  version  of  his 
message,  "  Come,  I  pray  you,  and  hear 
what  is  the  word  that  cometh  forth 
from  the  Lord"  (ver.  30).  3.  Observe 
the  oiUward  decoi-um  of  warship.  **  They 
sit  before  thee  as  My  people,  and  hear 
thy  words  *'  (ver.  31).  4.  Show  a 
fondness  for  the  word  which  the  state  of 
their  Jiearis  contradicts,  "  With  their 
mouth  they  show  much  love  ;  but  their 
heart  gocth  after  their  covetousness " 
(ver.  31).  5.  Are  charmed  with  the 
miLsic  of  eloquence,  "  Thou  art  unto 
them  as  a  very  lovely  song  of  one  that 
hath  a  pleasant  voice,  and  can  play  well 
on  an  instrument "  (ver.  32).  6.  Listen 
fiot  for  profit^  but  to  pick  up  material  for 
scornful  gossip,  "  They  hear  thy  words, 
but  they  do  them  not"  (ver.  32).  7. 
Only  when  calamity  comes  do  they  learn 
the  value  of  what  they  despised,  **  When 
this  cometh  to  pass  shall  they  know 
that  a  prophet  hath  been  among  them  ** 
(ver.  33). 

—  ''Ill  making  use  of  human  agents 
to  reveal  His  will  to  men,  the  Lord 
teaches  us  to  look  for  no  external  pei> 
fection.  There  may  be  found  all  the 
diversities  of  manner  and  nearly  all 
the  imperfections  which  distinguish 
ordinary  speakers,  for  the  Spirit,  even 
in  His  highest  operations,  must  stiil 
leave  free-play  to  native  peculiarities 
of  thought  and  utterance.     But  in  re- 

35i 


gard  to  its  substance  God's  Word  is 
perfect,  and  stands  nobly  apart  from 
all  that  is  of  man.  Let  it  erer  be 
ours,  therefore,  to  hear  it  with  rever- 
ence and  bow  to  its  requirements  with 
child-like  submission.  It  is  we  who 
must  fall  in  with  its  terms,  not  it  that 
must  accommodate  itself  to  oars." — 
Fairbaim, 

— "  The  Word  of  God  is  a  very  serious 
matter.  Let  every  one  take  heed  how- 
he  hears,  that  he  be  not  a  hearer  only, 
but  a  doer.  What  the  prophet  an- 
nounces comes  to  pass,  and  if  the  fal- 
filment  takes  place  the  mere  hearer 
will  be  the  loser ;  he  is  overtaken  by 
the  threatened  punishments  and  ex- 
cluded from  the  promised  blessings. 
He  has  not  to  deal  with  an  excellent 
orator;  but  behind  the  Son  of  man 
stands  the  Lord,  mighty  to  punish  and 
to  save." — Hengstenberg. 

Ver.  30l  "  Public  persons  are  a  com- 
mon subject  of  discourse.  Every  one 
takes  liberty  to  censure  them  at  plea- 
sure, and  faithful  ministers  know  not 
how  much  ill  is  said  of  them  every 
day.  But  Qod  takes  notice,  not  only 
of  what  is  decreed  against  them,  or 
sworn  against  them,  or  written  against 
them,  or  spoken  with  solemnity  and 
deliberation,  but  of  what  is  said  against 
them  in  common  talk,  and  He  will 
reckon  for  it.  His  prophets  shall 
not  always  be  made  the  song  of  the 
drunkards." — M.  Henry, 

Ver.  31.  "  Merely  to  hear  without 
doing  makes  all  preaching  unprofit- 
able. Strange  that  sermons  of  rebuke 
should  be  more  attractive  than  grace- 
sermons.  Men  would  rather  be  smitten 
than  caressed.  They  think,  perhaps, 
that  in  the  love  there  is  too  much 
of  design.  If  one  has  been  struck 
by  the  cudgel,  it  is  still  possible  to 
preserve  one's  heart  and  head;  but 
love  leaves  nothing  to  one*s  self,  it 
demands  all — the  whole  man  and  the 
whole  life." — Lange, 

—  "  Their  heart  is  on  their  half- 
penny, we  say ;  neither  can  the  load- 
stone of  God's  Word  hale  them  one  jot 
from  the  earth.      As  serpents  havo 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMlLETlO  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL. 


CHAP.  XXXIY. 


their  bodies  in  the  water,  their  heads 
out  of  the  water,  so  here  :  as  those 
Gergesites,  they  mind  a  swine-sty  more 
than  a  sanctuary." — Trapp, 

—  "  With  all  their  loud  mouth-pro- 
fessions of  love  to  God  and  His  ordi- 
nances, the  love  which  reigns  in  their 
heart  is  love  of  self,  of  fame,  pleasure, 
and  gain.  Govetousness  is  a  grand 
rival  to  the  love  of  God,  so  that  where 
the  love  of  Mammon  is,  there  the  love 
of  God  is  HQV*—Faus9ei. 


Ver.  32.  "  Mere  habit  as  regards  the 
hearing  of  sermons  makes  peo[)Ie  in- 
different, and  at  last  stupid.  Pious 
seutimentalism  is  spiritual  adultery. 
Satan  goes  with  us  into  church.  Edi- 
fication and  the  capacity  for  it  are  two 
different  things." — Lange. 

Ver.  33.  "A  true  prophet  will  al« 
ways  leave  beind  him  the  impression 
of  a  true  prophet." 


The  Bsproof  of  the  False  Shepherds  and  a  PRomsE  of  the  Good 
AND  True  Shepherd.    (Chap,  xzziv.) 


EXPLANATORY  NOTES.— Ver. 
1.  **  Prophesy  against  the  shepherds." 
•'The  trouble  which  the  prophet  here 
encounters  arises  from  the  loss  of  civil 
government  The  seeming  loss,  he 
contends,  is  a  real  gain,  as  the  present 
government  was  so  bad.*' — Hengsten- 
herg.  KM  designates  the  turning 
against  the  bad  shepherds  as  a  foil 
for  the  ensuing  promise. 

Ver.  2.  ''Woe  to  the  shepherds." 

The  rulers  who  sought  in  their  govern- 
ment their  own  selfish  ends,  not  the 
good  of  the  people  ruled.  Kliefoth 
understands  the  entire  body  of  offi- 
cials who  had  committed  to  them  the 
leadership  of  the  people.  The  office, 
like  that  of  a  shepherd  for  his  flock,  is 
to  guard  and  provide  for  his  people. 

Ver.  3.  '*  Ye  eat  the  fat,  and  clothe 
yon  with  the  wooL"  Kefers  to  the 
draining  of  the  subjects.  The  rulers 
levied  exorbitant  tributes.  ^  Ye  kill 
them  that  are  fed  " — the  culminating 
act  denoting  the  murder  of  the  subjects 
in  order  to  seize  on  their  goods. 

Ver.  4.  "That  which  was  driven 
away."  "  When  Israel  was  not  held 
together  in  the  name  of  Jehovah 
through  the  theocratic  offices,  the 
scattering,  the  self-abandonment  and 
surrender  to  the  worldly  powers  was 
the  natural  necessary  consequence." — 
Lange,    "  With  force  and  cruelty  have 


ye  ruled  them."  As  the  Egyptians 
once  did  to  the  Israelites  (Exod.  i.  13, 
14) — the  native  shepherds  are  no 
better  than  the  heathen  despots  were  in 
the  olden  time  (comp.  Ley.  xxv.  43). 

Ver.  5.  "Because  there  was  no 
shepherd  " — none  worthy  of  the  name, 
though  there  were  some  called  shep- 
herds (1  Kings  xxiL  17 ;  Matt.  ix.  36). 
"Became  meat  to  the  beasts  of  the 
field  " — the  heathen  nations,  the  wild 
stock.  They  became  a  prey  to  the 
Syrians,  Ammon,  Moab,  and  Assyria. 

Ver.6.«  My  sheep— My  flock."  The 

repeated  and  emphasised  "  My  flock " 
prepares  for  the  resolutions  of  Jehovah 
that  follow.  ''None  did  search  or 
seek  after  them" — rather  seek  or 
search,  *^The  former  is  the  part  of 
the  superior  rulers  to  enquire  after; 
to  search  out  is  the  duty  of  the  subor- 
dinate rulers." — Junius, 

Ver.  10.  ''I  am  against  the  shep- 
herds, and  regnire  My  flock  at  their 
hand."  God  had  already  begun  to  do 
so,  having  punished  Zedekiah  with  the 
deprivation  of  eyesight,  after  having 
first  caused  his  sons  to  be  killed  and 
then  the  other  princes  to  be  slain 
(Jer.  lil  10)."— FausseL 

Ver.  11.  "Behold  I,  even  L"  This 
found  its  most  glorious  fulfilment  in 
the  appearance  of  Christ,  as  vers.  23, 
24  expressly  announce  that  God  will 

355 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAT.  XXXIV. 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


execute  His  pastoral  office  specially 
by  the  Messiah.  Yet,  even  before  the 
appearance  of  Christ  the  pastoral  care 
of  God  was  active  in  the  restoration 
from  the  exile  and  the  other  gracious 
gifts  and  benefits,  which,  however,  all 
point  forward  to  the  true  fulfilment 
and  call  forth  the  desire  for  it.'' — 
Hengsienberg. 

Ver.  12.  ^The  dondj  and  dark 
day" — the  dark,  afflictive  time  of  the 
people  of  God,  when  dispersed  by  the 
heathen. 

Ver.  14.  ^I  wiU  feed  them — upon 
the  high  mountains  of  Israel " — in 

chaps,  xvii.  23,  xx.  40,  the  phrase  is, 
**  the  mountain  of  the  height  of  Israel,"- 
in  the  singular  number.  ''  The  reason 
of  the  differences  is,  there  Ezekiel 
spoke  of  the  central  seat  of  the  king- 
dom, where  the  people  met  for  the 
worship  of  Jehovah,  Mount  Zion ;  here 
he  speaks  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  at 
large,  all  the  parts  of  which  are  re- 
garded as  possessing  a  moral  eleva- 
tion."— Fausset. 

Yer.  16.  <«  I  wiU  feed  ihem  with  judg- 
ment " — justice  and  equity,  iu  coiitrast 
with  the  cruel  rigour  of  the  unfaithful 
rulers. 

Ver.  17.  ^I  Judge  between  cattle 
and  cattle.**  *'  The  officials  are  with 
yer.  10  discharged  and  gone :  the  per- 
sons concerned  can  only  come  into  con- 
sideration according  to  their  personal 
qualities,  not  according  to  their  official 
rank.  I  judge  between  one  class  of 
citizens  and  another,  so  as  to  award 
what  is  right  to  each." — Langef  d&& 

Yen  18.  "Ye  must  foul  the  residue 
with  your  feet.**  Not  content  with 
appropriating  to  their  own  use  the 
good  of  others,  they,  from  mere  wanton- 
ness, spoiled  what  they  did  not  use, 
so  aJs  to  be  of  no  use  to  the  owners. 
Groiiu8  explains  the  image  as  referring 
to  the  usuries  with  which  the  rich 
ground  the  poor  (chap.  xxiL  12 ;  Isa. 
xxiv.  2). 

Yer.  22.  **  Therefore  will  I  save  My 
356 


ilock,  and  they  ihaU  be  no  more  a 
prey.**  "After  the  restoration  from 
Babylon  the  Jews  were  delivered  in 
some  degree  from  the  oppression,  not 
only  of  foreigners,  but  also  of  their 
own  ffreat  people,  who  had  oppressed 
with  bondage  arising  out  of  debts  and 
mortgages  (Neh.  v.  1-19).  The  full 
and  final  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  is 
future." — Fausset. 

Yer.  23.  *"  I  wiU  set  np  one  Shep- 
herd ** — '*  the  complex  embodiment  of 
shepherd  watchfulness,  as  of  all  the 
duties  of  the  shepherd  office  —  the 
Divine  realisation  of  the  idea  of  all 
that  is  involved  generally  in  the  nature 
of  the  office,  as  service  towards  the 
community  for  the  sake  of  Gk>d,  as  sacred 
service  in  behalf  of  God's  people." — 
Lange,  "  With  the  unity  is  connected 
the  glory  of  the  king  and  his  kingdom, 
as  the  decline  was  connected  with  the 
multiplicity  of  the  shepherds.  With 
thecomingof  that  great  Shepherd  ceases 
not  only  the  division  of  Israel,  but  also 
the  separation  between  Israel  and  the 
heathen."— if^ti^^fenJerjr. 

Yer.  24.  ^'Iffy  servant  David  a 
prince" — "the  true  David,  the  Mes- 
siah, in  whom  the  stem  of  David  is  to 
culminate.  Not  a  resurrection  of 
David,  but  a  sending  of  a  David  who 
has  not  yet  been  present." — Hengsten- 
berg.  The  fittest  person  to  wield  the 
world-sceptre  abused  by  all  the  world- 
kings  (Dan.  il  34,  35,  44,  45). 

Yer.  25.  "I  will  make  a  covenant 
of  peace  " — "  a  security  against  hostile 
powers,  of  which  the  *  ceasing  of  evil 
beasts'  symbolises  the  negative  and 
the  *  dwelling  safely '  the  positive  side. 
Through  Christ  the  people  of  God  are 
predominant.  The  heathen  world  is 
forced  from  the  dominant  place  which 
it  had  hitherto  taken  and  sinks  to  the 
servile." — HengsteTiberg,  <fec. 

Yer.  26.  "Showers  of  blessing."  "The 
Holy  Spirit's  reviving  influences  are 
often  compared  to  a  refreshing  shower 
(Isa.  xliv.  3).  The  literal  fulfilment 
is,  however,  the  primary  one,  though 
the  spiritual  also  is  designed.     In  cor- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETia  COMMBNTART:  EZEKIEL.  orap.  xzxiv. 

respondence   with   the   settled   reign  yield,  through  the  showers  of  blessing 

of  righteousness  internally,  all  is  to  (ver.  26^.     By  reason  of  this  fertility 

be    prosperity    externally,    fertilising  Israel  snail  be  renowned  among  the 

showers  (according  to  the  promise  of  heathen  as  the  people  blessed  of  the 

the  ancient  covenant,  Lev.  zxvi   4;  Lord. 
Ps,  Ixviii.  9;   Mai.  iii.  10)  and  pro- 
ductive trees  and  lands." — Fa'ija^eU  Ver.  31.    *'And  ye  My  flock  are 


**  What  grace  when  the  God  of 

Ver.  29.  ''I  will  raise  up  for  them  heaven  condescends  to  men  who  are 

a  plant  of  renown.''    According  to  the  taken  from  the  earth  and  return  to  it ! 

old  style  of  exposition — Messiah,  the  Ps.   viiL;    xzxvi   8)." — HengsUnberg, 

Rod,  Branch,  the   Righteous   Branch  "There  is  evidently  an  emphasis  on 

(Isa.  XL  1;  Jer.  xxxiii.  5),  who  shall  meri.  Men  are  ye ;  remember  your  place, 

obtain   for  them  renown.     Hengsten-  you  are  merely  human ;  but  remember 

herg^  Fairbaim,  and  Geikie  translate —  at  the  same  time  that  I  am  your  God  : 

"a  plantation  for  a  name;"  the  soil  so  that  without  Me  nothing,  but  w.ith 

which  is  planted  will  be  famous  for  its  Me  aU.** — Lange, 


EOMILETICS. 

A  Grave  Impeaohment  of  Unfaithful  BuLma 

(Vers.  1-10.) 

L  They  abiiaed  their  authority  in  ministering  to  their  own  aelfish  indulgence 
and  personal  aggrandisement.  *'  rhe  shepherds  feed  themselves.  Ye  eat  the 
fat  and  clothe  you  with  the  wool "  (vers.  2,  3).  The  ruler  is  raised  to  a  lofty 
dignity  and  endowed  with  special  resources  in  order  to  watch  over  and  protect 
the  interests  of  his  people.  The  wants  and  even  the  luxuries  of  life  are  secured 
to  him  that  he  may  be  free  to  devote  his  powers  to  the  general  good.  He  is 
keenly  alive  to  any  act  of  treachery  on  the  part  of  his  people  ;  but  he  is  none 
the  less  treacherous  when  he  abuses  his  high  trust  in  seeking  only  his  own 
advantage.     He  has  basely  abdicated  the  highest  functions  of  his  kinghood :— - 

"He's  ft  king, 
A  true,  right  king,  toat  dftie  do  anght  save  wrong  } 
FearR  nothing  mortal  but  to  be  unjant : 
Who  ii  not  blown  up  with  the  flattering  puffs 
Of  spongy  sycophants  ;  who  stands  unmoved^ 
Despite  the  jostling  of  opinion.'*' — Martton. 

IL  They  ne^ected  the  plainest  duties  of  their  office.  1.  They  made  no 
provision  for  the  immediate  wants  of  the  people,  '*  Ye  feed  not  the  flock  "  (ver.  3\ 
The  first  demand  of  nature  is  food :  where  this  is  denied  to  a  people  the  result 
is  riot  or  starvation.  The  ruler  who  is  ignorant  how  to  procure  food  for  his 
people  is  incompetent ;  if  he  makes  no  effort  to  do  so  he  is  indolent ;  if  he  is 
indifferent  about  it  he  is  cruel.  The  king  should  be  a  father  to  his  people,  pro- 
viding for,  watching  over,  and  protecting  them.  2.  They  had  no  sympcUhy 
toUh  the  afflicted  and  unforttmate.  "The  diseased  have  ye  not  strengthened, 
neither  have  ye  healed  that  which  was  sick,  neither  have  ye  bound  up  that 
which  was  broken  "  (ver.  4).  It  is  a  severe  strain  on  the  loyalty  of  a  people 
when  their  sufferings  win  no  pity  from  their  selfish  ruler.  It  is  a  blot  on  the 
brilliant  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth  that  the  brave  seamen  who  defeated  the 
Spanish  Armada  were  left  to  rot  in  their  ships  or  die  in  the  streets  of  the  naval 
ports  because  there  were  no  hospitals  to  receive  the  wounded.  "It  would 
grieve  any  man's  heart,"  wrote  Lord  Howard,  the  lii^h  Admiral  of  that  daj,  **  to 

357 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  XXXIV.  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


seA  men  tlia*u  have  served  so  valiantly  die  so  miserably."  Modem  hospitals  and 
infirmaries  are  the  practical  outcome  of  an  enlightened  Christian  philantliropy. 
8.  They  made  no  effort  to  restore  the  disaffected  and  the  wandering,  "  Neither  have 
ye  brought  again  that  which  was  driven  away,  neither  have  ye  sought  that 
which  was  lost"  (ver.  4).  The  monarch  who  is  indifferent  to  the  emigration 
and  social  discontent  of  his  people  helps  to  weaken  the  stability  of  his  kingdom. 
Wealth  is  unsafe  in  the  midst  of  rebellious  poverty : — 

"  HI  fares  the  land,  to  hastening  ills  a  prey, 
Where  wealth  aocamolates  and  men  decay." 

The  formal  declaration  of  William  IL,  Kaiser  of  Germany,  in  favour  of  the 
International  Begulation  of  Labour,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  events,  pro- 
ceeding direct  from  imperial  authority,  of  modern  times.  The  oppressed  of  one 
country  have  enriched  other  countries  to  which  they  fled  in  their  despair.  4. 
They  retained  the  name  of  an  offke  which  their  conduct  had  robbed  of  all  practical 
frteamng.  **  Because  there  is  no  shepherd  "  (vers.  5,  8).  They  professed  to  be 
shepherds — vieilant,  faitliful,  kind ;  but  they  were  unworthy  of  the  name.  They 
were  frauds.  The  flock  was  worse  off  than  if  it  had  no  shepherd.  Better  no 
shepherd  than  such  shepherds.  An  honourable  man  would  relinquish  an  office 
the  duties  of  which  he  was  incompetent  or  unwilling  to  fulfil. 

IIL  Their  rule  was  one  of  tyranny  and  violence.  "  With  force  and  cruelty 
have  ye  ruled  them,  and  they  were  scattered  "  (vers.  4,  5).  It  was  a  cruel  irony 
of  the  shepherd-character  to  deal  in  blows  instead  of  food,  and  instead  of  tend- 
ing with  care  to  scatter  with  terror :  the  shepherd-garb  disguised  the  fangs  and 
savagery  of  the  wolf.  ''  It  is  ill  with  the  patient  when  his  physician  is  his  worst 
disease."  It  is  the  highest  injustice  when  the  ruler  uses  his  great  power  to 
oppress  and  destroy  his  people. 

lY.  They  shall  be  divested  of  the  office  they  had  degraded  and  called  to 
account  for  their  misdeeds.  '*  I  am  against  the  shepherds,  and  will  require  My 
flock  at  their  hand,  and  c<ause  them  to  cease  from  feeding  the  flock ;  neither  shall 
the  shepherds  feed  themselves  any  more"  (ver.  10).  Tyranny  and  wrong  cannot 
last  for  ever :  the  reckoning-day  comes  on  apace.  In  all  wickedness  there  is 
weakness  that  will  soon  or  later  be  fatal  to  its  reign.  It  i»  related  of  Lord  Ampt- 
hill,  British  Ambassador  to  the  Court  of  Berlin,  that  during  his  mission  in  Rome 
he  possessed  a  huge  boa-constrictor,  and  interested  himself  in  watching  its 
habits.  One  day  the  monster  escaped  from  the  box  where  he  supposed  it  was 
asleep,  quietly  wound  itself  around  his  body,  and  began  gradually  to  tighten  its 
folds.  His  position  became  extremely  perilous ;  but  the  consummate  coolness 
and  self-possession  which  had  enabled  him  to  win  many  a  diplomatic  triumph 
befriended  him  in  this  dangerous  emergency.  He  remembered  there  was  a  bone 
in  the  throat  of  the  serpent  which,  if  he  could  find  and  break,  he  would  save 
himself.  He  was  aware  that  either  he  or  the  snake  must  perish.  Not  a  moment 
must  be  lost  in  hesitation.  He  deliberately  seized  the  head  of  the  serpent, 
thrust  his  hand  down  its  throat  and  snapped  the  vital  bone.  The  coils  were 
relaxed,  the  victim  fell  at  his  feet,  and  he  was  free.  So  one  day  the  weak  place 
in  wrong-doing  is  sure  to  be  smitten  and  it  must  succumb.  Over  the  head  of 
every  tyrant  there  hangs  the  sword  of  retributive  justice. 

Lessons. — 1.  Treachery  in  government  means  suffering  among  the  people,  2.  A 
just  ruler  is  above  the  vice  of  corruption.  3.  The  highest  office  eamot  protect  Oie 
wrong-doer  from  ultimcUe  exposure  and  disgrace. 


358 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


MOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


COAT.  ZXZIT. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vera.  1,  2.  "Corruption  in  the  upper, 
the  goyeruing  classes,  those  who  give 
the  tone  and  measure  to  society,  carries 
along  with  it  corruption  among  tlie 
whole  people,  and  that  not  merely  for 
a  time,  but  for  ever. — It  is  a  very 
honourable  title  to  be  called  a  shep- 
herd, but  to  be  so  is  a  heavy  burden, 
with  much  trouble,  care,  and  labour." 
— Lange. 

Vers.  2-23.  "The  removal  of  false 
rulers  who  have  ruled  for  their  own 
selfish  aggrandisement,  not  for  the 
glory  of  God  or  the  real  good  of  their 
subjects,  is  to  precede  the  setting-up 
of  the  coming  King,  who  is  to  rule  in 
love  and  righteousness,  Messiah  the 
Good  Sheplierd.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  provides  for  the  eiernal  well- 
being  of  His  own  flock,  both  the  elect 
remnant  of  the  literal  Israel  and  also 
the  spiritual  Israel,  the  Church,  in- 
finitely better  than  the  best  of  earthly 
shepherds  ever  cared  for  his  sheep. 
But  the  false  shepherds  of  Israel  in 
Ezekiel's  days  cared  only  for  them- 
selves and  for  their  own  grovelling 
aims,  selfish  gain,  and  worldly  pre- 
eminence, like  Diotrephes  in  ages  long 
subsequent  (3  John  9)"—FausseL 

Yers.  2-10.  A  Bad  Shepherd— 1. 
Is  selfish  (ver.  2).  2.  Avaricious  ^ver.  S). 
3.  Heartless  (ver.  4).    4.  Cruel  (ver.  4). 

5.  A  terror  to  the  flock  (vers.  5,  6). 

6.  ^lall  not  escape  punishment  (vers. 
7-10). 

Ver,  2.  "Good  shepherds  they  should 
have  been,  but  they  were  naught  (Jer. 
xxiii),  and  naught  would  come  of  them 
for  their  maladministration.  The  sheep 
will  follow  the  shepherd.  The  com- 
mon people  are  like  a  flock  of  cranes 
—as  the  first  fly,  all  foWoyr :*—Trapp. 

—  "  There  is  a  woe  to  those  who 
are  in  public  trusts,  but  consult  only 
their  own  private  interests,  and  are 
more  inquisitive  about  the  benefice 
than  about  the  office,  what  money  is 
to  be  got  than  what  good  is  to  be 


done.  It  is  an  old  complaint,  all  seek 
their  own,  and  too  many  more  than 
their  own," — M.  Henry. 

Ver.  8.  "Ye  eat  the  fat."  "  This  ye 
might  do,  if  in  measure,  for  the  work- 
man is  worthy  of  his  wages  (1  Cor. 
ix.  7),  but  ye  gorge  yourselves  with 
the  best  of  the  best.  If  the  belly  may 
be  filled,  the  back  fitted,  that  is  all  you 
take  care  for." — Trapp. 

—  "Ye  kill  them."  "Contrive 
methods  for  a  seeming  legal  course  to 
forfeit  first  the  life,  and  next  the  estate 
of  the  well-fed,  rich,  and  wealthy,  and 
then  make  merry  and  feast  as  volup- 
tuous, unfaithful  shepherds  feast  on  the 
fattest  of  the  sheep  in  their  masters' 
fold."— Poo/. 

—  "The  priests  ate  the  tithes,  the 
first-fruits  and  the  ofierings  of  the 
people;  the  princes  received  the  tri- 
butes and  imposts ;  and  instead  of 
instructing  and  protecting  them,  the 
latter  took  away  their  lives  by  the 
cruelties  they  practised  against  them  ; 
the  former  destroyed  their  souls  by 
the  poison  of  their  doctrine  and  by 

*  their  bad  example.  The  fat  sheep 
point  out  the  rich,  to  whom  these 
pastors  often  disguised  the  truth  by 
a  cruel  condescension  and  complai- 
sance."— Calmet. 

Yers.  4-6.  The  DlBastrotis  Effects 
of  Sin.  1.  Disease  and  sufi'ering 
(ver.  4).  2.  Enslavement  and  oppres- 
sion (ver.  4).  3.  Estrangement  and 
dispersion  (vers.  5,  6).  4.  Abandon- 
ment to  ruin  (ver.  5). 

Ver.  4.  "A  timely  spiritual  refor- 
mation of  the  state  by  its  rulers  would 
have  averted  the  judgments  of  God 
altogether,  and  even  in  Ezekiel's  time, 
when  wrath  from  God  had  already 
descended,  faithful  conduct  on  their 
part  would  have  been  followed  by  a 
mitigation  of  this  punishment  and  a 
restoration  of  the  scattered  exiles." — 
Fausset. 

—  The  obligations  of  the  shepherd- 
359 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORAP.  XZXIT. 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


office  a  mirror  of  human    wretched- 
nesa. 

—  "  No  person  is  fit  for  the  office  of 
a  shepherd  who  does  not  well  under- 
stand the  diseases  to  which  sheep  are 
incident  and  the  mode  of  cure.  And 
is  any  man  fit  for  the  pastoral  office, 
to  be  a  shepherd  of  souls,  who  is  not 
well  acquainted  with  the  disease  of 
sin  in  all  its  varieties,  and  the  remedy 
for  this  disease  and  the  proper  mode 
of  administering  it  in  those  various 
cases  1  He  who  does  not  know  Jesus 
Christ  as  his  own  Saviour  never  can 
recommend  Him  to  others.  He  who 
is  not  saved  will  not  save." — A.  Clarke, 

Ver.  5.  "  Not  merely  in  the  bodily 
but  pre-eminently  in  the  spiritual 
enemies  of  the  people  of  God  inheres 
the  wolf-spirit,  the  devil" — Schmieder. 

Yer.  6.  The  QoaliflcationB  of  the 
True  Shepherd.  '*  1.  He  knows  the 
disease  of  sin  and  its  consequences, 
for  the  Eternal  Spirit^  by  whom  he  is 
called,  has  convinced  him  of  sin,  of 
righteousness,  and  of  judgment.  2. 
He  knows  well  the  great  remedy  for 
this  disease,  the  passion  and  sacrificial 
death  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  3. 
He  is  skilful  and  knows  how  to  apply 
this  remedy.  (1.)  The  healthy  and 
sound  he  knows  how  to  keep  in  health, 
and  cause  them  to  grow  in  grace  and 
in  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  (2.) 
Those  in  a  state  of  convalescence  he 
knows  how  to  cherish,  feed,  and  care 
for,  that  they  may  be  brought  into  a 
state  of  spiritual  soundness.  (3.)  Those 
still  under  the  whole  power  of  the 
general  disease,  how  to  reprove,  in- 
struct, and  awaken.  (4.)  Those  dying 
in  a  state  of  spiritual  weakness,  how 
to  find  out  and  remove  the  cause.  (5.) 
Those  fallen  into  sin  and  sorely  bruised 
and  broken  in  their  souls  by  that  fall, 
how  to  restore.  (6.)  Those  driven 
away  by  temptation  and  cruel  usage, 
how  to  find  out  and  turn  aside  the 
temptation  and  cruel  usage.  (7.) 
Those     who    have    wandered    from 


the  flock,  got  into  strange  pastures, 
and  are  perverted  by  erroneous  doc- 
trines, how  to  seek  and  bring  them 
back  to  the  fold.  (8.)  Those  among 
whom  the  wolf  has  got  and  scattered 
the  flock,  how  to  oppose,  confound, 
and  expel  the  wolf.  He  knows  how 
to  preach,  explain,  and  defend  the 
truth.  He  is  well  acquainted  with 
the  weapons  he  has  to  use,  and  the 
spirit  in  which  he  has  to  employ  them. 
In  a  word,  the  true  shepherd  gives  up 
his  life  to  the  sheep,  in  their  defence, 
and  in  labouring  for  their  welfare. 
And  while  he  is  thus  employed,  it  is 
the  duty  of  the  flock  to  feed  and  clothe 
him,  and  see  that  neither  he  nor  his 
family  lack  the  necessaries  and  con- 
veniences of  life." — A,  Clarke, 

Vers.  7-10.  The  Diyine  Jndgment 
<m  Unfiaithfhil  Hinisteiii^ — 1.  Is  pre- 
ceded by  a  clearly  detailed  indiclmerU  of 
offences  (ver.  8).  2.  Is  the  expiession  of 
Ae  righteous  indignation  of  God  against 
wrong-doing.  "  I  am  against  the  shep- 
herds "  (ver.  10.)  3.  Demands  a  strict 
account  of  the  tiiist  so  grossly  vidated. 
**  I  will  require  My  flock  at  iheit  hand  " 
(ver.  10).  4.  Deprives  the  offenders  of 
all  tJieir  power  and  emoluments.  "  I  will 
cause  them  to  cease  from  feeding  the 
flock,  neither  shall  the  shepherds  feed 
themselves  any  more**  (ver.  10).  5. 
75  mingled  with  tender  sympathy  for  those 
who  have  suffered  from  neglect  and  oppres- 
sion "I  will  deliver  My  flock  from 
their  mouth,  that  they  may  not  be 
meat  for  them  "  (ver.  10). 

—  **The  frightful  judgment  wl>ich  is 
contained  even  in  the  beautiful  name 
of  the  Shepherd.*' — Lange, 

Yen  8.  ''Qod  here  seemeth  to  be 
in  a  great  heat^  in  a  perturbation  of 
spirit,  causing  a  kind  of  impediment 
in  His  speech — '  As  I  live :  surely 
because '  —  so  thoroughly  was  He 
moved  against  these  lewd  shepherds, 
whose  faults  He  rip)>eth  up  again  to 
make  better  way  to  their  sentence.* — 
Trapp. 


360 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  xxxi?. 


EOMILETIC& 

God's  Care  over  His  Peopul 

(Vers.  11-31.) 

The  nnfaithftd  shepherds,  who  have  occupied  so  prominent  a  place  in  the 
prophets  vision,  now  sink  into  the  background.  They  have  been  arraigned, 
and  judument  passed  upon  them.  They  are  disposed  of.  And  now,  by  one  of 
those  skilful  dramatic  changes  so  characteristic  of  the  genius  of  Ezekiel,  the 
space  out  of  which  the  delinquents  have  vanished  is  filled  with  the  presence  of 
Jehovah,  and,  while  we  gaze,  shade  after  shade  of  the  Divine  character  is 
artistically  developed  with  inimitable  delicacy  of  touch,  until  we  are  enraptured 
with  a  picture  of  the  unutterable  tenderness  and  majesty  of  the  God  of  Israel. 
The  prophecy  is  full  of  consolation  to  the  stricken  nation,  and  is  intended  to  in- 

Spire  hop<*  in  the  breasts  of  the  disconsolate  exiles.     It  is  a  sublime  and  graphic 
esoriptiou  of  God^s  care  over  His  people^  as  we  shall  see  in  the  following  analysis. 

I.  He  will  gather  together  the  dispersed.  1.  He  tciU  seek  for  them  with 
Under  solioUude  {yeTH.  11-13).  In  contrast  with  the  heartless  rapacity  of  the 
rulers,  who  robbed  and  scattered  His  people,  Jehovah  will  sliow  that  His  concern 
for  their  welfare  springs  from  unselfish  though  unrequited  love.  He  seeks  not 
His  own  advantage,  but  theirs.  As  the  anxious  shepherd  plods  over  fell  and 
moorland,  through  stony  valleys  and  thorny  brakes,  in  search  of  his  wandering 
sheep,  80  the  Lord  will  penetrate  into  all  places  where  His  affrighted  people  have 
sought  temporary  shelter  "  in  the  cloudy  and  dark  day."  The  loving  heart  is  reck- 
less of  toil  and  undismayed  by  the  most  formidable  difficulties.  2.  He  will  make 
ample  provision  for  their  needs  (vers.  14-16).  He  finds  them  famished,  dispirited, 
wounded ;  but  He  **  will  feed  them  in  a  good  pasture,  will  bind  up  that  which 
is  broken,  and  strengthen  that  which  is  sick."  Though  His  providence  has  been 
abused  and  His  counsel  disregarded,  their  sufferings  move  His  pity  and  their 
wants  evoke  His  benevolence.  Even  our  sins  cannot  stem  the  perennial  outflow 
of  the  Divine  goodness.  But  how  inveterate  and  aggravated  is  sin  committed 
in  the  presence  of  such  unceasing  kindness !  3.  He  will  provide  for  ihem  a  place 
of  safety.  "There  shall  they  lie  in  a  good  fold  "  (ver.  14).  Defended  from  the 
harassing  exactions  of  false  shepherds,  and  from  the  ravages  of  wolfish  enemies, 
they  shall  forget  the  weariness  and  fear  of  their  long,  tedious  wanderings  in 
the  restfulness  and  securitv  with  which  they  are  now  enfolded.  It  is  not  enough 
for  Gk)d  to  seek  and  find  the  lost ;  His  purpose  is  not  accomplished  until  they 
are  safely  sheltered  within  the  arms  of  His  omnipotent  love. 

IL  He  wiU  deal  with  them  according  to  individual  merit  (vers.  17-22). 
Even  Divine  love  is  strictly  discriminative.  Its  affluence  embraces  all,  but  its 
personal  realisation  is  regulated  by  the  moral  condition  of  the  recipient  Love 
that  is  not  governed  by  wisdom  and  justice  loses  strength  and  sanctity.  ''I 
judge  between  cattle  and  cattle  ** — between  men  and  men.  God  has  an  infallible 
insight  into  character,  and  marks  shades  of  distinction  imperceptible  to  us. 
He  sees  elements  of  good  where  our  purblind  sense  sees  nothing  but  evil,  and 
detects  the  presence  of  sin  underneath  the  fairest  show  of  virtue.  He  knows 
how  to  encourage  the  weak  and  timid,  and  how  to  restrain  the  strong  and  for- 
ward. He  knows  how  to  succour  the  oppressed,  and  to  mete  out  justice  to 
the  oppressor.  It  is  better  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  Gkxl  than  be  at  the  mercy 
of  the  most  impartial  earthly  judge. 

361 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OUP.  XXXIY. 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


IIL  He  will  provide  for  them  THE  Gk>od  Shepherd.  1.  A  Ruler  of 
singular  and  peerless  woith.  The  One  Sliepberd,  the  Shepherd-King,  as  was 
David,  His  antitype  (ver.  23\  Their  many  shepherds  had  been  unfaithful, 
avaricious,  heartless,  cruel.  Ihey  had  oppressed  and  scattered  the  flock.  The 
One  (rood  Shepherd  would  be  beyond  the  reach  of  corruption  or  intimidation. 
He  will  rule  in  equity.  He  will  eently  lead  and  bravely  defend  His  people. 
He  will  sacrifice  His  life  for  the  sheep.  Others  had  destroyed  :  He  will  save. 
2.  The  rule  of  the  Good  Shepherd  vnll  bring  tJiem  into  closer  personal  relationship  to 
Qod.  "  I  the  Lord  will  be  their  God  '*  (ver.  24^  The  tyranny  of  the  false 
shepherds  had  driven  the  people  from  God,  and  fostered  in  their  distracted 
minds  doubts  as  to  His  rigtiteousness  and  goodness.  But  under  the  gracious 
regimen  of  the  Good  Shepherd  all  this  will  be  changed.  They  shall  learn  that 
the  covenant  promise  is  unrevoked — Jehovah  is  still  their  God.  The  govern- 
ment of  the  Divine  Prince  is  not  merely  legal  and  social,  but  intensely  and 
supremely  spiritual.  It  is  the  rule  of  God,  for  God,  and  leading  to  God.  Such 
rule  may  be  slow  and  gradual  in  its  development,  but  it  is  ever  bringing  us 
nearer  to  God,  and  revealing  His  purposes  and  character. 

**  Grod's  plans,  like  lilies  pure  and  white,  unfold ; 
We  must  not  tear  the  close,  short  leaves  apart. 
Time  will  reveal  the  calyxes  of  gold." 

lY.  He  will  endow  them  with  unprecedented  blessings.  1.  Peace  (ver.  25). 
2.  Prosperity  (vera  26,  27).  3.  Safety  (vers.  25,  28).  4.  Impeiishaole  renoivn 
(ver.  29).     5.  Union  with  the  Divine  (vers.  30,  31). 

Lessons.— The  Divine  care.  1.  A  source  of  comfort  to  the  afflicted,  2.  Of  hope 
to  the  penitent.     3.  Of  strength  and  hope  to  the  diligent. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vera.  11-31.  "The  description 
throughout  is  of  an  ideal  kind.  The 
prophet  foretells  simplv  the  nature  of 
the  coming  future  under  the  form  of 
the  old  landmarks  and  well-known 
relations.  The  best  of  the  past  shall 
revive  again ;  more  than  revive,  it 
shall  appear  free  from  the  defects  that 
formerly  intermingled  with  it,  clothed 
with  a  perfection  and  completeness 
hitherto  unknown.  But  while  the 
substance  should  thus  coincide  in  the 
new  and  the  old,  it  is  not  obscurely 
intimated  that  the  shell  would  ma- 
terially differ ;  for  certainly  the  literal 
David  should  not  be  the  Prince  in 
whom  the  promise  was  to  stand,  but 
One  unspeakably  greater  than  he. 
When  the  promised  Sliepherd  was 
found  to  be  the  glorious  and  mighty 
Lord,  to  whom,  as  David  in  the  spirit 
foresaw,  the  heritage,  not  of  Canaan, 
but  of  all  lands  and  all  nations  be- 
longed, it  behoved  the  Jews  to  con- 
362 


elude  that  all  the  rest  must  receive  a 
corresponding  enlargement;  the  re- 
gion, the  people,  the  inheritance  of 
blessing,  must  severally  be  what  the 
old  but  represented  and  typified.  What 
Canaan  would  have  been  with  its 
David  restored  again,  and  all  its  cove- 
nant blessings  enjoyed  in  richest  pro- 
fusion, such,  in  the  new  and  higher 
sphere  of  the  Messiah's  Kingdom,  shall 
the  whole  domain  be  over  which  He 
is  the  Lord,  when  this  promise  of  good 
things  to  come  attains  to  its  full  and 
final  accomplishment  We  see  the 
word  beginning  to  take  effect,  even 
before  Messiah  came,  in  the  partial 
re-establishment  of  the  Divine  King- 
dom within  the  ancient  bounds,  and, 
as  far  as  was  needed,  for  the  higher 
purposes  of  the  Kingdom.  We  see  it 
advancing  afterwards  towards  its  riper 
fulfilment,  when  the  great  object  of  the 
prediction  came;  and  did  the  part  of 
the  Good  Shepherd  by  avenging  for 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEItlEL 


etuT,  xixnr. 


ever  the  cause  of  His  elect  and  laying 
tlie  sure  foundation  of  His  everlasting 
inheritance.  And  we  see  it  travelling 
on  to  its  full  and  destined  realisation 
in  every  conquest  made  by  the  truth 
of  God  over  the  darkness  and  corrup- 
tion of  the  world." — Fairhaim. 

Vers.  11-16.  The  Divine  solidtnde. 

Seen  —  1.  In  active  endeavours  to 
restore  the  wandering  (vers.  11-13, 
16).  2.  In  bountifully  supplying  the 
wants  of  the  people  (vers.  13-15).  3. 
In  affording  security  and  rest  (vers. 
14,  15).  4.  In  the  sympathetic  treat- 
ment of  the  terrified  and  afflicted 
(ver.  16). 

Ver.  11.  "Rather  than  the  work 
shall  be  undone,  I  will  do  it  myself, 
and  then  it  is  sure  to  be  well  done. 
Aristotle  tells  of  a  certain  Persian  who, 
being  asked,  'What  did  most  of  all 
feed  the  horse  1 '  answered,  *  The  mas- 
ter's eye;'  and  of  a  certain  Afiican 
who,  when  it  was  demanded,  'What 
was  the  best  manure  or  soil  for  a  field  1' 
answered  'The  owner's  footsteps' — 
that  is,  his  presence  and  perambula- 
tion. Shepherds  should  reside  with 
their  flocks;  the  Arch-shepherd  will 
not  fail  to  do  so." — Trapp, 

—  "  Though  magistrates  and  minis- 
ters fail  in  doing  their  part  for  the 
good  of  the  Church,  God  will  not  fail 
in  doing  His.  He  will  take  the  flock 
into  His  own  hand  rather  than  the 
Church  shall  come  short  of  any  kind- 
ness He  has  designed  for  it.  The 
under-sheplierd  may  prove  careless, 
but  the  Chief  Shepherd  neither  slum- 
bers nor  sleeps.  They  may  be  false, 
but  God  abides  faithful" — M.  Henry. 

Ver.  12.  "  When  things  are  at  the 
worst  God  himself  will  set  in:  He 
reserveth  His  holy  hand  for  a  dead 
litt."— Trapp. 

Ver.  13.  "This  prophecy  primarily 
respected  their  restoration  from  cap- 
tivity in  Babylon,  and  was  in  part  at 
least  fulfilled  when  so  many  thousands 
of  them  returned  to  their  own  land 
under  the  conduct  of  Zerrubabel,  Ezra, 


and  others.  It  seems,  however,  to  look 
still  further,  even  to  the  general  re- 
storation of  the  whole  Jewish  nation 
from  their  present  wide  dispersion 
over  the  whole  world,  which  restora- 
tion most  of  the  prophets  foretell  shall 
be  effected  in  the  latter  days.  But 
there  is  no  need  to  confine  this  pro- 
mise wholly  to  the  Jews.  When  those 
in  any  age  or  nation  that  have  gone 
astray  from  God  are  brought  back  by 
repentance;  when  those  that  erred 
come  to  the  acknowledgment  of  the 
truth;  when  God's  outcasts  are  gath- 
ered and  restored,  and  religious  as- 
semblies that  were  dispersed  are  again 
collected  and  united  upon  the  ceasing 
of  persecution ;  and  when  the  Churches 
have  rest  and  liberty,  then  this  pre- 
diction has  a  true  accomplishment." — 
Benson. 

Ver.  13.  "  The  Divine  refreshments, 
images  of  the  spiritual  here,  of  the 
eternal  hereafter." — Lange, 

Ver.  15.  "Food  and  rest,  the  two 
great  necessities  of  human  life.  Their 
rest  will  nourish  them,  and  their  nour- 
ishment will  bring  them  new  rest. 
Best — true,  eternal  repose,  is  only  to 
be  had  under  the  shepherd-staff  of 
Christ." — Lange. 

Vers.  16-22.  The  Bivine  Jnstioe. 
1.  Will  punish  the  wanton  abuse  of 
prosperity  (ver.  16).  2.  Will  dis- 
criminate between  the  rich  and  poor, 
the  strong  and  weak,  the  oppressor 
and  oppressed  ^vers.  17-22).  3.  Will 
deliver  the  abused  captives  (vers. 
21,  22). 

Ver.  16.  The  Lord's  inspection  of  the 
flock  at  the  same  time  a  call  to  self- 
examination. 

—  "  The  Lord  feeds  with  judgment, 
that  is,  with  befittine  difference,  since 
He  dispenses  to  eacn  what  is  proper 
to  him.  He  performs  to  the  weak  no 
more  than  is  good-  for  them.  The 
children  he  feeds  with  milk,  and  de- 
fends them.  He  acts  mildly  or  severely, 
consoles,  frightens,  bUmes,  caresses,  as 
at  any  time  is  good  for  us.     For  the 

863 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMIIBTIC  COMMBNTAUT:  SZBKISL, 


fearful  He  relaxes  the  reins,  and  those 
who  place  their  coufidence  in  Him  He 
draws  to  Himself.  If  some  are  fat  and 
cormpt  the  weak,  He  takes  from  their 
strength.  Some  are  proud  of  the  gifts 
lent  to  them»  and  despise  the  simplicity 
of  others;  for  these  it  is  good  when 
they  are  humbled  and  are  deprived  of 
their  gifts,  so  that  they  may  obtain 
the  salvation  of  Glirist.  Thus  He  ac- 
complishes the  judgment  and  the  sepa- 
ration between  sheep  and  sheep ;  and 
so  each  one  should  be  concerned  about 
himself,  and  not  trouble  himself  re- 
specting othersL  The  separation  is 
already  going  on  here  in  secret^  but  at 
last  it  will  become  manifest  and  be 
seen  to  issue  in  a  wide  gulf.  A  stem 
judge  is  the  Good  Shepherd.  Not 
merely  the  unscrupulous  leaders  of  the 
flock,  but  even  the  sheep  themselves, 
will  be  brought  to  account  by  Him.* 
— Lamge, 

Ver.  17.  "  *  I  judge  between  cattle 
and  cattle.'  Between  false  and  true 
professors,  between  them  that  have 
only  the  form  and  them  that  have  the 
power  of  godliness,  between  the  back- 
slider in  heart  and  the  upright  man." 
^A.  Clarke. 

Ver.  18.  "Ye  abuse  Qod*s  mercies, 
you  consume  much  upon  yourselves, 
and  ye  spoil  more  on  which  the  poor 
would  have  been  glad  to  feed.  There 
are  some  who  would  rather  give  food 
to  their  sporting  dogs  than  to  the  poor 
around  them  who  are  ready  to  starve, 
and  would  be  glad  of  the  crumbs  that 
fall  from  the  table  of  those  masters.* 
—A.  Clarke. 

—  "Would  our  so-called  men  of 
culture  also  but  consider  it,  who  only 
tread  under  foot  the  pure  doctrine,  or 
trouble  it  by  their  goat>like  gambols.* 
— Lange. 

Ver.  21.  "The  mischievous  polemic 
in  the  Church.  A  theology  that  is 
quarrelsome  and  'combative  scatters 
tlie  Churches  in  the  world." — Lange. 

Vers,  23-31.   The  Oood  ShepliercL 
1.  The  Divine  Prince  (ver.  23).     2. 
S64 


Shall  ensure  peace,  safety,  prosperity, 
and  victory  (vers.  25-28).  Shall  be- 
come pre-eminent  in  digmty  and  great* 
ness  by  what  He  does  for  His  people 
(vers.  29,  30).  4.  Shall  exalt  His 
people  into  a  Divinely-ennobled  man- 
hood (ver.  31). 

Vers.  23,  24.  «  The  One  Shepherd, 
according  to  the  promise  in  its  fulfil- 
ment: 1.  His  official  position  through 
all  times.  2.  His  shepherd-service  in 
the  flesh  and  in  the  spirit  3.  His 
personality  in  respect  to  God  and  as 
regards  the  flock." — Lange. 

Ver.  23.  "  Who  indeed  is  the  only 
Shepherd.  Magistrates  and  ministers 
are  shepherds ;  but  Christ  is  the  Good 
Shepherd  (Jno.  x.  11)  ;  the  Great 
Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  Souls  (1  Peter 
ii.  25 ;  Heb.  xiil  20) ;  the  True  Shep- 
herd above  all  for  skill,  love,  and 
power,  above  Jacob,  above  David,  of 
whom  He  is  descended,  and  by  whose 
name  He  is  here  called  (Jer.  xxx.  9 ; 
Hosea  iii  5  ;  Ezek.  xxxvil  24)." — 
Trapp. 

—  "Messiah,  the  True  Shepherd,  who 
hath  given  Himself  this  name  both  in 
the  Prophets  and  in  the  Gospel,  and 
who  hath  perfectly  fulfilled  all  the 
duties,  the  characters  whereof  have 
been  before  described.  He  is  called 
David  because  He  sprung  from  David 
according  to  tlie  flesh,  because  He 
possessed  eminently  and  really  all 
those  qualities  which  the  Scriptures 

S've  to  David  as  the  type  of  the 
iessiah,  and  because  He  was  the 
person  in  whom  all  the  promises  made 
to  David  were  fulfilled.  Though  this 
prophecy  was  in  a  great  measure  com- 
pleted when  Christ  by  the  preaching 
of  the  Gospel  gathered  into  one  the 
children  of  God,  among  whom  were 
many  of  the  lost  sheep  of  Israel,  yet  it 
will  receive  a  further  completion  at  the 
general  conversion  of  the  Jews."— 
Calmet. 

—  "David.  1,  As  to  the  name,  Hia 
beloved  (Matt.  iii.  17).  2.  As  to  His 
birth  in  Bethlehem.  3.  As  to  Hia 
humble  state  and  littleness  (Isa.  liii.  3). 
4.  As  to  His  shepherd-service.    5.  Aa 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKJEL. 


cBkv.  xxxnr. 


to  His  anointing.  6.  As  to  His  de- 
Yotedness :  David  for  the  law,  Christ 
for  the  flock.  7.  As  to  His  victories." 
—Starke. 

—  "  David,  king  of  Israel,  had  been 
dead  upwards  of  400  years,  and  from 
that  time  till  now  there  never  was  a 
mler  of  any  kind,  either  in  the  Jewish 
Church  or  state,  of  the  name  of  David. 
This  then  must  be  some  typical  person, 
and  from  the  texts  marked  in  the 
margin  we  understand  that  Jesus 
Christ  alone  is  meant,  as  both  Old 
and  New  Testaments  agree  in  this. 
And  from  this  one  Shepherd  all  Chris- 
tian ministers  must  denve  their  autho- 
rity to  teach  and  their  grace  to  teach 
eflfectually." — A.  Clarke.  The  ancient 
Jews  allowed  that  the  Messiah  was 
meant  in  this  place. 

Ver.  24.  "This  is  that  beehive  of 
heavenly  honey  we  so  oft  meet  with 
in  the  Old  Testament,  which  therefore 
the  sectaries  have  so  little  reason  to 
reject" — Trapp, 

Ver.  25.  "  *  I  will  make  with  them 
a  covenant  of  peace ' — I  will  cut  with 
them  the  peace  covenant ;  a  covenant 
sacrifice^  procuring  and  establishing 
peace  between  GUxl  and  man ;  and  be- 
tween man  and  his  fellows.  The  cutting 
refers  to  the  ancient  mode  of  making 
covenants.  The  blood  was  poured  out, 
the  animal  was  divided  from  mouth 
to  tail,  exactly  in  two,  the  divisions 
placed  opposite  to  each  other,  the  con- 
tracting parties  entered  into  the  space, 
goin^  in  at  each  end,  and  met  in  the 
middle,  and  there  took  the  covenant 
oath.  He  is  the  Prince  of  Peace,  and 
through  Him  come  glory  to  God  in 
the  highest,  and  peace  and  good-will 
to  men  upon  earth," — A.  Clarke. 

—  "  The  evil  beasts  in  the  land — 
spiritual  false  guides,  worldly  perse- 
cutors, plausible  hypocritea" — Lange, 

Yen  26.  The  Church  a  source  of 
Uessing.  I.  As  it  is  the  dwelling-flace 
ofOod.  "My  hill."  %  As  U  is  enriched 
with  a  fUniiude  of  Divine  grace,  "  I 
will  cause  the  shower  to  come  down 
in  his  season :  there  shall  be  showers 


of  blessing."  3.  As  it  is  faithful  and 
active  in  diffusing  its  God-given  benefits. 
"  I  will  make  them  and  the  places 
round  about  a  blessing." 

—  There  the  Church  is  a  blessing 
where  there  is  the  rain  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Without  this  rain  nothing 
grows  in  tlie  Kingdom  of  God  :  one 
cannot  even  say  Jesus  is  Lord  (1 
Cor.  xii.  3). 

Yer.  28.  Spiritual  boldness.  "  1. 
Over  against  the  powers  of  the  world. 

2.  Over  against  the  wickedness  of  sin. 

3.  Over  against  the  transitoriness  and 
uncertainty  of  our  earthly  life.  4.  Over 
against  the  solicitude  of  our  own  heart.'* 
— Lange. 

Yer.  29.  "  *  I  will  raise  up  a  plant  of 
renown' — ^a  plantation  to  the  name: 
to  the  name  of  Christ.  The  words 
might  be  applied  to  the  Christian 
Church ;  but  that  Christ  may  be  called 
a  plant  or  plantation  here — as  He  is 
elsewhere  called  a  brancli  and  a  rod 
(laa.  iv.  2 ;  xL  1 ;  Jer.  xxiii.  5 ;  xxxv. 
15) — is  most  probable.  He  is  the 
person  of  name — Jesus;  who  has  a 
name  above  every  name,  at  whose 
name  every  knee  shall  bow ;  through 
whose  name,  by  faith  in  His  name,  the 
diseased  are  healed ;  and  in  whose 
name  all  our  prayers  and  supplications 
must  be  presented  to  God.  This  is  the 
person  of  Name  I " — Clarke. 

—  "Christ,  the  true  tree  of  life. 
Or  the  Church,  planted  and  rooted  in 
Christ,  and  much  renowned  all  the 
world  over.  Christ  mystical  is  a  vine 
covering  the  whole  earth." — Trapp. 

—  "  The  Kingdom  of  the  Anointed 
a  planting,  inasmuch  as  the  members 
of  the  Kingdom  are — 1.  Sown  by  the 
Word.  2.  Reared,  fostered  by  the 
Holy  Spirit.  3.  Grown  in  time  for 
eternity,  to  the  honour  of  God  the 
Father." — Lange. 

—  "Hungering  after  righteousness  as 
the  means  and  preservative  against  the 
eternal  hunger  and  distress  on  account 
of  sin ;  hunger  against  hunger,  as  the  way 
to  everlastmg  satisfaction." — Lange. 

Yers.  80, 31.  "  All  these  promises  be- 
366 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CAAP.  ZXX7. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


long  also  to  us,  if  we  be  true  believers 
in  Christ.  Then  we  can  say,  'The 
Lord  is  my  Shepherd,  I  shall  not 
want'  When  we  were  wandering  on 
the  mountains  of  error,  Jesus  sought 
us  and  brought  us  safely  into  the  fold. 
He  feeds  us  in  the  green  pastures  of 
His  ordinances  now.  He  leads  us  in 
paths  of  righteousness,  and  makes  us 
to  lie  down  at  rest,  reposing  on  His 
love  ;  and  will  at  last  bring  us  to  the 
heavenly  land  of  promise,  where  we 
shall  hunger  no  more  and  thirst  no 
more,  and  our  shame  shall  be  turned 
into  everlasting  glory." — Famset, 

Ver.  30.  "Only  by  the  way  do  the 
pilgrims  of  Qod  doubt;  not  at  the 
beginning,  and  at  the  end  not  at  all. 
At  first  they  proceed  in  faith,  at  last 
they  shall  see  face  to  face." — Lange. 

Ver.  31.  "Under  the  more  imme- 
diate interpretation  of  the  similitude 
that  men  are  meant,  there  is  at  the 
same  time  indicated  the  universality 
of  grace ;  that  not  Israel  alone  but 
Adam,  humanity,  are  named  as  the 
flock ;  and  the  greatness  also  of  the 
grace  is  perceptible  in  this,  that  Israel 
is  not  designated  by  its  honourable 


name,  that  which  expresses  its  election 
of  grace,  but  man,  which  calls  to  re- 
membrance dust  of  the  ground,  sin, 
and  death." — Sdimieder. 

—  "  This  is  a  chapter  which  both 
magistrates  and  rulers  of  the  Church 
ought  to  meditate  upon  very  seriously. 
The  complaints  that  God  here  makes 
of  false  shepherds,  and  the  curses  Ho 
denounces  against  them,  show  that  it 
is  the  duty  of  pastors,  with  their 
utmost  diligence,  to  watch  over  the 
sheep  with  which  they  are  entrusted, 
and  to  provide  with  care  and  readiness 
for  all  their  wants,  and  that  if  they 
fail  herein  they  must  give  a  severe 
account  to  God  for  it.  Tiiis  too  lays 
an  obligation  upon  princes  and  magis- 
trates to  govern  faithfully  and  justly 
the  people  committed  to  their  trust. 
What  befell  the  Jew?,  who  for  the 
unfaithfulness  of  their  prophets  and 
magistrates  were  utterly  destroyed, 
shows  that  it  is  the  greatest  misfortune 
to  a  nation  to  have  wicked  rulers,  and 
that  all  who  were  concerned  for  the 
glory  of  God  and  the  happiness  and 
edification  of  the  Church  have  great 
reason  to  pray  to  God  that  He  would 
always  raise  up  to  His  people  faithful 
and  good  pastors." — Ostervald. 


Thb  Utter  Ruin  of  Idijmea.    (Chap,  xxxv.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTEa— Ver.  2. 
"Mount  Seir" — Idumea,  the  woody 
mountain  region  in  the  south  of  that 
part  of  Palestine  which  lies  to  the 
east  of  Jordan  from  the  Dead  Sea  to 
the  Atlantic  Gulf.  "Seir"  means 
shaggy,  alluding  to  its  rugged  hills  and 
foresti^  and  originally  to  Esau,  the 
ancestor  of  Edom  (Gen.  xxv.  25; 
xxvii.  11). 

Yer.  3.  "I  will  make  thee  most 
desolate  "—literally  desolation  and  deso- 
lateness.  "  It  is  only  in  their  national 
character  of  foes  to  God's  people  that 
the  Edomites  are  to  be  utterly  de- 
stroyed. A  remnant  of  Edom,  as  of 
the  other  heathen,  is  to  be  called  by 
the  name  of  God  (Amos  ix.  12)." — 
Faussd, 

S«6 


Ver.  5.  "A  perpetual  hatred''— 
enmity  for  ever,  an  abiding  enmity. 
Edom  perpetuated  the  hereditary 
hatred  derived  from  Esau  against 
Jacob.  "  By  the  force  of  the  sword  " 
— by  the  hands  of  the  sword,  the  sword 
being  personified  as  a  devourer  whose 
hands  were  the  instruments  of  destruc- 
tion. "  In  the  time  their  iniquity  had 
an  end" — its  consummation.  "  Oppres- 
sion of  brethren  calls  at  once  for  the 
exercise  of  compassion,  which  is  best 
manifested  where  no  one  is  innocent 
When  guilt  makes  the  end,  ancient 
enmity  should  not  be  let  loose." — 
Lange. 

Ver.  a  "  Sith  thou  hast  not  hated 
blood  " — rather  the  affir  niative.  Surely 
tliou  dost  hate  blood.     "  The  preserva- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL 


OHAP.  XJOV. 


tion  of  thy  life  is  what  thou  art  intent 
on  securing.  The  thought  of  blood 
being  shed  among  thee  is  what  thou 
art  putting  far  from  thee  as  the  object 
of  aversion;  but  God's  purposes  are 
contrary  to  thine,  and  what  thou 
hatest  Ue  will  send — blood  shall  pur- 
sue thee." — Fairbaim.  **  The  effusion 
of  blood,  of  thy  own  blood,  shall  cleave 
fast  to  thy  footsteps.  Tlie  murderer 
hates  the  blood  which  he  sheds.  If 
he  hates  the  man  with  such  an  energy 
of  hate  that  he  attempts  his  life,  he 
hates  the  blood  in  which  is  the  man's 
soul." — Hengstenberg. 

Yer.  7.  ''  Cut  off  from  it  him  that 
passeth."  Tiiere  is  no  going  to  and 
fro— no  tniffic.  Hence  the  desolation 
of  death.  A  retribution  in  kind,  that 
she  should  be  cut  off  herself,  even  as 
she  stood  in  .the  cross  way  to  cut  off 
the  Israelites  who  escaped  (Obad.  14). 

Ver.  10.  "Whereas  the  Lord  was 
there."  ''It  is  not  said  the  Lord  is 
there,  but  loas  there.  For  a  moment 
He  had  withdrawn  Himself  (chap, 
xl  23) ;  but  that  He  was  there  secures 
that  He  will  be  there,  since  He  has 
not  yet  definitely  given  up  His  inheri- 
tance. Where  God  is  in  the  midst 
there  Edom  cannot  possibly  gain  a 
footing,  though  He  give  over  His 
people  even  for  a  long  time  to  the 
foe." — Hengsienberg. 


Ver.  11.  "I  will  do  according  to 
thine  anger."  '*  From  the  hating  come 
anger  and  envy,  expressing  themselves 
not  only  in  word  but  also  in  deed. 
Jehovah  acts  according  to  Edom's 
doi  n  gs. " — Lange, 

Vt?r.  13.  **With  your  mouth  ye 
have  boasted  against  me."  Edom  im- 
plied, if  he  (lid  not  express  it,  in  his 
taunts  against  Israel,  that  God  ha<l 
not  sufficient  power  to  protect  His 
people.  A  type  of  the  spirit  of  all  the 
foes  of  God  and  His  people  (1  Sam. 
ii.  3 ;  Rev.  xiii.  6). 

Ver.  14.  *'When  the  whole  earth 
rejoiceth,  I  will  make  thee  desolate." 

"  The  *  whole  earth '  refers  to  Judea 
and  the  nations  that  submit  them- 
selves to  Judea's  God.  When  >  these 
rejoice,  the  foes  of  God  and  His  people, 
represented  by  Edom  as  a  nation,  shall 
be  desolate.  Things  shall  be  com- 
pletely reversed  :  Israel,  that  now  for 
a  time  mourns,  shall  then  rejoice,  and 
that  for  ever.  Edom,  that  now  rejoices 
over  fallen  Israel,  shall  then,  when 
elsewhere  all  is  joy,  mourn,  and  for 
ever  (Isa.  Ixv.  17-19;  Matt.  v.  4; 
Luke  vi.  26y'—Fausset. 

Ver.  15.  "Mount  Seir,  and  aU 
Idnmea,  even  all  of  if — set  in  con- 
trast to  the  inheritance  of  the  house  of 
Israel. 


H0MILSTIC8. 

The  Enemies  of  Goix 

(Vers.  1-15.) 

It  sonnds  strange  to  hear  again  the  voice  of  denunciation  interposed  in  the 
midst  of  prophecies  full  of  consolation  and  hope.  The  doom  of  E<lom  has  been 
dealt  with  in  chapter  xxv.,  but  it  is  introduced  once  more  in  perfect  harmony 
with  the  immediate  design  of  the  prophet,  which  is  to  show  that  the  future 
triumph  of  Israel  will  be  assured  by  the  utter  defeat  of  her  bitterest  enemies. 
Idumea,  savagely  gloating  over  the  downfall  of  its  hated  rival,  and  eagerly  tak- 
ing possession  of  the  desolated  land,  had  an  apparent  superiority  over  Israel 
The  real  advantage  was  still  with  the  people  of  God.  With  them  was  deposited 
the  seed  of  Divine  blessing,  the  germ  of  a  glorious  future.  In  Idumea  no  such 
germ  existed.  There  was  nothing  there  but  inveterate  hostility  to  Jehovah, 
and  no  prospect  but  that  of  ultimate  ruin.     "  While  Israel  rose  in  Christ  to 

867 


Digitized  by 


Google 


miP.  jxxr.  BOMILSTTC  COMMENT  ART:  BZSKISL. 


the  supremacy  of  the  world,  E-lom  vanished  from  the  face  of  history — their 
niemoiial  perished,  their  envy  and  cruel  hatred  were  for  ever  buried  among  the 
ruins  of  the  nations.''  The  Edomites  represent  the  heathen  world  and  all  who 
have  rebelled  against  and  opposed  the  truth,  and  in  their  destruction  we  read 
the  ultimate  fate  of  the  enemies  of  Ood  in  all  ages.     Observe — 

I.  That  the  enemies  of  GKkL  axe  actoated  by  a  spirit  of  malignant  hatnd. 
'* Because  thou  hast  had  a  perpetual  hatred"  (ver.  5).  The  enmity  existing 
between  Jacob  and  Esau  from  their  birth  was  fostered  with  increasing  aggrava- 
tion by  the  descendants  of  the  latter.  Immediately  after  the  death  of  Isaac, 
Esau  settled  in  Edom,  and  conquered  the  rocky  territory  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Mount  Seir.  From  their  mountain  heights,  overlooking  the  southern  border 
of  the  Holy  Land,  the  Edomites  watched  with  undisguised  envy  the  growing 
power  of  the  favoured  tribes.  Their  hatred  became  more  acrid  and  implacable 
m  every  succeeding  generation.  As  the  father  of  Hannibal  caused  his  sou, 
when  only  nine  years  of  age,  to  swear  at  the  altar  eternal  hatred  to  the  Romans, 
80  the  sons  of  Edom  were  pledged  to  maintain  unceasing  hostility  to  IsraeL 
Time,  which  mollifies  the  fiercest  passions,  only  intensifiea  the  ever-cherished 
malice  of  the  Edomites,  and  they  embraced  every  opportunity  to  make  it  mani- 
fest. The  wild  unreasoning  hatred  of  the  Edomites  is  a  type  of  the  malignant 
opposition  of  the  enemies  of  God.  This  deplorable  condition  of  mind  is  an 
evidence  of  the  demoralising  effect  of  sin.  It  is  not  simply  a  dull,  sullen  indif- 
ference, but  an  ungovernable,  demoniacal  passion,  horribly  real  in  its  activity. 
Goodness  is  hated  because  it  is  good  :  God  is  hated  because  He  is  God. 

II.  That  the  enemies  of  God  are  infatuated  with  the  ftiry  of  their  opposi- 
tion, 1.  They  exult  over  the  disasters  of  God's  people.  "  Tliou  didst  rejoice  at  the 
inheritance  of  Israel,  because  it  was  desolate ''  (ver.  15).  As  Edom  watched  the 
advancement  of  Israel  with  envy,  so  it  noted  the  invasion  and  dismemberment 
of  the  kingdom  with  chuckling  satisfaction.  When  the  Israelites  were  prostrate 
and  groaning  under  the  triumphant  Chaldean  power,  Edom  laughed  at  their 
misfortunes.  There  is  a  laughter  that  is  utterly  joyless,  harsh,  metallic,  ringing 
with  scorn  and  an  indescribable  contemptuousness.  It  is  the  laughter  of  in- 
veterate hatred — ^an  inhuman  guffaw.  It  is  thus  that  the  enemies  of  God  exult 
over  the  temporary  defeat  of  His  people.  2.  They  take  a  savage  delight  in  helping 
to  make  tliose  disasters  more  complete.  *'  Thou  hast  aUeA  ttie  blood  of  the  children 
of  Israel  by  the  force  of  the  sword  in  the  time  of  their  calamity  "  (ver.  5). 
Edom,  forgetful  of  all  ties  of  kinship,  sent  troops  to  assist  the  Chaldeans  in  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem.  More  cruel  than  the  Chaldeans,  they  clamoured  for  the 
total  destruction  of  the  cit}',  and  exclaimed  with  fiendish  gesticulations — ''Base 
it,  rase  it^  even  to  the  foundation  thereof"  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7).  They  eagerly 
took  part  in  plundering  the  city,  they  occupied  the  passes  and  cut  off  the 
retreat  of  the  fugitives  who  escaped  the  massacre  at  the  storming,  and  openly 
rejoiced  when  the  citizens  were  carried  off  into  slavery,  boasting  loudly  of  their 
share  in  the  terrible  catastrophe  (Obad.  11-14).  They  were  never  forgotten  for 
their  base  and  cruel  treachery.  The  enemies  of  God  not  only  make  s|)ort  of 
the  misfortunes  of  His  people,  but  show  their  vindictiveness  in  doing  all  they 
can  to  intensify  their  sufferings.  3.  They  seize  with  avaricious  haste  the  possessiom 
they  help  to  ruifk  '*  These  two  countries  shall  be  mine,  and  we  will  possess  it " 
(ver.  10).  The  Edomites  not  only  re-entered  the  cities  captured  from  them  by 
David  when  he  was  settling  the  boundaries  of  the  Hebrew  empire,  but  they 
made  inroads  into  Southern  Palestine,  taking  possession  of  the  towns  as  far  as 
Hebron.  The  race  of  the  warrior  kings  of  «fudah  who  had  kept  them  in  check 
was  extinct*  and  the  country  was  too  feeble  to  resist  the  rapacity  of  the  Idu- 
means.     The  enemies  of  God  are  ever  eager  to  make  gain  out  of  the  tronblet 

368 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COM  MB  NT  A  R  Y :  EZEKIEL.  ohat.  XXX?. 


th^  have  helped  to  create.  4.  They  are  ignoiani  of  the  Power  they  rashly  defy. 
*•  Whereas  the  Lord  was  there"  (ver.  10).  What  a  sublime  stroke  of  the  pro- 
phetic pen  !  The  sentence  breaks  in  like  a  flash  of  ligli tiling — the  Lord  is  there  ! 
The  land  is  desolate,  but  not  forsaken  ;  conquered,  but  not  surrendered.  Israel 
has  been  carried  awaj,  but  not  Israel's  God.  The  land  and  the  people  still 
belong  to  Him.  This  fact  is  flashed  out  to  rebuke  the  presumption  of  Edom  ; 
but  Edom  sees  it  not,  heeds  it  not.  Like  all  the  enemies  of  God,  in  his  blind 
infatuation  he  wrestles  with  a  Power  that  ultimately  crushes  him. 

m  That  the  enemies  of  Qod  will  be  inevitably  destroyed.  1.  Their  destruc- 
Aon  wiU  be  a  Divine  ad.  "I  will  stretch  out  mine  hand  against  thee''  (ver.  3). 
The  Being  they  had  insulted  and  defied  vindicated  His  honour  and  supremacy 
by  their  righteous  punishment.  Josephus  informs  us  that^  soon  after  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem,  Nebuchadnezzar  turned  his  arms  against  Edom  and 
the  adjoining  nations  and  defeated  them  with  great  slaughter.  As  in  the  con- 
quest of  Israel,  Nebuchadnezzar  was  the  instrument  of  Jehovah  in  working  out 
tne  doom  of  Edom.  Jeremiah  (chap,  xlix.),  Ezekiel  (chaps,  xxv.,  xxxv.V  and 
Obadiah  describe  in  graphic  language  the  fearful  ravage  of  the  Chaldean  forces. 
The  ordinary  raids  of  robber  tribes  might  be  beaten  off,  for  the  Edomites  had 
a  reputation  for  warlike  valour ;  but  the  Ghaldees  were  irresistible,  and  were 
accustomed  to  do  their  work  with  desolating  thoroughness.  The  enemies  of 
God  are  helpless  when  His  power  is  put  forth  to  chastise.  2.  Their  destruciion 
will  be  on  account  of  their  inveterate  mckedness.  '*  I  will  do  according  to  thine 
anger,  envy,  hatred,  blasphemies,  boasting"  (vers.  11-13,  15).  Their  malignity 
towards  Grod  and  His  chosen  people  was  hereditary,  and  was  nourished  from 
generation  to  generation.  Their  impregnable  position  among  the  hills  increased 
their  haughtiness  j  they  boasted  of  the  wisdom  of  their  great  men,  and  they 
had  all  the  insolence  of  wealth,  their  country  being  situated  in  the  route  of 
commerce  from  north  to  south.  They  were  continually  stirring  up  the  jealousies 
of  the  tribes,  and  were  always  as  sharp  thorns  in  the  side  of  Israel.  But  th^ir 
course  of  wickedness  had  an  end ;  their  sins  ruined  them.  3.  Their  destruction 
will  be  by  the  same  weapon  with  which  they  destroyed  others,  "  Because  thou  hast 
shed  blood  by  the  force  of  the  sword  "  (vers.  5,  6).  The  law  of  retribution  is 
ever  operating  with  surprising  exactitude  and  impartiality.  Edom  had  wrought 
incredible  horrors  with  the  sword  and  been  reckless  in  shedding  human  blood. 
By  the  sword  shall  he  be  punished,  and  be  surfeited  with  a  very  carnival 
of  slaughter  and  bloodshed.  Joab  was  slain  by  the  weapon  with  which  he 
murdered  Abner  and  Amasa  years  previously  (1  Kings  ii.  2&-34).  Dogs  lapped 
tiie  blood  and  picked  the  bones  of  Jezebel,  as  they  had  done  to  Naboth,  the 
victim  of  her  fury,  fifteen  years  before  (2  Kings  ix.  '66).  4.  Their  destruction  will 
be  eomj^ete  and  inevocable  "  1  will  make  thee  most  desolate  "  (vers.  3,  4,  7,  9, 
16).  Thirty  ruined  towns  within  three  days'  journey  of  the  Red  Sea  attest  the 
former  greatness  of  Edom.  The  utter  desolation  that  fell  on  the  country  and 
on  the  descendants  of  Esau  is  one  of  the  most  impressive  facts  of  history.  They 
were  formerly  distinguished  for  wisdom,  now  they  are  sunk  in  the  grossest  folly. 
They  regard  the  ruins  around  them  as  the  work  of  spirits.  The  tribes  now 
wandering  in  Edom  are  savage  and  treacherous.  Even  the  Arabs  are  afraid  to 
enter  the  country,  or  to  conduct  any  party  within  its  borders.  The  desolation  is 
irrecoverable,  and  travellers  state  that  the  whole  region  is  a  vast  expanse  of  sand 
drifted  up  from  the  Bed  Sea  (Isa.  xxxiv.  6-15 ;  Jer.  xlix  7-22).  The  enemies 
of  God  will  be  smitten  beyond  the  power  of  recovery.  5.  Their  destruction  will 
be  a  vindication  of  the  character  of  the  Being  they  madly  oppose.  **  Thou  shalt  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord  "  (vers.  4,  9,  11,  12,  15). 

Lbbsons. — 1.  Active  opposition  to  the  good  is  the  offiprimg  of  nUensified  hakei. 

2a  tea 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CUAF.  XXXV. 


IIOMILETIC  COMMEyTARY:  EZEKIEL, 


2.  It  is  utterly  ftUile  to  oppose  Ood. 
timely  submission  and  repmtance. 


3.  The  Divine  vengeance  may  he  averted  by 


GERM  NOTES  ON  TEE  VERSES. 


Vers.  1-15.  "Why,  in  this  connec- 
tion, should  Edom  have  alone  been 
singled  out  for  destruction  f  Not  as  if 
her  people  only  were  appointed  to  suf- 
fer vengeance  at  the  hand  of  God,  but 
because,  in  the  bitterness  of  their  spite 
and  the  intensity  of  their  hatred  to 
the  cause  and  people  of  Gk>d,  they 
stood  pre-eminent  among  the  nations, 
and  80  were  fitly  chosen  as  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  whole.  The  region 
where  the  greatest  enmity  reigned  is 
the  ideal  territory  where  the  final 
recompenses  of  judgment  take  place. 
The  Edomite  spirit,  the  carnal,  unbe- 
lieving, rebellious  spirit,  is  most  surely 
doomed  to  perdition  :  enmity  to  the 
cause  and  kingdom  of  Christ  is  marked 
out  in  the  councils  of  heaven  for  irre- 
trievable ruin.  They  who  are  of  it 
cannot  overthrow  the  Church,  but 
must  themselves  be  overtiirown  and 
fall  under  the  stroke  of  vengeance." — 
FairbaiiTi, 

Ver.  3.  "  When  punishments  break 
in  and  are  already  taking  their  course, 
in  this  God,  as  it  were,  stretches  out 
His  hand.  Now,  since  His  hand  is 
not  shortened  to  help  His  children,  so 
also  it  is  not  too  weak  to  punish  His 
enemies  (Isa.  lix.  1)." — Starke. 

Ver.  4.  "  When  godliness  goes  out 
of  cities,  confusion  and  devastation 
enter  in.  We  can  never  sufficiently 
recognise  that  God  alone  is  eternal." — 
Lange. 

Vers.  5-7.  Hatred — 1.  One  of  the 
fruits  of  sin.  2.  A  prolific  source  of 
other  evil  passions.  3.  Is  intensified  in 
virulence  the  longer  it  is  cherished.  4. 
Prompts  to  deeds  of  cruelty  and  blood- 
shed.    5.  Will  be  signally  punished. 

—  **  The  fiercest  mutual  hatred  had 
for  centuries  thrust  apart  the  brother- 
races  of  Jacob  and  Esau.  The  refusal 
of  a  passage  through  Mount  Seir  to 
370 


the  Hebrews  under  Moses,  in  their 
march  from  Egypt  nine  hundred  years 
before,  had  entailed  the  long  sufferings  of 
the  wilderness  life,  and  had  never  been 
forgotten.  Under  Joram,  Amaziah, 
and  Uzziah  in  succession,  it  had  been 
virtually  a  Jewish  province,  till  the 
reign  of  the  weak  Ahaz.  The  destruo> 
tion  of  Jerusalem,  however,  had  at 
last  given  the  Edomites  a  chance  of 
revenge,  and  they  had  indulged  it  to 
the  VLttermosV'—Oeikie, 

Ver.  5.  "Edom  was  of  the  same 
stock,  brother  to  Jacob,  and  it  was 
sin  to  envy,  but  greater  to  hate,  and 
greatest  to  retain  a  perpetual  hatred, 
an  hereditary  enmity  from  Esau's 
time,  the  father  of  the  Edomites,  till 
now  :  near  one  thousand  two  hundred 
years  had  the  seed  of  Esau  hated 
Jacob's  seed  for  inheriting  the  bless- 
ing, which  they  as  little  valued  as  their 
father  did  before  them." — Pool. 

—  **  To  afflict  the  afflicted,  is  cruel 
This  is  scarcely  of  man,  bad  as  he  is. 
He  must  be  possessed  by  the  malignant 
spirit  of  the  devil,  when  he  wounds 
the  wounded,  exults  over  the  miseries 
of  the  afflicted,  and  seeks  opportuni- 
ties to  add  affliction  to  those  who  are 
already  under  the  rod  of  God." — A. 
Clarke. 

—  "Edom  is  often  in  Scripture  made 
the  type  of  the  most  bitter  and  in- 
veterate enemies  of  God's  people  in 
all  ages.  The  hatred  of  brothers, 
when  they  are  at  variance,  is  pro- 
verbially rancorous.  Such  was  Esau's 
hatred  of  Jacob,  though  the  latter 
averted  it  by  soft  words  and  con- 
ciliatory acts ;  and  such  was  the  in- 
herited bitterness  of  Esau's  descendants 
towards  Israel." — Faussei. 

—  "  Where  enmity  leads  to  :  it  per- 
petuates itself  by  degrees  in  the  heart ; 
it  is  not  afraid  even  to  use  the  sword : 
first  the  malice  of  the  tongue,  and 
then  the  violence  of  malice.    There- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OHAP.  XXX7, 


fore,  always  become  reconciled  at  once 
and  completely,  that  no  roots  may 
remain  in  the  heart  which  may  shoot 
up  afterwards. — ^The  prayer  of  an  im- 
placable man  yb  certain  not  to  be 
heard." — Lange, 

Ver.  6.  **'Even  blood  shall  pursue 
thee."  '*  As  a  bloodhound.  It  shall, 
it  shall ;  believe  me,  it  shall.** — Trajyp, 

—  "The  track  of  blood  behind  so 
many  celebrated  figures  in  history, 
behind  so  many  so-called  great  ex- 
ploits.— The  shedding  of  blood  a  char- 
acteristic symptom  of  the  world,  a 
mark  of  the  spirit  that  rules  in  the 
world,  and  of  the  wickedness  in  which 
it  lies." — Lange. 

Ver.  7.  "  Trade  and  intercourse  cease 
where  God  sends  His  judgments.  The 
Lord  destroys  nations  that  delight  in 
war." — Lange. 

Ver.  9.  *^  Edom's  sin  was  perpetual 
hatred,  and  Edom's  punishment  shall 
be  perpetual  desolations.  Edomites 
would  never  return  into  friendship  with 
the  Israelites,  but  still  hate,  molest, 
and  waste  them  ;  now,  for  just  recom- 
pense, Edom's  cities  shall  be  wasted, 
and  never  return  to  their  former  glory." 

— P(Wrf. 

—  *'  Sin  is  not  to  become  eternalised ; 
tlierefore eternal  punishment." — Starck. 

Ver.  10.  "  Whereas  the  Lord  was 
there."  The  Presence  of  God — 1.  A 
reality  though  unrecognised.  2.  A 
comfort  in  the  midst  of  desolation 
and  suffering.  3.  The  hope  and  guar- 
antee of  deliverance  and  future  pros- 
perity. 4.  A  startling  revelation  to 
His  enemies. 

Vers.  10,  11.  "The  overthrow  and 
exile  of  the  Israelites  from  their  land 
ought  to  have  moved  Edom  to  self- 
examination,  lest  there  should  be  in 
herself  sins  found  which  might  provoke 
God  to  inflict  similar  judgments.  In- 
stead of  this,  she  regarded  Israel's 
calamity  as  her  opportunity.  'These 
two  countries  shall  be  mine,  and  we 
will  possess  it'  She  forgot,  in  her 
wicked  presumption,  that  the  land  of 


Israel  was  peculiarly  the  Lord's  posses- 
sion and  the  Lord's  earthly  dwelling- 
place  ;  therefore,  so  far  was  Edom  from 
being  about  to  gain  possession  of 
Israel's  inheritance,  that  she  was  about 
to  be  deprived  of  her  own,  and  that 
for  ever." — Faussei, 

Vers.  11-15.  The  Triumph  of  the 
Wicked — 1.  Finds  its  joy  in  the  down- 
fall of  those  they  hated  (vers.  11,  15). 
2.  Is  unreal :  their  conquered  posses- 
sions a  desolation  ;  their  boasting 
hollow  and  joyless  (vers.  12-16).  3. 
Is  soon  changed  to  dejection,  while  all 
else  rejoice  (ver.  14). 

Vers.  12,  13.  The  Speech  of  the 
■^cked — 1.  Blasphefrnms.  "  All  thy 
blasphemies  which  thou  ha&t  spoken" 
(ver.  12).  2.  Boastful,  "With  youi 
mouth  ye  have  boasted"  (ver.  13).  3. 
Copious  in  its  insolent  vocabulary,  "  Ye 
have  multiplied  your  words  against 
Me"  (ver.  13).  4.  Does  not  escape 
Divine  notice.  "I  have  heard  thee" 
(ver.  13). 

Ver.  13.  "Worldly  men  think  lightly 
of  speaking  vindictive  and  calumnious 
words  against  the  people  of  God,  and 
of  forming  projects  for  taking  selfish 
advantage  of  their  times  of  extremity ; 
but  God  regards  such  words  against 
His  people  as  spoken  against  Himself. 
There  is  not  a  word  that  goeth  out 
of  our  lips  which  God  does  not  hear. 
How  careful  and  guarded  we  should 
be  in  our  words,  especially  in  times 
when  our  carnal  passions  and  tempers 
are  excited  1  (Prov.  x.  19)." — Fausset. 

Ver.  14,  15.  "What  an  entire  re- 
versal of  the  present  order  of  things 
there  will  be  at  the  second  coming  of 
Christ !  The  enemies  of  God,  who  so 
often  seem  now  to  triumph,  shall  then 
be  cast  down  in  everlasting  sorrow. 
The  people  of  God,  Israel  and  the 
elect  Church,  who  so  often  now  mourn, 
shall  then  rejoice  with  joy  unspeak- 
able and  full  of  glory.  Edom,  that 
rejoiced  over  fallen  Israel,  shall  then 
mourn  over  her  own  irretrievable  fall 
while  *  Jerusalem  shall  be  a  rejoicing 

371 


Digitized  by 


Google 


€BAP.  XXZTL 


HOMILMTia  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIBL. 


and  her  people  a  joy.'  Let  at  see 
that  we  take  our  portion  now  with  the 
people  of  Ood  in  their  season  of  trial, 
that  80  we  may  have  our  everlasting 

Eortion  with  them  in   their  coming 
lessedneaa." — FausseL 

Yer.  14.  SnffBring  —  1.  Aggra- 
vated when  all  around  is  gay.  2. 
Has  always  in  it  a  depressing  element 
of  loneliness.  S.  Has  special  signifi- 
cance when  we  are  conscious  it  is 
Divinely  inflicted. 

—  *'  When  the  whole  land  of  Israel 
rejoiceth.;  as  it  is  sometimes  hale  and 
well  with  the  Church  when  the  wicked 
are  in  the  suds.  Judea  was  the  world 
of  the  world,  as  Athens  was  the 
Epitome  of  Greece,  the  Greece  of 
Greece." — Trapp. 

—  "  When  tiie  whole  earth  is  in 
peace  and  plenty  and  enjoys  both,  thou 
shalt  want  all ;  and  then  envy  at  the 
welfare  of  others  shall  break  thy  heart. 
Envy  was  thy  sin,  and  now  what  is 
the  object  of  envy — the  prosperity  of 
others — shall  be  thy  grief."— PooZ. 

—  "  No  true  grace  without  justice. 
The  theocracy  must  accordingly  pass 
through  the  fire  of  affliction  and  be- 
come purified  :  for  the  same  reason, 
the  heathenism  whose  iniquity  is  full 
must  show  that  it  has  fallen  under 
the  Divine  justice.  For  grace  is  not 
toleration  of  the  bad." — Havemick, 


Yer.  15.  *' The  Edomites  who 
thought  of  seizing  on  others^  lands,  lost 
their  own.  They  who  covet  all  do  oft 
lose  all,  yea,  even  the  pleasure  of  that 
they  possess ;  as  a  greedy  dog  swallow- 
eth  the  whole  meat  that  is  cast  him, 
without  any  pleasure,  as  gaping  still 
for  the  next  morsel* — Trapp. 

—  "Thou  tookest  pleasure  in  the 
ruin  of  My  people ;  for  this  thy  sin  I 
will  ruin  thee,  and  then  do  to  thee  as 
thou  didst ;  I  will  retaliate  and  rejoice 
in  thy  ruin :  thou  helpedst  to  make 
Jerusalem  desolate ;  (  will  make  thee 
so :  thou  criedst  to  ruin  them  all,  to 
destroy  all  the  land ;  all  thy  land 
shall  be  ruined,  and  by  these  judg- 
ments I  will  be  known  to  be  the  Lord.* 
—Pool. 

—  "This  whole  chapter  strongly 
inculcates  this  maxim — Do  as  thou 
wouldst  be  done  by,  and  what  thoa 
wouldst  not  have  done  to  thee,  do  not 
to  others.  And  from  it  we  learn  that 
every  man  may,  in  some  sori^  be  said 
to  make  his  own  temporal  good  or 
evil ;  for  as  he  does  to  others  God 
will  take  care  to  do  to  him,  whether 
it  be  evil  or  good,  weal  or  woe.    Would 

?on  not  be  slandered  or  backbitten! 
'hen  do  not  slander  or  backbite. 
Wouldst  thou  wish  to  live  in  peace  t 
Then  do  not  disturb  the  peace  of 
others.  Be  merciful,  and  thou  shalt 
obtain  mercy." — A.  Clarke. 


Thb  Pboiosb  of  Bbiteb  Days  for  Isbael.    (Chap,  xxxvi) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Yer.  1. 
^Ye  mountains  of  Israel" — ^in  con- 
trast to  Mount  Seir  of  the  previous 
prophecy.  They  are  here  personified  : 
Israel's  elevation  is  moral,  not  merely 
physical,  as  Edom's. 

Yer.  2.  "  The  ancient  high  places." 
"  The  perpetual  heights  are  the 
natural  mountains,  as  a  figure  of  the 
unchangeable  grandeur  of  which  Israel 
boasted,  because  it  had  the  Eternal  for 
its  protector,  and  in  Him  the  security 
of  Its  own  perpetuity "  (comp^  Ps. 
2). — HengsUfiberg. 

872 


Yer.  3.  "Made  yon  desolate  and 
swallowed  you  up" — laid  you  waste, 
and  panted  after  you  on  every  side ;  like 
wild  beasts  after  their  prey,  implying 
the  Kreedy  cupidity  of  Edom  as  to 
Israel's  inheritance.  **  Ye  are  taken  np 
in  the  lips  of  talkers  "—literally,  "  Ye 
are  made  to  go  up  on  the  lip  of  the 
tongue,  i.&,  on  the  lip  of  the  slanderer, 
the  man  of  tongue.  Edom  slandered 
Israel  because  of  the  connection  of 
the  latter  with  Jehovah,  as  though  He 
were  unable  to  save  them." — FausseL 

Yer.  4.  "Thus  saith  the  hnd  to 
the  mountains,  hill%"  Ac.    The  men- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTW  OOMMBNTART:  EZEKIEL. 


ORAP.  XZZVX* 


tion  of  particulars  is  meant  to  point  to 
the  eye  which  observes  all,  the  Divine 
care  which  behoMs  each  and  all,  over 
which  only  a  human  eye  weeps,  or,  on 
the  contrary,  rejoices.  The  complete- 
ness of  the  renewed  blessedness  of  all 
parts  of  the  land  is  implied. 

Yer.  5.  ''  With  Joy  of  heart»  despite- 
ftil  minds,  to  cast  it  out  as  a  inrey" — 

"  with  gladness  of  heart  and  deadly 
scorn,  have  appropriated  My  land  to 
desolate  and  plunder  it" — Getkie, 

Ver.  7.  ''Shall  bear  their  shame" 

— shall  bear  their  share  of  contempt 
in  turn — a  perpetual  shame,  whereas 
the  shame  that  Israel  bore  from  these 
heathen  was  only  temporary. 

Yer.  8.  '^  ShaU  shoot  forth  your 
hranches  and  yield  fruit  to  My  people, 
for  they  are  at  hand  to  come  " — ''  shall 
shoot  out  your  veniure  and  yield  your 
fruits  to  My  people  Israel,  for  they 
will  soon  come." — GeUde,  "  Leaves  and 
branches  come  into  view  as  food  for 
cattle,  while  the  fruit  is  for  man.  Of 
the  seventy  years  Chaldean  servitude 
twenty  had  already  elapsed,  so  that 
many  of  those  still  living  might  yet 
see  the  joyful  day." — Hengsienberg. 

Yer.  11.  ''Will  do  better  nntoyon 
than  at  yonr  beginnings  " — '*  better 
than  in  your  pa^t.  This  was  fulfilled 
when  Ue  appeared  in  the  Holy  Land 
who  could  say  of  Himself, '  Come  onto 
Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy 
laden,'  and  who  far  outshone  Solomon 
in  all  his  glory." — Eengstenberg, 

Yer.  14.  "Thou  shalt  deyonr  men 
no  more,  neither  bereave  thy  nations 
any  more."  "  The  land  of  Israel  had  a 
dungerous  position.  It  was  a  land  of 
transit,  an  apple  of  discord  for  the 
Asiatic  and  African  powers,  and  ex- 
posed to  oppression  by  the  surrounding 
nations  of  the  wilderness,  who  always 
went  to  it  for  barter.  On  account  of 
this  dangerous  position  it  is  designated, 
even  in  Num.  xiii.  32,  as  a  land  that 
devours  its  inhabitants.  Precisely 
such  a  land  had  God  chosen  for  His 


people.  They  should  always  have 
occasion  to  look  up  to  Him ;  and  when 
they  fell  away  the  rods  were  also  laid 
up.  Peaceful  seclusion  would  have 
produced  a  stagnant  condition,  the 
worst  that  can  befall  the  people  of  God. 
It  is  essential  to  the  Church  in  this 
world  to  be  militant." — Hengstenberg. 

Yer.  19.  "I  scattered  them  among 
the  heathen."  "  The  reason  for  their 
removal  was  their  sin,  which  God's 
holiness  could  not  let  pass  unpunished.*' 
— FausseL 

Yer.  20.  ''They  profiaed  My  holy 
name."  ''The  name  of  My  lioliness  is 
not  simply  the  holy  name  of  Jehovah, 
but  the  name  in  which  His  holiness 
is  manifest,  so  that  by  it  man  names 
His  holiness,  and  hence  the  Holy  Qod 
Himself." — Lange, 

Yer.  2L  **l  had  pity  for  Mine  holy 
name" — "I  felt  pity  for  it.  God's 
own  name,  so  dishonoured,  was  the 
primary  object  of  His  pitying  concern, 
then  His  people  secondarily  through 
HiB  concern  for  it.* — fairbainL 

Yer.  28.  "  I  will  sanctify  My  great 
name" — "i«..  My  holiness  as  ex- 
pressed in  My  name,  securing  due 
weight  to  it,  so  that  it  shall  not  simply 
be  named  as  name,  but  evidently  ex- 
perienced as  fact.  In  its  being  the 
name  of  His  holiness  lies  the  necessity, 
when  the  people  who  thus  name  God 
do  not  sanctify  it^  but,  on  the  contrary, 
only  contribute  everywhere  to  its  pro- 
fanation, that  then  Jehovah  should 
take  in  hand  the  sanctification  of  His 
name, and  thereby  of  Himself." — Lange, 
*' Shall  be  sanctified  in  you  before  their 
eyes  " — "  or  before  your  eyes.  It  must 
be  done  first  before  the  eyes  of  the 
people  who  by  their  depravity  had 
lost  sight  of  God's  real  character ;  and 
then  what  was  seen  by  them  experi- 
mentally would  also  be  seen  reflectively 
by  the  heathen  who  dwelt  around." — 
Fatrbaim. 

Yer.  25.  "Then  will  I  sprinkle 
dean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall 

373 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORAF.  XXXTL 


HOMILETIO  aOMMENTAMT:  EZBKIEL. 


be  dean.''  "The  external  restoration 
must  be  preceded  by  an  internal  one. 
The  change  in  their  condition  must 
not  be  superficial,  but  must  be  based 
on  a  radical  renewal  of  the  heart." — 
Faussei.  "  The  immediate  sense  of  the 
verse  is:  That  Jehovah  leads  back 
Israel  from  exile  into  their  own  land, 
and  consecrates  them  there  to  be  a 
people,  since  the  punishment,  so  charac- 
teristic for  the  sin  that  occasioned  it^ 
is  shown  to  be  removed  by  the  bring- 
ing of  them  again  into  tlieir  own  land, 
the  forgiveness  of  sins  thereby  already 
proclaimed  at  once  evinces  and  mani- 
fests itself  as  purification  of  the  people, 
and  the  people  put  from  them  their  old 
life,  especially  their  idolatry." — La/nge, 

Ver.  26.  "I  will  give  yon  a  heart 
of  flesh '' — ^not  carnal  in  opposition  to 
spiritual,  but  impressible  and  docile, 
fit  for  receiving  the  good  seed. 

Ver.  27.  "  I  will  cause  yon  to  walk 
in  My  statutes."  "  From  the  bestow- 
ment  of  the  new  heart  flows  the  altered 
position  toward  the  law  of  God." — 
Hengdenberg. 

Yer.  29.  '^  I  will  also  save  yon  from 
all  your  undeannesses "— ^the  pro- 
vince of  Jesus,  according  to  His  name 
(Matt  L  21).  To  be  specially  exer- 
cised in  behalf  of  the  Jews  in  the 
latter  days  (Rom.  xi.  26).  ''And  I 
will  call  for  the  com  " — ^  as  a  master 
calls  for  a  servant.  All  the  powers 
and  productions  of  nature  are  the 
servants  of  Jehovah  (Ps.  cv.  16  ;  Matt. 
viiL  8,  9):'—Faussd. 

Yer.  31.  ''  Then  shall  ye  remember 
your  own  evil  ways  " — ''  with  shame 
and  loathing.  The  unexpected  grace 
and  love  of  God  manifested  in  Christ 
to  Israel  shall  melt  the  people  into 
true  re2)entance,  which  mere  legal  fear 
could  not  (chap.  xvL  61,  63;  Ps. 
cxxx.  4 ;  Zech.  xii  10  *  Jer.  xxxiiL  8, 
9).'*— fotttset 


Yer.  36.  "This  land  is  become  like 
the  garden  of  Eden."  "  We  have  here 
the  clear  counterpart  of  the  night- 
piece  (Joel  iL  3).  The  comparison  of 
this  fundamental  passage,  according  to 
which  the  figure  of  the  land  of  ^en 
can  only  signify  a  prosperous  state  in 
general,  shows  how  erroneous  it  is  to 
find  in  this  passage  the  restoration  of 
Canaan  to  a  really  paradisiac  glory, 
and  to  charge  those  who  cannot  find 
this  in  it  with  a  spiritualising  evapora- 
tion."— Hengstenberg. 

Yer.  36.  '*  I  the  Lord  have  spoken 
it,  and  I  will  do  it."  <<  I,  Jehoval), 
whose  name  and  nature  afford  a  security 
that  between  speaking  and  doing  no 
gulf  can  be  fixed." — Sengstenberg, 

Yer.  37.  "I  wiU  yet  for  this  be 
inquired  of" — "  so  as  to  grant  it.  On 
former  occasions  He  had  refused  to 
be  in(|uired  of  by  Israel,  because  the 
inquirers  were  not  in  a  fit  condition 
of  mind  to  receive  a  blessing  (chap, 
xiv.  3 ;  XX.  3).  But  hereafter,  as  in 
the  restoration  from  Babylon  (Neh, 
viii.,  ix. ;  Dan.  ix.  3-23),  God  will 
prepare  His  people's  hearts  to  pray 
aright  for  the  blessings  which  He  is 
about  to  give  (Ps.  cii.  13-17,  20 ;  Zech. 
xii.  10-14 ;  xiiL  ly --Faussei. 

Yers.  37,  38.  "I  will  increase  them 
with  men  like  a  flock,  as  the  holy 
flock."  "The  passover  was  the  only 
one  among  the  festivals  in  which  there 
was  a  great  accumulation  of  sheep, 
with  which  the  fulness  of  men  in  re- 
stored Israel  is  compared.  But  the 
consecrated  sheep  are  meant  here,  not 
any  other  gathering  of  sheep,  because 
the  people  that  is  compared  with  the 
sheep  is  the  people  of  the  saints  of  the 
Lord.  The  fulfilment  is  to  be  sought 
in  the  Church  of  Christ  still  more  than 
in  the  times  between  the  exile  and 
Christ" — Eengsienberg. 


374 


Digitized  by 


Google 


tiOMILETlO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEU  obap.  zxzfl. 


HOMILETICS. 

Hope  for  a  Ruined  Nation. 

(Vers.  1-15.) 

In  this  chapter  the  prophet  continues  the  theme  with  which  his  whole  sonl 
was  possessed — the  prospective  revival  and  prosperity  of  Israel  In  the  darkest 
day  of  national  desolation  the  lamp  of  prophecy  glowed  with  a  Divinely  kindled 
flame.  The  land  is  smitten  and  helpless ;  but  hope  is  still  left,  tiioagh  that  hope 
is  enshrined  for  the  time  in  the  breast  of  one  man,  as  in  the  fatal  box  of 
Pandora,  from  which  issued  all  the  evils  that  afflict  mankind,  hope  was  still  left 
at  the  bottom.  The  keen  spiritual  insight  of  Ezekiel  saw  that,  amid  the  pre- 
vailing ruin,  Israel  still  retained  an  interest  in  the  power  and  faithfulness  of  God 
which  would  bring  about  her  future  restoration,  while  the  exulting  hopes  of  the 
heathen  that  her  downfall  was  permanent  were  doomed  to  disappointment. 
Observe— 

L  That  a  rained  nation  is  an  object  of  Divine  compasaion.  1.  He  sees  Us 
Ttsofwrces  exhausted.  "  They  have  made  you  desolate,  and  swallowed  you  up  on 
every  side"  (ver.  3).  The  land  is  denuded  of  its  inhabitants  and  its  wealth. 
The  hills  are  there,  but  they  are  no  longer  covered  with  grazing  flocks  and 
herds.  The  valleys  are  there,  but  the  diligent  husbandmen  are  gone,  and  the 
fields  and  vineyards  degenerate  into  barrenness  or  are  choked  with  the  wild 
growths  of  untamed  luxuriousness.  The  cities  crumble  to  ruin  and  are  forsaken. 
The  hum  of  commerce  is  hushed,  and  the  animated  scenes  of  a  thriving  popula- 
tion are  no  longer  visible.  The  garden  has  become  a  wilderness,  the  ground  a 
grave  in  which  the  national  life  lies  buried.  2.  He  sees  Us  land  possessed  with 
strangers.  ''  Even  the  high  places  are  ours — a  possession  unto  the  residue  of  the 
heathen — which  have  appointed  My  land  into  their  possession  with  the  joy  of 
all  their  heart,  with  despiteful  minds "  (vers.  2,  3,  5).  The  strangers  had  no 
right  to  the  land ;  it  belonged  to  God :  nor  would  they  have  dared  to  seize  it 
had  His  people,  to  whom  it  had  been  given  as  a  heritage,  remained  faithful  to 
Him.  They  were  marauders,  robbers,  who  pounced  upon  the  land  with  the 
avaricious  joy  with  which  the  wreckers  plunder  a  stranded  ship.  It  was  *'  cast 
out  for  a  prey.''  It  moved  the  compassion  and  indignation  of  Jehovah  to  see 
His  heritage  overrun  and  pilfered  by  those  who  fiercely  hated  both  Him  and 
His  people.  3.  He  sees  its  lum  the  sport  and  mockery  of  Us  enrmies.  ''  Aha,  the 
places  ore  ours — ye  are  taken  up  in  the  lips  of  talkers  and  are  an  infamy  of  the 
people — a  prey  and  derision  to  the  heathen "  (vers.  2,  3,  4).  They  gloat  over 
the  misfortunes  of  the  nation  they  hated  and  dreaded.  Israel  had  become  a 
byword  and  a  reproach.  The  foulest  slander  was  freely  circulated,  and  her 
enemies  chuckled  with  a  hideous  satisfaction  as  they  rolled  the  toothsome 
morsel  in  their  mouths.  Every  taunt  would  rankle  like  a  poisoned  barb  as  the 
unhappy  Israelite  reflected  it  was  a  just  recompense  for  his  inveterate  folly. 
This  state  of  things  was  faithfully  predicted  (Jer.  xxiv.  9),  and  nothing  was 
done  to  prevent  it.  The  warning  was  despised.  Abandoned  by  God  and  man, 
Israel  was  exposed  to  the  pitiless  contempt  of  the  wicked.  And  yet  the  heart 
of  Jehovah  yearned  with  compassion  towards  His  afflicted  people. 

II.  That  Divine  Power  can  restore  a  mined  nation  to  inrosperity.    1.  He 

can  do  U  speedily.     "  They  are  at  hand  to  come  "  (ver.  8).     Though  there  were 
fifty  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity  yet  to  run^  it  was  near  at  hand  in  Good's 

875 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBAF.  XXXTL  EOUILETIQ  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIML. 


detenuiDatioQ.  Fifty  ^ears  is  a  long  period  in  the  life  of  an  individaal,  bat  it 
i&  insignificant  in  the  life  of  a  nation.  The  time  ia  near  because  it  is  sare  to 
come.  Though  Israel  was  far  from  home,  dispersed  in  many  countries,  and 
held  in  bondage  by  the  power  of  her  captors,  she  shall  be  brought  again  to  her 
own  laud.  Time  is  a  tnfliug  factor  in  the  working  out  of  eternal  purposes ; 
and  yet  many  then  living  were  privileged  to  witness  the  promised  restoration. 
Qod  is  slow  to  punish ;  swift  to  bless.  2.  He  can  do  it  effedually  (vers.  8-15V 
The  waste  places  shall  be  tilled  and  sown  (ver.  8),  the  earth  abound  in  fruitful- 
ness  (ver.  8),  the  hills  covered  witii  flocks  and  herds  (ver.  11),  the  cities  rebuilt 
and  crowded  with  inhabitants  (ver.  10),  commerce  expand  with  ever-increasing 
activity  (ver.  11),  the  taunt  of  desohition  silenced  (ver.  15),  and  the  land  that 
had  cast  out  its  people  to  perish  siiall  support  and  cherish  them  on  a  scale  of 
unexampled  munificence  (vers.  11-15).  When  a  penitent  nation  returns  to 
God  there  is  no  blessing  He  will  withhold :  its  grievances  are  redressed,  its 
honour  retrieved,  its  peace  and  prosperity  ensured. 

III.  That  tlie  promise  of  Divine  help  imipireB  national  hope.    Israel  was 

utterly  prostrate.  There  was  no  country *in  that  neighbourhood  so  desolate 
and  forsaken.  The  land  of  plenty  was  cursed  with  emptiness,  and,  like  an  un- 
natural mother,  had  cast  out  its  children  to  perish.  Browbeaten,  calumniated, 
and  oppressed  by  their  enemies,  the  people  lost  heart  and  sank  into  the  help- 
lessness of  despair.  They  had  no  more  hope  of  revival  than  the  salt-encrusted 
pine-logs  that  travellers  tell  us  are  strewn  on  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea, 
saturated  for  centuries  with  brine.  Left  to  themselves,  there  was  no  possibility 
of  recovery.  But  they  were  not  to  be  so  completely  abandoned.  Gradually, 
and  at  first  faintly,  whispers  of  Divine  help  reached  their  ears.  The  impression 
grew  in  distinctness  and  strength  that  the  promise  was  real,  and  at  length  out 
of  the  dark  firmament  of  their  miseries  the  bright  star  of  hope  once  more  shone 
forth.  They  had  ample  evidence,  from  past  experiences,  that  what  Jehovah 
promised  He  would  surely  perform.  The  worst  of  sinners  need  not  despair ; 
for  him  the  hope  of  salvation  shines,  the  promise  is  still  in  force.  Let  him  but 
repent  and  cry  for  help,  and  all  will  yet  be  well. 

Learn — 1.  Thai  there  is  power  in  the  midst  of  apparent  knpoteneg.     S.  That 
national  revival  begins  in  ihepuUing  away  of  national  sins. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  1-15.  Qod  and  Nature.     1.  will  abide.    4.  Nature  responds  with 

God  never  forgets  His  absolute  pro-  grateful  quickness  to  the  touch  of  the 

prietorship  in  nature.      His  are   the  Divine  blessing.    "  Ye  mountains  shall 

mountains,  hills,  rivers,  and  valleys,  shoot  forth  your  branches  and  yield 

for  He  made  them  (vers.  4-6).    2.  Na-  your  fruit.     I  will  multiply  upon  you 

ture  remains  true  to  God  when  man  man  and  beast,  and  will  do  better  unto 

is  unfaithful     Man  may  desolate  but  you  than  at  your  beginnings"  (vers, 

cannot  destroy  nature.     The  unchang-  8-11).     5.    God  will  make  nature  a 

ing  continuity  of  its  mountains,  hills,  fruitful  inheritance  to  the  obedient 

rivers,  and  valleys  rebukes  his  fickleness  (vers.  12-15). 
and  infidelity.     3.  Nature  is  honoured         —  Man  aiid  Katnza.     1.  Man  le- 

by  signal  displays  of  Divine  power,  gards  nature   as  an   opportunity  to 

''The  mountains  of  Israel  **  had  wit-  indulge  a  covetous  spirits    "Theplaoes 

nessed  the  miracles  of  (}od  on  behalf  are  ours  in  possession  ^  (ver.  2).    2. 

of  His  chosen  people,  and  while  the  Man  abuses  Uie  resources  of  nature  by 

earth  sUmds  their  voiceless  testimony  sinful  extravagance.  ''They  have  made 


376 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOUILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OBAf,  XXXVI. 


yoa  desolate,  und  swallowed  you  up  on 
every  side "  (ver.  3).  3.  It  is  an  evi- 
dence of  great  moral  debasement  when 
man  exults  over  the  desolations  of 
nature  he  himself  has  made.  ''The 
enemy  hath  said  against  you,  *Ahal 
— Ye  are  taken  up  in  the  lips  of  talkers, 
and  are  an  infamy  of  tlie  people — a 
prey  and  derision — with  the  joy  of  all 
their  heart,  with  despiteful  minds,  to 
cast  it  out  for  a  prey  "  (vers.  2,  3-5). 
4.  When  man  violates  nature  he  vio- 
lates the  laws  of  Qod,  and  suffers  ac- 
cordingly. "Thou  land  devourest  up 
men,  and  hast  bereaved  thy  nations  " 
(ver.  13).  5.  When  man  obeys  God, 
all  the  resources  of  nature  minister  to 
his  enjoyment  (vers.  8-15). 

Vers.  1-4.  "The  grand  distinction 
between  the  people  of  God  as  Israel, 
and  the  people  of  the  world  as  Edom, 
is,  whereas  the  latter  are  finally  given 
over  to  destruction,  the  former  are 
only  chastened  for  a  time,  and  shall 
be  finally  and  completely  delivered. 
The  people  of  the  world  may  now 
seem  exalted  to  a  great  height,  but 
their  elevation  is  of  a  carnal  and  mate- 
rial kind,  and  is  therefore  transitory. 
The  elevation  of  the  Israel  of  God  is 
spiritual,  and  therefore  permanent 
Her  hills  are  'the  everlasting  hills* 
(Gen.  xlix.  26).  The  Mount  Zion,  as 
the  seat  of  God's  earthly  throne,  can- 
not be  removed,  but  abideth  for  ever 
(Ps.  cxxv.  1).  Tlierefore  Edom's  shout 
of  triumph  over  the  fallen  Israel  shall 
be  turned  into  wailing  for  her  own 
fall  She  had  greedily  thought  to  take 
possession  of  the  ancient  high  places 
of  the  people  of  Gotl.  Nay  more,  she 
had  turned  into  derision  tiie  )>roniise 
of  perpetuity  which  God  had  given  to 
His  people,  as  though  that  promise 
was  now  proved  to  be  abortive,  and 
had  sneered  at  Israel's  connection  with 
Jehovah  as  though  He  were  unable 
to  save  them." — FausseL 

Ver.  2.  "  Many  were  the  enemies  of 
God's  people,  but  they  so  conspired 
in  one  de:jign,  and  were  so  one  in 
their  humours,  enmity,  and  carriage, 
that   the   prophet    speaks   of   them 


as  one,  and  particularly  of  Edom,*-^ 
Pool. 

—  "  The  scorn  of  the  world  an  old 
experience.  Thus  were  the  prophets 
and  Christ  reproached,  and  the  Lord 
said  that  men  would  speak  all  manner 
of  evil  against  His  disciples  (Matt. 
V.  11),  and  Paul,  that  we  should  be  a 
spectacle  to  the  world  (1  Oor.  iv.  9)." 


Ver.  3.  "Ye  are  taken  up  on  the 
lips  of  talkers,  and  are  an  infamy  of 
the  people."  Slander.  1.  A  vice  of 
great  talkers.  2.  Is  devoid  of  com- 
passion for  the  unfortunate.  3.  De- 
lights in  exaggeration  and  malicious 
innuendoes.  4.  Is  frequently  employed 
to  disparage  and  afflict  the  people  of 
God. 

—  "  Ye  are  made  to  ascend  upon  the 
lip  of  the  tongue  and  upon  the  evil 
fame  of  the  people,  God  takes  it  ex- 
treme ill  that  His  people  should  be 
traduced  and  defamed,  which  hath 
been  their  lot  in  all  ages,  but  He  will 
not  fail  to  vindicate  them  and  to 
avenge  them." — Trapp, 

—  *'God  knows,  sees,  and  hears  the 
misery  of  His  children :  that  must 
comfort  them,  therefore  they  cannot 
despair.  How  ready  men  often  are 
not  only  to  count  up  the  sufferings 
of  others,  but  also  in  their  talk  to 
exaggerate  still  more." — Starch. 

Vers.  4-6.  The  Divine  Sympathy 
with  Nature.  1.  Because  it  is  His 
handiwork  and  reflects  His  character. 
2.  Because  it  is  the  dwelling-place  and 
training  ground  of  man.  3.  Because 
of  the  havoc  wrought  in  it  by  the  fury 
of  His  enemies.  4.  Because  it  is  ever 
faithful  and  obedient  to  His  laws. 

Vers.  6, 7.  Wrong-doing.  1.  Rouses 
the  Divine  anger.  2.  Is  doomed  while 
it  rejoices  in  its  brief  triumph.  3, 
Will  suffer  the  misery  it  inflicts  on 
others.  4.  Is  certain  to  be  Divinely 
punished. 

Ver.  6.  "  To  these  lifeless  creatures 
He  directeth  His  speech  to  show  that 
every  creature  groaneth  and  waileth 

877 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.ZXXfL 


BOMILBTIC  COMMESTAMT:  BZEKISL 


for  the  redemption  of  our  bodie&  It 
fareth  the  better  also  in  this  life  pre- 
sent, for  the  elect's  sake,  as  it  was 
once  cursed  for  man's  sin,  and  hath 
lain  bedridden,  as  it  were,  ever  since.** 

Ver.  7.  "The  righteous  God,  to 
whom  vengeance  belongs,  will  render 
shame  for  shame.  Those  that  put 
contempt  and  reproach  on  God's  people 
will  sooner  or  later  have  it  turned 
upon  themselves;  perhaps  in  this 
world,  either  their  follies  or  their 
calamities,  their  miscarriages  or  their 
mischances,  shall  be  their  reproach; 
at  furthest,  in  that  day  when  all  the 
impenitent  shall  rise  to  shame  and 
everlasting  contempt." — M,  Henry, 

—  "They  shall  be  paid  home  in 
their  own  coin,  be  overshot  in  their 
own  bow,  be  covered  with  their  own 
confusion." — Trapp. 

Vers.  8-15.  The  FertUitj  of  Nature. 
1.  A  signal  proof  of  the  Divine  bless- 
ing, "Behold  I  am  for  you.  And 
I  will  multiply"  (vers.  8,  9).  2. 
Evidenced  in  the  abundant  increase  of 
fruit,  cattle,  men  and  wealth  (vers. 
8-11).  3.  Should  be  regarded  by  the 
people  of  God  as  a  special  blessing. 
"Even  My  people  Israel  shall  possess 
thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  their  inherit- 
ance" (ver.  12).  4.  The  more  con- 
spicuous because  of  former  barrenness 
and  decay  (vers.  13-15).  5.  A  type  of 
the  future  prosperity  of  the  people  of 
God. 

—  "  While  Edom  and  Tyre  rejoiced 
in  their  sins  at  the  fall  of  Jerusalem, 
the  jealousy  of  the  Lord  was  roused 
to  say  that  they  should  return,  and 
as  Jeremiah  had  said  that  fields  and 
vineyards  should  again  be  sold  in  that 
city.  The  promises,  like  clouds  of  re- 
freshing rain,  scatter  their  blessings 
on  every  age.  Tliey  were  in  one  form 
or  other  continually  repeated,  and  in 
all  the  glowing  powers  of  Oriental 
language.  But  however  justified  the 
prophets  might  be  in  the  use  of  hyper- 
bole and  metaphor,  they  could  not 
exceed  the  truth,  which  would  have 
been  the  case  had  their  promises  been 

378 


restricted  to  the  weak  but  rising  times 
of  Zerubbabel,  Ezra,  and  Nehemiah. 
And  if  the  waste  places  were  rebuilt, 
why  then,  T»hole  Palestina,  dost  thou 
lie  very  much  in  ruins  to  this  dayt 
Consequently  the  gracious  doad  of 
covenant  blessings  only  scattered  its 
drops  on  Jewish  ages,  and  gave  showers 
to  the  primitive  church,  reserving  its 
fulness,  or  the  residue  of  the  Spirit, 
for  the  mountain  of  His  holiness  in 
the  glory  of  the  latter  day."— 5tt^»/i?. 
—  "A  certain  fulfilment  of  the  most 
literal  kind  began  at  an  early  period 
to  be  given  to  the  prophecy.  Feople 
of  the  stock  of  Israel  did  again  possess 
the  land  of  their  fathers ;  by  them  the 
mountains  of  Israel  were  again  culti- 
vated, and  for  them  the  land  yielded 
its  fruit;  there  again,  as  of  old,  the 
seed  of  man  and  of  beast  did  greatly 
increase  and  multiply,  so  that  the 
region  was  known  for  ages  as  one  of 
the  most  fertile  and  prosperous  in 
Asia,  and  that  too  while  the  old  and 
hereditary  enemies  of  Israel  in  the 
neighbourhood  sank  into  comparative 
insignificance  and  lost  their  original 
place  in  the  scale  of  nations.  Had 
Israel  but  seen  in  all  this  the  hand  of 
God,  and  viewed  the  whole  in  connec- 
tion with  His  unchangeable  righteous- 
ness, there  should  certainly  have  been 
nothing  wanting  to  complete  the  corre- 
spondence between  the  description  of 
the  prophet  and  the  facts  of  history. 
But  the  old  relations  of  the  covenant 
people  with  the  kingdom  of  God  give 
way ;  the  outward  Israel  are  no  longer 
distinctively  the  covenant  people — all 
the  children  of  faith  of  every  land 
become  the  seed  of  blessing  and  heirs 
according  to  the  promise.  And  while 
it  is  only  under  the  Gospel  ■  dis- 
pensation that  we  can  expect  the 
perfect  realisation  of  the  promised 
good,  we  must  now  no  longer  expect 
it  after  the  old  form,  or  according  to 
the  simply  literal  interpretation.  The 
good  is  too  great  and  expansive  to  be 
now  shut  up  within  such  narrow  limits, 
for  since  wherever  there  is  a  royal 
priesthood  offering  up  spiritual  ser- 
vices to  God,  there  the  incense  and 
offerings  of  the  temple  are  perpetuated 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILSTIO  COMMBNTAHY:  EZEKISL 


eBAf.  XXXV& 


(Mai.  i  11 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5),  so  wherever 
there  are  memhers  of  Giirist  there  also 
are  the  mountaius  of  Canaan,  there 
are  the  people  who  have  the  promise 
of  all  things  for  their  portion,  on 
whom  descends  the  blessing — life  for 
evermore.  Nor  can  the  old  evils  pro- 
perly return  again,  for  the  good  is 
avowedly  connected  with  nothing  but 
a  spiritual  qualification,  and  is  entirely 
dissevered  from  a  merely  ancestral 
relationship  or  a  political  existence  in 
the  world." — Fairbaim, 

Ver.  8.  "Thus  shall  the  ruined 
churches  bring  fruit,  wine,  and  bread, 
that  is,  the  mysteries  of  doctrine  to 
the  profit  of  the  people,  that  they  may 
no  longer  be  rude  and  ignorant^  but  a 
people  taught  of  God.  Therefore  the 
spiritual  husbandmen,  vine -dressers, 
till  and  sow  diligently.  With  the 
plough  of  fear  they  turn  up  the  soil 
of  the  heart  in  which  they  sow  the 
new  word  of  the  Gospel,  whereby  the 
forsaken  churches  become  planted 
anew;  and  these  are  the  mountains 
which  the  Lord  addresses." — Hdm- 
Hoffman. 

Vers.  9-11.  "The  Lord  declares  to 
the  people  of  Israel,  'Behold,  I  am 
for  you.'  Since  God  is  ultimately  to 
be  for  them,  no  power  can  avail  any- 
thing that  is  against  them.  God  will 
Hurh  to'  His  people  in  mercy,  and 
they  shall  at  the  same  time  turn  to 
Him  in  repentance.  The  restoration 
to  their  own  land  is  to  be  literal,  and 
all  things  and  all  persons  in  the  re> 
stored  state  of  Israel  are  to  share  in 
the  coming  blessedness — 'the  moun- 
tains, the  hills,  the  rivers,  the  valleys, 
the  desolate  wastes,  the  houses,  the 
cities,  man  and  beast.'  So  in  the 
case  of  the  spiritual  Israel,  the  true 
Church :  she  is  now  a  little  and  de- 
spised flock,  but  she  shall  at  last  be  a 
multitude  which  no  man  can  num- 
ber (Eev.  viL  9);  whereas  the  anti- 
christian  faction,  and  all  the  carnal, 
worldly,  and  unbelieving,  who  shall 
for  a  time  seem  to  triumph  over  the 


Church  of  Christ  (Rev.  zL  7-11),  shall 
])erish  awfully  and  everlastingly."— 
FausseU 

Ver.  9.  "It  is  a  blessing  to  the 
earth  to  be  made  serviceable  to  men, 
especially  to  good  men  that  will  serve 
Grod  with  cheerfulness  in  the  use  of 
those  good  things  which  the  earth 
serves  up  to  them." — M.  Henry. 

—  "  *  I  will  turn  unto  you.'  Look 
towards  you  with  regard  to  what 
has  been  and  is  your  estate,  your 
sufferings,  which  were  less  than  you 
deserved,  yet  were  the  greater  because 
ye  are  mine.  Your  inhabitants  gave 
me  the  back  and  sinned  against  me, 
and  I  turned  the  back  on  you  and 
regarded  you  not:  then  all  darkness 
covered  you,  now  my  face  shall  be 
towards  you,  and  you  shall  prosper 
and  be  fruitful  to  the  comfort  of  those 
that  shall  dwell  in  you  and  plough 
and  sow  you." — PooL 

Ver.  10.  "They  are  far  wrong  who 
consider  a  great  increase  of  men  as  a 
curse  because  it  gives  rise  to  want  and 
distress.  God  can  nourish  many  as 
well  as  few,  and  we  should  live 
moderately,  avoid  endeavouring  to  sur- 
pass others  in  expenditure,  and  seek 
for  concord  in  families." — I/uiher. 

Ver.  11.  "God's  kingdom  in  the 
world  is  a  growing  kingdom,  and  His 
Church,  though  for  a  time  it  may  be 
diminished,  shall  recover  itself  and  be 
again  replenished." — M.  Henry. 

Ver.  12.  "The  promised  cood  is 
always  to  be  understood  with  tne  con- 
dition that  men  repent  (Mai.  iii.  7). 
The  self-evident  condition  is,  that  they 
do  not  fill  up  the  measure  of  their 
sins  anew.  There  is  no  charter  of 
immunity  against  Te  would  not  How 
often  is  the  country  or  a  district  made 
to  bear  the  blame  when  there  comes 
a  pestilence  among  men  or  cattle,  when 
it  should  be  known  that  sin  gaining 
the  upper  hand  provoked  God's  wrath 
thereto."— Zkuifw. 


Digitized  by 


379 

Google 


CHAf.  xxxvL  BOMILBTIC  OOMMBNTABY:  BZBKIBL. 


HOMILETICS. 

Sm  THE  Cause  of  National  Buqi. 

(Vers.  16-21.) 

Onoe  more  the  Jews  are  reminded  of  the  reason  for  the  calamities  that 
had  oyertaken  them :  the  root-cause  was  their  sin.  It  might  seem  strange  to 
them  that  they,  of  all  people,  should  be  so  deeply  liumiliated ;  but  such  was 
the  obstinacy  of  their  rebellion  that  no  other  course  was  open  but  for  Jehovah 
to  vindicate  the  cause  of  righteousness  by  unmistakable  marks  of  His  dis- 
pleasure. So  far  as  they  were  concerned  they  had  no  reason  to  expect  any- 
thine  but  a  continuance  of  His  righteous  severity ;  but  a  supreme  regard  for 
His  holy  name,  which  had  influenced  Him  in  bringing  about  their  downfall,  is 
now  to  operate  in  promoting  their  recovery.  Their  restoration  must  begin  in 
the  conviction  and  acknowledgment  of  their  sins. 

L  Sin  is  a  defilement  of  the  national  life  (ver.  17).  It  is  so  because  it  is  a 
defilement  of  the  individual  life.  Sin  is  the  polluted  heritage  of  universal 
man,  for  all  have  sinned ;  but  it  is  intensely  individual  and  personal.  Its  taint 
permeates  every  power  and  faculty  of  the  man — "The  whole  head  is  sick  and 
the  whole  heart  faint :  from  the  sole  of  the  foot  even  unto  the  head  there  is  no 
soundness  in  it,  but  wounds  and  braises  and  putrefying  sores."  Its  seat  is 
inward,  and  it  is  often  disguised  under  a  fair  and  beautiful  exterior ;  but  attack 
it,  and  its  impurities  soon  become  actively  manifest,  as  the  cuttle-fish  surprised  by 
an  enemy  emits  an  inky  fluid  tiiat  darkens  and  befouls  the  most  pellucid  waters. 
The  nation  is  defiled  because  the  citizen  is  defiled,  and  instead  of  seeking 
cleansing  has  stirred  up  the  muddy  sediment  in  himself  and  others.  "  Let  sin 
be  your  deepest  sorrow,  your  heaviest  grief,  the  spiing  of  many  tears,  the  burden 
of  many  aighsi  the  occasion  of  daily  visits  to  the  cross  of  Calvary.* 

**  Weep  not  for  broad  luidB  lost ; 
Weep  not  tot  fair  hopes  croesed  | 
Weep  not  when  limbe  wax  old ; 
Weep  not  when  friends  grow  cold  | 
Weep  not  that  death  must  part 
Thine  and  the  best  loved  heart : 

Tet  weep^weep  all  thon  can-* 
Weep,  weep,  because  thou  art 

A  sin-defilM  man." 

IL  Sin  b  a  profiuiation  of  the  DlTine  holinesB  (vers.  20,  21).  Sin  is  not 
only  a  degradation  to  man,  but  an  injustice  and  injury  towards  God  :  it  seems 
to  drag  Him  to  the  level  of  man,  and  to  rob  Him  of  every  attribute  that  con- 
stitutes Him  Divine.  The  conduct  and  attendant  miseries  of  the  Israelites 
dishonoured  Jehovah  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen,  who  naturally  inferred  that  if 
this  was  all  He  could  do  for  His  worshippers,  then  He  was  no  better  than  their 
own  deities,  and  the  morality  of  His  people  was  in  many  respects  inferior  to 
that  of  their  own.  Do  not  think  that  your  iniquities  are  unnoticed,  or  that 
you  are  the  only  one  afiected  by  them.  The  unbelieving  world  is  watching 
you.  The  mere  profession  of  religion  is  a  caricature  and  a  hypocrisy^  and  every 
act  of  sin  is  a  defamation  of  the  character  of  the  holy  God. 

nL  Sin  is  punished  \if  national  roia  (vers.  18,  19).    The  Jews  were  driven 
out  of  their  own  land  because  of  their  incorrigible  wickedness.     Their  murders, 
idolatries,  and  injustice  roused  the  auger  of  God,  and  ''  according  to  their  way 
880 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILSTW  OOMMBNTinY:  SZEKIEU 


CBAF.  XXXTL 


and  their  doings''  He  adjadged  them  to  punishment.  His  hand  scattered 
them,  and  no  power  could  detain  them  in  the  land  when  His  hand  was  against 
them,  just  as  no  power  could  have  disturbed  their  security  if  they  had  remained 
faithful  to  Him.  The  nation  that  makes  an  enemy  of  God  is  doomed.  The 
strongest  fortifications  must  yield,  the  astutest  policy  be  confounded,  commerce 
decay,  wealth  give  way  to  poverty,  and  the  proudest  people  be  humbled  to  the 
dost.    The  first  step  in  national  ruin  begins  in  moral  wrong. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yen.  16-38.  "There  are  mountain 
regions  lying  within  the  tropics  where 
in  the  course  of  a  single  day  the 
traveller  finds  every  vegetable  form 
peculiar  to  every  line  of  latitude  be- 
tween the  equator  and  the  poles,  and 
these  all  laid  out  in  regular  arrange- 
ment. Leaving  the  palms  which  cover 
the  mountain's  feet,  he  ascends  into 
the  regions  of  the  olive;  from  these 
he  rises  to  a  more  temperate  climate, 
where  vines  festoon  the  trees,  or  trail 
their  limbs  along  the  naked  rock ;  still 
ascending,  he  reaches  a  belt  of  oaks 
and  chestnuts ;  from  that  he  passes  to 
rugj^ed  lieiiilits  shaggy  with  the  hardy 
pine  ;  by-aud-by  he  enters  a  region 
where  trees  are  dwarfed  into  bushes; 
rising  above  that  his  foot  presses  a 
soft  carpet  of  lowly  mosses,  till  climb- 
ing the  rocks  where  only  the  lichen 
lives,  he  leaves  all  life  below ;  and 
now,  shivering  in  the  cold,  panting  in 
the  thin  air  for  breath|  he  stands  on 
those  dreary  elevations  where  eternal 
winter  sits  on  a  throne  of  snow,  and 
waving  her  ioy  sceptre,  says  to  vegeta- 
tion— *  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and 
no  further.'  Like  some  such  lofty 
mountain  of  the  tropics  there  are 
portions  of  the  Divine  Word  where 
in  a  space  of  limited  extent — ^within 
the  short  compass  of  a  chapter,  or 
even  part  of  it — the  more  prominent 
doctrines  of  salvation  are  brought  into 
juxtaposition  and  arranged  side  by 
side  almost  in  systematic  order.  This 
portion  of  Scripture  presents  an  epitome 
or  outline  of  the  Gospel  Its  details, 
with  their  minute  and  varied  beauties, 
are  here,  so  to  speak,  in  shade;  but 
the  grand  truths  of  redemption  stand 
boldly  up,  much  as  we  have  seen  from 
sea  the  summits  of  a  mountain  range, 


or  the  lofty  headlands  of  a  dim  and 
distant  coast  We  are  aware  that  the 
Mosaic  economy,  and  many  of  God's 
dealings  with  His  ancient  people,  were 
but  the  shadows  of  good  things  to 
come ;  and  when  the  things  are  come, 
why  look  at  the  shadow  when  you 
possess  the  substance  f  However 
valued  in  his  absence  the  portrait  of 
a  son,  what  mother,  when  her  boy  is 
folded  in  her  arms,  and  she  has  his 
loved  and  living  face  to  gaze  on,  turns 
to  the  cold  picture  ?  What  artist 
studies  a  landscape  in  the  grey  dawn 
when  he  may  see  it  in  the  blaze  of 
day  1  True.  Yet  such  study  has  its 
advantages.  It  not  seldom  happens 
that  a  portrait  brings  to  view  certain 
shades  of  expression  which  we  had  not 
previously  observed  in  the  face  of  the 
veritable  man ;  and  when  some  mag- 
nificent form  of  architecture,  or  the 
serried  ridges  and  rocky  peaks  of  a 
mountain,  have  stood  up  between  us 
and  the  lingering  lights  of  day,  we 
have  found  that  although  the  nunor 
beauties  of  fluted  columns  or  frowning 
crags  were  lost  in  the  shades  of  even- 
ing, yet,  drawn  in  sharp  and  clear 
outline  against  a  twilight  sky,  the 
efiect  of  the  whole  was  even  more 
impressive  than  when  eyed  in  the 
glare  of  day.  Thus  it  may  be  well 
occasionally  to  examine  the  Gospel  in 
the  broad  shadows  and  strongly  de- 
fined outlines  of  an  old  economy  ; 
and  through  God's  government  of  Uis 
ancient  people  to  study  the  motives,  the 
nature,  and  ends  of  His  dealings  with 
ourselves.  In  this  way  the  passage 
before  us  has  peculiar  claims  upon  our 
attention." — Guthrii^s  Oospd  in  Etekiel. 

Yer.  16.  ^  Han's  previous  course  of 
381 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OSAMXXYL 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZBKISL. 


action  is  the  cause  of  God's  subse- 
quent course  of  action.  We  shall  have 
to  give  account  not  only  because  of 
the  evil  which  we  have  done,  but  also 
for  the  good  things  which  we  have 
had.  The  world  is  perfect  throughout 
where  man  does  not  come  in  to  dis- 
turb it.  Storms  clear  the  air,  an 
observation  which  bears  application  in 
regard  to  the  judgments  of  God.** — 
Lange. 

Vers.  16,  17.  "The  word  of  the 
Lord  came  unto  roe,  saying,  Son  of 
man.**  The  Human  Side  of  the  Divine 
Messaga  ''The  rain  in  its  descent 
from  heaven  falls  upon  the  surface 
of  our  earth,  percolates  through  the 
porous  soil,  and  flowing  along  rocky 
fissures  or  veins  of  sand,  is  conveyed 
below  ground  to  the  fountain  whence 
it  springs.  Now,  although  rising  out 
of  the  earth,  that  water  is  not  of  the 
earth  earthy.  The  world's  deepest 
we.l  owes  its  treasures  to  the  skies. 
So  was  it  with  the  revealed  will  of 
God.  It  flowed  along  human  channels, 
yet  its  origin  was  more  than  celestial, 
it  was  Divine.  Those  waters  at  whose 
pure  and  perennial  springs  faith  drinks 
and  lives,  while  conveyed  to  man  along 
earthly  channels,  have  their  source  far 
away — ^in  the  throne  of  God.  No 
doubt  Gh)d  could  have  used  other 
instrumentality.  He  might  have  com- 
missioned angels  on  His  errands  of 
mercy,  and  spoken  at  all  times,  as  He 
did  sometimes,  by  seraph  lips.  With 
rare  exceptions  His  ambassadors  were 
men.  The  patriarchs,  prophets,  and 
apostles — ^those  inspired  missionaries 
of  heaven — were  all  sons  of  men. 
In  this  arrangement  observe — 1.  The 
kindness  of  God  to  man.  Who  has  read 
the  story  of  Moses  without  feeling  that 
it  was  a  very  great  kindness  both  to 
the  infant  and  his  mother  that  he  had 
her  bosom  to  lie  on,  and  that  God  in 
His  providence  so  arranged  matters 
that  the  very  mother  of  the  child  was 
hired  to  be  its  nurse.  Who  else  could 
be  expected  to  treat  the  outcast  so 
lovingly  and  kindly)  And  I  hold 
it  a  singular  kindness  to  man  that 
he  is  selected  to  be  the  instrument  of 


saving  his  fellow-men.  If  that  parent 
is  happy  who  has  snatched  a  beloved 
child  from  the  flood  or  fire,  and  the 
child  saved  and  thus  twice  given  him 
becomes  doubly  dear,  what  happiness 
in  purity  or  permanence  to  be  com- 
pared with  his  who  is  a  labourer  with 
God  in  saving  souls!  2.  The  honour 
conferred  on  mnn.  What  dignity  does 
this  world  offer,  what  glittering  stars, 
what  jewelled  honours  flash  on  her 
swelling  breast,  to  be  for  one  moment 
compared  with  those  which  they  win 
on  earth  and  wear  in  heaven  who  have 
turned  souls  from  darkness  to  light) 
As  yon  planet  worlds  that  roll  above 
us  (&aw  bright  radiance  from  the  sun 
around  which  they  move,  so  surely 
shall  they  shine  who  spend  and  are 
spent  in  Jesus*  service;  they  shall 
share  His  honours  and  shine  in  His 
lustre.  It  was  the  prayer  of  Brainerd, 
*'  Oh  that  I  were  a  flaming  fire  in  the 
service  of  my  God  1 '  3.  The  wisdom 
of  God,  Mirabeau  said  of  a  man  who 
addressed  the  French  Convention  for 
the  first  time,  '  That  man  will  yet  act 
a  great  part;  he  speaks  as  one  who 
believes  every  word  he  says.'  Much 
of  pulpit  power  under  Gk>d  depends 
on  that  They  make  others  feel  who 
feel  themselves.  It  is  true  a  man 
may  impart  light  to  others  who  does 
not  himself  see  the  light  It  is  true 
that  like  a  concave  speculum  cut  from 
a  block  of  ice,  which,  concentrating  the 
rays  of  the  sun,  kindles  touchwood  or 
explodes  gunpowder,apreacher  may  set 
others  on  fire  when  his  own  heart  is 
cold  as  frost  Yet  commonly  it  happens 
that  it  is  what  comes  from  the  heart 
of  preachers  that  penetrates  and  affects 
the  hearts  of  hearers.  Like  a  ball  red- 
hot  from  the  cannon's  mouth,  he  must 
burn  himself  who  would  set  others  on 
fire.  If  man  may  not  feel  what  he 
preaches,  angels  could  not  Man  saved 
him>elf  the  more  earnestly  seeks  the 
salvation  of  his  perishing  fellow-man. 
During  a  heavy  storm  off  the  coast  of 
Spain  a  dismasted  merchantman  was 
observed  by  a  British  frigate  drifting 
before  the  gale.  Every  eye  and  glass 
were  on  her,  and  a  canvas  shelter  on 
a  deck  almost  level  with  the  sea  sug- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOUlLBTtO  COMUBNTART:  BZSKIEL. 


CHAP,  xxxn. 


gested  the  idea  that  even  yet  there 
might  be  life  on  board.  With  all 
their  faults  no  men  are  more  alive  to 
humanity  than  our  rough  and  hardy 
mariners;  and  so  the  order  instantly 
sounds  to  put  the  ship  about,  and 
presentiy  a  boat  is  lowered,  and  starts 
with  instructions  to  bear  down  upon 
the  wreck.  Away  after  that  drifting 
hulk  go  these  gallant  men  over  the 
mountain  swell  of  a  roaring  sea; 
they  reach  it,  they  shout,  and  now  a 
strange  object  rolls  from  that  canvas 
screen  against  the  lee  shroud  of  a 
broken  mast.  It  is  hauled  into  the 
boat  It  proves  to  be  the  trunk  of  a 
man,  bent  head  and  knees  together, 
80  dried  up  and  shrivelled  as  to  be 
hardly  felt  within  the  ample  clothes — 
so  light  that  a  mere  boy  lifted  it  on 
board.  It  is  conveyed  to  the  ship  and 
laid  on  the  deck.  In  horror  and  pity 
the  crew  gather  around  it.  These 
feelings  suddenly  change  into  astonish- 
ment. The  object  shows  signs  of  life. 
The  seamen  draw  nearer;  it  moves 
and  then  mutters — in  a  deep  sepul- 
chral voice,  mutters — *  There  is  an- 
other man.'  Rescued  himself,  the  first 
use  the  saved  one  made  of  speech  was 
to  try  to  save  another.** — Ouihrie. 

Ver.  17.  The  DefUer.  **  1.  Sin  a  de- 
filement. Look  at  sin,  pluck  off  that 
painted  mask  and  turn  upon  her  face 
the  lamp  of  God's  Word.  We  start, 
for  it  reveals  a  death's  head.  I  stay 
not  to  quote  texts  descriptive  of  sin. 
It  is  a  debt,  a  burden,  a  thief,  a  sick- 
ness, a  leprosy,  a  plague,  a  poison,  a 
serpent,  a  sting— everything  that  man 
hates  it  is.  Name  me  the  evil  that 
springs  not  from  this  root — the  crime 
that  lies  not  at  this  door.  Hypocrite 
and  dead  professor  1  let  us  open  thy 
bosom :  full  of  all  corruption,  how  it 
smells  like  a  chamel  house  !  We  are 
driven  back  by  the  noisome  stench — 
we  hasten  to  close  the  door.  It  is  a 
painted,  putrid  sepulchre,  whose  fair 
exterior  but  aggravates  the  foulness 
within.  2.  The  nature  of  this  defile- 
ment, (a.)  It  is  internal  Like  snow- 
drift, wnen  it  has  levelled  the  church- 
yard moundsy  and  glistening  in  the 


winter  sun,  lies  so  pure,  white,  fair, 
and  beautiful  above  the  dead  that 
fester  and  rot  below,  a  plausible  pro- 
fession may  wear  the  look  of  iimocence 
and  conceal  from  human  eyes  the  foul- 
est heart-corruption.  The  grass  grows 
green  upon  the  sides  of  the  mountain 
that  holds  a  volcano  in  its  bowels. 
Behind  the  rosy  cheek  and  lustrous 
eye  of  beauty  how  often  does  there 
lurk  a  deadly  disease,  the  deadliest 
disease  of  all.  Like  these  maladies, 
sin  has  its  seat  within.  It  is  a  disease 
of  the  heart,  and  the  worst  and  dead- 
liest of  all  hearUcomplaints.  (b,)  It  is 
universal.  Although  the  hues  of  the 
skin  differ,  the  form  of  the  skull  and 
the  features  of  the  face  are  cast  in 
different  moulds,  the  features,  colour, 
and  character  of  the  heart  are  the 
same  in  all  men.  In  Adam  all  have 
died — have  sinned,  and  therefore  died. 
Thus  sin,  like  our  atmosphere^  em- 
braces every  region  of  the  world.  Like 
death,  it  is  universal  The  tree  is  dis- 
eased not  at  the  top,  but  at  the  root, 
and  therefore  no  branch  of  the  human 
family  can  possibly  escape  being  af- 
fected by  sin.  (c)  It  is  incurable. 
What  moral  effect  had  God's  judg- 
ments on  His  ancient  people!  A» 
always  happens  in  incurable  diseases, 
the  patient  grew  worse  instead  of 
better.  As  always  happens  when  life 
is  gone,  the  dead  become  more  and 
more  offensive.  This  internal  and 
universal  defilement  is  one  which 
neither  sorrows  can  atone  for  nor  suf- 
ferings remove.  I  have  seen  the  char- 
acters of  the  writing  remain  on  paper 
which  the  flames  had  turned  into  a 
film  of  buoyant  coal ;  I  have  seen  the 
thread  that  had  been  passed  through 
the  fire  retain  in  its  cold  grey  ashes 
the  twist  which  it  had  got  in  spinning ; 
I  have  found  every  shivered  splinter 
of  the  flint  as  hard  as  the  unbroken 
stone;  and  let  trials  come  in  provi- 
dence sharp  as  the  fire  and  ponderous 
as  the  crushing  hammer,  unless  a 
gracious  God  send  along  with  these 
something  else  than  these,  bruised, 
broken,  bleeding  as  thy  heart  may 
be,  its  nature  remains  the  same." — 
Guthrie. 

383 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OttAP.  ItXfL 


HOMILSTIO  OOMMENTAMT:  MUKIBL. 


—  Man  Sinning.  ''I.  ManufMetk 
Compare  man  with  any  other  of  the 
creatures  of  Qod,  and  how  directly  we 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  he  is  not, 
nor  can  be,  the  creature  he  came  from 
his  Maker's  hands.  Turn  to  the  bloody 
horrors  of  this  battlefield.  The  tram- 
pled ground  lies  thick  with  the  mingled 
mraye,  the  air  is  shaken  with  the  most 
horrible  sounds,  every  countenance 
expresses  the  passions  of  a  fiend. 
Covering  her  eyes,  humanity  flies 
shrieking  from  the  scene  and  leaves 
it  to  rage,  revenge,  and  agony.  Fiercer 
than  the  cannon's  flash  flames  of  wrath 
shoot  from  brothers'  eyes ;  they  draw, 
they  brandish  their  swords,  they  sheath 
them  in  each  other's  bowels ;  every 
stroke  makes  a  widow,  every  ringing 
volley  scatters  a  hundred  orphans  on 
a  homeless  world.  Sooner  would  I  be 
an  atheist,  and  believe  there  was  no 
GU>d,  than  that  a  man  appears  in  this 
scene  as  he  came  from  the  hand  of  a 
Benignant  Divinity.  Man  must  have 
fallen.  2.  Apart  from  derived  sinfid-' 
ness  man  has  personal  sins  to  answer  for. 
You  may  deny  original,  but  can  any 
man  in  his  senses  deny  actual  sin  f 
You  may  as  well  deny  your  existence ; 
it  sticks  to  you  like  your  shadow.  If 
every  thread  of  life's  web  were  yet  to 
weave,  what  man  would  make  the  future 
a  faithful  copy  of  the  past?  No  man  liv- 
ing would.  3.  The  guilt  of  these  actual 
sins  is  mam's  own.  We  attempt  in  vain 
to  fix  the  blame  on  others — to  lay  the 
burden  on  any  shoulders  but  our  own. 
We  talk  of  the  strength,  we  plead  the 
suddenness  of  temptation ;  but  how 
often  haye  we  sinned  designedly, 
deliberately,  repeatedly?  We  have 
sinned  when  we  knew  we  were  sin- 
ning ;  we  have  repaired  to  scenes  where 
we  knew  that  we  were  to  sin.  We 
have  done  what  the  heathen  never 
did,  what  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  never 
did,  what  Tyre  and  Sidon  never  did — 
we  have  rejected  a  Saviour,  and  in- 
sanely refused  eternal  life." — Guthrie. 

Vers.  18,  19.  Ck>d'»  Punitive  Jus- 

tica     "  1.  Ood  is  slow  to  punish.    No 

hand  of  clock  goes  so  slow  as  His  hand 

of  vengeance.     Look,  for  example,  on 

SS4 


the  eatastrophe  of  the  Deluge.  There 
was  a  truce  of  one  hundred  and  twenty 
years  between  the  first  stroke  of  the 
hell  and  the  first  crash  of  the  thunder. 
Noah  grew  grey  preaching  repentance. 
The  ark  stood  useless  for  years,  a  huge 
laughing-stock  for  the  scofier's  wit. 
Most  patient  Qod !  God  does  pour 
out  His  fury ;  but  His  indignation  is 
the  volcano  that  groans  loud  and  long 
before  it  discharges  the  elements  of 
destruction  and  pours  its  fiery  lavas 
on  the  vineyards  at  its  feet  2.  The 
truth  of  Ood  requires  the  punishment  of 
sin.  God  has  reiterated  in  a  thousand 
ways  the  awful  sentence — *The  soul 
that  sinneth  it  shall  die.'  Let  sin  go 
unpunished  either  in  person  or  substi- 
tute ;  this  saves  the  sinner — no  doubt 
of  that ;  but  at  what  price !  You  save 
the  creature's  life  at  the  expense  of 
the  Creator's  honour.  Your  scheme 
exalts  man,  but  far  more  than  man  is 
exalted  is  (jk)d  degraded.  By  it  no 
man  is  lost ;  but  there  is  a  greater  loss 
— something  more  awful  happens.  The 
truth  of  God  is  lost ;  and  in  that  loss 
His  crown  is  spoiled  of  its  topmost 
jewel,  His  kingdom  totters,  and  the 
throne  of  the  universe  is  shaken  to  its 
foundations.  3.  The  love  of  Ood  requires 
the  punishment  of  sin.  Love  for  those 
who  have  the  highest  claim  on  a 
sovereign's  protection  requires  that 
justice  take  her  course  and  the  guilty 
die.  That  the  community  may  live  in 
peace,  that  the  citizen  may  feel  safe 
in  the  bosom  of  his  family,  that  streets 
may  be  safe  to  walk  on,  that  beds 
may  be  safe  to  lie  in,  that  our  country 
may  be  fit  to  live  in,  crime  must  be 
punished.  Divine  love  is  no  blind 
Divinity,  and  God  being  as  wise  as 
tender,  sinners  may  rest  assured  that 
out  of  mere  pity  for  them  He  will 
neither  sacrifice  the  interests  nor  peril 
the  happiness  of  His  people.  4.  Unless 
sin  is  punished  the  language  of  Scripture 
appears  extravagani.  Let  me  beseech, 
implore  you  to  read  with  tears  and 
prayers  those  passages  of  Scripture 
that  unveil  the  miseries  of  the  lost 
Blot  not  from  your  minds  what  you 
cannot  blot  out  of  the  book  of  GhxL 
The    sufferings    and    miseries   whicb 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  OOMMBNTinT :  EZBKIBL. 


OBAP.  XZXfL 


await  the  impenitent  and  unbelieving, 
Ood  has  painted  in  must  appalling 
coloars.  They  are  such  that,  to  save 
as  from  them,  His  Son  descended  from 
these  heavens  and  expired  upon  a  cross. 
They  are  such  that  wlien  Paul  thought 
of  the  lost  he  wept  like  a  woman. 
The  Gk>spel  has  in  it  elements  of  terror. 
Bui  it  is  like  our  atmosphere — occa- 
sionally riven  by  the  thunder  and 
illumined  by  the  fatal  flash,  at  times 
the  path  of  the  stealthy  pestilence, 
charged  with  elements  of  destruction 
and  impregnated  with  the  seeds  of 
disease ;  but  how  much  more  a  great 
magazine  of  health,  filled  with  the  most 
harmonious  sounds,  fragrant  with  the 
sweetest  odours,  hung  with  golden 
drapery,  the  pathway  of  sunbeams, 
the  womb  of  showers,  the  feeder  of 
fertilising  streams,  the  parent  of  har- 
vests, and  the  fountain  of  all  earth's 
life  I  And,  just  as  in  that  atmosphere 
which  (}od  has  wrapped  around  our 
globe  there  is  much  more  health  than 
sickness,  much  more  food  than  famine, 
much  more  life  than  death,  so  in  the 
Bible  there  is  much  more  love  than 
terror." — Outhrie. 

Ver.  19.  "  The  scattering  power  of 
sin :  in  truth,  it  scatters  the  souls  of 
men  into  the  whole  world,  and  that  is 
already  their  judgment  which  sinners 
have  to  experience." — Lange, 

—  "  God  frequently  repeats  that 
His  judgments  upon  the  Jews  were  no 
more  than  what  their  own  ways  or 
doings  obliged  Him  to  inflict  There 
was  in  His  dealings  with  them  no 
arbitrary  exercise  of  sovereignty,  but 
they  were  dealt  with  according  to  their 
own  conduct.  And  thus  Qod  deals  with 
mankind  in  general :  His  actions  in 
regard  to  them  are  not  founded  in 
an  arbitrary  exercise  of  His  absolute 
sovereignty  over  them,  but  in  impar- 
tial justice,  wisdom,  and  goodness; 
and  He  judges  them  according  to  their 
own  ways,  and  not  according  to  the 
dictates  of  an  arbitrary  wilL" — Benson. 


Vers.  20,  21.  The  Name  of  Ood— 
1.  Is  the  expression  of  His  immaculate 
holiness.  2.  Is  defamed  by  human 
sin.  3.  Is  misunderstood  by  those  who 
witness  the  suflerings  of  His  people. 
4.  Will  vindicate  to  the  universe  its 
inviolable  justice  and  righteousness. 

Ver.  20.  "They  did  profanely  sin 
against  those  precepts  of  My  law  which 
heathens  did  know,  venerate,  and  ob- 
serve better  than  the  Jews.  Their 
heat)  1  en  neighbours  said,  with  taunt 
and  cutting  reprimand — *  These  are 
the  people  of  the  Lord.'  These  captive 
slaves,  that  are  most  forlorn  of  men, 
will  have  it  that  their  God  is  the  Lord, 
the  mighty  and  the  good  God,  the  true 
and  faithful  One  that  gave  them  the 
land  out  of  which  they  are  driven.  If 
He  be  good  as  they  boast,  how  comes 
it  to  pass  that  His  people  are  in  such 
ill  state  f  Was  He  weak  and  could 
not  keep  them  in  their  own  land, 
or  doth  He  falsify  His  word  f  You 
miserable  Jews,  say  what  this  mean- 
eth.  But  by  their  impure  life  they 
opened  the  mouths  of  the  heathens  to 
blaspheme  and  call  the  holiness  of  God 
into  question.  ^  When  they  saw  His 
people  so  unholy  they  concluded — '  As 
IS  the  people  so  is  their  God ; '  and  this, 
as  it  was  a  great  offence  and  scandal 
to  the  heathen,  so  it  was  a  great  dis- 
honour to  God." — Pool, 

—  **  With  the  sinner  goes  also  hit 
curse,  his  other  shadow. — Thus  this 
chapter  teaches  us  how  the  first  petition 
of  the  Lord's  prayer  should  be  under- 
stood. The  name  of  the  Lord  is  hal- 
lowed as  well  by  the  prosperity  of  the 
elect,  which  may  obtain  even  under 
the  cross,  as  by  their  purification  from 
sin. — A  bad  life  ought  not  to  put  good 
doctrine  in  question." — Lange, 

Ver.  21.  "God  His  own  justification 
in  this  world. — God  sanctifies  His 
name  among  men  by  benefits  as  well 
as  by  judgments  and  punishments.**^ 
Lanqe, 


9B 


Digitized  by 


385 

Google 


CHAP.  XXXTL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  LZEKIEL. 


HOMILETICS. 

Spiritual  Prospsbiit. 

(Vers.  22-38.) 

L  Is  bestowed  as  aa  act  of  unmerited  Divine  goodness  (vers.  22-24). 
Israel  had  forfeited  all  claim  to  the  Divine  pity ;  they  had  broken  every  cUnse 
in  their  part  of  the  covenant  No  injustice  would  have  been  done  had  they 
been  passed  by  for  ever  and  another  nation  selected  to  carry  out  the  work  in 
which  they  had  so  signally  failed.  But  the  Divine  honour  roust  be  vindicated. 
The  Lord  had  chosen  Israel,  had  wedded  Himself  to  them  in  closest  union  of 
both  promise  and  blessing,  had  lavished  upon  them  the  love  of  His  great  heart 
and  made  them  distinguished  by  miracles  of  power.  Must  all  this  go  for 
nothing!  Amid  the  general  defection  He  did  not  overlook  the  fact  that  a 
few  remained  faithful  And  yet,  not  for  their  sakes,  nor  for  the  sake  of  the 
people  who  had  so  cruelly  disappointed  and  wronged  Him,  but  for  His  own 
Name's  sake,  He  resolves  upon  the  vindication  of  His  houour.  That  vindica- 
tion had  been  partially  seen  in  the  punishment,  but  is  to  be  more  fully 
displayed  in  the  restoration  and  prosperity  of  His  people.  An  old  lesson, 
which  the  world  in  all  ages  has  been  so  slow  to  take  in,  is  to  be  again  enforced 
—that  spiritual  good  is  superior  to  and  the  only  sound  basis  of  temporal  good. 
Our  smallest  mercies  are  undeserved.  How .  unfathomable  is  the  goodness 
which  continually  surrounds  us  with  spiritual  riches! 

II.  Begins  in  a  thorough  renovation  of  the  moral  natnre.  1.  Sin  is  removed 
(ver.  25).  There  is  no  possibility  of  the  future  being  better  than  the  present 
unless  the  heart  is  cleansed  from  sin.  Man  is  powerless  to  do  this  (Jer.  ii  22). 
It  is  an  act  of  Qod.  The  ceremonial  cleansing  of  the  Law  was  typical  of  the 
spiritual  cleansing  of  the  Grospel.  The  Divine  cleansing  is  thorough  and  com- 
plete— "Ye  shall  be  cleansed  from  all  your  filthiness  and  from  all  your  fonl 
gods.**  2.  A  new  nature  acquired  (ver.  26).  The  old  nature  was  full  of 
idolatries;  the  new  shall  be  clear  of  these.  The  old  nature  was  stubborn, 
stolid,  hard  as  stone ;  the  new  shall  be  soft,  tender,  impressionable,  receiving 
the  Divine  impress  as  the  melted  wax  receives  the  impress  of  the  seal  The 
human  shall  be  suffused,  interpenetrated,  and  transformed  by  the  Divine.  It 
is  a  spiritual  miracle.  Man  can  mould  the  intellect  and  modify  the  disposition, 
but  God  alone  can  change  and  renew  the  heart.  3.  The  renovation  evidenced  ^ 
practical  obedience  (ver.  27).  In  the  spiritual  world,  as  in  the  physical,  every 
effect  must  have  an  adequate  cause,  and  the  effect  must  ever  be  in  harmony 
with  the  nature  and  operative  force  of  the  cause.  A  life  of  moral  obedience  is 
the  practical  outcome  of  the  influence  of  moral  law  acting  at  the  centre  of 
activity.  Physical  law  is  inflexible,  and  must  ever  produce  the  same  class  of 
phenomena  with  unvarying  regularity.  Moral  law  is  not  less  unalterable,  but 
it  operates  within  the  sphere  of  human  freedom  and  cannot  produce  the  same 
cast-iron  sameness  of  results  as  is  done  in  the  unchanging  operations  of  physical 
law :  it  respects  the  free,  voluntary  exercise  of  the  human  will.  The  Spirit  of 
God  so  operates  upon  all  the  powei-s  of  the  soul  as  to  make  obedience  to 
God's  law  not  only  possible,  but  cheerful,  consistent,  and  acceptable.  Enforced, 
mechanically  regulated  obedience  is  unworthy  of  man  and  displeasing  to  Qod. 
The  reality  of  a  spiritually  transformed  nature  is  seen  in  a  constant  endeavour 
to  observe  the  Divine  "  statutes  and  judgments  and  do  thenu'* 

III.  Is  the  only  condition  in  which  temporal  prosperity  can  be  tnly 
386 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  OOMMSNTART:  BZSKIEL. 


aspredated  and  safely  enjoyed  (vers.  28-30,  33-38).  With  the  return  of 
Israel  to  spiritual  allegiance  there  is  promised  a  return  of  temporal  prosperity, 
and  it  is  more  than  hinted  in  these  verses  that  the  outward  prosperity  should 
be  proportioned  to  their  moral  obedienca  Had  they  been  more  faithful,  the 
promise  of  national  restoration  would  have  been  more  completely  realised  than 
history  as  yet  has  shown  it  to  be.  Temporal  prosperity  to  the  unbelieving 
is  not  only  delusive,  but  dangerous.  The  success  achieved  by  diligence  and 
virtue  has  become  a  curse  when  the  loss  of  rectitude  has  led  to  its  abuse.  The 
founders  of  the  illustrious  family  of  the  Medici  rose  to  affluence  and  power  not 
only  by  their  commercial  genius,  but  by  their  philanthropy  and  virtue,  John 
de  Medici  being  lionoured  by  his  countrymen  with  the  title  of  "the  Father  of 
the  Poor;**  and  his  son  Cosmo  has  inscribed  on  his  tomb  the  title  of  "Father 
of  his  country.*'  But  with  the  decline  of  virtue  in  their  descendants  wealth 
and  prestit/e  vanished.  Spiritual  prosperity  is  the  precursor  of  temporal  pros- 
perity. We  never  properly  enjoy  the  good  thin^  of  this  life  but  as  we  use 
them  in  the  fear  and  love  of  God,  the  aU-bountifuT  Giver. 

IV.  Humbles  the  soul  under  a  sense  of  personal  unworthiness  (vers.  31, 
32).  *Tis  ever  so.  Nothing  humbles  the  soul  more  than  a  display  of  God's 
condescending  goodness.  We  are  ashamed  of  the  sins  committed  against  bene- 
ficence so  tender,  so  constant,  so  generous.  We  feel  that  such  mercy  is  utterly 
undeserved.  The  goodness  of  God  melts  the  heart  into  penitence,  which  a 
misconception  of  severity  has  hardened  into  indifference  or  reckless  bravado 
(Rom,  ii.  4,  5).  A  genuine  repentance  is  one  of  the  most  hopeful  symptoms 
of  spiritual  prosperity.  The  glory  of  Divine  grace  is  often  seen  to  best  advan- 
tage through  the  mist  of  tears. 

y.  Is  secured  by  eamest  and  persevering  prayer  (ver.  37).  God  had  pro- 
mised prosperity,  and,  apart  from  Israel's  deservings,  had  determined  to  bestow 
it,  but  none  the  less  must  it  be  sought  by  prayer  and  supplication.  Whatever 
God  has  promised  is  a  legitimate  subject  for  prayer.  Prayer  is  the  language  of 
conscious  dependence;  but  how  vast  is  the  scope  of  the  suppliant  which  is 
limited  only  by  "  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  promises  I  *'  Those  blessings 
are  most  highly  prized,  and  bring  the  greatest  spiritual  enrichment^  which  are 
secured  by  eamest  and  agonising  prayer. 

Lessons. — 1.  CM  has  a  definite  pu/rpose  in  giving  or  withholding  prosperity. 
2.  Spiritual  prosperity  is  the  highest  kind  of  prosperity.  3.  The  highest  blessings 
are  not  secu/red  without  importunate  prayer. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  22-24.  The  Divine  Lnparti-  which  Gh>d  sees  in  His  people  that  He 

ality — 1.   An   essential  characteristic  has  pity  on  them,  for  if  God  weighed 

of  the  Divine  nature.     2.    Exercised  their  merits  there  could  be  nothing 

in  the  accurate  distribution  of  punish-  in  them  to  recommend  them  to  His 

inent  and   reward.      3.    Eeveals  the  favour;  but  it  is  in  consideration  of 

enormity  of  human  ingratitude  and  sin.  His  own  holy  name  and  character  as 

4.  Vindicates  the  integrity  of  theDivine  the  God  of  covenanted  grace,  that  so 

name.    5.  Seen  in  the  generous  treat-  He  may  vindicate  its  sanctity  before 

ment  of  the  underserving.    6.  A  power-  the  nations  from  the  reproach  brought 

ful  motive  to  repentance  and  obedience,  on  it  through  the  sins  and  the  terrible 

punishment  of  the  covenant  people. 

Ver.  23.  'Ut  is  not  for  any  merit  Ijet  us  hence  learn  that  the  honour 


Digitized  by 


387 

Google 


OBAF.  XXXTL 


HOMILBTJC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


of  Hit  own  holy  name  is  the  first 
grand  end  of  aU  God's  dealings  of 
wrath  and  mercy.  Let  us  fall  in  with 
the  purpose  of  Qoi^  and  make  the 
honour  of  His  name  our  chief  plea 
in  our  prayers  for  mercy  and  our  in- 
fluencing motive  in  all  our  acts/ — 
FausseL 

—  '*  Ood'B  Motive  in  SalvatioiL  1. 
Regard  to  His  own  glory.  2.  In 
savmg  man  for  His  own  honour  and 
glory  God  exhibits  the  mercy,  holi- 
ness, love,  and  other  attributes  of  the 
Godhead.  3.  The  doctrine  that  God 
is  not  moved  to  save  man  by  any 
merit  or  worth  in  him  is  a  truth  of 
the  highest  importance  to  sinners.  4. 
It  is  as  important  for  the  saint  as  for 
the  sinner  to  remember  that  he  is  not 
saved  through  personal  merit,  or  for 
his  own  sake.  5.  This  doctrine,  while 
it  keeps  the  saint  humble,  will  help  to 
make  him  holy. 

"Here,  no  ornament  to  park  or  gar- 
deUi  stands  a  dwarfed,  stunted,  bark- 
bound  tree.  How  am  I  to  develop 
that  stem  into  tall  and  graceful  beauty, 
to  clothe  with  blossoms  those  naked 
branches  and  hang  them  till  tliey  bend 
with  clustered  fruit  t  Change  such  as 
that  is  not  to  be  effected  by  surface- 
dressing,  or  any  care  bestowed  on  the 
upper  soil.  The  remedy  must  go  to 
the  root.  You  cannot  make  that  tree 
grow  upwards  till  you  break  the  crust 
below,  pulverise  the  hard  subsoil,  and 
give  the  roots  room  and  way  to  strike 
deeper  down  ;  for  the  deeper  the  root 
and  the  wider-spread  the  fine  filaments 
of  its  rootlets,  the  higher  the  tree  lifts 
an  umbrageous  head  to  heaven  and 
throws  out  its  hundred  arms  to  catch, 
in  dews,  raindrops,  and  sunbeams,  the 
biasings  of  the  sky.  The  believer 
offers  this  analogy  between  grace 
and  nature,  that,  as  the  tree  grows 
best  skyward  that  grows  most  down- 
ward, the  lower  the  saint  descends  in 
humility  the  higher  he  rises  in  holi- 
ness. The  soaring  corresponds  to  the 
sinking." — Outhru^s  Oospd  in  Exekiel. 

Vers.  23,  24.  "Ood  Glorilled  in  Be- 
demption.     1.  God  might  have  vindi- 
cated His  honour  and  sanctified  His 
388 


name  in  our  destruction.  2.  God 
sanctifies  His  name  and  glorifies  Him- 
self in  our  redemption.  3.  God's 
power,  wisdom,  holiness,  justice,  and 
mercy  glorified  in  redemption.  4.  In 
redemption  God  is  glorified  in  the 
complete  discomfiture  of  all  His  and 
our  enemies. 

"  The  effect  of  the  wind  is  visible, 
not  the  element  itself.  The  clouds 
scud  across  the  sky,  the  trees  swing 
their  arms  wildly  in  the  air,  aeriid 
waves  chase  each  other  across  the  com, 
and  the  boat,  catching  the  gale  in  her 
flowing  sheet,  goes  dancing  over  the 
billows.  So,  although  in  a  sense  in- 
finitely higher,  the  Invisible  is  visible  ; 
and  in  His  works  we  see  One  who, 
seeing  all,  remains  Himself  unseen 
God  is  lost,  not  in  darkness,  but  in 
light;  a  sun  that  blinds  the  eye  which 
is  turned  on  its  burning  disc  Angels 
themselves,  unable  to  sustain  His  glory, 
cover  their  faces  with  their  wings  and 
use  them,  as  a  man  his  hand,  to  screen 
their  eyes  from  the  ineffable  effulgence. 
Unbeliever  though  he  was,  the  great 
Laplace,  in  one  of  his  last  and  not  least 
memorable  utterances,  said — *  It  is  the 
little  that  we  know ;  it  is  the  great 
that  remains  unknown.'  On  the  con- 
secrated spot,  where  the  cross  of  salva- 
tion rose  and  the  blood  of  a  Bedeemer 
fell,  I  find  the  centre  of  a  spiritual 
universe.  Here,  in  a  completed  arch, 
if  I  may  so  speak,  locked  fast  by  the 
key,  all  the  properties  of  divinity  meet ; 
here,  concentrated  as  in  a  focus,  its 
varied  attributes  blend  and  shine.**— > 
Quihrie. 

Vers.  25-28.  Heart-Benewal  —  1. 
The  work  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  2. 
Accomplished  only  by  being  cleansed 
from  sin.  8.  A  thorough  and  self- 
conscious  change.  4.  Evidenced  by 
an  outward  and  practical  obedience  to 
the  Divine  law.  5.  Puts  the  soul  in 
its  true  relationship  to  God. 

Yer.  25.  ''The  mention  of  clean 
water  to  be  sprinkled  on  the  people  as 
the  means  of  purification  can  only  be 
understood  symbolically ;  it  does  not 
refer  to  any   mere  external  rite,  or 


Digitized  by 


Google 


no  Ml  LET  IC  COMMESTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


oHAP.  zxzn. 


to  anj  specific  ordinance  of  the  old 
eovenant,  sach  as  the  lustration  cere- 
mony with  water  and  the  ashes  of  the 
red  heiter,  or  to  the  ablations  con- 
nected with  the  consecration  of  the 
Levites.  It  is  rather  to  be  viewed  in" 
reference  to  the  purifications  by  water 
collectively,  which  were  all,  in  one 
respect  or  another,  symbolical  of  the 
removal  of  impurity  and  the  establish- 
ment of  the  worshipper  in  a  sound  and 
acceptable  condition.  This  was  no 
more  of  a  merely  formal  and  outward 
character  in  Old  Testament  times  than 
it  is  nowy  as  we  may  learn  from  the 
whole  tenor  of  this  prophecy.  It  was 
by  their  moral  pollutions  most  of  all 
that  the  people  of  Israel  had  profaned 
Qod's  name  and  drawn  down  His  dis- 
pleasure ;  and  the  purification  which 
was  to  undo  the  evil  and  again  to 
sanctify  the  name  of  God  could  be 
nothing  short  pf  a  conformity  to  God's 
own  righteousness,  which  throughout 
all  ages  is  the  same." — Fairbaim, 

—  Man  Jnstifled.    "  1.  Grod's  people 
are  not  chosen  because  they  are  holy. 

2.  In  redemption,  the  saved  are  not 
justified  by  themselves,  but  by  God. 

3.  We  are  not  justified  through  the 
administration  or  efBcacy  of  any  oat- 
ward  ordinance.  4.  We  are  justified, 
or  cleansed  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  by 
the  blood  of  Christ.  Tlie  greatest  of 
all  questions,  '  What  must  I  do  to  be 
layed  t '  is  one  which  admits  of  a 
short  and  plain  answer.  Capable  of  a 
wide  expansion,  it  may  yet  be  brought 
within  a  very  narrow  compass.  The 
river,  which  there  flows  between  dis- 
tant wooded  banks  and  yonder  spreads 
itself  out  into  a  lake,  reflecting  on  its 
mirror-face  the  bright  heavens  above 
and  the  dark  hills  around,  is  here— 
where  its  foaming  waters  flash  past 
loud  as  thunder  and  quick  as  lightning, 
or  creep  sullenly  along  at  the  bottom 
of  the  deep,  dark  gorge  —  brought 
within  narrow  bounds ;  bounds  so 
narrow  that,  with  nerve  enough,  by 
one  brave  leap  from  rock  to  rock  I 
could  clear  its  breadth.  Even  so  all  the 
wide  expanse  of  doctrines  to  be  be- 
lieved and  duties  to  be  done  over 
which  we  might  expatiate  in  reply  to 


the  question,  '  What  shall  I  do  to  be 
savedt'  is  contracted,  com  pressed,  com- 
prehended in  Paul's  brief  aildress — 
*  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and 
thou  shalt  be  saved.'  As  salvation  is 
the  one  thing  neediul  for  man,  faith  is 
the  one  thing  needful  for  salvation." — 
ChUhrie. 

Ver.  26.  Man  Converted.  *'l.  It 
is  a  great  change — not  a  mere  out- 
ward reformation.  2.  It  is  a  birth. 
3.  It  is  a  resurrection.  Our  little 
child,  watching  with  curious  eve  the 
apparent  motion  of  objects,  calls  out 
in  ecstasy  and  bids  us  see  how  hedge 
and  house  are  flying  past  the  carriage. 
You  know  it  is  not  these  that  move ; 
nor  the  fixed  and  firm  shore,  with  its 
trees  and  fields,  and  boats  at  anchor, 
and  harbours  and  headlands,  that  is 
gliding  by  the  cabin-window.  That  is 
but  an  illusion  of  the  eye  ;  the  motion 
is  not  in  them  but  us." — Guthrie, 

—  The  Heart  of  Stone  and  the 
Heart  of  Flesh.     *"  I.  The  heart  ofstoiie. 

I.  Stone  is  cold.     2.  Hard.     3.  Dead. 

II.  The  heart  of  flesh  a  ^ew  heart.  1. 
By  this  change  the  understanding  and 
judgment  are  enlightened.  2.  The 
temper  and  disposition  are  changed 
and  sanctified.  3.  In  conversion  man 
gets  a  warm  heart,  a  soft  heart,  a  living 
heart  4.  By  conversion  man  is  en- 
nobled. Near  by  a  mass  of  rock  that 
had  fallen  from  the  overhanging  crag, 
which  had  some  wild-flowers  growing 
in  its  fissures  and  on  its  top  the  fox- 
glove with  its  spikes  of  beautiful  but 
deadly  flowers,  we  once  came  upon  an 
adder  as  it  lay  in  ribbon-coil,  basking 
on  the  sunny  ground.  At  our  approach 
the  reptile  stirred,  uncoiled  itself,  and 
raising  its  head,  with  eyes  like  burning 
coals,  it  showed  its  venomous  fangs, 
shook  its  cloven  tongue,  hissed,  and 
gave  sign  of  battle.  Attacked,  it  re- 
treated, and  making  for  that  grey 
stone,  wormed  itself  into  a  hole  in  its 
side.  Its  nest  and  home  were  there. 
And  in  looking  on  that  shattered  rock, 
fallen  from  its  primeval  elevation,  with 
its  flowery  but  fatal  charms,  the  home 
and  nest  of  the  adder,  where  nothing 
grew  but  poisoned  beauty  and  tir» thing 

369 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  XXXTL 


EOMILETIO  OOMMENTAMT:  BZBKIBL 


dwelt  bat  a  poisoned  brood,  it  seemed 
to  as  an  emblem  of  that  heart  which 
the  verse  describes  as  a  stone,  which 
experience  proves  is  a  habitation  of 
devils,  and  which  the  prophet  pro- 
nounces to  be  desperately  wicked." — 
ChUhrie. 

—  "  The  heart  of  stone  does  not  bear 
bending  according  to  God's  will,  where- 
as  the  heart  of  flesh  is  soft  and  of  snch 
a  texture  that  God  can  impress  into  its 
understanding  a  living  knowledge,  into 
its  will  a  voluntary  obedience,  and  into 
the  inclinations  a  holy  order/— S!torib& 

Yer.  27.  The  New  Ufa    ''L  It  it 

a  willing  obedience  to  the  law  of  Ood. 
II.  It  it  a  progressive  obedience.  *I 
will  cause  you  to  walk  in  My  statutes.' 
Other  images  convey  the  idea  of  pro- 
gress, but  this  of  progress  achieved  bj 
exertion,  progress  the  triumph  of  an 
intelligent  mind  and  the  reward  of  a 
determined  will.  1.  In  this  image 
God's  people  find  comfort  and  en- 
couragement. 2.  This  image  stimu- 
lates to  exertion.  IIL  This  willing 
and  progressive  obedience  it  the  sign  and 
teal  of  salvation.  IV.  Or^  of  the  most 
powerful  means  to  accomplish  the  duty 
of  the  new  life  is  to  cultivate  the  love  of 
Christ,  1.  Love  is  the  most  powerfiJ 
of  all  motives.  2.  Love  is  a  motive 
to  duty  as  pleasant  as  it  is  powerfuL 
Y.  A  powerful  motive  to  duty  lies  in  the 
fact  that  by  our  obedience  to  these  statutes 
the  verdict  of  judgment  shall  be  setOed, 
The  last  day  is  Gtod's  Day  of  settle- 
ment with  a  world  that  has  had  long 
credit.  It  is  the  winding-up  of  this 
eartli's  bankrupt  estate  and  each  man's 
individual  interests.  It  is  the  closing 
of  an  open  account  that  has  been 
running  on  ever  since  the  fall.  It  is 
the  day  when  the  balance  is  struck 
and  our  fate  is  heaven  or  hell.  Our 
hands  are  now  sowing  seed  for  that 
great  harvest.*' — Ouikrie, 

—  "I  will  put  My  Spirit^  the  great 
principle  of  light,  life,  and  love,  within 
you,  to  actuate  the  new  spirit  and 
to  influence  the  new  affections  and 
passions,  that  the  animal  spirit  may 
not  become  brutish,  that  the  mental 
powers  become  not  foolish.      I  will 

890 


put  My  Spirit  within  you,  so  that  as 
the  new  spirit  may  influence  the  new 
heart,  so  will  My  Spirit  influence  your 
new  spirit^  that  each  may  have  a 
proper  mover;  and  then  all  will  be 
pure,  regular,  harmonious,  when  pas- 
sion is  influenced  by  reason  and  reason 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  the  cause 
shall  be  evidenced  by  the  effects ;  for 
I  will  cause  you  to  walk  in  My  statutes 
— ^not  only  to  believe  and  reverence 
My  appointments  relative  to  what  I 
command  you  to  perform;  but  ye 
shall  walk  in  them,  your  conduct  shall 
be  regulated  by  them." — A.  Clarke. 

—  "First  the  inward  and  then  the 
outward  change  is  God's  order,  while 
we  men  always  proceed  in  the  reverse 
order.  What  good  a  man  does  is  not 
his,  but  (Jod's  work  in  him." — Starke. 

Yer.  28.  "To  the  heavenly  among 
men  there  is  no  lack  even  on  earth; 
to  him  who  has  what  alone  is  worth 
having  nothing  shall  be  wanting." — 
Lange. 

Yers.  29-36.  "Spiritual  blessings 
were  largely  comprised  in  their  tem- 
poral ones,  as  the  kernel  is  enclosed 
in  the  shell  Hence  Christian  holi- 
ness and  all  the  blessings  of  the  new 
covenant  are  here  principally  implied. 
The  Jews  looked  for  the  bringing-in 
of  a  better  hope.  They  had  a  layer 
in  which  they  washed ;  but  David  says, 
*  I  will  wash  my  hands  in  innocency.' 
They  had  the  blood  of  sprinkling,  but 
a  better  fountain  was  expected  to  be 
opened  for  sin  and  for  uncleanness. 
They  had  circumcision ;  but  the  true 
circumcision  was  that  of  the  heart 
They  had  the  law  written  on  the 
tables  of  stone ;  but  the  Messiah  who 
says,  'Thy  law  is  within  Me^'  here 
promises  to  write  it  on  the  heart." — 
Suidife. 

Yers.  29,  30.  The  FtodnetiyeiieM  of 
Nature— 1.  A  Divine  gift.  "I  will 
multiply  the  fruit  of  the  tree  and  the 
increase  of  the  field."  2.  Promptly 
responds  to  the  Divine  voice.  "I  will 
call  for  the  com  and  increase  it"  3. 
A  guarantee  against  famine.     "I  wfll 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIC  OOMMSNTAJtT:  EZSKISL. 


lay  no  famine  upon  jou — ye  shall 
receive  no  more  reproach  or  famine 
among  the  heathen."  4.  h  appreciated 
OfJy  by  those  who  are  moraUy  deansed. 
''I  will  saye  you  from  all  your  un- 
cleannesses.^ 

Ver.  29.  "<I  will  call  for  the  com.* 
All  necessaries  for  aliment  comprised 
in  one,  and  these  brought  to  them  at 
GU)d's  call,  which  they  will  hear  (Ps. 
cv.  16,  40;  Heb.  ii.  21,  22>  Famine 
is  God's  arrow ;  He  shoots  it ;  where 
it  is,  He  layeth  it;  but  His  people 
shall  neither  have  it  their  misery  nor 
their  reproach  any  more.** — Pool. 

Ver.  31-36.  "Nothmg  so  melte  the 
sinner  into  repentance  as  the  love  and 
grace  of  God,  where  he  could  have 
looked  only  for  wrath  because  of  his 
sins.  Let  us,  if  we  desire  true  repent- 
ance, receive  it  as  the  gift  of  God  at 
the  foot  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  where 
we  see  our  sin  forgiven  at  the  cost  of 
such  an  awful  sacrifice,  flowing  from 
the  gratuitous  love  of  God.  The 
terrors  of  the  law  can  frighten,  but 
the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  alone  can 
melt  the  heart ** — Fawtsei 

Vers.  31,  32.  Oonsdous  Sin—l.  The 
resuU  of  reflection  on  personal  wrong- 
doing. ''Then  shall  ye  remember 
your  evil  ways  and  your  doings  that 
were  not  good.**  2.  HunMes  the  soul 
in  profound  self-abasemenL  '*  Ye  shall 
lotne  yourselves  in  your  own  sight  for 
your  iniquities  and  for  your  abomina- 
tions. Be  ashamed  and  confounded  for 
your  own  ways."  3.  Convinces  the  soul 
that  all  blessings  have  a  Divine  source. 
''Not  for  your  sakes  do  I  this,  saith 
the  Lord  God." 

Ver.  31.  *'  When  I  have  given  you 
My  Spirit,  renewed  your  hearts, 
brought  you  by  miraculous  mercy  out 
of  captivity  in  a  strange  land  unto 
liberty  in  your  own,  ye  shall  call  to 
mind,  review  and  examine  all  your 
past  life,  your  ways  opposite  to  God's, 
therefore  both  their  own  by  choice 
and  also  evil  in  their  very  nature. 
Your  mind  shall  abhor  what  you  loved 


and  deeply  griere  at  what  you  re- 
joiced in.  When  swine  ye  wallowed 
in  mire ;  when  made  sheep  you  shall 
as  much  fear  and  flee  from  it." — Pool 

—  "There  are  some  things  we  can 
hardly  forget — our  sorrows  and  our 

Pleasures,  as  Esau ;  some  things  we  can 
ardly  remember— our  faults  and  our 
friends,  as  Joseph's  butler.  Augustine 
was  famous  for  two  of  his  works — hia 
'Retractions,'  which  are  the  confessions 
of  his  errors;  and  his  *  Confessions,* 
which  are  the  retractions  of  his  life.** 
— Trapp. 

—  "  Li  conversion  man  regains  his 
memory.  Lonthing  is  not  a  sign  of 
sickness  only,  but  in  matters  spiritual 
it  is  a  sign  of  convalescence.  Our  life 
must  become  sorrow  to  us,  otherwise 
sorrow  will  not  become  life  to  us.**— 
Lange. 

Ver.  32.  "  Grace  works  shame,  and 
so  much  the  more  as  it  makes  the 
wilderness  a  paradise,  the  beggar  a 
king,  and  the  sinner  a  priest.  We 
boast  of  nothing  in  Christ  and  we 
boast  of  all  things." — Lange. 

Vers.  33-36.  Moral  Reform— 1.  The 
basis  of  temporal  prosperity.  2.  Can 
be  accomplished  only  by  Divine  power. 
3.  An  evidence  to  the  world  of  the 
Divine  veracity. 

Ver.  36.  " '  I  the  Lord  have  spoken 
it,  and  I  will  do  it.'  Thtt  Security  of 
the  Belieyen  1.  The  text  announces 
a  most  important  truth.  2.  This  truth 
imparts  comfort  to  a  true  Christian. 
Through  his  confidence  in  this  truth— 
(1)  he  commits  all  his  earthly  cares 
to  God ;  (2)  he  is  sustained  amid  the 
trials  of  life ;  (3)  he  cheerfully  hopes 
and  patiently  waits  for  heaven.  & 
Both  nature  and  providence  illustrate 
the  truth  of  the  text.  The  voice  of 
every  storm  that,  like  an  anery  child, 
weeps  and  cries  itself  to  sleep,  the 
voice  of  every  shower  that  has  cleared 
up  into  sunshine,  the  hoarse  Toice 
of  ocean  breaking  in  impotent  rage 
against  its  ancient  bounds,  the  voice 
of  the  seasons  as  they  have  marched 
to  the  music  of  the  spheres  in  un« 

391 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  zxzn. 


EOMILETW  OOAMENTAXT:  SZBKIBL. 


broken  succession  oyer  the  earth,  the 
scream  of  the  satyr  in  Babylon's  empty 
ha]ls,  the  fierce  shout  of  the  Bedouin 
as  he  hnrls  his  spear  and  careers  in 
freedom  over  his  desert  sands,  the 
wail  and  weeping  of  the  wandering 
Jew  over  the  ruins  of  Zion — in  all 
these  I  hear  the  echo  of  this  voice  of 
OroA — '  I  the  Lord  have  spoken,  and  I 
will  do  it."*— OueAritf. 

Yen  37,  38.  An  Increasing  Popu- 
lation— 1.  An  evidence  of  national 
prosperity.  2.  A  great  national  re- 
sponsibility. 3.  Should  be  instructed 
in  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  God. 
4.  An  imposing  spectacle  when  en- 
gaged in   the  praise  and  service  of 


SS' 


Ver.  37.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God." 
The  Divine  Word — L  Emphasised  by 
frequent  repetition.  This  the  fourteenth 
time  this  expression  is  used  in  the 
present  chapter.  2.  The  foundation 
and   guaraniee  of  blessing  to   man. 

3.  Should  be  devoutly  pondered.  4. 
Is  infallible  alike  in  promise  and 
threatening. 

—  *•  *  I  will  yet  for  this  be  enquired 
of  by  the  house  of  Israel,  to  do  it  for 
them.'  The  Nature,  Necessity,  and 
Power  of  Prayer.  1.  Nature  herself 
teaches  us  to  pray.  2.  Some  diflS- 
culties  connected  with  the  duty.  The 
decrees  of  GJod  render  prayer  unneces- 
sary. From  want  of  faiili  prayer  must 
be  useless.    3.  Prayer  must  be  earnest. 

4.  Prayer  is  powerful.  5.  Prayer  is 
confident  Child  of  Qod,  pray  on.  By 
prayer  thy  hand  can  touch  the  stars, 
thy  arm  stretches  up  to  heaven.  Nor 
let  thy  holy  boldness  be  dashed  by  the 
thought  that  prayer  has  no  power  to 
bend  these  skies  and  bring  down  thy 
Gk>d.  When  I  pull  upon  the  rope 
which  fastens  my  little  skiff  to  a 
distant  and  mighty  ship,  this  feeble 
arm  may  not  draw  its  vast  bulk  to 
me,  but  I  draw  myself  to  it,  to  ride  in 
safety  under  protection  of  its  guns, 
and  in  my  want  enjoy  the  fulness  of 
its  stores.  And  it  equally  serves  my 
purpose  and  supplies  my  needs  that, 
although   prayer   were   powerless   to 

392 


move  God  to  me,  it  moves  me  to  QtoL 
If  He  does  not  descend  to  earth  I 
ascend  to  heaven." — Ouihrie. 

—  "  For  all  these  blessings,  whether 
of  sanctification  or  of  millennial  glory, 
God  will  be  enquired  of  in  prayer; 
for  the  duty  and  the  promise  are 
everywhere  connected  in  the  sacred 
writings.  It  is  remarkable  that  when 
St.  Paul  mentions  holiness  of  heart  at 
large,  it  is  generally  with  the  most 
fervent  supplications  for  its  attain- 
ment (Eph.  iil  14-19;  1  Thess.  v. 
23).  This  is  still  the  only  way  for 
men  to  attain  purity  of  heart  ana  the 
mind  of  Chiiaf'—^ulcliffe. 


t 


Yer.  38.  ''Thus  shall  men  multi- 
ily  and  fill  the  cities  of  replanted 
udah.  And  the  increase  of  the  num- 
bers of  a  people  is  then  honourable 
when  they  are  all  dedicated  to  God 
as  a  holy  flock,  to  be  presented  to 
Him  as  living  sacrifices.  Crowds  are 
a  lovely  sight  in  God's  temple." — 
Benson. 

—  '*  Such  promises  as  those  oon- 
tained  in  this  chapter  cannot  be  taken 
in  an  absolute  sense;  they  must  be 
understood  to  some  extent  condi- 
tionally. They  reveal  the  kind  pro- 
pensions  of  God  towards  His  people, 
what  He  is  disposed  and  ready  to  do 
towards  them,  rather  than  what  He 
will  for  certain  accomplish  at  any  stage 
or  period  of  their  history.  So  far  the 
Word  contains  an  absolute  element, 
as  Grod  certainly  pledges  Himself  to 
make  provision  for  securing,  in  a  larger 
measure  than  formerly,  a  proper  re- 
generation of  heart  and  conduct  in 
His  people,  and  also  for  giving  palpable 
proof  of  this  in  their  more  flourishing 
and  prosperous  condition  generally. 
The  goodness  of  God  was  certainly  to 
manifest  itself  for  these  ends;  but  it 
would  do  so  to  the  full  extent  repre- 
sented only  if  they  continued  in  His 
goodness.'' — FcUrhakn, 

—  "  There  is  no  period  of  the  Jewish 
history  from  that  time  until  now 
to  which  this  beautiful  chapter  can 
be  applied.  It  must  belong  to  the 
Gospel  dispensation ;  and  if  the  Jews 
will  still  refuse,  contradiot,  and  bias- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMENTART:  BZBKISL, 


OHAF.  ZlXfIL 


pheroe,  let  no  Christian  have  any 
fellowship  with  them  in  their  opposi- 
tion to  this  Almighty  Saviour.  Let 
none  be  indifferent  to  His  salvation, 


let  all  plead  His  promises,  and  let  the 
messengers  of  the  Churches  proclaim 
to  the  Christian  world  a  free,  a  full, 
and  a  present  salvation.* — A.  Clarhi, 


Thx  Vision  ot  the  Dry  Bones  Seyiyified  a  Symbol  of  the  Death 
AND  Besurrbotion  OF  IsRAEU    (Chap,  xxzvii.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1. 
*  The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me." 

''The  abrupt  commencement  without 
andf  points  out  that  the  fact  here 
related  is  eztraoniinarj  and  out  of 
connection  with  the  usual  prophetic 
activity.  The  hand  of  the  Lord  de- 
notes the  overruling  Divine  influence.'' 
—Hengstenbei-g.  "  The  valley  -— **  the 
plain  or  valley  near  Tel  Abib,  familiar 
to  Ezekiel  as  the  scene  of  the  vision  of 
the  chenibim.  Now,  however,  to  his 
horror,  he  found  it  full  of  dry,  wither- 
ing bones — the  wreck  of  a  vast  host 
slain  by  the  sword.  Wandering  over 
the  wide  expanse,  the  multitude  of 
these  ghastly  relics  of  mortality  and 
their  bleached  dryness,  the  very  em- 
bodiment of  death,  filled  him  with 
awe." — OeUeie. 

Ver.  3.  ''Can  these  bones  Uve?" 

''Implying  that,  humanly  speaking, 
they  could  not ;  but  faith  leaves  the 
question  of  possibility  to  rest  with 
God,  with  whom  nothing  is  impossible 
(Dent,  xxxii.  39).  An  image  of  Chris- 
tian faith  which  believes  iu  the  coming 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  in  spite  of  all 
appearances  against  it^  because  God 
has  said  it  (John  v.  21 ;  Som.  iv.  17 ; 
2  Cor.  I  ^y—Faussei. 

Yer.  4.  "Prophesy  npon  these 
bones  *• — ^prophesy  over  them  ;  pro- 
claim God's  quickening  word  to  them. 

Ver.  6.  "  Te  shall  know  that  I  am 
the  Lord " — '*  by  the  actual  proof  of 
My  Divinity  which  I  will  give  in  re- 
viving Israel" — Faussei. 

Yer.  7.  '*  And  as  I  prophesied  there 
was  a  noise."  God's  voice  of  power  is 
followed  by  a  rustling  caused  by  the 


Dones  coming  rustling  np  firom  the 
surface  of  the  valley." — Lange. 

Yer.  8.  <<  The  sinews  and  the  flesh 
came  npon  them,  and  the  sUn  ooYsred 
them;  but  there  was  no  breath  in 
them."  "So  far,  they  were  only  co- 
hering in  order  as  unsightly  skeletons. 
I'he  next  step,  that  of  covering  them 
successively  with  sinews,  skin,  and 
flesh,  gives  them  beauty ;  but  still  no 
breath  of  life  in  them.  This  may 
imply  that  Israel  hereafter,  as  at  the 
restoration  from  Babylon  was  the 
case  in  part,  shall  return  to  Judea 
unconverted  at  flrst  (Zech.  xiii.  8,  9). 
Spiritually  a  man  may  assume  all  the 
semblances  of  spiritual  life,  yet  have 
none,  and  so  be  dead  before  God." — 
Fatuxet.  " There  is  reference  to  the  first 
creation  of  man.  There  also  the  lower 
element  comes  first  into  being,  then  the 
higher.  The  prophet  is  penetrated 
with  the  thought  that  the  real  misery 
of  the  people  is  the  moral  ruin.  The 
remedy,  therefore,  cannot  stop  at  the 
restoration  of  the  civic  state.  The 
main  thing  is  a  renewed  outpouring 
of  the  Spirit  and  the  restoration  of 
union  with  God  thereby  efiected,  which 
was  originally  accomplished  by  Ghxl 
breathing  into  man  the  breath  of  life." 
'^Rengsienberg. 

Yer.  9.  *'  Prophesy  nnto  the  wind  " 
— the  spirit  of  life,  or  life-breath.  For 
it  is  distinct  from  ''the  four  winds" 
from  which  it  is  summoned.  Lange 
says  what  is  here  spoken  of  is — the 
universal  spirituality  which  pervades 
all  creation.  The  Spirit  is  evidently 
here  referred  to  under  the  symbol  of 
the  wind.  His  influence  is  supreme 
and  operates  in  all  parts  of  the  earth. 

Yer.  10.  **  So  I  pnqphesied,  and  Um 
893 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XZXTIL 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIBL. 


breath  came  into  them  * — Buoh  honour 
God  gives  to  the  Divine  word  even  in 
the  mouth  of  a  roan  :  how  niucii  more 
when  in  the  mouth  of  the  Son  of  God  1 
(John  y.  S5-29^.  Though  this  chapter 
does  not  directly  prove  the  resurrection 
of  the  dead,  it  does  so  indirectly,  for 
it  takes  for  granted  the  future  fact  as 
one  recognised  bj  believing  Jews,  and 
so  made  the  image  of  their  national 
restoration  (Isa.  xxr.  8;  zxvi  10; 
Dan.  xii  2  ;  Hosea  rl  2  ;  xiii.  14). 

Yer.  11.  ''Our  bones  are  dried.'' 
•*  We  are  undone  " — Oesemm.  "  Ee- 
duced  to  ourselves" — Hitgig,  "It  is 
over  with  us  " — DdUzsck.  "  We  are 
cut  off  for  us.  The  for  us  points  out 
how  grievous  the  sad  fact  is  for  those 
concerned,  how  painfully  they  were 
affected  by  it  ^ — Hengstenberg,  There 
is  nothing  in  us  to  give  hope,  like  a 
withered  branch  cut  off  from  a  tree,  or 
a  limb  from  the  body.  The  national 
state  was  as  hopeless  of  revival  as 
marrowless  bones  of  reanimation. 
"Gut  off,**  separated,  shut  out  from 
God's  help. 

Ver.  12.  *' I  will  open  your  graves  " 

— the  abodes  of  the  exile,  since  the 
Jews  who  were  in  exile  considered 
themselves  like  dead  men. 

Yer.  14.  •'And  shall  put  My  Spirit 
in  you,  and  ye  ahaU  UYe."  "The 
inspiriting  and  quickening  for  a  home 
system  which  is  to  have  permanence, 
and  especially  in  the  case  of  a  people 
like  Israel,  will  of  necessity  be  spiritual 
and  religious  (Isa.  xiv.  1  ;  chap.  xvii. 
24  ;  xxii.  14  ;  xxxvl  36)."— Zan^tf. 
"  Wherever  within  the  Christian 
Church  a  new  state  of  death  arises, 
there  this  prophecy  always  comes  again 
into  force,  until  at  the  end  of  days  death 
be  fully  overcome." — Hengstenberg, 

Ver.  16.  "Take  thee  one  sticks- 
alluding  to  Num.  xviL  2,  the  tribal 
rod.  The  union  of  the  two  rods  was 
a  prophecy  in  action  of  the  brotherly 
onion  which  is  to  reunite  the  ten 
tribes  and  Judah.  As  their  severance 
under  Jeroboam  was  fraught  with  the 
394 


greatest  evil  to  the  covenant  people,  so 
die  first  result  of  both  being  joined  by 
the  Spirit  of  life  to  God  is,  they  be- 
come joined  together  under  the  one 
Covenant  King,  Messiah — David. — 
''Write  upon  it.  For  Judah,  and  for 
the  children  of  Israel  his  companions* 
— his  associates :  le..  For  Judah  and, 
besides  Benjamin  and  Levi,  those 
who  had  joined  themselves  to  him  of 
Ephraim,  Mauasseh,  Simeon,  Ashur, 
Zebulun,  Issachar,  as  having  the 
temple  and  lawful  priesthood  in  Ids 
borders  (2  Ohron.  xi  12,  13,  16 ;  xv. 
9;  XXX  11,  18).  The  latter  became 
identified  with  Judah  after  the  carry- 
ing away  of  the  ten  tribes,  and  re- 
turned with  Judah  from  Babylon,  and 
so  shall  be  associated  with  that  tribe  at 
the  future  restoration.  ''Than  take 
another  stick,  and  inite  upon  it,  For 
Joseph,  the  stick  of  Ephraim,  and  for 
all  the  house  of  Israel  his  companions." 
"Ephraim's  posterity  took  the  lead, 
not  only  of  the  other  descendants  of 
Joseph,  but  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel 
For  400  years,  during  the  period  of 
the  Judges,  with  Manasseh  and  Ben- 
jamin, its  dependent  tribes,  it  had 
formerly  taken  the  lead:  Shiloh  was 
its  religious  capital,  Shechem  its  civil 
capital  Gk>d  had  transferred  the 
birthright  from  Reuben,  for  dishonour- 
ing his  father's  bed,  to  Joseph,  whose 
representative  his  son  Ephraim,  though 
younger  than  his  brother  Manasseh, 
was  made  by  his  grandfather  Jacob 
(Gen.  xlviii.  19 ;  1  Chron.  v.  1).  From 
the  pre-eminence  of  Ephraim,  Israel  is 
attached  to  him  as  companions.  The 
'  all '  in  this  case,  not  in  that  of  Judah, 
which  has  attached  as  companions  only 
,  some  of  the  children  of  Israel,  implies 
that  the  btUk  of  the  ten  tribes  did  not 
return  at  the  restoration  from  Babylon, 
but  is  and  shall  continue  distinct  from 
Judah  until  the  coming  union  at  the 
restoration." — Faussei, 

Yer.  19.  "And  they  shall  he  one 
in  mine  hand.**  ''The  interpretation 
keeps  firm  hold  of  the  symbolic  action 
— the  union  by  and  in  God,  as  opposed 
to  the  separation  by  and  in  Ephraim.* 
— Langs. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL. 


CBAB,  UXVIL 


Yer.  22.  ^I  will  make  them  one 
natioiL''  The  now  plainly  expressed 
8i<:nification  of  the  stick :  the  one  nation 
will  be  one  kingdom.  "  And  one  king 
shall  be  king  to  them  alL"  "Not 
Zerubbabely  who  was  not  a  king  either 
in  fact  or  name,  and  who  ruled  over 
bat  a  few  Jews,  and  that  only  for  a 
few  years,  whereas  the  king  here  reigns 
for  ever.  Messiah  is  meant  (chap, 
xzxiy.  23,  24).  The  union  of  Judah 
and  Israel  under  King  Messiah  sym- 
bolises the  union  of  Jews  and  Gentiles 
under  Him,  partly  now,  perfectly  here- 
after (yer.  24 ;  John  z.  16)." — FausseL 

Yer.  23.  *<  Neither  shall  they  defUe 
thamselyes  with  idols."  *'Siuce  sin, 
and  especially  idolatry,  had  contributed 
to  the  separation  spoken  of,  the  dis- 
course turns  to  that.  The  worship  of 
idols  islocalised  transgression." — Lange. 

Yer.  24.  ''DaTidlCy  servant  shall  be 
king  over  them."    See  note  on  yer.  22, 

Yer.  25.  '*  They  shall  dwell  therein 
for  ever"  (Isa.  Iz.  21;  Joel  iii.  20; 
Amos  iz.  15). 


Yer.  26.  ''I  will  make  a  covenant 
of  peace" — better  than  the  old  leigal 
covenant,  because  an  unchangeable 
covenant  of  grace  (chap,  xxxiv.  25 ;  Isa. 
Iv.  3 ;  Jer.  xzxiL  40).  Will  guarantee 
them  security  from  all  hostile  enemies. 
"And  I  will  place  them."  ''God  now 
Himself  orders  and  determines  every- 
thing concerning  them — sets  them,  in 
opposition  to  their  former  fluctuating, 
because  self-ordered,  condition." — Fair- 
bairn,  '*1  will  set  Mj  sanctuary  in 
the  midst  of  them."  The  essence  of 
the  sanctuary  is  the  presence  of  God 
among  them. 

Yer.  28.  "  The  heathen  shall  know 
that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify  Israel" 
"This  separation  and  preference,  this 
marking-off  from  the  profane  world, 
which  constitutes  the  idea  of  sancti- 
fication,  follows  from  this,  that  God's 
sanctuary  is  in  Israel,  that  He  dwells 
among  them  with  all  the  fulness  of 
His  blessings  and  gifts.  The  natural 
consequence  of  this  recognition  com- 
pelled by  facts  is,  that  the  heathen 
seek  for  admittance  among  this  people." 
— Eengstenherg. 


EOMILETICS. 

The  Besusoitation  of  an  Effbtb  Natiov. 

(Vers.  1-14.) 

In  this  paragraph  we  have  another  example  of  the  bold  and  startling  imagery 
familiar  to  the  genius  of  Ezekiel,  and  of  his  vivid  insight  into  the  possibilities 
of  Divine  power.  To  his  realising  faith,  the  bleached  and  desiccated  skeletons 
of  the  valley  are  a  formidable  army  of  living  and  moving  forces.  The  concep- 
tion of  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  on  so  vast  a  scale  indicates  a  remarkable 
advance  in  that  age  of  the  revelation  of  what  God  can  do  for  His  people. 
Observe — 

L  That  the  resuscitation  of  an  effete  nation  seems  a  physical  impossi- 
bility. 1.  The  nation  is  lifeless  and  hopeless  (ver.  1,  2).  The  skeletons  are 
dislocated  and  scattered ;  the  bones  are  very  dry  and  crumbling  into  dust. 
Though  not  actually  buried,  they  are  slowly  burying  themselves  in  their  pro- 
gressive decay.  The  evidence  of  death  is  complete.  It  is  beyond  the  power 
of  any  known  physical  law  to  breathe  the  ghastly  fragments  into  life.  A 
nation,  or  an  individual,  so  utterly  defunct  seems  beyond  the  pos^bility  of 
recovery.  Saith  the  proverb,  ^*From  privation  to  possession  there  is  no  return,^ 
Well  might  Israel  say,  "Our  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope  is  lost;  we  are 
cut  off  from  our  parts"  (ver.  11).      2.  Its  resurrection  not  impossible  to  Ood 

395 


Digitized  by 


Google 


QBAF.  xxxTiL  HOMILETIC  OOMMSNTARY:  BZBKIEL. 

(▼er.  3).     If  Ezekiel  had  been  asked  the  question  by  any  other  than  JehoTah, 
''Can  these  bones  livet"  he  would  have  promptly  answered,  "No;  it  is  im- 

Possible. "  It  is  beyond  the  reach  of  human  philosophy  to  put  life  into  dry 
ones,  and  it  passes  the  wit  of  human  politics  to  restore  a  captive  and  scattered 
nation.  But  the  prophet  had  already  learned  not  to  limit  the  power  of  Gk>d, 
and  he  reverently  and  falteringly  answered,  **  Lord,  Thou  knowest : "  if  it  can 
be  done  and  is  to  be  done,  Thou  alone  must  do  iti  All  things  are  possible  to 
Gh>d.     His  power  is  limited  only  by  His  will 

IL  That  the  resuscitation  of  an  effete  nation  is  accompliahed  only  \(f 
Divine  power.  1.  By  Divine  power  worHng  through  authorised  human  agencif 
(vers.  4-8).  The  prophet  was  directed  to  prophesy  over  the  bones ;  the  terms 
of  the  message  were  put  into  his  lips,  and  the  results  of  his  preaching  were 
Divinely  indicated  to  him.  He  obeyed  the  Divine  mandate ;  he  preached ;  the 
silent  valley  rustled  and  rattled  with  the  noise  of  bone  fitting  into  bone,  and 
while  he  gazed  there  grew  as  from  the  soil  an  innumerable  mass  of  perfected 
human  forma.  But  here  the  limitation  of  human  agency,  even  when  actins 
under  Divine  supervision,  is  plainly  indicated.  The  bodies  were  prone  and 
lifeless :  *'  there  was  no  breath  in  them."  While  startled  and  terrified  at  the 
effect  of  his  words,  as  if  an  army  of  Fran  kens  teins  had  been  summoned  from 
the  dust,  the  prophet  felt  his  own  utter  helplessness.  He  was  powerless  to  ad- 
vance the  development  a  single  step  further.  It  was  an  experience  that  is  often 
familiar  to  the  earnest  preacher.  He  may  sway  his  audience  with  his  impas* 
sioned  eloquence  till  they  are  roused  into  boisterous  enthusiasm  or  dissolved 
in  tears  ;  but  there  his  power  ends.  To  create  a  moral  and  spiritual  change  is 
beyond  his  province,  it  is  said  that  on  one  occasion,  when  Chrysostom  was 
greeted  by  his  congregation  with  a  storm  of  delighted  applause  because  of  his 
overwhelming  eloquence,  he  besought  them  with  tears  to  forget  the  preacher 
and  look  to  God,  who  alone  can  renew  the  heart  and  reform  the  life.  2.  By  the 
direct  inspiration  of  the  Divine  breath  (vers.  9,  10).  Life  is  the  breath  of  Qod. 
Still,  under  Divine  direction,  the  prophet  invokes  the  help  of  the  life-givine 
Spirit.  A  mysterious  breath  passes  over  the  prostrate  forms ;  they  move  and 
leap  to  their  feet,  "  an  exceeding  great  army."  The  Spirit  that  renews  the  face 
of  the  earth,  robing  it  with  velvet  verdure  and  decorating  it  with  nodding 
flowers,  can  alone  raise  the  dead  to  life  and  adorn  the  soul  with  spiritual  beauty* 
A  lady  who  recently  visited  the  Fijian  Archipelago  writes: — "As  I  lived  for 
two  years  in  the  midst  of  this  kindly,  courteous  people,  and  marked  tlie  reverent 
devoutness  of  their  lives  and  the  simple  earnestness  of  their  bearing  at  the 
never-failing  morning  and  evening  family  worship  and  frequent  church  services, 
I  found  it  hard  to  believe  the  facts  related  to  me  by  reliable  eye-witnesses  of 
the  appalling  scenes  of  carnage,  fighting,  human  sacrifices,  debasing  idolatry, 
and  loathsome  cannibal  feasts  which  five,  ten,  or  fifteen  years  previously  formed 
the  incidents  of  daily  life  in  districts  where  now  English  ladies  and  their  chil* 
dren  may  travel  or  settle  in  perfect  security."  What  had  wrought  this  change! 
The  breath  of  the  Divine  Spirit  had  blown  through  those  lovely  islands  and 
transformed  the  moral  wastes. 

III.  That  the  resuscitation  of  an  effete  nation  is  a  snggestiye  revelation  of 
the  Divine  character  (vers.  11-14).  1.  That  God  alone  has  absolute  power  over 
lije  and  death.  It  is  the  vanity  of  man  to  set  too  high  a  value  upon  his  own 
works.  He  imagines  he  can  work  out  his  own  regeneration ;  but  when  he 
touches  the  mysterious  edge  of  life  and  death  he  is  baffled  and  compelled  to 
confess  his  helplessness.  It  is  the  solitary  and  incommunicable  prerogative  of 
the  Godhead  to  educe  life  out  of  death.  The  supreme  greatness  of  Qod  is 
evidenced  in  the  exercise  of  His  resurrection  power.  S.  That  the  nations  should 
396 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OHAP.  XZZTIL 


learn  to  acknowledge  and  adore  the  true  Ood.  "Ye  shall  know  tiiat  I  am  the 
Lord:  that  I  the  Li>rd  have  spoken  it  and  performed  it"  (vers.  13,  14).  The 
deities  of  the  heathen  could  do  nothing  for  their  votaries,  either  to  prevent 
their  ruin  or  to  rescue  them  from  it.  There  is  but  one  living  and  true  G^d, 
and  the  only  hope  of  moral  revival  and  salvation  for  humanity  is  in  Him. 
"Thou  hast  made  us  for  Thyself,'*  wrote  Augustine,  "and  our  hearts  can  have 
no  rest  until  they  rest  in  Thee." 

LESSONa — 1.  The  nation  that  ignores  Ood  must  perish.  2.  One  nation  is  Divinely 
favoured  that  other  nations  may  be  Messed,  3.  Ood  trill  be  glorified  either  tn  the  rise 
or  fall  of  nations. 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  1-14.  "Seized  by  the  hand  of 
the  Spirit,  Ezekiel  is  borne  aloft.  He 
is  carried  away  through  mid-air  and 
set  down  in  a  lonely  valley  among  the 
hills  of  a  distant  land.  A&  some  former 
period  it  appears  to  have  been  the 
scene  of  a  gr^at  battle.  There  hosts 
had  sustained  the  charge  of  hosts,  and 
crowns  perhaps  were  staked  and  won. 
The  peace  of  these  solitudes  had  been 
rudely  broken  by  the  shrieks  of  the 
wounded,  the  wild  shouts  of  the  vic- 
tors, the  clash  of  arms,  and  the  savage 
roar  of  war.  It  was  silent,  calm  now. 
The  storm  was  down ;  but  the  tempest 
that  swept  over  it  had  left  it  strewn 
with  wrecks.  The  dead  had  been  left 
unburied.  They  mouldered  where  they 
fell,  the  skull  rattled  in  the  cloven  hel- 
met, the  sword  of  the  warrior  lay  rust- 
ing beside  his  skeleton,  and  the  handle 
was  still  in  the  relaxed  grasp  of  the 
bony  fingers.  On  these  unsepulchred 
corpses  the  birds  of  the  air  had  sum- 
mered and  the  wild  beasts  of  the  field 
had  wintered.  The  rain  had  washed  and 
the  sun  had  bleached  the  bones  which 
the  ravens  had  picked  bare — they  were 
white  and  dry.  In  these  grim  and 
ghastly  skeletons  a  doleful  picture  of 
death  was  spread  out  before  the  pro- 
phet. In  all  the  scene  which  he  sur- 
veyed there  was  neither  sign  nor  sound 
of  life,  but,  it  may  be,  the  croak  of  the 
raven,  the  howl  of  the  famished  wolf, 
or  the  echo  of  his  own  solitary  foot- 
fall. Here  Ezekiel  was  standing,  a 
lonely  man,  amid  the  mouldering  dead, 
when  a  voice  made  him  start.  It  came 
from  the  skies,  charged  with  the  strange 
question — 'Son  of  man,  can  these  bones 


live)'  So  soon  as,  afber  addressing 
the  bones,  the  prophet  addresses  his 
Gk>d,  there  came  from  heaven  a  living, 
life-giving  breath.  It  blows  down  the 
valley,  and  as,  in  passing,  it  kisses  the 
icy  lips  of  the  dead,  and  stirs  their  hair 
and  fans  their  cheek,  man  after  man 
springs  to  hb  feet^  until  the  field  which 
Ezekiel  found  covered  with  ghastly 
skeletons  is  crowded  with  a  mighty 
army,  all  armed  for  battle  and  war — ^ 
the  marshalled  host  of  Qod." — Outhrie. 
—  "There  can  be  no  reasonable 
doubt  as  to  the  leading  scope  and  pur- 
pose of  this  remarkable  vision.  It  is 
intended  to  counteract  the  feeling  of 
despair  which  had  succeeded  to  the 
opposite  one  of  carnal  security  and 
presumptuous  confidence  which  at  an 
earlier  period  had  wrought  so  disas- 
trously among  the  people.  Now  that 
they  were  reduced  to  so  hapless  and 
shattered  a  condition,  the  glowing  de- 
lineations the  prophet  had  been  draw- 
ing of  a  happy  future  seemed  as 
visionary  to  their  minds  as  formerly 
had  appeared  his  dark  forebodinjra  of 
impending  distress  and  ruin.  They 
felt  as  if  they  had  become  like  bones 
djjA  and  scattered  at  the  grave's 
nillTi<|fc  mid  destitute  of  everything  on 
whichthey  could  build  any  reasonable 
prospect  of  restored  felicity.  The  pro- 
phet therefore  meets  them  on  their 
own  ground.  He  admits  that,  as  com- 
pared with  the  elevated  prospects  he 
had  been  unfolding,  they  were  in  them- 
selves no  better  than  lifeless  skeletons, 
but  at  the  same  time  shows  that  even 
this  could  raise  no  barrier  against  the 
realisation  of  the  better  future,  sinea 

397 


Digitized  by 


Google 


0B4P.  XIJLflL 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTARr:  BZBKIBL. 


Uiey  had  to  do  with  the  word  of  Him 
who  is  equally  able  to  make  alive  as 
to  kill.  And  it  most  have  been  im- 
possible for  any  thoughtful  and  pious 
Israelite  to  enter  into  the  application 
made  of  this  vision  to  the  temporal 
resuscitation  of  Israel's  prostrate  con- 
dition, without  perceiving  how  it  also 
involved,  for  all  true  believers,  the 
future  resurrection  of  their  bodies  from 
the  power  of  death." — Fairhakm. 

—  "  Besides  the  deliverance  of  the 
Jews  from  Babylon,  this  vision  is 
a  lively  representation  of  a  threefold 
resurrection.  1.  Of  the  resurrection  of 
souls  from  the  death  of  sin  to  the  life 
of  righteousness,  to  a  holy,  heavenly, 
spiritual,  and  Divine  life  by  the  power 
of  Divine  grace  accompanying  the  word 
of  ChrUt  (John  v.  24,  25).  2.  The 
resurrection  of  the  Gospel  Church,  or 
any  part  of  it^  from  an  afflicted  state 
to  liberty  and  peace.  3.  The  resurrec- 
tion of  the  body  at  the  great  day, 
especially  the  bodies  of  believers,  to 
life  eternal" — Benson. 

Yer.  1-10.  Lessons  fVom  the  Valley 
of  Vision.  "  1.  The  text  presents  us  with 
a  picture  of  the  spiritual  state  of  owr  race 
— '  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins/  2. 
With  an  iUustraiion  of  the  human  instrth 
mentality  God  generally  employs  in  the 
work  of  quickening  the  dead  in  sin — the 
preaching  of  the  Gospel.  3.  With  a 
view  of  the  Divine  agency  employed  in 
the  work  of  quickening  the  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins — the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit."— r.  D.  Anderson,  B.A. 

—  The  Secret  of  Successful  Preach- 
ing and  True  BeTivaL  "  1.  The  first 
thing  necessary  is  a  Divinely  appointed 
sphere.  The  prophet  had  to  spealc 
his  message  in  a  particular  place.  One 
reason  why  men  are  not  successful 
to-day  is  because  they  are  not  where 
God  designed  them  to  be.  Not 
ministers  simply,  but  Christian  men 
in  business,  for  secular  professions  are 
as  much  in  God's  hands  as  religious 
ones.  2.  A  second  requirement  is  con- 
tact with  the  misery  to  he  removed.  The 
prophet  was  not  commanded  to  stand 
a  great  distance  otf  and  proclaim  his 
message.      'The  Spirit  of  the  Lord 

S»8 


set  him  down  in  the  midst  of  the 
valley  and  caused  him  to  pass  by 
them  round  about,'  and  thus  he  was 
brought  into  close  contact  with  his 
worlc  We  must  not  say,  *  The  people 
must  come  up  to  us;'  we  must  go 
down  to  them,  sympathise  with  them, 
identify  ourselves  with  them.  3.  The 
next  requirement  is  confidence  in  Ood 
(ver.  3^.  4.  A  fourth  requirement  is  an 
inspirea  message  (vers.  4-6).  We  ought 
always  to  listen  for  what  God  says  ; 
and  if  the  vision  tarry  we  should 
aeonise  in  prayer  —  *  Lord,  tell  as 
uniat  to  say  and  how  to  say  it.'  5. 
There  must  be  a  willingness  to  declare  the 
message  given.  '  So  I  prophesied  as  I 
was  commanded.'  6.  JFhen  oil  these 
requirements  are  met,  the  result  must  be 
a  manifestation  of  Divine  power.  We 
have,  in  the  mode  in  which  this  power 
was  manifested,  the  indication  of  a 
true  revivaL  It  is  gradual  There 
was  (1.)  an  effect  produced.  *  There 
was  a  noise.'  (2.)  The  effect  became 
visible.  *  Behold  a  shaking.'  (3.) 
The  visible  effect  took  a  particular 
form.  *  The  bones  came  together,' 
&c.  (4.)  The  Holy  Ghost  came  down 
and  life  is  given.  '  The  breath  came 
into  them,  and  they  lived  and  stood  np 
on  their  feet' " — The  Lay  PrecuAer. 

—  Spiritual    Besmirection.       **  1. 
The  condition  of  the  world.    (1.)  Spiri- 
tually^ead — •  Bones.'    (2.)  Hopelessly 
(3.)  Universally  so 


-*  Drv  bones.' 
— •  A  valley  full.'  S.  The  means  for  its 
recovery.  (1.)  A  Divine  appointment — 
preaching.  (2.)  The  claim  of  attention. 
(3.)  The  offer  of  salvation.  3.  The 
wonderful  result,  (l.)  The  Gospel  is 
accompanied  by  Divine  power.  (2.) 
The  Spirit  is  essential  to  complete 
success.  (3.)  In  the  use  of  the  means 
success  is  certain." — Pulpit  Analyst. 

Vers.  1,  2.  In  the  Presence  of  Death. 
1.  A  humbling  spectacle.  2.  A  solemn 
reminder  of  our  own  mortality.  3.  An 
occasion  of  sorrow.*  4.  We  see  the 
superficiality  of  all  things  earthly.  0. 
We  are  taught  the  necessity  of  a  moral 
and  spiritual  preparedness.  6.  Find 
our  true  consolation  in  the  loving  and 
eternal  Gk>d. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILSTW  COMMBNTABT:  BZBKIEL. 


OHAP.  XZZfIL 


Ver.  1.  "  This  valley  is  found  indeed 
everywhere.  In  other  words.  Is  there 
not  plenty  of  dead  bones  t  The  best 
thing  isy  that  Qod  still  cares  even  for 
snch*'' — Lange. 

Yer.  2.  "  As  Christ  often  improved 
His  miracles  by  a  spiritual  torn  of 
thought^  so  we  may  improve  this 
astonishing  restoration  of  the  Jews  to 
illustrate  the  conversion  of  sinners. 
Man  in  his  fallen  state  is  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins;  he  has  lost  the 
life  of  God.  He  is  dry  and  parched, 
for  in  his  flesh  dwelleth  no  good  thing. 
He  has  lain  a  long  time  in  that  most 
piteous  situation,  so  that  he  is  not 
only  dry,  but  with  man  there  is  no 
hope  of  his  conversion.  The  calamity 
is  not  solitary  but  universal — •  Behold 
there  were  very  many  in  the  open 
valley.'  To  raise  and  recover  fallen 
man,  ministers  must  not  only  be  im- 
pelled with  the  spirit  of  faith  and  love, 
but  they  most  mix  among  the  wicked, 
as  the  physicians  with  the  sick.  We 
may  stay  in  our  closets  learning  our 
Master's  wisdom  till  we  neglect  to  do 
oar  Master's  work.  We  must  mix 
among  the  dry  bones,  watch  their 
passions,  trace  their  habits,  and  learn 
their  evasions  of  conscience  and  of  the 
Qospel.  Ministers  must  not  despair, 
though  the  cases  may  seem  hopeless." 
—Sfiddiff&. 

Ver.  8.  "  0  Lord,  Thou  knowest." 
Human  Perplexity — 1.  Finds  refuge 
in  the  Divine  omniscience.  2.  Eeve- 
rently  acknowledges  the  illimitableness 
of  the  Divine  power.  3.  Teaches  the 
soul  to  render  unquestioning  obedience 
to  the  Divine  command. 

—  **  The  Russians  in  a  difficult 
question  are  accustomed  to  answer — 
'God  and  our  great  Duke  know  all 
this.' "— TVopp. 

—  ^  Since  Gt>d  is  omniscient  and 
omnipotent,  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead  is  possible;  but  since  He  has 
also  promised  it  and  cannot  break  His 
word,  it  is  also  certain  (John  v.  25)." 
—SUvrke. 

Ver.  4.    "0  ye  dry  bones,  hear 


the  word  of  the  Lord."  An  Urgent 
Message.  Addressed — L  To  a  dead 
nationality.  2.  To  a  dead  Church. 
S.  To  a  dead  faith.     4.  To  dead  souls. 

Ver.  6.  "Neither  need  the  resur- 
rection of  the  dead  be  held  a  thing 
incredible  concerning  God's  power  and 
truth  (Acts  xxvi  8).  The  keeping 
green  of  Noah's  olive-tree  in  the  time 
of  the  flood,  the  blossoming  of  Aaron's 
dry  rod,  the  flesh  and  sinews  coming 
to  these  dry  bones  and  the  breath 
entering  into  them,  what  were  they 
all  but  so  many  lively  emblems  of  the 
resurrection  1 " — Trapp, 

Yer.  6.  '' Sinews  tie  the  bones  to- 
gether. Flesh  fills  up  the  hoUownesses, 
and  being  full  of  muscles,  helps  motion. 
Skin,  as  the  upper  silken  garment, 
covers  all  with  a  clear  and  blushing 
colour.  Breath  lastly  must  be  added* 
All  this  God  declares  He  will  do."-^ 
PooL 

Vers.  7-10.  The  Successful  Preacher 
— 1.  Is  Divinely  commissioned.  2.  Is 
careful  to  declare  only  the  message 
Grod  reveals  to  Him.  "So  I  pro- 
phesied as  I  was  commanded"  (vers. 
7,  10).  3.  Recognises  the  necessity  of 
prayer  for  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit. 
"  Gome  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath, 
and  breathe  upon  these  slain"  (ver. 
9).  4.  Is  honoured  in  seeing  the  iruit 
of  his  labours.  "  The  breath  came  into 
them,  and  they  lived  "  (ver.  10). 

—  "  Three  degrees  or  processes  have 
been  remarked  in  this  mystic  vision. 
When  the  prophet  was  commanded  to 
prophesy,  to  foretell,  on  the  authority 
of  God,  that  there  should  be  a  restorar 
tion  to  their  own  land — 1.  There  was 
a  noise,  which  was  followed  by  a  general 
shaking,  during  which  the  bones  be* 
came  arranged  and  united.  2.  The 
flesh  and  skin  came  upon  them,  so 
that  the  dry  bones  were  no  longer 
seen.  3.  The  spirit  or  soul  came  into 
them,  and  they  stood  up  perfectly 
vivified.  Perhaps  these  might  be  illus- 
trated by  three  periods  of  time  which 
marked  the  regeneration  of  the  Jewish 
polity : — 1.  The  publication  of  the  edict 

399 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.XZXm. 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


of  Cyrus  in  behalf  of  the  Jews,  which 
caused  a  general  shaking  or  stir  among 
the  people/  so  that  the  several  families 
began  to  approach  each  other  and  pre- 
pare for  their  return  to  Judea  (EjEra 
i  2,  3).  But  thoueh  partially  restored, 
they  were  obliged  to  discontinue  the 
rebuilding  of  the  Temple.  2.  The  edict 
published  by  Darius  in  the  second  year 
of  his  reign  (Ezra  \y,  23,  24),  which 
removed  the  impediments  thrown  in 
the  way  of  the  Jews  ^Ezra  vi.  6,  7^. 
S.  The  mission  of  Nehemiah  with 
orders  from  Artazerzes  to  complete 
the  building  of  the  Temple  and  the 
city  (Neh.  il  7).  Then  the  Jews  be- 
came a  great  army,  and  found  them- 
selves in  sufficient  force  to  defend 
themselves  and  city  from  all  their 
enemies." — A,  Clarke, 

—  "The  vision  secondarily  sets  forth 
the  spiritual  resurrection  of  the  people 
of  God  now  through  the  regenerating 
power  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  then 
hereafter  their  literal  resurrection  also, 
through  the  same  Spirit  (Itom.  viil 
11 ;  Phil.  iii.  20).  It  needs  the  same 
Almighty  power  to  raise  a  sinner  from 
his  natural  state  of  spiritual  death  as 
it  does  to  raise  a  corpse  to  life.  To 
man  both  alike  are  impossible.  But 
faith  believes  in  the  power  and  will 
of  God  to  quicken  the  dead  where  to 
sense  the  case  would  seem  hopeless. 
The  spiritual  resurrection  is  not  in- 
stantaneously complete,  but  is  pro- 
gressive. At  first  there  is  the  outward 
and  inward  preparation  for  the  recep- 
tion of  the  Spirit  of  life,  and  then  at 
last  the  breath  of  life  enters  the  man, 
and  he  becomes  truly  born  again  of 
the  Spirit.  Let  us  never  be  satisfied 
with  the  outward  semblances  of  spiri- 
tual life — the  bones,  sinews,  flesh,  and 
skin — which  give  the  form  of  beauty 
and  life,  but  which  are  not  the  life 
itself.  None  but  living  believers  shall 
stand  before  the  living  Qod.  Prayer 
is  the  'means  whereby  to  obtain  the 
breath  of  spiritual  life,  both  for  our- 
selves and  for  others  (ver.  9 ;  SoL  Song 
iv.  l6y—Faus8eL 

Ver.  7.  "  If  the  voice  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  is  heard  in  the  hearty  then  there 
400 


is  a  movement  of  the  heart,  and  blessed 
is  he  who  obeys  the  impulse.'' — Siarek 

Ver.  8.  "The  spirit  and  not  the 
uniform  is  that  which  tnily  unifies^ 
and  the  consciences  of  men  are  not  to 
be  dealt  with  as  the  regimental  tailor 
deals  with  soldiers." — Lange. 

Yer.  9.  "  When  ministers  succeed  in 
promoting  a  law-work  on  the  mind^ 
always  in  due  time  mixing  comfort 
with  terror,  they  must  turn  their  eyes 
to  heaven  and  become  advocates  and 
intercessors  for  the  promised  Com- 
forter. Our  sermons  nave  too  much 
of  the  didactic;  we  divide,  explain, 
and  teach.  We  dwell  on  words  and 
truths  already  understood.  But  after 
setting  good  things  before  an  audience^ 
why  may  we  not  assist  piety  in  utter- 
ing the  wishes  of  their  hearts  to  obtain 
themt  The  frequent  prayers  which 
St.  Paul  mixes  with  his  discourses  iure 
the  most  pathetic  and  touching  parts 
of  his  writings." — Suidiffe. 

—  "  Vision  of  the  Dry  Bonae — a 
theme  for  a  missionary  sermon.  1.  A 
striking  description  of  the  religious  stale 
of  the  heathen  world,  (1.)  The  persons 
made  the  subject  of  this  prophetic 
vision  are  represented  as  dead.  (2.) 
The  number  of  the  dead  forms  another 
part  of  the  picture — *the  valley  was 
full  of  bones.'  (3.)  They  were  un- 
buried.  The  destructive  effects  of  sin, 
the  sad  ravages  of  death,  lay  exposed 
and  open  to  the  sun.  (4.)  The  state  of 
the  dead — *  the  bones  were  very  dry.' 
Under  this  strong  figure  the  hopeless- 
ness of  their  condition  is  represented. 
H  The  means  hy  which  its  mystical 
resurrection  is  to  be  effected.  (1.)  The 
ministry  of  the  Word  is  the  grand 
means  appointed  by  God  for  the  sal- 
vation of  the  world.  (2.)  The  words 
may  be  considered  as  an  injunction  on 
the  preachers  of  the  Gk>spel — 'Pro- 
phesy unto  these  dry  bones.'  (3.) 
The  injunction  'Prophesy'  respects 
not  only  ministers,  but  you  also  who 
have  a  private  station  in  the  Church. 
3.  The  certain  success  which  should  follow 
the  application  of  the  appointed  means, 
(1.)  Our  confidence  rests  on  the  power 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTia  OOMMENTART:  BZBKIBL. 


OHAP.  XXXVIL 


of  the  Gk)spel.  (2  )  Our  confidence  in 
the  certain  success  of  the  Qospel  rests 
also  on  experience.  (3.)  Prophecy  con- 
firms the  certainty  of  success.'' — R, 
JFaisan. 

Ver.  10.  "*An  exceeding  great 
army.'  A  power,  or  army  of  strong, 
courageous,  and  well-ordered  soldiers. 
The  phrase  in  the  Hebrew  is  very 
full — a  power,  or  great  host,  very,  very 
great.  Thus  they  rise  that  the  prophet 
and  we  might  know  how  safe  they 
would  be  in  themselves,  and  how 
terrible  to  their  enemies." — PooL 

Vers.  11-14.  National  Life— 1.  De- 
pendent on  God  for  its  worth  and 
permanence.  2.  Sinks  into  decay  and 
oblivion  when  it  ignores  God.  3. 
Indebted  for  its  revival  to  the  good- 
ness and  power  of  God. 

Ver.  11.  "*Our  hope  is  lost.'  Let 
them  hope  as  hope  can :  we  have 
hanged  up  all  our  hopes  now  that  the 
city  and  Temple  are  destroyed.  Thus 
earnal  confidence,  as  it  riseth  up  into  a 


corky,  frothy  hope  when  it  seeth  suffl- 
cient  help,  so  it  sitteth  down  into  a 
faithless,  sullen  discontent  and  despair 
when  it  can  see  no  second  causes." — 
Trapp. 

—  The  language  of  unbelief  makes 
the  calamity  great,  and  (Jod's  power 
to  help  littlei 

Vers.  12,13.  "Though  your  captivity 
be  as  death,  your  prisons  and  confine- 
ments  close  as  the  grave,  yet  I  will 
open  those  graves.  I  will  lift  you  out, 
lend  you  a  hand  to  bring  you  out  with 
life  and  strength.  And  I  will  be  your 
guide,  that  you  may  know  the  way ;  be 
your  support^  that  you  may  be  able  to 
go ;  and  your  guard  and  defence  against 
dangers  of  the  way,  that  you  may 
certainly  come  into  your  own  land. 
When  your  restitution  to  your  own 
land  and  your  prosperity  in  it,  when 
your  growth  to  strength  and  power  shall 
be  so  miraculously  effected,  then  you 
shall  acknowledge  and  publish  the 
glory  of  My  power,  faithfulnesa^  good- 
ness, and  wisdom." — FooL 


HOMILETICS. 

The  TTnitt  of  thb  Kingdom  ot  Goik 

(Vers.  15-28.) 

I  Promoted  l^  the  blending  of  hoBtUe  nationalities  into  a  nniversal  lirother- 
liood  (vers.  15-22).  We  have  here  another  example  of  the  realism  of  Ezekiel's 
method  of  teaching.  By  the  bringing  together  of  two  separate  rods,  or  sceptres, 
till  they  appeared  as  one  in  the  hand  of  ^e  prophet,  he  illustrated  the  approach- 
ing union  of  the  rival  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel  Tiie  misfortunes  of  the 
past  had  been  intensified  by  the  rupture  of  the  kingdom  of  David.  Internecine 
wars  had  weakened  both  North  and  South  and  left  the  exhausted  tribes  an  easy 
prey  to  the  heathen  invaders.  The  removal  of  the  ten  tribes  into  Assyrian 
exile  more  than  a  century  and  a  half  before  toned  down  the  bitterness  of 
ancient  animosities  in  the  breasts  of  the  two  tribes  still  left  in  the  land  ;  and 
when  they,  in  their  turn,  suffered  the  miseries  of  exile,  a  spirit  of  brotherhood 
was  awakened  among  all  the  tribes,  and  they  yearned  for  the  time  when  they 
should  again  become  a  united  nation.  The  prophets  no  less  than  the  people 
looked  forward  to  this  desirable  consummation.  They  saw  that  the  fiires  of 
afiliction  were  already  fusing  the  broken  and  scattered  elements  into  a  strongly 
welded  national  unity.  But  in  the  wider  scope  of  the  prophetic  vision,  the 
onion  of  Israel  and  Judah  was  regarded  as  a  type  of  the  future  union  of  all 
nations  in  the  universal  kingdom  of  Messiah.  In  the  march  of  the  centuries 
and  the  advancement  of  knowledge  the  nations  are  being  drawn  closer  to  each 

2  0  401 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OUP.  zxxim.  HOMtlBTW  OOMMBNTJJtT:  BZBKIEL. 

other;  war,  hatred,  and  jealousy  will  ultimately  disappear,  and  peace  and  ligh^ 
•onsneia  eyerywhere  prevail : — 

^  O  toenef  loriMBtiiig  faUe,  and  yet  trae, 
Soenet  of  aooompliibad  bUas  I    Which  who  oaa  ••% 
Though  but  in  distent  proipeot,  ftnd  not  feel 
Hif  soul  refreehed  with  f orstaite  of  the  joy  f 
Antipftthiee  are  none.    In  the  heart 
No  paadon  tonchee  a  discordant  string. 
Bat  all  is  harmony  and  love.** — CSoiopar. 

IL  Admowledges  the  anpromeanthozity  of  the  one  Divine  King.  ^^IwOlmake 
them  one  uation,  and  one  king  shall  be  king  to  them  all.  David  My  servant 
shall  be  king  over  them,  and  they  all  shall  have  one  shepherd.  My  servant 
David  shall  be  their  prince  for  ever  "  (vers.  22-25).  It  was  plainly  revealed  that 
the  coming  Messiah-King  was  to  be  a  descendant  of  David,  the  Jewish  hero, 
and  both  prophets  and  people  expected  that  he  would  restore  the  kingdom  on 
the  lines  of  its  ancient  constitution,  for  they  knew  nothing  higher.  The  con- 
ception of  a  purely  spiritual  kingdom  was  altogether  beyond  the  range  of  human 
thought,  and  was  not  dreamed  of  till  proclaimed  by  the  lips  of  our  Lord.  Even 
then  the  idea  was  but  slowly  comprehended  by  the  best-instructed  Jewish  minds ; 
and  the  rejection  of  the  true  Messiah  by  the  bulk  of  the  Jewish  nation  shows 
how  unwilling  or  incapable  they  were  to  take  in  the  sublime  notion.  It  is  only 
by  the  light  of  the  New  Testament  that  a  later  age  has  been  able  to  realise 
the  far-reaching  significance  of  the  prophetic  vision.  The  true  Israel  is  not  a 
political  but  a  spiritual  community,  gathered  out  of  all  nations  under  heaven, 
compacted  and  unified  into  a  spiritual  kingdom,  acknowledging  and  serving  one 
Divine  Buler,  who  is  King  of  kings  and  I^rd  of  lords. 

III.  EstaUiflhed  by  the  DiTinely  imparted  righteonaness  of  its  anldecta  (vers. 

23,  24).  Sin  disintegrates  and  scatters,  as  the  chequered  history  of  the  Jewish 
nation  proves.  But  the  stability  and  permanent  unity  of  the  Messianic  king- 
dom will  be  ensured  in  the  fact  that  it  is  built  up  and  established  in  right- 
eousness. It  is  composed  of  sanctified  natures  from  which  the  enfeebling  defile- 
ment of  iniquity  will  be  cleansed,  and  the  changed  lives  of  its  subjects  will  be 
evidenced  in  practical  holiness.  ''  They  shall  walk  in  My  judgments,  and  observe 
My  statutes  and  do  theuL"    It  is : — 

^  The  kingdom  of  eoteblished  peaoe^ 
Which  can  no  more  remove  ; 
The  perfect  power  of  gfodlinesi^ 
The  onmipotenoe  of  love." 

lY.  Oonfiimed  by  a  perpetual  covenant  (vers.  26,  27).    The  termi  of  the 

covenant  have  a  Divine  origin  and  sanction — *'  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they 
shall  be  My  people."  Here  is  the  guarantee  of  its  inviolability.  Had  it  rested 
on  political  or  any  human  considerations,  it  would  have  been  insecure.  Glod  is 
ever  faithful  to  His  part  of  the  covenant,  notwithstanding  the  infidelity  and 
ingratitude  of  His  people.  It  is,  moreover,  a  covenant  of  peace — the  moral 
breach  occasioned  by  sin  is  healed  by  pardon  and  reconciliation  through  the 
intervention  of  Messiah,  who  by  His  offered  and  accepted  sacrifice  has  made  it 
possible  to  subdue  the  inveterate  enmity  of  the  human  heart  and  bring  man 
into  spiritual  union  with  God.  The  reality  and  perpetuity  of  the  covenant  are 
assured  by  the  abiding  presence  of  God  with  His  people.  "  I  will  set  up  My 
sanctuary  in  the  midst  of  them  for  evermore."  The  unity  of  the  Divine 
kingdom  will  be  maintained  by  incessant  worship  and  the  loftiest  spiritual 
fellowship. 

V.  Demonatxates  the  Divine  faithftilneaa  (ver.  28).    Israel  had  sinned  and 
402 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTART:  BZEKIBL. 


OBAB,  XZZfIL 


hjul  defamed  the  reputation  of  Jehovah,  and  in  their  sufferings,  which  rendered 
them  a  spectacle  of  wonder  and  a  theme  of  derision,  their  enemies  entertained 
false  and  distorted  views  of  the  Gh>d  of  Israel  But  in  the  moral  reform  of 
Israel  and  the  unmistakable  evidence  of  God's  presence  and  working  amongst 
them,  the  heathen  are  compelled  to  own  that  He  is  the  only  true  God,  and 
unalterably  faithful  in  word  and  deed.  The  growing  unity  of  the  kingdom  of 
righteousness  is  an  ever-present  object-lesson  to  the  universe,  teaching  the 
indefectible  faithfulness  of  Jehovah. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  unity  of  the  kingdom  of  Ood  is  founded  in  spiritual  affinity  to 
ihe  Divins.  2.  Is  in  process  of  organisation  wherever  Christ  is  embraced  and  wor- 
shipped.   S.  JFiU  one  day  be  a  grand  reality . 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  15-28.  "  The  whole  people  of 
Israel  had  been  represented  as  partici- 
pating in  the  regenerating  efficacy  of 
the  spirit  of  life  which  was  to  be  given 
from  above ;  and  as  the  direct  result  of 
this  was  to  unite  them  to  God,  so  its 
secondary  operation  could  not  fail  to 
be  to  unite  them  in  brotherly  concord 
with  each  other.  For  the  true  covenant- 
people  must  form  but  one  body,  as 
they  can  only  have  one  Head;  and 
hence,  as  the  necessary  shell  for  pre- 
serving  this  great  truth,  it  was  so 
strictlv  enjoined  of  old  that  they 
should  have  but  one  Temple,  one  high- 
priest^  one  king,  and  one  oommon- 
wealtL  The  breaking-up  of  this 
united  brotherhood  by  the  revolt  of 
the  ten  tribes  under  Jeroboam,  how- 
ever needful  at  the  time  as  a  salutary 
chastisement  to  the  house  of  David,  is 
constantly  represented  as  a  sad  dis- 
memberment of  the  household  of  God, 
and  the  source,  to  a  large  extent^  of  the 
more  overwhelming  tide  of  evils  which 
thenceforth  set  in  upon  the  land,  and 
at  last  laid  it  desolate.  As  soon,  diere- 
fore,  as  there  might  be  produced  a  re- 
vived and  healthful  condition  among 
the  covenant-people,  there  must  be  a 
return  to  brotheny  union,  and  that  in 
connection  with  the  house  of  David ; 
for  to  this  house  had  been  committed 
the  right  to  rule  over  the  heritage  of 
God,  and  to  abide  in  separation  from 
it  was  to  continue  in  rebellion  against 
Heaven.  That  there  has  been  no 
adequate  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy 
in  WW  majr  be  called  the  literal  sense 


of  its  terms  is  too  plain  to  require  any 
lengthened  proof.  The  most  char- 
acteristic part  of  the  description — the 
cementing,  strengthening,  benignant 
rule  of  David  —  had  not  even  the 
appearance  of  a  literal  fulfilment  in 
the  post-Babylonish  history  of  Israel ; 
and,  with  so  strong  and  prominent  a 
feature  of  an  ideal  sort  as  the  eternal 
presidency  of  David,  it  seems  amazing 
that  any  one  should  expect  it  to  be 
realised  after  that  manner  in  the  ages 
to  come." — Fairhaim. 

Yers.   15-17.    Joining  the  Sticka. 

''  1.  Leam  Vie  sad  condition  of  the  people 
of  Israel  at  the  time  the  prophet  wrote. 

il.)  it  was  contrary  to  nature.  (2.) 
Hspleasing  to  G^d.  (3.)  Disastrous 
to  themselves.  2.  The  happy  condUion 
to  which  the  people  of  Israel  were  about  to 
be  restored.  That  of  unity,  harmony, 
oneness.  (1.^  Union  is  of  great  im- 
portance to  tne  Church  itself.  (2.)  It 
is  an  immense  advantage  to  the  sur- 
rounding community.  (3.)  It  is  well- 
pleasing  and  highly  honouring  to  God« 
3.  The  agency  by  which  this  delightful 
change  was  to  be  effected.  (1.)  God 
breathed  into  them  a  principle  of 
spiritual  life.  (2.)  He  sent  them  wise 
advisers  and  earnest  intercessors.  ^3.) 
He  visited  them  with  a  sore  trial — 
captivity.  (4.)  He  appointed  them  a 
common  work — the  rebuilding  of  the 
city  and  Temple  of  Jerusalem.  ^5.) 
He  makes  His  residence  in  their  midst. 
Christ  in  the  midst  of  a  Church  acts 
like  a  magnet  in  the  midst  of  steel 

403 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  XXXVIL 


BOMILLTW  COMMEMARY:  EZEKIEL, 


pftiticles :  He  attracts  all  to  Himself." 
'^Puljrii  AnalysL 

Yer.  16.  **A  deft  stick  is  a  poor 
business  in  itself,  but  if  Gk>d  please  to 
make  use  of  so  slender  a  thing,  it  may 
serye  for  a  very  great  purpose ;  as  here 
by  the  uniting  of  two  sorxy  sticks  in 
the  hands  of  the  prophet  is  prefigured 
the  uniting  of  Judah  and  Israel,  yea, 
of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  in  the  hand  of 
the  Lord — that  is,  in  Christ  Jesus, 
who  is  the  hand,  the  right  hand  and 
the  arm  of  God  the  Father." — Trofp, 

Ver.  17.  "'Join  them  one  to  another/ 
Some  would  have  this  done  miracu- 
lously ;  but  I  do  not  think  God  bade 
the  prophet  work  a  miracle.  Were  it 
so,  God  would  rather  have  said,  'I 
will  make  them  one,'  for  He  can  do 
miracles.  It  was  enoueh  if  glued 
together,  or  but  held  in  his  hand,  so 
that  in  his  hand  they  were  one." — 
PooL 

Yers.  18-20.  The  Unity  of  the  People 
of  Qod — 1.  Has  its  basis  in  their  united 
lave  of  God.  2.  Strengthened  by  Divinely 
ordered  events,  '^l  will  make  them 
one  stick,  and  they  shall  be  one  in 
mine  hand  "  (ver.  i9\  3.  Admits  of 
great  diversity  of  individual  character. 
Each  tribe  had  its  distinctive  peculi- 
arity. 4.  Shall  be  openly  recognised. 
"The  sticks  shall  be  in  thine  hand 
before  their  eyes  "  (ver.  20). 

Yer.  19.  "I  will  once  more  bring 
them  all  under  one  King  and  make 
them  of  one  mind.  Religion  is  the 
only  best  bond  of  affection.  The  very 
heathens  honoured  the  primitive  Chris- 
tians for  their  unanimity.  As  the  cur- 
tains of  the  Tabernacle  were  joined  by 
loops,  BO  were  they  by  love;  and  as 
the  stones  of  the  Temple  were  so  closely 
cemented  together  that  they  seemed 
to  be  but  one  stone,  so  was  it  among 
thenu  Neither  need  we  wonder,  since 
Christ's  Church  is  but  one;  neither  is 
there  any  such  oneness  or  entireness 
anywhere  as  among  the  saints.  Other 
societies  are  but  as  the  clay  in  the 
toes  of  Nebuohadneuar's  image:  they 
404 


may  cleave  together,  but  not  incorpo- 
rate one  into  another." — Trapp. 

Yer.  20.  "As  the  separation  of  Judah 
and  Ephraim  was  the  punishment  of 
apostasy,  and  led  to  still  further  evils, 
religious  and  political,  80  hereafter, 
when  both  are  one  with  God,  through 
the  spirit  of  life  uniting  them  to  the 
one  Covenant- Head,  Messiah -David, 
they  shall  be  united  to  one  another  as 
no  longer  two  but  one  people.  In  re- 
spect to  the  spiritual  Israe),  the  Church, 
nothing  has  more  impeded  the  progress 
of  the  Gospel  than  the  mutual  divisions 
of  professing  Christians.  Let  us  pray 
for  the  blessed  time  when  all  Christians 
shall  be  one  inwardly  and  outwardly, 
as  the  Lord  Jesus  prayed  (John  xvii. 
21).  Meanwhile,  if  in  non-essentials 
we  differ  for  a  time,  let  us  endeavour 
at  least  to  keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit 
in  the  bond  of  peace.** — FausseL 

Yers.  21-26.    National  Unity— 1. 

Conditioned  by  geographical  environment 
**  I  will  gather  them  on  every  side,  and 
make  them  one  nation  in  the  land, 
upon  the  mountains  of  Israel "  (vers. 
21,  22).  2.  Confirmed  by  the  suppression 
of  tribal  feuds  and  animosities,  '*  They 
shall  be  no  more  two  nations  *'  (ver.  22). 
8.  Cemented  by  good  government.  "  One 
king  shall  be  king  to  them  all.  David, 
my  servant,  shall  be  king  over  them, 
and  they  all  shall  have  one  shepherd" 
(vers.  22,  24).  4.  Has  a  solid  founda- 
tion in  practical  piety,  "  Neither  shall 
they  defile  themselves  any  more  with 
idols:  they  shall  walk  in  My  judg- 
ments, and  do  them"  (vers.  23,  2^. 
5.  Secures  permanency  of  national  life. 
"They  shall  dwell  in  the  land,  they 
and  their  children's  children  for  ever  " 
(ver.  26). 

Ver.  22.  '*  Politically  speaking,  they 
never  had  a  king  from  that  day  to  this, 
and  the  grand  junction  and  government 
spoken  of  here  must  refer  to  another 
time — to  that  in  which  they  shall  be 
brought  into  the  Christian  Church  with 
the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles,  when  Jesus, 
the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords, 
shall  rule  over  them." — A,  Clarke, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILBTIO  OOMMENTARr:  EZBEIBL. 


OBAF,  IXIVIL 


Ver.  23.  "  Idolatry  is  a  very  defiling 
sin,  and  the  Jews  in  both  kingdoms 
were  exceedingly  addicted  to  it,  perti- 
nacious in  it,  to  the  utter  rain  of  both 
kingdoms ;  but  after  the  return  from 
Babylonish  captivity,  we  find  nowhere 
that  they  fell  into  idolatry,** — Pool. 

Ver.  24.  "No  Christian  is  a  bad 
man,  unless  he  be  a  counterfeiu" — 
Athenagoras. 

Vers.  26-28.  The  Presence  of  God 
with  His  People — 1.  Guaranteed  by 
covenant  relationship,  "I  will  make  a 
covenant  of  peace  with  them :  I  will 
be  their  Grod,  and  they  shall  be  My 
people"  (vers.  26,  27).  2.  An  assur- 
ance of  stabilUy  and  increase,  "  I  will 
]»lace  them  and  multiply  them"  (ver. 
26).  3.  A  motive  for  loftiest  worship. 
''I  will  set  My  sanctuary  in  the  midst 
of  them  :  My  tabernacle  shall  be  with 
them  "  (vers.  26,  27).  4.  A  teslimony 
to  the  Divine  faithfulness,  '*The  lieathen 
shall  know  that  I  the  Lord  do  sanctify 
Israel"  (ver.  28). 

Ver.  26.  " '  It  shall  be  an  everlast- 
ing covenant  with  them,*  may  be  fitly 
explained  of  the  Qospel,  being  such  a 
covenant  as  shall  never  be  abolished 
or  give  way  to  any  new  dispensation. 
It  is  certain  that  the  expression,  'a 
covenant  of  peace,'  could  not  at  all 
agree  with  the  ancient  covenant;  for 
when  was  there  an  age,  half  an  age, 
or  twenty  years'  peace  in  Israel !  The 
whole  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  is 
nothing  more  than  a  recital  of  wars 
and  continual  divisions.  And  if  we 
understand  it  of  peace  between  God 
and  His  people,  where  shall  we  find 
this  people  faithfully  attached  to  the 
Lord  during  one  century  only!  We 
have  only  to  open  the  books  of  the 
prophets  and  the  other  sacred  records 
to  remark  their  infidelities  and  per- 
petual rebellions  against  Gk>d.  This 
expression,  therefore,  can  only  respect 
the  new  covenant  whereof  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Prince  of  Peace,  is  the  Mediator, 
and  who  gives  us  that  true  peace  which 
surpasses  all  conceptions." — Benson. 


—  "  In  closing  this  section,  we  pre- 
sent a  brief  outline  of  the  view  that 
has  been  taken  of  the  prophecies 
contained  in  the  three  closely  related 
chapters,  xxxiv.,  xxxv.,  xxxvii.,  and 
which  in  substance  applies  equally  to 
many  other  portions  of  the  prophetical 
Scriptures.  1.  They  were  originally 
given  to  revive  and  animate  the  hearts 
of  God's  covenant-people,  by  holding 
out  to  them  the  assured  prospect  of  a 
reversion  from  the  present  evil,  and 
their  still  certain  destination  in  God's 

Eurpose  to  the  highest  and  most 
onourable  place  on  the  earth.  2. 
It  was  the  duty  of  those  to  whom 
such  prophecies  were  delivered  at  once 
to  believe  the  word  spoken  to  them, 
and  apply  themselves  in  earnest  to  do 
what  was  needed  to  secure  its  accom- 
plishment 3.  But  there  being  mani- 
festly ideal  features  introduced  into 
the  delineation,  clearly  betokens  a 
kind  and  degree  of  blessing  which 
could  not  have  been  completely  ful- 
filled under  the  old  covenant  4.  The 
new  things  thus  to  be  looked  for  in 
the  future  could  only  meet  with  their 
full  and  adequate  accomplishment  in 
Ohristi  who  is  certainly  the  David  of 
tne  promise.  5.  Therefore,  in  form- 
ing one's  conceptions  now  of  the  real 
import  of  such  prophecies,  we  must 
throw  ourselves  back  upon  the  nar- 
rower and  more  imperfect  relations 
amid  which  they  were  written,  and 
thence  judge  of  what  is  still  to  come. 
Those  who  would  find  a  literal  Israel 
and  a  non-literal  David,  or  a  literal 
restoration  in  Christian  times,  and  a 
non-literal  Tabernacle  and  ritual  of 
worship,  arbitrarily  confound  together 
things  dissimilar  and  incongruous,  and 
render  certainty  of  interpretation  abso- 
lutely impossible.  6.  The  view  thus 
given  is  confirmed  by  the  reproduction 
of  some  of  these  prophecies  in  the  field 
of  the  New  Testament  Church,  set 
free,  as  was  expected,  from  the  out- 
ward distinctions  and  limits  of  the 
Old.  7.  The  common  interpretation 
which  understands  Christ  by  David, 
and  takes  all  the  rest  literally,  must 
inevitably  tend  to  justify  the  Jew  in 
his  unbelief." — Fairbaim. 


405 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP,  xxzym. 


HOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIBL, 


The  Warlike  Assault  of  Gog,  and  its  Repxtlse.    (Chap,  xizviii) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.-Ver.  2. 
"  (Jog."    "  An  ideal  namie ;  it  is  simplj 
the  root  of  Magog,  the  only  related 
name  known  to  history.     The  whole 
prophecy  demands  a  non-literal  inter- 
pretation.     The  prophetical  delinea- 
tions of  the  Divine  principles  of  govern- 
ment  are   thrown   into  the  familiar 
forms  of  Old  Testament  relations.    The 
final  triumph  of  Messiah's  truth  over 
the  most  distant  and  harbarous  nations 
is  represented  as  a  literal  conflict  on 
a  gigantic  scale,  Israel  being  the  battle- 
field, ending  in  the  complete  triumph 
of  Israel's  anointed  King,  the  Saviour 
of  the   world.     It  is   a  prophetical 
parable,  in  which  every  trait  in  the 
delineation  is  full  of  important  mean- 
ing, only  couched  in  the  language  of 
a  symbolical  representation.      While 
the  vision  respecting  Qog  and  Magog 
in  the  Apocalypse  (chap,  xx.)  may  be 
regarded  in  substance  a  reannounce- 
ment  of  the   prophecy  before   us,  it 
does  not  follow  that  the  prophecy  in 
the  Apocalypse  has  exactly  the  same 
compass  as  in  Ezekiel.     In  each  case 
alike  the  vision   is   appropriated   to 
describe    the   final    workings   of  the 
world's  evil,  and  its  results  in  con- 
nection  with   the   kingdom  of  God ; 
only,  the  starting-point  is  placed  farther 
in  advance  in  the  one  case  than  in  the 
other.     Therefore,  as  found  in  Ezekiel, 
it  can  throw  no  light  on  the  chrono- 
logical   arrangement   of   the    Apoca- 
lypse."— Fairbaim,     *'  Ohief  prince  of 
Heshech  and  Tubal "     *'  Rosh,"  trans- 
lated chiefs  is  taken  as  a  proper  name 
by  some,  and  probably  refers  to  the 
Russi,  a  people  from  whom  the  modern 
Russians  derive  their  name.    Schroder 
accepts  Magog  as  equivalent  to  Scy- 
thians.    Tubal  —  Tabal,  according  to 
him,  bordered  on  Cilicia,  and  seems 
to   have    been   what   was   afterwards 
Cappadocia.     It  was  famous  for  great 
horses.    Meshech  he  regards  as  having 
lain  north-east  of  Cappadocia  in  Lower 
Armenia.     Magog  was  Q()g's  original 
kingdom,    though    he    acquired    the 
mastery    over    Meshech    and    Tubal, 
406 


and   so  might  be  called  their  ddef 

prince, 

Yer.  3.  ''I  am  against  thee,  0  Gog; 
the  chief  prince  of  Meshedh  and 
TuhaL"  His  high-sounding  titles  are 
repeated,  to  imply  the  haughty  self- 
confidence  of  the  invader  as  invincible. 

Yer.  4.  "I  wiU  turn  thee  hack"— 
*'as  a  refractory  wild  beast  which 
thinks  to  take  its  own  way,  but  is  bent 
by  a  superior  power  to  turn  on  a  course 
which  must  end  in  its  destruction. 
Satan  shall  be  by  overruling  Provi- 
dence permitted  to  deceive  them  to 
their  ruin  ^v.  xx.  7,  8)." — FausseL 
*'  It  is  significant  that  the  irruption  of 
Gog  is  here  and  in  what  follows  re- 
ferred to  Jehovah.  He  means  to  march 
against  Jehovah,  but  the  latter  has 
him  in  tow — ^he  must  march  whither 
He  will  to  his  own  destruction,  as  in 
former  times  Pharaoh  did  not  thwart 
the  (jk>d  of  Israel  when  he  refused  to 
let  His  people  go,  but  acted  so  because 
Jehovah  Himself  had  hardened  his 
heart  to  plunge  him  into  destruction.*' 
— Eengstenberg.  '*  And  put  hooloi  into 
thy  Jaws" — rings  in  thy  jaws;  the 
rings  which  are  put  in  the  most 
tender  parts  of  intractable  animals  on 
which  to  fasten  the  bridle  or  reins 
(chaps,  xix.  4,  xxix.  4 ;  2  Kings  xix 
28).  *< Horses  and  horsemen"  — a 
decidedly  Scythian  trait,  for  the  rich- 
ness in  horses  of  these  hordes,  most 
equestrian  tribes,  was  already  known 
to  Herodotus.  *'  Olothed  with  all  sorts 
of  armour" — "clothed  with  splendour, 
an  Assyrian  element  introduced :  thus 
the  figure  of  Gog  is  enlarged." — Lange, 

Yer.  5.  "Persia,  Ethiopia, and  Lnqra," 

or  Phut.  "These  are  in  the  farthest 
south  from  Babylon,  where  Ezekiel 
lived.  The  Asiatic  Cush  or  Ethiopia 
lay  in  Central  and  Northern  Babylon. 
Phut  was  the  name,  according  to  Eben^ 
of  some  wandering  tribes  of  Arabia. 
Sayce  thinks  Phut  was  the  Somali 
country  in  Eastern  Africa." — Geiiie, 


Digitized  by 


Googlf 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTART:  BZEKIBL, 


OHAF.  XZZfllL 


Ver.  6.  "Gomer"— the  Celtic  Cim- 
merians of  Crim-Tartary.  "  Togannah'' 
— "the  Armenians  of  the  Caucasus, 
south  of  Iheria.  A  pictorial  and  maui- 
festlj  symbolical  grouping  of  nations. 
There  is  no  impossibility  in  the  con- 
nection of  nations  so  distant  from  one 
another.  The  anti-Chaldaic  coalition, 
which  the  prophet  himself  had  wit- 
'  nessed, actually  extended  from  Ethiopia 
to  Persia.  The  impossible  lies  rather 
in  this,  that  all  these  nations  are  to 
co-operate  at  a  definite  time  against  the 
petty  Palestine." — Hengstenbarg,  &c, 

Ver.  7.  "  Be  thou  prepared."  "Irony. 
Prepare  thee  and  all  thine  with  idl 
needful  accoutrements  for  war,  that  ye 
may  perish  together  1 " — FausseU 

Yen  8.  "After  many  days  thaa 
Shalt  be  visited''  (Isa.  zxiv.  22,  xxix. 
6).  Gog  meauD  to  visit  the  people 
of  God,  but  in  reality  he  is  himself 
visited.  It  was  God  who  led  him  in 
order  to  prepare  him  for  his  downfall. 
It  is  very  consolatory  to  the  Church 
that  God  not  merely  conquers  its 
enemies,  that  even  their  hostile  under- 
taking is  under  His  guidance,  that 
they  move  not  hand  nor  foot  but  at 
His  command.  "  In  the  latter  years  " 
— "at  the  end  of  the  years.  This 
indicates  that  the  catastrophe  belongs 
to  a  quite  new  order  of  things — the 
Messianic  epoch." — Hengsienberg, 

Yer.  9.  "Thou  shalt  ascend  and 
come  like  a  storm— like  a  doud  to 
cover  the  land."  "  The  cavalry  of  the 
Tanjou  frequently  consisted  of  two  or 
three  hundred  thousand  men,  formid- 
able by  the  matchless  dexterity  with 
which  they  managed  their  bows  and 
their  horses,  by  their  hardy  patience 
in  supporting  the  inclemency  of  the 
weather ;  unchecked  by  torrents  or  by 
precipices,  by  the  deepest  rivers  or  by 
the  most  lofty  mountains,  they  spread 
themselves  over  the  face  of  the  country 
and  overthrew  all  who  opposed  them.'' 
— QibJxm. 

Yer.  10.  "  Thou  shalt  think  an  evil 
thought" — conceive  a  mischievous  pur- 


pose, as  to  attacking  God's  people  in 
their  defenceless  state. 

Ver.  11.  "I  will  go  up  to  the  land 
of  unwalled  villages,  to  them  that 
dwell  safely."  The  towns  lie  open, 
in  fancieil  security,  the  prize  of  a 
sudden  attack. 

Yer  12.  <<That  dweU  in  the  midst 
of  the  land" — <Hhe  navel  of  the  land, 
not  physically  but  morally;  a  central 
position  for  beins  a  blessing  to  the 
world.  The  literal  sense,  *  navel,'  seems 
to  point  to  the  fact  of  its  being  the 
moral  centre  of  the  world,  not  to  its 
moral  eminence  (chap.  v.  5)." — Faussd, 

Yer.  13.  <'Sheba  and  Dedan  and 
the  merchants  of  Tarshish" — "the 
Arabian  nations  Sheba  and  Dedan 
as  representatives  of  the  land-trade, 
and  Tarshish  of  the  sea-trade.  Bepr^ 
sentatives  of  that  portion  of  the  world 
who,  though  they  are  not  disposed  to 
take  any  active  part  against  the  cause 
of  God,  are  well  pleased  to  see  others 
do  it.  This  worldly  feeling  makes 
them  disrelish  the  truth,  and  they  are 
ready  to  cheer  on  those  who  would 
make  a  spoil  of  its  defenders," — Fair* 
bcUm. 

Yer.  15.  ''All  of  them  riding  iqHni 
horses."  It  is  related  of  the  Scythians 
that  they  eat,  drink,  and  sleep  in  the 
saddle. 

Yer.  16.  '*When  I  shall  be  sancti- 
fied in  thee,  0  Gog" — when  God  dis- 
plays His  incomparable  glory  in  his 
punibhnient. 

Yer.  17.  ''Art  thon  he  of  whom  I 
have  spoken  in  old  time  by  liy  ser* 
vants  the  prophets  of  Israel?"    "  Gog 

and  Magog  are  here  identified  with 
the  enemies  spoken  of  in  other  pro- 
phecies (Num.  xxiv.  17-24;  Isa.  xzvii. 
1 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  20,  21 ;  Jer.  xxx.  23,  24 ; 
Joel  iii.  2 ;  Micah  v.  6,  6 ;  Isa.  xiv.  12- 
14,  lix.  19).  God  is  represented  as 
addressing  Gog  at  the  time  of  his 
assault ;  therefore  the  old  time  is  the 
time  long  prior  when  Esekiel  uttered 

407 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTART:  MZEKOL 


tbese  prophecies ;  bo  he  also,  as  well  as  tions  come  upon  the  sense  like  a  uiii* 

Daniel  (zi.)  and  Zechariah  (ziv.),  are  rersal  judgment — Hengstenherg. 
included  among  the  prophets  of  Israel 

here." — Fausset.  Yer.  21.  '^Erery  man's  sword  sliaU 

be  against  his  brother/'    One  great 

Yer.  18.  '^liy  fdry  shall  oome  np  means  hy  which  Gk>d  sweeps  away  the 

inliyfiice" — literally,  into  My  nose ;  enemies  of  the  king  is  the  internal 

in  Hebrew  the  idiomatic  expression  discord,  for  which  He  presents  the 

for  anger,  as  men  in  anger  breathe  natural  occasions.     The  community  of 

strongly  through  the  nostrils.  hatred   can   scarcely  offer   successful 

resistance  to  these  (see  historical  ex- 

Yer.  20.  '*A11  shall  shake  at  liy  ample,  2  Chron.  zx.). 
preaenoa.''   *'An  earthquake,  the  figure 

of  a  great  annihilating  catastrophe  in  Yer.  22.  ''With  pestilence^  blood, 

the  human  world,  in  which  all  has  bail,  Are,  and  brimatone."   The  colours 

the  feeling  as  if  the  earth  were  dis-  of  the  picture  are  partly  taken  from 

solving:     The  catastrophe  affects  only  the  Egyptian  plagues,  and  from  the 

the  enemies  of  God's  people ;  but  it  is  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
so  dreadful  that  the  whole  world  seems 

to  come  to  an  end — that  all  that  lives  Yer.  23.  ''  Thus  will  I  magniiy  Uy- 
on  earth  is  felt  to  be  affected  by  it ;  self"  The  destruction  is  effected  by 
eyery  high  thing  is  cast  to  the  ground  an  interyention  of  Jehovah,  His  fight- 
without  discriminating  whether  it  be-  ing  for  His  people,  who  are  small 
longs  to  the  enemy  or  not.  All  terrible  compared  to  the  greatness  of  Gog 
particular  judgments  in  their  opera-  (ver.  15). 

S0MIZETIC8. 

Thb  Fmtos  Onslaught  of  thb  Enemds  or  thb  TRxmi. 

(Yers.  1-28.) 

The  beautiful  picture  of  tranquil  prosperity  depicted  in  the  close  of  the  last 
chapter  would  be  difficult  for  the  captive  Jews  to  realise,  unless  there  was  the 
assurance  of  protection  from  hostile  attacks  like  those  which  had  brought  them 
to  their  present  deplorable  condition.  What  avails  it,  they  cry,  even  if  we 
are  restored  1  The  heathen  power  still  predominates,  and  we  shall  be  crushed 
back  again  into  irretrievable  ruin.  The  wild,  savage  races  of  Scythia  had 
spread  terror  over  all  Western  Asia  in  the  days  of  Josiah,  and  were  still 
remembered  with  dread.  Against  such  desponding  thoughts  the  prophet  here 
offers  comfort.  The  heathen  nations  as  a  whole,  in  their  opposition  to  the 
kingdom  of  God,  are  represented  under  the  figure  of  a  great  invasion  of  the 
Holy  Land  by  the  Scythian  forces.  All  the  battles  which  restored  Israel  has 
to  wage  are  united  in  one  great  battle.  He  who  would  lead  his  people  out  of 
captivitv  would  be  their  omnipotent  defender,  the  foe  would  be  triumphantly 
vanquished,  and  Israel,  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah,  finally  delivered  from 
all  fear,  would  enter  on  a  period  of  temporal  and  spiritual  prosperity.  The 
descriptions  of  the  chapter  illustrate  ihe  fierce  onslaught  of  we  enemies  of  the 
TruiK    Observe— 

I.  That  the  enemiee  of  the  Truth  axe  rallied  and  commanded  by  a  leader 
of  congpicaona  ability  (vers.  2-7).  Gog,  the  chief  prince  of  Meshech  and  Tubal 
— an  ideal  character,  one  possessing  great  military  genius,  faculty  for  organisa- 
tion, power  to  manoeuvre  vast  armies,  revelling  in  destruction,  and  animated  by 
a  mighty  hatred  to  the  good.  Grog's  forces  are  composed  of  diverse  nationalitiesi 
408 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTARY:  BZEKIBL. 


extending  over  a  wide  area  (vers.  5,  6),  and  present  an  imposing  and  threatening 
aspect  (vers.  4,  7).  The  invasion  and  overthrow  of  the  Chaldeans,  the  conflict 
of  the  Maccabees  with  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  the  temporary  successes  and  defeat 
of  the  Turks — to  each  of  which  historical  events  some  interpreters  would  limit 
the  application  of  the  prophecy — were  but  feeble  prototypes  of  a  coming  struggle 
with  a  powerful  embodied  Antichrist.  Sin  is  fitful  in  breeding  formidable 
confederacies,  and  never  lacks  a  leader.  The  people  of  Gk>d  have  often  to 
complain  with  the  Psalmist — '*  How  are  they  increased  that  trouble  me  t  Many 
are  they  that  rise  up  against  me  **  (Ps.  iiL  1). 

IL  That  the  enemioB  of  the  Truth  axe  fertile  in  plots  to  work  intanhirf 
^vers.  10-12).  '*  Thou  shalt  think  an  evil  thought "  (ver.  10).  Here  is  a  land 
aefenceless,  '*  dwelling  without  walls,  and  having  neither  bars  nor  gates,"  its 
people  inoffensive,  quietly  pursuing  their  avocations  in  fancied  secunty ;  their 
**  cattle  and  goods  "  are  increasing,  and  they  have  no  means  of  offering  resistance. 
Let  us  pick  a  quarrel  with  them,  and  **  take  a  spoil "  (ver.  13).  It  is  true 
they  have  done  us  no  harm,  nor  are  likely  to  do ;  but  what  of  that  t  It  is 
enough  that  they  love  the  truth  that  we  hate,  and  will  become  an  easy  prey  to 
our  superior  force.  If  we  yield  to  the  suggestions  of  an  evil  heart,  we  trample 
down  the  laws  of  justice  and  equity,  and  can  readily  concert  a  plan  of  wholesale 
robbery  and  crime.  The  boldest  highwayman  or  cattle-riever  will  not  go  more 
directly  to  his  mark  than  we. 

III.  That  there  is  a  class  of  persons  ever  ready  to  make  gain  out  of  the 
havoc  created  by  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  (ver.  13V.  The  eager  merchants  of 
Tarshish  are  referred  to  as  young  lions  because  ot  their  well-known  ferocity. 
There  is  little  room  for  gentleness  and  pity  in  the  breast  of  the  unscrupulous 
trader.  Where  the  carrion  lies,  there  the  vultures  gather :  where  there  is  spoil, 
the  traders.  Gain  is  often  made  out  of  the  misfortunes  and  sufferings  of  others. 
Many  who  would  shrink  from  bringing  about  the  ruin  of  others  do  not  hesitate 
to  make  all  possible  profit  out  of  the  ruin.  Looters,  **  the  snappers-up  of  uncon- 
sidered trifles,"  hang  about  the  skirts  of  every  victorious  army. 

rv.  That  the  onslaught  of  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  is  fierce  and  terrihle 
(vers.  8,  9,  14-17).  The  army  of  Oog  was  to  burst  upon  Israel  like  a  storm- 
cloud,  enveloping  and  desolating  the  land.  In  all  ages  the  forces  of  unbelief 
have  made  violent  attacks  upon  the  citadel  of  Divine  Truth  ;  and  there  have 
been  times  when  it  seemed  as  if  the  foundations  had  been  shaken  and  the  fabric 
must  fall  into  hopeless  ruin.  But  when  the  shock  has  spent  itself,  the  strong- 
hold has  stood  forth  more  prominent  and  stable  than  beforei  The  great  world- 
crisis  is  yet  future.  A  time  is  coming  that  will  test  the  faith  of  the  most 
stalwart.  Baffled  and  defeated  in  all  previous  attempts,  the  enemies  of  the 
Truth  will  gather  up  and  concentrate  all  their  powers,  and  all  that  wily 
diplomacy,  vindictive  hatred,  and  intensified  rage  can  do  will  be  combined  in 
one  grand,  united,  final  effort.    What  will  be  the  result  t    Mark — 

Y.  That  the  most  formidable  onset  of  the  enemies  of  the  Tntih  will  be 
Divinely  opposed  (vers.  17-23).  1.  The  Divine  anger  will  be  roused  (vers.  17-19). 
**  My  fury  shall  come  up  in  My  face  " — in  My  nostrils,  as  men  are  accustomed 
to  show  anger  by  a  flushed  countenance  and  dilated  nostrils.  An  anthropo- 
morphic representation :  Ood  stooping  to  the  use  of  human  methods  of  thought 
and  expression.  Injustice  and  cruelty  provoke  the  Divine  wrath ;  He  is  not  an 
indifferent  spectator  of  the  oppressions  inflicted  upon  His  people.  **  When  the 
great  day  of  His  wrath  is  come,  who  shall  be  able  to  stand  t  *'  (Bev.  vi.  17^ 
2.  The  Divine  potcer  will  employ  against  the  enemies  of  the  Truth  the  most  destructive^ 
/orcM'^earthquakes,  wars,  pestilence,  storms  (vera  19-22).     The  resources  of 

409 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  U1V111« 


HOMIIBTIC  OOMMENTJJtT:  BZBKIBL. 


the  QiUTene  are  in  the  hands  of  God,  and  He  can  use  them  on  the  side  of 
righteousness  and  in  the  punishment  of  tyranny  and  wrong.  Heaven  and  earth 
are  armed  against  every  evil  work,  and  will  effectually  prevent  its  triumph. 
3.  The  Divine  character  wUl  he  vindicated  in  taking  vengeance  on  tiie  enemies  of  the  TnUh 
(ver.  23V  God  will  be  known  and  His  honour  magnified  in  judgment  as  well  as 
in  showing  mercy.  The  mightiest  army  is  impotent  before  His  avenging  sword. 
The  defence  and  rescue  of  His  people  will  demonstrate  His  power.  His  faithfut 
nesSy  and  His  justice. 

Lessons. — 1.  Haired  of  the  Truth  manifests  ifsdf  in  violent  opposition.  2.  A 
time  comes  in  the  life  of  every  man  when  he  must  take  sides  for  or  against  the  TruHk 
3.  Evil  is  doomed  to  suffer  terrible  defeat.  4.  The  resources  of  Omnipotence  are  ai 
work  in  defence  of  the  Truth. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEESISS. 


Chaps.  zzviil,xxix.  ''The  last  con- 
flict of  the  world  with  God,  and  the 
complete  overthrow  of  the  former. 
The  place  occupied  by  this  section 
shows  that  it  refers  to  times  subse- 

Suent  to  the  restoration  of  Israel 
[itherto  the  prophecies  have  been 
directed  against  the  more  immediate 
neighbours  of  Qod'a  people.  Their 
fall  is  to  make  room  for  Israel's 
triumph.  But  as  the  Church — the  true 
Israel — waxes  stronger  and  stronger, 
more  distant  nations  will  come  into 
collision  and  must  be  overthrown  be- 
fore the  triumph  is  complete.  Hence 
the  present  prophecy  is  directed  against 
peoples  dwelling  in  the  remote  regions 
of  the  North.  From  this  quarter  had 
come  the  terrible  invasion  of  the 
Scythians,  who  had  possession  of  Asia 
twenty-three  years,  and  in  the  course 
of  this  time  they  had  certainly  over- 
run Syria,  and  had  probably  made 
their  appearance  in  the  Holy  Land. 
Some  have  thought  that  this  prophecy 
is  directed  against  these  Scythians, 
foretelling  their  fall,  like  that  of  the 
other  invaders  of  the  land  of  Israel. 
But  in  this  prophecy  there  is  little 
distinctive   of  one  nation.     It   is   a 

5athering  together  of  the  enemies  of 
ehovah  to  make  their  last  effort,  and 
to  be  overthrown.  The  seer  passes 
now  to  the  final  struggle  between  good 
and  evil,  and  the  triumphant  establish- 
ment of  the  Divine  rulei  It  is  the 
same  struggle  which  is  depicted  in  the 
Book  of  Revelation  (xx  7-10),  where 
410 


St.  John  adopts  words  and  phrases 
of  Ezekiel,  indicating  thereby  that  he 
is  predicting  the  same  event  which 
Ezekiel  had  foieUAd."— Speaker's  Com- 
meniary. 

Vers.  1-23.  "In  many  passages  of 
Scripture  God  forewarns  the  Church 
of  a  great  conspiracy,  headed  by  one 
person,  about  to  be  made  against  God 
and  His  Christ,  as  also  against  both 
the  literal  and  the  spiritual  Israel  in 
the  last  days. '  As  Antiochus  fearfully 
desolated  Judea  and  blasphemously 
desecrated  the  Temple  of  Gk>d,  towards 
the  close  of  Old  Testament  times, 
so  Antichrist,  here  described  under 
the  ideal  name  Gog,  and  his  godless 
hosts  under  the  name  Magog,  shall 
terribly  oppress  Israel  and  the  Church 
of  Christ,  and  arrogate  to  himself 
divine  honours,  towards  the  close  of 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  New 
Testament  dispensation.  Haughty  and 
blasphemous  self-confidence  shall  be 
his  prominent  characteristic.  His  im- 
mense hordes  of  formidable  warriors 
in  his  train,  seduced  by  Satan  to  their 
destruction,  shall  add  to  his  innate 
presumption." — Fausset. 

Vers.  1-13.  The  Audacity  of  EviL 
— 1.  Often  embodied  in  a  champion  of 
distinguished  genius  (vers.  2,  3^.  2. 
Succeeds  in  organising  a  formidable 
confederacy  (vers.  4-6).  3.  Is  blind 
to  the  superiority  of  the  power  with 
which  it  has  to  wrestle,  and  is  deaf 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL 


oflAP.  zxcvnt 


to  all  warnings  (vers.  7,  8).  4.  Ap- 
parently oyerwhelming  in  its  attack 
(ver.  9).  5.  Stimulated  by  its  own 
wicked  devices  (ver.  10).  6.  Wantonly 
assaults  the  inoffensive  and  defenceless 
(vers.  11,  12).  7.  Is  applauded  by 
those  who  hope  to  share  in  the  wreck- 
age it  creates  (ver.  13). 

Yers.  1-7.  The  Sufferings  of  Gk>d'8 
People.  "  1.  After  propliecies  of  grace 
and  mercy  come  tidings  of  afflictions 
and  judgmente  (ver.  2).  2.  The  great 
princes  of  the  earth,  being  no  friends 
to  the  Church  of  God,  have  God  for 
their  enemy  (ver.  3).  3.  The  Lord  at 
His  pleasure  can  bring  enemies  and 
armies  upon  His  own  people  (ver.  4). 
4.  The  Lord  can  easily  bring  men  to 
do  His  work  and  service,  whatever  the 
difficulty  or  danger  be  (ver.  4).  5. 
From  all  quarters  of  the  world  there 
are  enemies  ready  to  combine  and  act 
with  Gog  and  Antichrist  against  the 
Church,  the  Truth,  and  Christ  Him- 
self  (vers.  5,  6).  6.  The  enemies  of 
the  Church  make  great  preparations 
against  the  same  (ver.  7).  7.  Princes, 
notwithstanding  all  their  preparations, 
cannot  secure  themselves,  nor  those 
under  their  command  (ver.  7)." — Qreen- 
kiU. 

Ver.  2.  "This  cannot  be  one  single 

Grson,  or  one  only  prince,  though 
:e  enough  it  points  out  some  one 
by  whom  the  troubles  foretold  were 
begun ;  yet  the  successors  of  this  one, 
whoever  he  was,  are  included  and 
designed  by  this  Gog;  nor  is  he  to  be 
limited  to  one  certain  nation  that  he 
was  king  of,  nor  yet  confined  to  one 
age,  or  to  two  or  three.  Others  think 
that  idl  the  enemies  of  Israel,  in  all 
quarters,  both  open  and  secret  enemies, 
are  hero  intended,  and  that  the  anti- 
Christian  forces  and  combinations  are 
what  the  prophet  foretells." — Pool. 

Ver.  4.  "  I  will  turn  thee  back,  and 
put  My  hook  into  thy  jaws"— "1  will 
disappoint  all  thy  designs,  and  turn  thee 
about  as  easily  as  a  fisherman  masters 
a  great  fish,  when  he  has  once  fastened 
the  hook  into  its  jt^ws."— Benson. 


—  "I  will  place  rings  in  thy  jaws." 
"Gog  is  represented  as  an  unmanage- 
able beast  which  is  compelled  to  follow 
its  leader,  and  the  thought  is  thereby 
expressed  that  Gog  is  compelled  to 
obey  the  power  of  God  against  his 
will"— -Kit/. 

Ver.  7.  "God,  the  prophet,  and  the 
Church  deride  tliis  mighty  preparation, 
as  once  the  daughter  of  Zion  laughed 
Sennacherib,  that  proud  Assyrian,  to 
scorn,  and  the  scoff  is  doubled.  Such 
a  mighty  army  will  need  great  maga- 
zines and  granaries,  and  good  watches 
and  guards,  for  their  marching  in  safety; 
therefore,  awaken  thy  diligence,  let 
nothing  be  wanting,  for,  0  Gog,  thou 
wilt  find  I  am  against  thee,  saith  the 
Lord."— Poo/. 

Ver.  8.  God  Slow  to  PunlslL     "  1. 

God  bears  with  the  worst  of  men  a 
long  time.  'After  many  days.'  2. 
Though  wicked  men  be  spared  long, 
yet  at  last  they  shall  suffer.  *Thou 
shalt  be  visited.'" — OreenhilL 

—  "  They  shall  dwell  safely."  "This 
began  to  be  fulfilled  when,  for  three 
hundred  and  eighty  years  after  their 
return,  Israel  Uved  tolerably  quiet : 
afterwards  Antiochus  vexed  them  and 
did  much  damage.  What  remains  of 
longer  and  fuller  quiet  and  prosperity 
after  the  slaying  of  Gog,  time  will  dis- 
cover  to  the  people  of  God,  whose  lot 
it  will  be  to  stand  up  in  those  days," — 
Pod, 

Ver.  9.  "  This  storm  is  violent,  with 
confused,  tumultuous  noises  and  with 
devastation,  as  the  word  implies  ;  and 
come  as  a  storm — that  is,  as  dark, 
as  large,  as  inevitable,  and  which  con- 
tinueth  the  violent  waving  storm." — 
Pool 

—  The  Adversitiefl  of  the  Ohnrch. 
"  1.  The  Church  and  people  of  God 
are  subject  to  calamities.  The  Church 
is  oft  afflicted  and  tossed  with  tempest : 
but  here  is  some  comfort— storms, 
tempests,  and  clouds  last  not  long;  they 
cease  after  a  little  time,  and  the  sun 
shines  again.  2.  The  goodness  of  God 
in  foretelling  the  Church  what  shall 
come  upon  it :  storm,  clouds,  perplexity 

411 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBIF.  ZZXTin. 


EOMILETW  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


*-not  to  discourage  His  people,  but 
to  awaken  them  to  prayer,  holiness  of 
life,  and  living  by  faith." — OreenhilL 

—  **  In  the  world  we  have  anguish 
to  the  end ;  before  we  expect  it,  a 
storm  arises  and  heaven  and  earth 
seem  hid  from  oar  eyes.  Oar  security 
is  peace  with  God :  Christians  wish 
indeed  peace  with  all  men,  but  the 
world  keeps  no  peace  with  them. 
Such  is  its  turbulence,  that  it  has  no 
rest ;  such  its  darkness,  that  it  would 
like  to  shut  out  all  light,  even  Gh>d 
Himself  from  being  our  lamp.  —  If 
great  armies  resemble  clouds,  how  soon 
can  a  wind  disperse  them  1  (2  Kings 
xix.  Z6y'—Lange. 

Vers.  10-13.  God's  Knowledge  of 
the  Tactics  of  the  Wicked.     '\  1.  God 

foreknows  and  determines  things  to 
come,  even  those  things  that  seem 
most  free  and  contingent,  as  the 
thoughts  of  men's  hearts  (ver.   10^ 

2.  God  doth  not  only  foreknow  but 
prediscovers  the  purposes,  counsels, 
and  plots  of  His  Church's  enemies,  to 
evidence  His  care  thereof  (ver.  10, 11). 

3.  The  enemies  of  the  Church  do  watch 
and  take  ad  vantage  against  the  Church : 
they  wait  for  and  seek  occasions  to  ruin 
the  same  (vers.  11,  12).  4.  Wicked 
ones  will  undertake  great  matters  and 
venture  their  lives  to  satisfy  their  lusts 
(ver.  12).  5.  The  wicked  confederate 
and  combine  together  to  mischief  the 
Church  of  God  (ver.  13).  Wicked 
men  are  thorns,  and  they  cleave  to- 
gether to  scratch  and  vex  the  rights 
eous." — GreenhilL 

7er.  10.  A  Wicked  Brain.     1.  A 

willing  ally  of  a  wicked  heart.  2. 
Fertile  in  plotting  mischief.  3.  Its 
only  conception  of  justice  is  how  it 
may  most  cleverly  circumvent  it.  4. 
Is  indifferent  to  the  sufferings  its 
schemings  may  occasion  others.  5.  Is 
often  deluded  by  its  own  smartness. 

—  **  Thus  God  is  a  heart-searcher ; 
He  knows  the  evil  purpose  in  the  man 
himself."— 5/afcfc 

Vers.  12, 13,  **  A  covetous  desire  for 
the  possessions  of  the  people  of  God 
412 


and  envy  at  their  exalted  position  in 
the  centre  of  the  world  are  the  motives 
by  which  Gog  is  impelled  to  enter 
upon  his  predatory  expedition  against 
the  people  living  in  the  depth  of  peace. 
This  covetousness  is  so  great^  that  even 
the  rich  trading  populations  of  Sabea, 
Dedan,  and  Tarshish  perceive  it,  and 
declare  that  it  is  this  alone  which  has 
determined  Gog  to  undertake  his  ex- 
pedition. Their  words  give  promi- 
nence to  the  obvious  thirst  for  booty 
which  characterises  the  multitude  led 
by  Gog."— Jf<5«. 

Yer.  12.  ^  How  good  it  is  to  possess 
the  goods  which  cannot  be  stolen — the 
joy  which  no  one  shall  take  from  us  1 
— To  the  end  the  world  seeks  only  the 
temporal,  the  earthly." — Lange, 

Ver.  13.  "Tlie  merchants  of  Tarshish 
— the  inhabitants  of  the  sea-coast  west- 
ward,  and  liiagog  north.  Robbers  by 
land  on  three  sides,  pirates  bj  sea  on 
the  fourth,  in  a  confederacy  to  spoil  the 
Church  of  God."— Pool 

—  **It  is  the  tendency  of  a  gun- 
seeking  spirit  to  look  to  no  other 
considerations  but  its  own  selfish  and 
worldly  interests.  Gain  is  the  godli- 
ness of  the  carnal  mind.  Whatever 
promotes  directly  or  indirectly  the 
acquisition  of  silver,  gold,  cattle,  and 
goods  is  the  uppermost  thought;  and 
whilst,  perhaps,  the  more  quietly  dis- 
posed of  the  worldly  shrink  from 
an  active  participation  in  unjust  and 
ungodly  invasions,  yet  they  are  well 

E leased  at  such  wars  when  seeming  to 
e  conducive  to  their  own  gains,  and 
will  not  scruple  to  traffic  in  the  un- 
hallowed spoils,  at  the  sacrifice  of 
conscience  and  the  will  of  God." — 
FausseL 

Vers.  14-23.  The  Power  of  StU— 1. 

Is  imposing  in  its  battle-march  (vers. 
14-16).  2.  Is  allured  and  limited  by 
the  power  it  opposes  (vers.  16,  17). 
3.  Excites  the  Divine  wrath  (vers.  18, 
19).  4.  The  forces  of  heaven  and 
earth  combine  in  its  defeat  (vers.  20- 
22).  5.  Its  defeat  a  signal  vindication 
of  the  Divine  character  (ver.  83). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  OOMMBNTARY:  BZBKIBL, 


QBKB, 


Vers.  U-16.  The  Divine  Protec- 
tioiL  "  1.  When  God's  people  are  in 
Canaan  they  have  safety  (ver.  14).  2. 
Those  who  design  and  attempt  mis- 
chief against  the  people  of  God  shall 
experimentally  know  that  God  is  their 
Protector  and  the  Revenger  of  their 
wrongs  (ver.  14).  3.  The  secret  plots 
and  deep  designs  of  men  at  length 
break  ont  into  action  (ver.  15).  A, 
The  great  enemies  of  the  Church  have 
many  helpers  and  adherents  fitted  to 
further  their  wicked  designs  (ver.  15). 
5.  Though  all  people  and  lands  in  the 
world  be  the  Lord's,  yet  some  people 
and  lands  are  His  in  a  more  peculiar 
manner  (ver.  16).  6.  God  takes  occa- 
sion, from  the  attempts  of  the  wicked,  to 
execute  His  just  judgments  upon  them, 
and  so  to  get  glory  to  His  name  even 
from  heathens  (ver.  16)." — GreenhiU. 

Ver.  14.  "'Prophesy  and  say  unto 
Gog.'  Say  it  over  again,  that  it  may 
be  the  better  considered  for  the 
strengthening  of  the  hands  and  hearts 
of  My  people." — Trapp. 

Ver.  16.  "Gog  gathers  all  from  all 
quarters  to  be  with  him  to  take  the 
spoil ;  God  brings  them  together  to 
do  that  among  them  which  may  make 
the  heathen  see  and  own  His  hand. 
They  do  it  in  proud  contemi't  of  God 
and  His  people;  but  God  doth  it  to 

florify  His  own  name  and  to  vindicate 
lis  people." — Fool. 

Ver.  17.  "  *  By  My  servants  the  pro- 
phets of  Israel.'  Not  by  prognosti- 
cators  or  soothsayers,  but  by  true 
prophets.  Now,  though  they  had  not 
foretold  this  when  Ezekiel  did,  yet 
when  the  question  shall  be  asked  by 
the  Church,  it  will  be  so  many  hun- 
dreds of  years  past,  it  may  well  refer 
to  these  prophets.  Besides,  Dan.  xi. ; 
Zech.  xiv. ;  Isa.  xxvi.  20,  21,  xxvii.  1 ; 
Jer.  XXX.  23,  24;  Joel  iii.  1,  15,  16; 
Micah  V.  5,  6,  are  prophets  cited  as 
those  who  spake  of  this  mighty  enemy 
and  his  coming,  and  from  which  an 
understanding  reader  may  soon  collect 
that  this  foe  was  intended  as  well  as 
others  in  those  places." — Fool. 


—  The   Oredibility   of  FroxAtecF. 

"1.  The  Lord  doth  infallibly  know 
things  to  come.  2.  The  prophets  de- 
livered many  things  which  were  not 
recorded.  3.  Those  whom  God  sends 
to  make  known  His  mind  to  men.  He 
owns,  honours,  and  protects.  4.  It  is 
not  an  accidental  or  casual  thing  that 
enemies  do  come  against  the  Church.'' 
— OreenMU. 

—  Everything  has  been  told  before : 
they  who  hold  to  the  Word  have  to 
fear  no  surprises. 

Vers.  18-22.  God's  Proceedings 
against  His  Enemies.  "  1.  When 
wicked  men  are  plotting  and  attempt- 
ing the  ruin  of  the  Church,  God's 
wrath  is  kindled  against  them  (ver. 
18).  2.  When  mischief  is  intended 
against  God's  people.  His  love  and 
indignation  are  manifested:  His  love 
to  His  people,  His  indignation  towards 
their  enemies  (vers.  18,  19).  3.  The 
judgments  of  God  are  dreadful;  they 
affect  all  creatures — ^the  fishes  of  the 
sea,  the  fowls  of  heaven,  the  beasts 
of  the  field,  all  that  creeps  upon  the 
earth:  all  men  on  the  face  of  the 
earth  shall  shake;  mountains,  rocks, 
walls,  shall  fall  (ver.  20).  4.  God  can 
easily  raise  forces  against  His  and  the 
Church's  enemies ;  He  can  do  it  with- 
out any  trouble  (vers.  21,  22^.  5. 
As  God  can  easily  gather  armies  for 
the  good  of  His  Church,  so  He  can  as 
easily  ruin  armies  which  are  against 
His  Church:  He  can  mingle  a  per- 
verse spirit  among  them,  so  divide 
them  that  they  shall  execute  one  an- 
other (ver.  21).  6.  God  hath  a  variety 
of  means  and  ways  whereby  to  destroy 
armies  and  punish  enemies  (ver.  22). 
7.  Those  who  join  with  great  ones  in 
wicked  enterprises  must  look  to  suffer 
grievous  things  with  them." — OreenhiU. 

Ver.  18.  "Fury  is  the  glow  which 
bursts  forth  in  the  breathing  of  wrath. 
The  wrath  of  God  is  the  holy  jealousy 
with  which  He,  for  the  protection  ot 
His  kingdom — the  kingdom  of  peace 
—dashes  down  the  widied;  and  this 
wrath  of  eternal  protecting  love  is 
fearful" — Sckmieder. 

413 


Digitized  by 


Google 


iMAF.  XXXIX. 


HOMILSTW  aOMMBNTART:  BZBKIEL. 


Vera.  19-23.  "The  visible  creation 
takes  part  in  this  great  catastrophe. 
A  dreadful  scene  of  confusion  ensaes, 
and  ruin  bursts  forth  from  every  side 
upon  the  head  of  sinners.  In  fierce 
bewilderment  thej  draw  their  swords 
one  upon  another.  All  conceivable 
plagues  work  together  for  their  de- 
struction, and  so  Jehovah  is  mani- 
fested as  the  holy  God." — Hdvemick 

Ver.  20.  "Here  is  a  lofty  strain 
indeed,  giving  us  the  description  of 
the  tokens  of  God's  presence  against 
His  enemies;  the  effects  of  His  dis- 
pleasure against  them  are  seen  in  all 
the  creatures,  sensible  that  their  Maker 
is  angry,  though  they  know  not  with 
whom  or  for  what.  If  to  be  inter- 
preted literally,  we  shall  find  some 
Scripture  parallels  (Ps.  IxxviL  16,  19 ; 
xxix  5,  6^.  But  men,  apprehensive 
of  God's  displeasure  and  shaken  with 
their  own  guilt,  shall  much  more  shake. 
But  I  think  it  is  a  very  elegant  allusive 
description  of  those  strange  troubles 


and  consternation  of  men's  minds  at 
that  day,  and  so  metaphorically  to  be 
understood." — PooL 

Ver.  23.  "Thus  undeniably  prove 
that  I  am  the  mighty,  just,  faithful, 
wise,  holy,  and  merciful  Grod  toward 
My  people ;  and  that  I  am  the  great, 
just,  and  terrible  One  against  Mine 
and  My  Church's  enemies." — Pool, 

—  ''This  end  God  proposeth  to 
Himself  in  all  His  works;  and  well 
He  may,  since  He  hath  none  higher 
than  Himself  to  whom  to  have  respect 
And  let  all  this  that  hath  been  said 
comfort  us  against  the  rage  and  good 
success,  if  any  such  yet  be,  of  the 
anti- Christian  rout,  since  these  are 
but — as  was  once  said  of  decaying 
Carthage — the  last  sprunts  and  bites 
of  dying  wild  beasts." — Trapp. 

—  "  The  conclusion  is,  that  the  re- 
sult of  everything  is  to  magnify  and 
sanctify  God.  We  ought,  therefore, 
to  begin  all  our  affain  with  GknL" — 
Lang&. 


Thb  DfiSTRUOTiON  ov  QoQ  AND  HIS  Yast  Abmibs.    (Chap,  zzxix.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  2. 
^I  will  leave  bnt  the  sixth  part  of 
thee  •* — I  will  six  thee ;  i.«.,  afflict  thee 
with  six  plagues — pestilence,  blood, 
overflowing  rain,  hailstones,  fire,  brim- 
stone (chap,  xxxviii  22).  Or,  draw 
thee  back  with  a  hook  of  six  teeth 
(chap,  xxxviii  4) — ^the  six  teeth  being 
those  six  plagues.  The  rendering  in 
the  text  supposes  that  the  verb  is 
derived  from  the  Hebrew  numeral  six ; 
but  this  rendering  is  not  recognised  by 
the  LXX.  or  the  Vulgate.  The  verb 
has  an  Ethiopic  root^  and  the  passage 
should  be  rendered — 1  will  lead  thee 
along — to  thy  ruin. 

Ver.  3.  "  I  will  smite  thy  bow  oiit 
of  thy  left  hand."  The  Scythians 
were  renowned  as  archers.  The  left 
hand  holds  the  bow,  the  right  bends 
it  and  fits  on  the  arrow.  God  will 
strike  the  weapons  out  of  his  hand,  so 
that  he  shall  be  incapable  of  fighting. 
^  Then  Shalt  fall  npon  the  monntains 
414 


of  IsraeL"  The  scene  of  Israel's 
preservation  shall  be  that  of  Gbg's 
destruction. 

Ver.  6.  ^'  I  will  send  a  fire  among 
them  that  dwell  in  the  IsleB."  The 
judgment  described  iti  chap,  xxxviii 
20  as  universal  is  here  extended  to 
the  isles  to  show  that  it  should  fall 
not  only  on  Qog  and  his  land,  but  on 
those  who  share  his  feelings  of  hatred 
and  opposition  to  the  kingdom  of 
God,  and  who  had  perhaps  helped 
Gog  with  fleets  and  troops. 

Ver.  7.  ""IwUlnotletthempoUnta 
My  holy  name  ** — by  seeming  to  desert 
My  people.  He  would  profane  His 
name  if  He  were  to  abandon  His  people 
continually  to  the  heathen  world.  The 
revelation  of  holiness  in  Israel  pre- 
cludes further  profanation  of  Jehovah  in 
reference  to  Israel  among  the  heathen. 

Ver.  8.  <<  Behold  it  la  come,  it  ig 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMBNTART:  EZEKIBL. 


CBAF.  XttSL 


" — ^very  expressive,  denoting  the 
absolute  certainty  of  the  event  The 
prophet  sets  it  down  as  already  past, 
as  it  is  the  nature  of  faith  to  see  that 
which  is  not  as  if  it  already  existed. 

Yer.  9.  ''They  shall  hnm  them 
with  flre  seven  years."  The  weapons 
of  the  army  left  on  the  battlefield  shall 
be  so  numerous  as  to  supply  fuel  for 
the  people  of  the  land  for  seven  years. 
Seven  years  is  a  hyperbolical  term  de- 
rived from  the  intensive  significancy 
of  the  number  in  Hebrew  usage  and 
designed  to  express  a  very  long  time. 
Seven  was  the  number  connected  with 
the  cleansing  after  contact  with  the 
dead  (Num.  xix.  11),  and  this  purifi- 
cation of  the  land  by  the  clearance  of 
the  heathenish  spoils  was  a  holy  work, 
and  indicated  how  thorough  would  be 
thejudgmentof  God  upon  His  enemies. 

Yer.  11.  ''I  will  give  unto  Oog  a 
place  of  graves."  Gog  meant  to  bury 
the  people  of  God  and  appropriate 
their  land ;  but  he  is  buried  by  them, 
and  receives  only  so  much  of  the  land 
as  suffices  for  a  grave.  ''  The  valley  of 
the  passengers  on  the  east " — referring 
to  its  position  on  the  east  side  of  the 
Dead  Sea,  along  which  lay  the  high- 
road for  traffic  to  Petra  and  Eision- 
geber.  It  would  thus  be  notoriously 
public,  and,  arresting  travellers  in  their 
progress,  would  compel  them  to  reflect 
on  the  signal  judgment  inflicted  on 
the  enemies  of  the  covenabt-people. 
There  is  also,  as  is  common  in  Hebrew, 
a  play  upon  words — there  were  pas- 
sengers to  be  buried,  passengers  to  walk 
over  their  graves,  passengers  to  bury 
them  (ver.  15).  •^It  shall  stop  the 
noses  of  the  passengers  " — arrest  the 
attention  and  impede  the  progress  of 
the  passers  by  the  multitude  of  graves 
and  the  strong  odour  of  decay.  Their 
graves  would  be  close  to  those  of 
their  ancient  prototypes,  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah  in  the  Dead  Sea,  both 
alike  being  signal  instances  of  God's 
judgments. 

Yer.  14.  ''Men  of  continual  employ- 
ment."   Literally,  men  of  eonlinuance, 


men  regularly  appointed  to  this  busi- 
ness, to  express  the  magnitude  of  the 
work  and  the  systematic  way  in  which 
it  is  performed.  ^  After  the  end  of 
seven  months  shall  they  search" — to 
see  if  the  work  was  complete. 

Yer.  16.  "Thus  shall  they  cleanse 
the  land."  According  to  the  Mosaic 
law,  a  dead  body  caused  a  peculiar 
defilement  to  all  with  which  it  came  in 
contacts  So  that,  as  the  land  of  Israel 
represents  figuratively  the  Church  of 
Christ,  the  purification  of  that  land  is 
a  proper  part  of  the  figure  to  indicate 
such  a  sanctification  and  cleansing  of 
His  Church  as  St.  Paul  describes  in 
Eph.  V.  26,  27. 

Yer.  17.  "  Speak  to  every  feathered 
fowl  and  every  beast:  gather  your- 
selves to  My  sacrifice."  This  bold 
imagery  is  quite  in  the  style  of  Eze- 
kiel's  poetic  genius.  The  invited 
guests  are  represented  as  being  filled 
not  only  with  the  flesh  of  the  victims 
in  general,  but  with  that  of  the  horses 
and  the  charioteers.  The  entire  pas- 
sage is  strikingly  parallel  with  Sev. 
xix.  17, 19.  Compare  also  Isa.  xviil  6, 
xxziv.  6 ;  Zeph.  L  7  ;  Mark  ix.  49. 

Yer.  18.  •'Fatlings  of  Bashan"— 
often  applied  in  the  prophets  to  proud, 
despotic,  wanton  enemies  of  Qod  and 
His  people,  Bashan  being  renowned 
for  its  fat  meadows.  Fatness  implies 
prosperity,  which  often  makes  men 
refractory  towards  God  (Deut.  xzxii 
U,  15). 

Yers.  22,  23.  •*  The  house  of  Israel 
shall  know;  and  the  heathen  shall 
know."  The  terrible  judgment  upon 
Gog  will  have  this  twofold  efiect  as  a 
revelation  of  the  glory  of  God — Israel 
will  know  that  the  Lord  is,  and  will 
continue  to  be,  its  God ;  and  the 
heathen  will  know  that  He  gave  Israel 
into  their  power  and  thrust  it  out  of 
its  own  land,  not  from  weakness,  but 
to  punish  it  for  its  faithless  apostasy. 

Yer.  25.  ''And  have  mercy  on  tha 
whde  house  of  IsraeL"    The  restora- 

416 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OUAP.  TITTT,  HOMlLBTia  OOMMJfNTART:  BZBKIBL. 

tions  of  Israel  heretofore  have  been  had  yet  in  Canaan  their  home  and  in 

partial ;  there  must  be  one  yet  future  the  Temple  at  Jerusalem  their  spiritual 

that  is  to  be  universal  (Hos.  i«   11 ;  dwelling-place. 
Bom.  xi.  26). 

Yer.  29.  "I  have  poured  out  My 

Yer.  26.  "  After  they  have  home  Spiiit."    Comp.  Joel  ii.  28  ;  Zech.  zil 

their  shame  " — after  they  snail  have  10  ;  Acts  ii.  17.     There  St.  Peter  dis- 

bome  in  full  the  punishment  of  their  tinctly  appropriates  these  prophecies 

sin :  after  they  have  become  sensible  to  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit 

of  their  guilt  and  ashamed  of  it  (chaps,  on   the'  day  of  Pentecost^  and    the 

XX.  43 ;  xxxyL  31).  inau^ration  of  the  Church  of  Christ 

by  that  miraculous  event.     But  this 

Yer.  28.  ''  And  have  left  none  of  was  the  beginning  of  the  fulfilment  of 

them  any  more  there."    After  the  fall  these  verses  of  the  prophets.     They 

of  the  Chaldean  monarchy,  access  to  shall  find  their  consummation  when 

their  native  land  was  free  to  all  Israel;  time  shall  be  no  mora 
and  those  who  voluntarily  remained 


E0MILETIC8. 

The  Signal  Defeat  or  the  Enbihes  or  God's  People 

(Yers.  1-29.) 

In  this  chapter  we  have  a  prophetic  description  of  the  ultimate  fate  of  Go^, 
the  ideal  impersonation  of  the  power  of  evil,  and  the  utter  destruction  of  hu 
vast  armies.  The  embattled  hosts  march  to  the  conflict  with  proud  ostentation 
and  confident  of  victory.  Their  swords  shall  soon  provide  a  banquet  for  the 
birds  of  prey  that  hover  over  them,  and  for  the  wild  beasts  whose  hungry 
prowls  are  heard  afound  them,  little  dreaming  that  the  stricken  bodies  of  the 
mvaders  must  furnish  the  feast.  An  unseen  and  irresistible  power  lures  them 
on  to  their  ruin ;  they  are  smitten  with  paralysis,  their  weapons  drop  from  their 
hands  and  cover  the  ground  like  corn  newly  cut  with  the  reaper ;  they  perish 
in  myriads  on  the  mountains  and  the  open  fields,  the  birds  and  beasts  ai>s 
summoned  to  gorge  themselves  on  the  human  carrion,  and  the  only  remnants  of 
the  once  formidable  warriors  of  Gog  are  found  in  innumerable  grayea  In  this 
boldly  conceived  vision  we  have  a  realistic  picture  of  the  final  and  utter  destruc* 
tion  of  all  the  enemies  of  God's  people. 

I.  This  defeat  will  be  an  act  of  Divine  Judgment  (vers.  1-7).  The  champions 
of  evil  do  not  sufiiciently  consider  what  is  involved  in  the  fact  that  God  is 
against  them.  Little  do  they  know  about  the  infinite  resources  of  the  power 
they  have  to  reckon  with.  They  see  in  the  people  of  God  only  the  apparently 
helpless  victims  of  their  hatred  and  fury  :  they  know  not,  nor  do  they  care  to 
know,  the  real  character  of  their  Almighty  Defender.  The  silence  of  God  they 
mistake  for  indifference ;  the  patience  of  God  they  misconstrue  into  weakness ; 
the  threaten ings  of  Gh)d  are  meaningless  vauntings,  or  if  they  mean  anythingi 
they  apply  to  every  one  else  but  themselves ;  their  attitude  and  spirit  is  a  com- 
bination of  blasphemous  and  reckless  defiance.  God  is  slow  to  punish,  full  of 
long-suffering  and  mercy,  careful  to  afford  ample  space  for  repentance ;  and  yet 
all  the  time  a  finely  attuned  ear  may  detect  the  Divine  refrain  rising  on  the  air, 
already  palpitating  with  the  breath  of  coming  vengeance — *' Shall  I  not  visit  for 
these  things,  saith  the  Lord  ;  and  shall  not  My  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a  nation 
as  this  t "  (Jer.  v.  9,  29 ;  ix.  9).  At  last  the  thunderbolt  crashes  out  of  the 
416 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ffOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTART:  EZEKISU 


gathering  clouds,  the  enemies  of  Ood  are  stricken  with  fear,  their  forces  routed, 
and  all  are  involved  in  terrible  and  irrevocable  destruction. 

IL  This  defeat  will  be  on  a  scale  of  unexampled  ▼a8tae8&  This  is  evident — 
1.  From  the  number  of  weapons  strewn  on  the  battlefield  (vers.  8-10).  2. 
From  the  time  and  space  occupied  in  burying  the  slain  (vers.  11-16).  3.  From 
the  greatness  of  the  feast  provided  for  the  birds  and  beasts  of  prey  (vers.  17-22). 
Many  of  the  wars  of  history  were  waged  on  a  gigantic  scale,  and  the  wars  of 
the  Jews  were  often  attended  with  great  slaughter.  The  two  rival  kingdoms 
of  Judah  and  Israel  were  in  perpetual  feud  with  each  other,  and  there  were  few 
wars  in  the  history  of  the  world  marked  with  greater  ferocity  and  destruction. 
It  is  compute4  that  in  one  battle  the  number  of  the  slain  amounted  to  no  less 
than  500,000  Israelites.  But  the  greatest  battle  of  the  ages  will  not  exceed  in 
calamity  and  carnage  the  final  overthrow  of  the  enemies  of  God's  people.  Their 
widespread  combinations^  their  vast  hosts  cleveriy  marshalled  in  battle  array, 
their  compacted  unity,  will  make  their  defeat  the  easier,  the  more  direct  and 
complete.  They  will  be  allured  to  gather  into  a  mass,  that  in  a  mass  they 
may  perish. 

IIL  This  defeat  will  make  dear  to  the  nations  the  unchanging  eanity  of  the 
Divine  procedure.  1.  Thai  the  people  of  Ood,  like  aU  other  peoples,  are  punished 
because  of  their  iniquities  (vers.  23,  24).  The  Israelites  wilfully  and  stubbornly 
trespassed  against  Ood ;  therefore  He  hid  His  face,  withdrew  His  protection, 
and  abandoned  them  to  the  cruelty  of  their  enemies.  They  could  not  com- 
plain tiiat  they  were  unjustly  or  harshly  treated.  ''According  to  their  un- 
cleanness  and  their  transgressions "  they  were  dealt  with.  They  deserved  all 
they  got,  and  when  they  came  to  themselves,  they  would  be  the  first  to 
acknowledge  it.  It  was  not  God's  vindictiveness  but  their  own  iniquities  that 
plunged  them  into  misery.  He  simply  deals  with  them  as  with  all  other 
offenders,  of  whatever  nationality.  God  is  the  implacable  foe  of  sin  wherever 
•and  in  whomsoever  found  (Rom.  iL  6-11).  He  is  unchangeably  faithful  in 
justice,  mercy,  and  truth.  2.  That  all  who  faithfully  respond  to  Vie  teaching  of 
the  Divine  Spirit  shall  enjoy  the  protection  and  favour  of  God  (vers.  25-29).  While 
God  will  punish  evil-doers,  He  does  not  overlook  the  least  symptoms  of  re- 
pentance, and  is  eager  to  make  known  His  clemency.  Those  who  have  injured 
Him  the  most  are  assured  of  His  mercy.  It  is  said  the  Emperor  Adrian, 
meeting  a  man  who  had  insulted  him  before  he  came  to  the  throne,  said  to 
him,  "  Approach ;  you  have  nothing  to  fear ;  I  am  an  emperor."  It  is  God-like 
to  be  free  from  resentment.  The  Spirit  is  given  to  convince  of  sin,  to  melt 
the  soul  into  contrition,  to  direct  it  to  the  great  source  of  help,  and  to  bring 
it  face  to  face  with  God,  where  all  is  light  and  peace  and  safety.  God  hides 
His  face  from  the  incorrigible  sinner,  but  reveals  it  to  the  truly  penitent 

Lbssons. — 1.  The  most  powerful  combinaMons  of  the  wicked  are  impotent  when 
in  conflict  with  Jehovah.  %  The  Divine  honour  is  pledged  to  ensure  the  ultimale 
triumph  of  righteousness.  3.  Disobedience  to  the  Divine  law  in  individuals  or  in 
nations  wUl  be  vieiied  unth  terrible  punishment. 


aERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yers.  1-29.  "  The  present  chapter  Ezekiel  is  not  predicting  the  invasion 
proceeds  to  describe  the  defeat  of  evil  of  an  actual  army,  but  the  advance  of 
and  the  triumph  of  God  and  His  evil  under  that  figure.  So  he  declares 
people.     We  must  bear  in  mind  that     the  overthrow  of  evil  by  the  figure  of 

2D  417 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OHAP.  xxxn. 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIBL. 


a  host  routed  and  slain,  and  the  conse- 
quent purification  of  a  land  partially 
overrun  and  disturbed.  It  is  the 
manner  of  Ezekiel  to  dwell  upon  the 
details  of  the  fi^rative  acts  which  he 
portrays,  bringing  them  before  the 
mind  as  vivid  pictures,  and  employing, 
so  to  speak,  the  strongest  colouring. 
This  has  led  some  so  to  rest  on  the 
picture  as  to  forget  that  it  is  a  figure. 
Thus  they  have  searched  history  to 
find  out  some  campaign  in  the  land 
of  Israel,  some  overthrow  of  invaders, 
on  which  to  fix  this  prophecy,  and 
have  assigned  localities  to  the  burial- 
place,  and  even  thou«;ht  to  discover 
the  spot  to  which  belongs  the  appella- 
tion, Hamoii'Qog.  But  in  truth  the 
details  are  set  forth  in  order  to  carry 
out  the  allegory,  and  their  very  ex- 
travagance, so  to  speak,  points  out 
that  we  have  but  the  shadow  of  a 
great  spiritual  reality,  which  man  can 
only  faintly  represent  and  feebly  grasp 
in  afigvre," — Speakers  CommerUary. 

—  "  We  find  in  the  prophecy  the  fol- 
lowing important  and  salutary  truths : 
— 1.  While  the  appearance  of  the  new 
David  to  take  the  rule  and  presidency 
over  God's  heritage  would  have  the 
effect  of  setting  His  people  free  from 
the  old  troubles  and  dangers  which 
had  hitherto  assailed  them,  it  should 
be  far  from  securing  them  against  all 
future  conflicts  with  evil.  It  would 
rather  tend  to  call  up  other  adversaries 
and  enlarge  the  field  of  conflict,  so  as 
to  make  it  embrace  the  most  distant 
and  barbarous  regions  of  the  earth. 
For  the  whole  earth  is  Christ's  heri- 
tage, and  sooner  or  later  it  must  come 
to  an  issue  between  the  adherents  of 
His  cause  and  the  children  of  error 
and  corruption.  2.  From  the  very 
nature  of  the  case,  tliis  trial  would 
fall  to  be  made  on  a  very  large  scale 
and  with  most  gigantic  resources,  so 
that  all  preceding  contests  should  ap- 
pear small  and  vanish  out  of  sight,  in 
comparison  of  this  last  great  struggle 
in  which  the  world's  destiny  was  to  be 
decided  for  good  or  evil.  3.  Though 
the  odds  in  this  conflict  could  not  but 
appear  beforehand  very  great  against 
the  people  and  cause  of  Christ,  yet 

418 


the  result  should  be  certainly  on  their 
side,  and  simply  because  with  them  u 
the  truth  and  the  might  of  Jehovah. 
4.  As  all  originated  in  the  claim  of 
Messiah  and  His  truth  to  the  entire 
possession  of  the  world,  so  the  whole 
is  represented  as  ending  in  the  com- 
plete establishment  of  the  claim.  It 
is  understood  at  last  that  it  was  His 
zeal  for  the  interests  of  righteousness 
which  led  Him  to  chastise,  in  former 
times,  His  own  professing  people,  and 
that  the  same  now  has  induced  Him 
to  render  them  triumphant  over  every 
form  and  agency  of  evil  And  now, 
all  counter  rule  and  authority  being 
put  down,  the  prospect  stretches  out 
before  the  Church  of  eternal  peace  and 
blessedness  in  what  at  length  become 
the  new  heavens  and  the  new  earth, 
wherein  dwelleth  righteousness."— 
Fairbairtk 

Yers.  1-7.  €k>d'8  Dealings  with  His 
Enemies.  **  1.  Those  who  are  enemies 
unto  the  Church,  (}od  is  an  enemy 
unto  them.  2.  Wicked  men  may  be 
in  great  honour  and  have  great  power. 
3.  There  are  seeming  contradictions  in 
Holy  Scripture.  God  was  with  Gog 
and  against  Gog :  with  him  by  His 
providence  to  bring  him  forth  to  mani- 
fest his  spleen  and  gall  against  the 
land  of  Israel;  and  against  him  by 
His  power  and  justice  to  destroy  him 
for  his  cruelty  and  bloodiness.  There 
are  many  scriptures  seeming  to  destroy 
one  another ;  but  if  rightly  understood 
do  sweetly  comply  and  shake  hands 
together.  4.  Good's  hand  is  in  the 
undertakings  of  enemies  against  the 
Church.  5.  It  is  in  the  Lord  to  dis- 
able and  disappoint  warriors  when 
they  are  ready  for  battle.  6.  That  in 
the  same  place  where  God  shows  rich 
mercy  to  the  godly,  there  Ho  executes 
severe  judgments  upon  the  enemies. 
7.  That  armies  and  others  are  exposed 
to  public  shame  and  miserable  ends  is 
of  God.  8.  What  the  Lord  speaks, 
that  shall  certainly  take  place.  9. 
When  God  begins  to  visit  the  enemies 
of  His  Church,  He  makes  progress 
therein.  10.  When  God  shows  mercy 
to  His  Church  and  destroys  the  enemies 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIG  COMMBNTARY:  EZEKIBL. 


OHAP.  zxxn. 


of  it,  He  provides  for  His  own  honour, 
sanctifies  His  name,  and  makes  Him- 
self to  be  known  distinct  from  all  other 
gods.**— Gr«e«WW. 

—  The  Infiataation  of  the  Wicked— 
L  Renders  them  reckless  in  their 
attack  upon  a  superior  Power  (ver.  1). 
2.  Blinds  them  to  the  fact  that  they 
are  being  led  to  destruction  by  the 
Power  they  defy  (ver.  2).  3.  Knows 
not  the  moment  they  may  be  suddenly 
reduced  to  helplessness  (ver.  3).  4.  In- 
volves them  in  terrible  and  universal 
destruction  (vers.  4-6).  5.  Makes  their 
punishment  a  means  of  exalting  the 
justice  and  holiness  of  the  Being  they 
madly  opposed  (ver.  7). 

Vers.  2-5.  ''  As  the  land  of  Israel 
shall  be  the  scene  of  Gog's  wicked 
attack  on  the  people  of  Gkd,  so  shall 
it  be  the  scene  of  the  awfiU  punish- 
ment  inflicted  upon  Qog  and  of  the 
deliverance  of  Israel  How  often.  GU>d 
thus  marks  the  retributive  justice  of 
His  dealings  (as  in  the  case  of  Ahab's 
and  Jezebel's  obtaining  possession  of 
Naboth's  vineyard  through  false  accu- 
sation, murder,  and  robbery)  by  visit- 
ing the  transgressor  with  judgment  on 
the  very  scene  of  his  guilt  1  (1  Rings 
zxi.  19,  xxii.  38;  2  Kings  ix.  21,  25, 
26,  Z^y—Fausset. 

Yer.  3.  The  Man  of  War — 1.  An 

imposing  figure  when  fully  armed  for 
battle.  2.  Should  carefully  weigh  the 
merits  of  the  cause  he  espouses.  3. 
Exposes  his  folly  when  he  proudly 
boasts  about  his  individual  prowess. 
4u  May  in  a  moment  be  deprived  of 
both  strength  and  weapons. 

—  **  I  will  disarm  thee.  As  Hero- 
dotus reports  of  Sennacherib  and  his 
Assyrians  in  Egypt,  that  their  quivers, 
bow-strings,  and  targets  were  gnawed 
to  pieces  by  mice  and  rats  in  one 
nighty  so  that  they  were  forced  to  fly 
for  their  lives.  And  as  our  chroniclers 
tell  us  that  in  the  battle  between 
Edward  IIL  of  England  and  Philip  of 
France  there  fell  such  a  piercing 
shower  of  rain  as  dissolved  their 
strings  and  made  their  bows  useless." 
—Tra:pf. 


Ver  6.  "  Those  who  shall  abet  Gog, 
virtually  though  not  actively  joining 
him  in  the  invasion,  shall  be  taught 
by  bitter  experience  to  know  that 
their  fancied  security  in  their  se«vgirt 
or  sea- washed  and  distant  lands  is  a 
self-deceit ;  a  fire  from  the  Lord  shall 
consume  them,  so  that  they  shall  know, 
to  their  cost,  the  God  of  power,  whom 
they  refused  to  know  as  the  God  of 
grace  and  love.  Self-confidence  and 
careless  living,  under  the  mistaken 
notion  of  security,  have  proved  the 
ruin  of  millions  of  immortal  souls." — 
FausseL 

—  "  The  fire  of  God  upon  sympa- 
thies with  evil.  —  The  far-reaching 
effect  of  Divine  judgment." — Lange, 

Ver.  7.  "  Israel  hereafter  shall,  by 
the  special  grace  of  God,  be  kept  from 
dishonouring  the  holy  name  of  their 
God  by  their  sins  and  the  consequent 
judgments  which  made  the  heathen 
think  that  Jehovah  was  unable  or 
unwilling  to  save  His  people.  How 
joyful  is  the  prospect  to  the  people  of 
God  that  the  time  is  ere  long  com- 
ing when  they  shall  be  placed  under 
the  blessed  necessity  of  uninterrupted 
obedience  to  God's  will  I  Tempta- 
tions from  the  flesh,  the  world,  and 
Satan,  whi'ch  now  harass  them,  shall 
then  be  at  an  end.  Sin,  which  is  now 
their  greatest  sorrow  because  it  most 
dishonours  the  name  of  their  Lord, 
shall  be  no  more ;  and  the  Lord  shall 
make  known  His  holy  name  with 
such  attractive  power  that  He  will 
not  let  them  pollute  it  any  more.'' — 
FausseL 

Ver.  8.  The  InfaUlhle  Certitude  of 
the  Divine  Word.  1.  Notwithstanding 
that  all  natural  appearances  are  against 
it.  2.  Though  its  fulfilment  is  in  the 
future.  3.  Notwithstanding  the  most 
desperate  opposition.  4.  Confirmed  by 
many  notable  examples.  5.  Because 
the  Lord  hath  spoken  it.  6.  Should 
induce  an  unfaltering  confidence. 

—  Fulfilled  Prophecy.  "  1.  There 
is  a  certain  time  determined  for  the 
destruction  of  the  Church's  enemies, 
which  God  looks  upon  as  present  and 

419 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  xxxn. 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIEL. 


done.  2.  The  particular  time  is  hidden 
from  men  and  known  only  unto  (Ml.** 
—OremkUL 

Yen.  9,  10.  The  Spoilt  of  a  Great 
Victory.  "  1.  God  will  give  victories 
to  His  Church  and  people  which  seem 
incredible.  2.  The  Lord  makes  that 
advantageous  to  His  people  which 
their  enemies  intended  to  damnify  and 
ruin  them  by.  3.  After  the  overthrow 
of  Gk)g  and  Magos,  Antichrist  and  bis 
adherents,  the  Church  of  God  shall 
have  great  peace.  4.  The  people  of 
God  shall  have  a  day  of  recompense 
for  the  wrongs  and  injuries  they  have 
sustained." — OreenhiU. 

—  "  It  may  be  wondered  they  bum 
these  weapons  which  might  be  of  use 
to  them  for  defence  and  safety ;  but  it 
was  done  partly  because  they  were 
weapons  of  the  uncircumcised,  partly 
because  they  were  anatliematay  as  ail 
Jericho  was,  but  chiefly  in  testimony 
that  God  was  their  safety  and  defence." 
—Pool. 

—  Mariana  in  his  History  of  Spain 
says,  that  after  the  Spaniards  had 
given  that  signal  overthrow  to  the 
Saracens  in  1212,  they  found  such  a 
vast  quantity  of  lances,  javelins,  and 
such-like  that  they  served  tliem  for 
four  years  for  fuel 

—  **  Tlie  fire  of  Christianity  comes 
at  last  over  all  the  weapons  of  this 
world.  They  then  warn  instead  of 
injuring.  If  God  is  our  shield,  then  it 
is  seen  what  becomes  of  all  the  shields 
of  men,  long  and  short.  Let  not  your- 
self be  covered  and  screened  by  the 
world.  The  world,  with  its  pomp  and 
power,  after  all  exists  only  to  furnish 
fuel  for  the  children  of  God.  Thus 
the  godly  man  finally  gains  the  upper 
hand,  however  long  and  strongly  the 
ungodly    have    behaved   proudly." — 

Vers.  11-16.  The  Burial  of  the 
Slain.  ''  1.  God  disappoints  the  ex- 
pectation of  the  wicked  while  living, 
yet  sometimes  affords  favour  when 
they  are  dead.  2.  After  great  victories 
wherein  many  are  slain  people  should, 
for  public  good,  be  careful  to  bury 
420 


the  dead,  though  it  require  time,  be 
troublesome  and  chargeable.  3.  By 
great  victories  over  enemies  GU)d 
honours  His  own  name  and  makes  His 
people  to  have  a  name.  4  After  con- 
quering there  ought  to  be  cleansing." 
— OreenhilL 

—  "  Where  Gog  shall  expect  to  find 
a  spoil  and  a  possession,  he  shall  only 
find  a  grave ;  and  that  a  grave  near 
the  sea  that  entombs  his  ancient  pro- 
totypes, the  fire-blasted  cities  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah — the  Dead  Sea.  The 
publicity  of  this  place  of  burial  will 
arrest  the  attention  of  the  many  that 
pass  that  way.  These  shall  recognise 
the  ri^'hteous  judgment  of  the  Lord  in 
the  destruction  of  Gog.  How  often 
are  the  transgressor's  deeply-laid  plans 
brought  to  nothing  in  a  moment^  and 
the  mischief  which  he  prepares  for 
others  recoils  on  himself  1  Those  who 
have  experienced  great  deliverances - 
should  be  thoroughly  zealous  in  pro- 
moting a  complete  and  radical  reforma- 
tion. Every  man  should  render  the 
utmost  help  he  can  towards  furthering 
the  good  work.  Sin,  the  polluting 
thing,  needs  to  be  searched  out  in  its 
most  secret  recesses.  Let  not  the 
casual  passer-by  think  that  he  is  ex- 
empt from  the  duty  of  exerting  himi- 
self  in  word  and  deed  for  the  glory 
of  God  and  the  good  of  the  Church, 
any  more  than  the  stationary  dweller 
in  his  own  home.  All  have  their  place 
and  work  to  do;  and  it  is  only  by 
general  co-operation  that  the  work 
of  the  Lord  can  be  most  completely 
effected." — Fausset. 

Yer.  11.  The  Fate  of  the  Proud. 

1.  A  defeat  where  they  expected  vic- 
tory. 2.  Execration  and  disgust  where 
they  expected  applause.  3.  Oblivion 
where  tliey  expected  fame.  4.  A  grave 
where  they  expected  riches.  5.  It 
is  a  testimony  to  the  sacredness  of 
the  human  body  that  even  the  proud 
and  cruel  are  honoured  with  a  grave. 
6.  Justice  leaves  its  dead  victim  at 
the  grave's  mouth  :  Mercy  tenderly 
buries  it. 

—  "  Besides  many  other  reasons  for 
burying  these  slaughtered  multitudeSi 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  CoMMENTAMr:  BZBKIBL. 


CHAP.  zzxa. 


the  humanity  that  religion  is  full  of 
would  guide  the  Jews  to  it,  and  God 
tells  OS  that  Grog  shall  have  a  grave 
in  Israel.  He  came  to  take  possession, 
and  so  he  shall,  but  not  as  he  purposed 
and  hoped,  but  as  God  intended :  Gog 
shall  possess  his  house  of  darkness  in 
that  land  which  he  invaded  to  make 
a  prey  of.  He  shall  have  one  place 
there — a  grave.*' — Pooh 

—  ''Like  Gog,  many  a  one  finds  a 
grave  where  he  least  expected  it  The 
grave,  a  quiet  answer  to  so  many  loud 
questions,  the  echo  to  so  many  and 
various  forms  of  *  I  will  I '  Here  the 
proudest  and  roost  foaming  waves  will 
subside.  Masters  cease  at  the  brink 
of  the  grave ;  the  continuation  follows 
— kd,  rottenness,  horror,  judgment  of 
survivors  on  the  dead,  to  say  nothing 
of  the  judgment  of  (}od,  who  has  from 
the  beginning  had  the  same  decision 
regarding  them."— Xan^d 

Yer.  13.  ''It  shall  be  to  the  house 
of  Israel  a  renown,  a  commendation, 
matter  of  praise,  that  they  did,  like 
men,  bury  the  dead,  who  otherwise 
must  have  been  all  dung  on  the  face 
of  the  earth,  and  the  swelling  hill 
rising  from  their  buried  bones  shall 
be  a  monument  to  the  praise  of  Israel's 
courtesy.  Or  else  thus,  the  day  of 
My  being  glorified  shall  be  a  renown 
to  Israel.  As  it  is  an  honour  to  be 
owned  of  Gk)d,  so  when  G^d  shows  He 
owneth  such,  He  gives  them  honour 
among  all  that  observe  it." — Pod, 

Yer.  15.  The  Sacredness  of  the 
Huxnaii  Body.  1.  It  is  designed  to 
be  the  temple  of  the  Divine  (1  Cor. 
viL  19\  2.  Shall  ultimately  be  raised 
from  the  dead  (Rom.  viii  23 ;  1  Cor. 
XV.  35).  3.  Should  ensure  it  reverent 
burial  4.  Not  a  single  bone  to  be 
treated  with  indignity. 

Yer.  16.  "The  world,  the  city  of 
the  dead — Hamonah.  What  a  stillness 
of  death  after  the  bustle  of  so  many 
departing  things  and  departed  men  {— 
The  enemies  of  the  Church  leave  after 
iheir  death  a  shameful  name  behind 
ihem  (Acts  xii.  20-23)."— Iom^^ 


Yers.  17-29.  "The  destruction  of  the 
euemy,  viewed  as  to  its  results  with 
reference  to  the  people  of  God.     The 

Purposes  of  the  past  dispensation  shall 
e  made  clear  to  God's  people  them- 
selves and  to  the  heathen*  All  shall 
see  that  the  judgments  which  have 
fallen  upon  the  chosen  race  were  no 
si^n  of  any  change  of  purpose  of  the 
Almighty,  but  the  consequence  of  their 
sins,  and  that,  these  slue  once  aban- 
doned, the  favour  of  their  God  will 
return  in  yet  more  abundance.**— 
Speaker* s  Commeniary. 

Yers.  17-20.  Evidences  of  BiTlne 
Judgment  '*  1.  That  all  creatures  are 
at  the  command  of  God,  and  ordered 
to  do  this  or  that  according  to  His 
wise  providence  (ver.  17).  2.  That 
God  doth  execute  some  great  and 
signal  judgment  when  He  summons 
the  creatures  to  eat  the  flesh  and  drink 
the  blood  of  the  slain  (vers.  18,  19), 
3.  It  is  matter  of  delight  and  pleasure 
unto  Goil  to  destroy  the  enemies  of 
His  Church  and  people  (ver.  17).  4. 
God  is  impartial  in  His  judicial  dis- 
pensations; He  punisheth  the  great 
delinquents  as  well  as  the  lesser  (vers. 
18,  20).  5.  Great  men  and  vulgar 
ones  also  may  be  a  prev  to  the 
creatures,  and  lie  without  burial  for 
a  season.  6.  God  provides  for  the 
brute  and  dumb  creatures,  and  that 
abundantly  (ver.  17)." — QreenhUL 

—  A  Stiange  Banguet  1.  K  we 
consider  the  guests  invited — ^the  birds 
and  beasts  of  prey  (ver.  17).  2.  If 
we  consider  the  kind  of  food  provided 
— ^the  flesh  of  princes  and  mighty  men 
(ver,  18).  3.  K  we  consider  the 
horrible  surfeiting  of  the  wild  revellers 
(vers.  19,  20).  4.  A  revolting  spectacle 
of  humbled  pride. 

Yer.  17.  "What  an  end  after  such 
a  beginning  1  The  beginning  was, 
Israel  shall  fall  a  prejr  to  Gog;  now 
the  end  is,  that  Gog  lies  there  a  prey 
to  the  very  beasts  of  the  field.* — 
Lomgi. 

Yers.  21-24.  The  Final  Ime  of 
DiTlne  Puniahment.     "1.  The  great 

421 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORA?.  XXXIZ. 


FOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL. 


end  of  GrO'I's  jadgtnents  upon  sinfal 
men  is  His  glory  (ver.  21).  2.  Dread- 
ful judgments  upon  the  wicked  are 
eneaging  mercies  unto  the  ^odly  (ver. 
22)1  3.  GU>d  doth  withhold  mercies 
from  His  people  and  lay  sad  judg- 
ments upon  them  for  their  sins  (ver. 
23).  4.  Gk>d  will  convince  His  enemies 
of  the  true  cause  of  His  executing 
dreadful  judgments  upon  His  people 
(ver.  23).  5.  None  have  just  ground 
of  complaint  whatsoever  judgments 
are  upon  them,  howsoever  God  deal 
by  them  (ver.  24).''— ffr««iAi«. 

Vers.  23-29.  The  Hidden  and  the 
Open  Face  of  Ood.  1.  That  human 
sin  obscures  the  vision  of  God's  face 
(vers.  23,  24).  2.  That  when  God 
hides  His  face  His  people  are  exposed 
to  the  ravages  of  the  enemy  (ver.  23). 
3.  Tliat  while  God  hides  His  face  His 
hand  is  employed  in  promoting  the 
interests  of  His  people  (vers.  25,  27, 
28).  4.  That  when  suffering  humbles 
the  soul  into  genuine  repentance  the 
fisuse  of  God  reappears.  Bepentance  is 
the  soul  coming  to  the  knowledge  of 
God  (vers.  26,  28).  0.  The  work  of 
the  Divine  Spirit  upon  the  soul  pre- 
pares it  for  tne  everlasting  vision  of 
the  open  face  of  Gk>d  (ver.  29 ;  comp. 
2  Cor.  iii  18). 

Yer.  28.  '*The  heathen  thought 
meanly  of  the  Gk>d  of  Israel,  and 
reckoned  they  came  into  captivity  be- 
cause the  people  of  some  greater  god 
had  by  the  power  of  their  god  pre- 
vaUed  acainst  Israel's  God  and  His 
people;  but  by  this  overthrow  given 
to  Gog  they  shall  see  it  was  not  im- 
potence in  Israel's  (}od,  but  iniquity 
in  Israel's  people,  that  brought  them 
into  captivity.  When  (Jod  withdrew 
His  defence,  as  fenceless,  they  fell 
under  the  sword  of  the  enemy,  for  it 
is  He  that  subdueth  enemies  and  giveth 
victory." — Pool. 

Vers.  25-29.  Ood'a  Gbodneaa  a 
MoUve  for  His  Addvlty.  ''I.  The 
afflictions  of  God's  people  may  be 
long  and  sharp,  yet  they  shall  not 
be  always;  they  shall  have  an  end. 
422 


2.  There  is  a  day  of  mercy  to  come 
for  the  Jews,  even  all  of  them  (ver. 
25).  3.  The  great  things  God  doth 
for  His  people  are  not  done  for  their 
worth  or  merits,  but  for  His  holy 
name's  sake  (ver.  25).  4.  Sin  brings 
men  to  shame  and  punishment,  which 
they  must  undergo  somewhere  or  other 
(ver.  26).  5.  In  times  of  peace  and 
safety  usually  men  forget  God  and  sin 
against  Him  (ver.  26).  6.  The  Lord 
by  openly  delivering  His  people  from 
an  afflicted  condition  doth  sanctify 
His  own  name  and  hath  it  sanctified 
by  others  (vers.  27,  28).  7.  There  is 
a  time  when  the  Jews  shall  not  only 
have  mercy,  but  abundant  and  lasting 
mercy  (ver.  29).  Now  they  are  like 
dead  trees  without  any  sap  in  them ; 
but  then  they  will  be  like  trees  well- 
rooted,  full  of  sap,  and  in  their  greatest 
glory — full  of  branches,  leaves,  blos- 
soms, fruit,  and  the  sun  shining  upon 
them  (Bom.  xL  15)." — GreenhtU, 

Ver.  26.  "This  restoring  captive 
Jews  is  mere  mercy.  It  is  very  tme 
by  sin  they  deserved  to  be  made 
captives,  and  it  is  as  true  they  never 
did  or  could  deserve  a  deliverance 
from  captivity.  It  was  not  extremity 
of  justice  that  so  punished,  but  it  was 
the  riches  of  mercy  that  so  pardoned 
and  redeemed." — Pool 

Ver.  27.  "  Sanctified  by  their  accept- 
ing punishment,  repenting  for  sin, 
loathing  their  former  ways  and  them- 
selves ibr  them,  acknowledging  God 
to  be  holyi  engaging  themselves  in 
covenant  of  perpetual  obedience  to 
God  and  keeping  it ;  by  these  things 
God  will  be  sanctified  among  the 
Israelites  and  in  sight  of  the  nations, 
when  they  see  the  furnace  hath  puri- 
fied them."— Pool 

Ver.  29.  The  Promise  of  the  Spirit. 
1.  The  constant  theme  of  Old  Testa- 
ment prophets.  2.  Blessedly  realised 
in  the  history  of  the  Church  in  all 
ages.  8.  Fulfilled  in  the  remarkable 
advances  of  the  Gospel  in  the  present 
day.  4.  The  guarantee  of  future  uni- 
versal yiotoxy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIQ  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL.  OUP.  Xt 


—  ^^It  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  as  a  Spirit  of  power  shall  strengthen 
which,  when  poured  out,  inclines  the  them  for  every  duty  and  enable  them 
heart  to  appreciate  aright  God's  mar-  to  withstand  and  conquer  every  temp- 
yellous  gf^^e,  and  so  produces  repent-  tation ;  as  a  Spirit  of  holiness  shall 
ance.  Th»  same  Spirit  in  the  heart  is  cleanse  them  from  sin,  sanctify  their 
also  the  earnest  to  assure  the  children  souls,  and  stamp  them  with  Mine 
ofGod that theiruow reconciled Fatlier  image;  and  as  a  Spirit  of  adoption 
will  hide  His  face  from  them  no  more,  and  consolation  shall  inspire  them 
May  the  promise  of  the  full  outpouring  with  confidence  and  hope,  and  render 
of  Uie  blessed  Spirit  in  the  latter  days  every  branch  of  obedience  and  every 
on  both  Israel  and  the  Church  be  soon  exercise  of  piety  and  virtue  sweet  and 
realised;  and  for  this  end  may  tlie  delightful  to  them." — Benson, 

spirit  of  prayer  more  and  more  per-         —  "The  true  Israel,  the  people  of 

vade  all  the  professing  disciples  of  the  the  Spirit.     The  outpouring  of  the 

Lord  Jesus  1 " — FausseL  Spirit  of  Jehovah  is  the  end  of  all  the 

—  "  Which  as  a  Spirit  of  truth  shall  ways  which  He  has  gone  with  Israel 
enlighten  their  minds,  and  make  them  in  anger  and  compassion,  and  the 
wise  unto  salvation;  as  a  Spirit  of  grace  consummation  of  Israel  in  the  Chris- 
shall  regenerate  and  create  them  anew ;  tian  Church." — Lange, 


*<The  deliverance  of  the  Hebrews  was  wrought  out  in  a  most  remarkable 
manner.  Mattathias,  raising  the  standard  of  patriotism,  called  arouud  him  the 
pious  portion  of  his  countrymen.  His  party  increased  rapidly  till  they  became 
a  considerable  army.  He  appointed  his  third  and  bravest  son  Judiis  military 
commander,  by  whom  the  Syrian  generals  that  were  sent  against  him  were 
defeated.  In  battle  after  battle  he  proved  victorious.  Even  the  army  which 
Lysias  sent  into  Judea  could  not  stand  before  him.  Though  composed  of  thirty 
thousand  foot  and  seven  thousand  cavalry,  and  increased  by  auxiliaries  from  the 
provinces,  it  proved  powerless  before  him.  Putting  the  enemy  to  flight,  he 
secured  immense  booty.  The  like  success  attended  him  the  following  year, 
when  he  defeated  an  army  of  sixty  thousand  men,  made  himself  master  of 
several  strong  cities,  and,  retaking  Jerusalem,  purified  the  Temple  and  restored 
its  solemn  services.  His  brothers,  Simon  and  Jonathan,  proved  themselves 
worthy  successors  of  this  devoted  patriot;  the  independence  of  the  Jews  was 
finally  secured,  and  the  royal  dignity  vested  in  the  Asmon»an  family,  in  which 
it  continued  till  the  time  of  Herod  the  Qreat" — Henderson. 


The  Vision  or  the  Restored  Tebiplb  and  the  Beinhabited  Land. 

(Chaps.  xl.-xlviii) 

This  is  a  development  of  the  promise  contained  in  chapter  zxxviL  27.  The 
subject  of  the  closing  chapters  of  Ezekiel  is  the  restitution  of  the  kingdom  of 
God.  This  is  expressed  by  a  vision  in  which  are  displayed  not  only  a  rebuilt 
Temple,  but  also  by  a  reformed  priesthood,  reorganised  services,  a  restored 
monarchy,  a  reapportioned  tenitory,  a  renewed  people,  and,  as  a  consequence, 
the  diffusion  of  fertility  and  plenty  over  the  whole  earth.  The  return  from 
Babylon  was  indeed  the  beginning  of  this  work,  but  only  a  beginning,  intro- 
ductory to  the  future  kingdom  of  God,  first  upon  earth,  finally  in  heaven.  The 
vision  must  therefore  be  viewed  as  strictly  symbolical,  the  symbols  employed 
being  the  Mosaic  ordinances.  These  ordinances  had  indeed  in  themselves  a 
hidden  meaning.  The  Tabernacle  in  the  midst  of  the  tents  of  the  tribes,  and 
afterwards  the  Temple  in  the  capital  of  the  laud  of  inheritance,  was  intended 
to  signify  the  dwelling  of  Jehovah  among  His  people ;  the  priesthood  was  to 

423 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  XL. 


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIBL. 


denote  the  mediation  between  Gk>d  and  man  ;  the  monarchy  the  sovereignty  of 
God,  the  i>eople  the  saints  of  God,  the  territory  their  inheritance.  So  t^at  the 
symbols  here  employed  have  an  essential  propriety ;  yet  they  are  truly  symbols^ 
and  as  such  they  are  to  be  regarded.  ** — Speaker's  Commeniary, 


Thb  Ideal  Temple  of  the  Future.    (Chap.  xL) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1. 
''In  tlie  Ave  and  twentieth  year.** 

The  fiftieth  year  from  the  18  th  of 
Josiah,  the  year  of  his  memorable 
passover  (2  Kings  xxii.  12).  The 
jubilee  year  began  with  the  month  of 
Tisri,  on  the  tenth  day  of  which  was 
the  day  of  atonement.  Grod  allowed 
the  prophet  to  see  the  Temple  and  the 
future  freedom  of  Israel  on  the  day  of 
jubilee  l)ecause  then  servants  became 
free,  and  on  the  day  of  atonement 
because  then  the  sins  of  Israel  are 
forgiven.  '<In  the  fonrteentli  year 
after  the  city  was  smitten,  in  the  self- 
same day."  The  desolation  of  the 
Temple,  city,  and  commonwealth  is 
here  recalled  in  vivid  contrast  to  the 
glorious  restoration  that  is  to  be. 

Ver.  2.  **  Set  me  upon  a  very  liigh 
mountain  "  —  Moriah,  very  high  as 
compared  with  the  plains  of  Babylon, 
still  more  so  as  to  its  moral  elevation 
(chaps,  xvii.  22 ;  xx.  40).—"  By  which 
was  as  the  frame  of  a  city."  It  is 
not  a  city  which  is  seen,  but  a  building 
— the  Temple  and  its  courts — ^like  a 
city  in  its  construction,  surrounded  by 
massive  walls. 

Yer.  3.  "  Behold,  there  was  a  man." 
The  Old  Testament  manifestation  of 
heavenly  beings  as  men  prepared 
men's  minds  for  the  coming  incar* 
nation. — "  Like  the  appearance  of 
brass."  Brightly  sliiuing  —  resplen- 
dent.—«  With  a  line  of  flax"— for 
long  measurements  —  measuring  the 
ground-plan. — **  And  a  measuring 
reed  " — used  in  measuring  houses.  It 
marked  the  straightness  of  the  walls. 
To  measure  implied  a  separation  to 
sacred  purposes. 

Yor.  5.  **  By  the  cubit  and  a  hand- 
breadth."  Measures  were  mostly  taken 
from  the  human  body.     The  greater 
424 


cubit,  the  len^h  from  the  elbow  to  the 
end  of  the  middle  finger,  a  little  more 
than  two  feet ;  exceeding  the  ordinary 
cubit,  from  the  elbow  to  the  wrist,  by 
a  hand-breadth — {.«.,  twenty-one  inches 
in  all  The  palm  was  the  full  breadth 
of  the  hand,  three  and  a  half  inches. 
«•  The  breadth  of  the  building."  The 
boundary  wall  The  height  and 
breadth  of  this  will  are  given,  but  not 
the  length,  which  is  determined  here- 
after, and  shown  to  enclose  a  square,  a 
side  of  which  is  500  cubits. 

Ver.  6.  "  The  gate  which  looketh 
toward  the  east."  This  is  particularly 
described,  all  the  other  gate-buildings 
being  exactly  like  it.  The  east  gate 
was  to  be  especially  sacred,  as  it  was 
through  it  the  glory  of  God  had  de- 
parted (chap.  XL  23),  and  through  it 
the  glory  was  to  return  (chaps.  xliii« 
1,  2 ;  xUv.  2,  3). 

Ver.  7.  "  And  every  little  chamber 
was" — guard-cliambers,  for  the  use  of 
the  Levites  who  watched  at  the  Temple 
gates,  and  for  depositing  utensils  and 
musical  instruments.  In  our  transla- 
tion the  words  was  and  %oere  are  con- 
tinually introduced,  but  are  not  in  the 
original.  They  would  be  better  away. 
The  substantives  depend  upon  the  verb 
measured  throughout 

Yer.  9.  «  And  the  posts  thereof  "—a 

projection  like  the  ram's  horn.  Hence 
in  architecture  a  column  projecting 
from  the  wall  with  its  base,  shaft,  and 
capital,  or  it  may  be  the  base  only,  as 
in  verses  16,  49. 


Ver.   14.   -He 

angel  is  exhibiting  a 
structed  building,  and 
said  to  make  it. 


The 
newly  con* 
therefore   is 


''Naxrow  windows  "—dosed  with 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  SZSKIEL 


OHAP.X&, 


network — the  jambs  sloping  towards 
the  opening.  The  ancients  had  no 
glass,  so  they  had  the  windows  latticed 
— narrow  in  the  interior  of  the  walls 
and  widening  at  the  exterior.  This 
however,  though  common  in  later 
styles,  is  not  in  accordance  with  the 
architecture,  in  which  all  the  lines  were 
straight  and  the  spaces  rectangular. 
''Idkewlae  to  fhe  arches  "  —  the 
porches.  The  arch  was  at  this  time 
unknown  in  architecture.  The  word 
probably  denotes  a  hall  or  colonnade 
of  posts,  as  in  verse  14. 

Yer.  17.  **A  pavement  made  for 
the  court* — tesselated  mosaic  This 
pavement  came  up  to  the  sides  of  the 
gate-build  iugSy  and  was  carried  along 
the  sides  of  the  court  parallel  to  the 
boundary-wall,  thus  forming  a  border 
of  forty-four  cubits  to  the  court  * 

Yer.   18.   ''The  lower  pavement** 

The  outer  court  being  lower  than  the 
inner,  the  pavement  running  round,  it 
was  naturally  called  the  lower  pave- 
ment^ to  distinguish  it  from  the  pave- 
ment of  the  inner  court 

Yers.  20-28.  The  north  and  south 
gates  were  of  precisely  the  same  dimen- 
sions as  the  eastern  gate.  In  the  case 
of  the  two  other  gates  no  mention 
is  made  of  a  building  with  thirty 
chambers,  such  as  was  found  on  the 
east  side.  Only  one  was  needed,  and 
it  was  assigned  to  the  east  as  being 
the  sacred  quarter,  and  that  most  con- 
veniently situated  for  the  officiating 
priests. 

Yer.  31.  ''The  arches  thereof— 

the  porches,  the  columned  hall.  "  And 
the  going  np  to  it  had  eight  atepa." 
From  the  precincts  to  the  outer  court 
were  seven  steps,  from  the  outer  to 
the  inner  court  eight,  making  together 
the  number  of  the  Psalms  (Ps.  czx.- 
cxxxivA  supposed  by  some  to  have  been 
called  Psalms  of  Degrees  because  they 
were  sung  by  the  choir  of  Levites  upon 
the  steps  (degrees)  of  the  Temple  courts. 

Yer.S8.  "B7  the  poata  of  the  gates." 


By  the  pillars  which  were  in  front  and 
along  the  sides  of  the  gate-building. 
Gates  must  here  be  used  for  the  gates 
proper,  of  which  there  were  more  than 
one  in  the  gate-building. 

Yer.  39.  "In  the  porch."  Not 
under  the  covered  portico,  which  was 
only  ten  cubits  broad,  but  in  the 
angles  formed  by  the  porch  and  gate 
front 

Yer.  43.  "  And  within  were  hooks  " 

-—cooking  apparatus  for  cooking  the 
flesh  of  the  sacrifices  that  fell  to  the 
priests.  The  hooks  were  fastened  in 
the  walls  within  the  apartment^  to 
hang  the  meat  from,  so  as  to  roast  it 

Yer.  44.  "  The  chambers  of  the 
singers."  These  were  Levites  of  par- 
ticular families,  those  of  Heman, 
Asaph,  and  Merari,  whose  genealogy 
is  carefully  traced  up  to  Levi  in  1 
Chron.  vi  31. 

Yer.  45.  "  The  keepers  of  the  charge 
of  the  house  " — the  priests  who  keep 
watch  as  guards  of  the  Temple. 

Yer.  46.  "  The  keepers  of  the  charge 
of  the  altar :  the  sons  of  Zadok."  The 
priests  were  all  descended  from  one 
or  other  of  the  two  sons  of  Aaron — 
Eleasar  and  Ithamar.  David  distri- 
buted the  priestly  offices  between  the 
families  of  Zadok,  the  representative 
of  Eleazar,  and  Ahimelech,  the  repre- 
sentative of  Ithamar.  The  high-priest- 
hood had  for  many  years  been  in  the 
line  of  Ithamar,  to  which  Eli  belonged  ; 
but  Solomon,  removing  Abiathar  from 
the  high-priesthood  because  of  the  part 
he  took  in  the  rebellion  of  Adonijnli, 
and  appointing  Zadok,  restored  this 
office  to  the  family  of  Eleazar.  The 
priests  who  had  charge  of  the  sacrifices 
were  distinguished  from  the  rest  of 
the  Levitical  priests  as  they  "  which 
come  near  to  the  Lord  to  minister  unto 
Him.*' 

Yer.  4&  "  The  porch  of  the  house." 

The  new  chapter  should  begin  at  this 
verse,  as  here  the  seer  passes  from  the 

425 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  tt  BOMlllSnC  COMMENTARY  :   rZEKIEL. 

court  to  the  Temple  itself  beginning  Ver.  49.  "By  the  stops" — ten  steps 

with   the   porch.      The  front  of  the  (Ixx.),  as  in  the  later  Temple.    ** Pillars 

Temple  porch  consisted  of  a  central  \tj  the  posts  " — literally,  to  the  post^, 

opening  with  two  oohmms  on  either  meaning  that  upon  the  bases  (fosU) 

sida  stood  shafts  (pillars). 

HOMILETICa. 

A  DiviNBLT  Inspibed  Sibb. 

(Vers.  1-4) 

The  concluding  vision  of  the  prophet  is  not  the  least  striking  in  the  magnificent 
series.  The  poetical  conception  is  full  of  boldness  and  grandeur,  though  the 
details  are  wrought  out  with  prosaic  minuteness  of  literalness.  It  is  quite  in 
keeping  with  the  graphic  style  of  this  sublime  prophet  of  the  captivity.  Ezekiel 
bursts  upon  the  scene  like  the  storm-cloud  described  in  his  first  prophecy ;  the 
progress  of  his  visions  dazzles  us  like  the  revolving  chromatic  lights  in  the  midst  of 
the  moving  cloud,  until  the  storm  is  spent,  the  cloud  melts  into  space,  and  so  much 
of  the  light  remains  as  reveals  the  splendours  of  a  city,  Temple,  and  common- 
wealth illumined  with  the  unfading  glory  of  an  ever-present  God.  He  writes 
as  a  Jew  and  a  priest  familiar  from  his  earliest  days  to  the  time  of  his  opening 
manhood  with  the  scenes  of  the  Temple-worship  in  his  ever-loved  Jerusalem. 
The  materials  of  his  visions  are  drawn  from  the  experience  of  his  youth,  when 
impressions  are  clearest  and  most  indelible.  His  conception  of  the  Temple  of 
the  future  is  therefore  an  enlargement  of  the  one  h^  had  seen  and  known  on 
Mount  Moriah ;  for  the  human  mind  cannot  create  anything  out  of  nothing,  but 
can  only  contrast,  combine,  and  expand  from  something  that  already  exists. 
And  the  glory  of  future  Messianic  times  will  exceed  that  of  the  present,  as  the 
glowing  picture  now  presented  by  the  prophet  transcended  the  scene  of  deplore 
able  desolation  that  then  reigned  over  the  land  of  promise.  Like  all  the  other 
visions,  the  one  we  are  now  to  consider  was  intended  to  comfort  and  inspirit  the 
disconsolate  Jews,  and  to  light  up  the  gloom  of  their  captivity  with  the  well- 
founded  hope  of  a  brighter  and  better  day.  The  rarest  blessings — blessings  that 
form  a  new  epoch  in  the  outgrowth  of  religious  experience — often  come  to  God's 
people  in  the  hour  of  their  most  abject  misery.  We  are  sometimes  humbled 
that  we  may  gather  strength  to  bear  more  meekly  the  weight  of  a  loftier 
exaltation.    Observe — 

I.  That  a  BiTlnely  inspired  Seer  retains  the  use  of  his  natural  faculties 
in  intensified  deamess.  1.  He  is  conscious  of  a  lofty  mental  elevation.  ^'  The 
hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  me,  brought  me  into  the  land  of  Israel,  and  set  me 
upon  a  very  high  mountain"  (vers.  1,  2).  Genius  is  something  distinct  from 
Divine  inspiration.  Genius  is  a  species  of  inspiration;  it  generates  its  own 
inspiration.  It  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  imposes  on  its  possessor  a  responsibility 
for  its  legitimate  use  proportioned  to  its  quality.  Where  ordinary  talent 
advances  by  slow  degrees,  genius  soars  on  rapid  wing.  But  Divine  inspira- 
tion is  the  mind  of  God  acting  for  the  time  being  on  the  mind  of  man  for  a 
special  and  definite  purpose.  Whatever  genius  or  talent  man  possesses,  it  is  raised 
by  contact  with  the  Divine  Spirit  and  made  the  vehicle  of  the  Divine  purpose. 
The  man  is  still  conscious  that  he  is  himself,  while  he  is  also  conscious  he  is 
but  the  instrument,  for  the  time  being,  of  a  superior  power.  2.  He  is  dearly 
cognisant  of  matters  of  fadL  Ezekiel  is  not  so  far  carried  away  out  of  himself, 
or  fascinated  by  the  brilliance  of  the  visions  of  God,  as  to  overlook  that  it  was 
420 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ffOMILSTiO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL  ottAf.  XL 


**  in  the  five  and  twentieth  year  of  the  oaptivity,  in  the  tenth  day  of  the  month, 
in  the  fourteenth  year  after  the  city  was  smitten  "  (ver.  1).  Divine  inspiration 
does  not  destroy  or  supersede,  but  strengthens  and  clarifies  our  common-sense. 
It  allows  room  for  the  free-play  of  individual  peculiarities.  It  preserves  the 
truth  communicated  inviolate,  in  its  human  setting.  It  does  not  do  for  man 
what  he  can  do  for  himself.  Hence  the  inspired  books  of  the  Bible  bear  the 
impress  of  the  writers'  strongly  marked  individuality. 

IL  That  the  Divinely  inspired  Seer  la  favoured  with  extraordinazy  visiduiL 
1.  He  $668  in  ouUine  a  magnificent  cUtf-temple.  "The  frame  of  a  city  on  the 
south "  (ver.  2).  Precisely  in  this  direction  would  the  former  city  and  Temple 
appear  to  any  one  approaching  them  from  the  north.  He  saw  the  picture  or 
model  of  a  temple  as  vast  as  a  city ;  it  is  a  dty  for  men  to  dwell  in ;  it  is  a 
temple  for  Ood  to  dwell  in.  To  his  priestly  predilections  the  building  is 
all  temple,  occupying  a  space  and  presenting  a  grandeur  of  ritual  exceed- 
ing anything  hitherto  known  in  Jewish  history.  The  highest  conception  to 
Ezekiel  of  the  future  glory  of  Israel  was  a  great  temple  with  a  perfect  form 
of  worship.  The  loftiest  vision  of  the  latest  New  Testament  seer  is  that  of  a 
city  in  which  there  is  no  temple,  but  where  Qod  is  Himself  the  temple  and 
the  light  and  glorv  of  the  whole  (Rev.  xxi.  22,  23).  ''Accustomed  to  cities, 
we  raise  a  great  city  of  Qod  in  our  imaginations  of  the  future,  just  as  in  an 
age  or  region  where  cities  were  unknown  we  might  have  pictured  heaven  as 
a  garden  like  Eden.'' — Oeikie.  2.  He  i8  brought  into  the  presence  of  an  instructor 
possessing  rare  endowments.  ''Whose  appearance  was  like  the  appearance  of 
brass" — shining  with  the  lustre  of  su|>erior  gifts :  "with  a  line  of  flax  in  his 
hand  and  a  measuring  reed** — instruments  for  conveying  exact  knowledge 
(ver.  3).  This  being  is  identified  by  the  New  Testament  seer  as  Christ,  the 
sovereign  architect  of  His  own  Church  (Rev.  i.  13-15;  xi  1).  Sucli  a  person 
might  well  be  introduced  with  an  ecce — "Behold  a  man"  (ver.  3).  All  the 
details  of  the  vision  that  followed  were  imparted  by  this  heavenly  messenger, 
and  become  intelligible  only  as  he  enlightens  and  instructs  the  mind  of  the 
beholder.  The  inspiration  of  the  Divine  Spirit  brings  the  soul  into  the  im- 
mediate presence  of  God  and  lights  up  the  revealed  word  with  a  Divine 
meaning.  Then  it  is  that  the  lines  of  right  and  wrong  stand  out  in  dear  and 
startling  contrast 

III.  That  a  Divinely  inspired  Seer  is  roaniied  to  exercise  his  best  powers 
to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  sutdects  revealed  (ver.  4).  Not  only  are 
the  outward  and  inward  senses  to  be  on  the  alert,  but  all  are  to  be  earnestly 
concentrated  upon  the  devout  study  of  the  truth.  It  is  surprising  how  much 
can  be  seen  in  a  subject  that  engages  our  afiections.  Love  quickens  and 
illumines  all  our  sensibilities.  "Love  sees  not  with  the  eyes,  but  with  the 
mind.^  Inspiration  helps  but  does  not  displace  our  natural  faculties.  Mental 
and  spiritual  insight  are  gained  by  the  diligent  exercise  of  our  powers  (Heb. 
T.  14Y  Nature  reveals  its  greatest  secrets  only  to  the  industrious.  The  world 
is  full  of  endless  suggestiveness  to  the  wakeful  and  resolute  student 

lY.  The  Divinely  inspired  Seer  is  oonunissioned  to  i^ely  and  Mly  com- 
municate his  knowledge  for  the  benefit  of  others.  "Declare  all  that  thou 
seest  to  the  house  of  Israel  **  (ver.  4).  We  may  not  tell  all  we  learn  from 
others,  but  we  may  safely  declare  all  we  learn  from  GU)d :  there  is  nothing  to 
conceid;  nothing  but  what  will  be  the  better  for  telling.  We  have  never 
mastered  a  subject  until  we  can  talk  about  it  intelligently  and  forcibly.  What- 
ever knowledge  has  been  helpftd  to  ourselves  should  be  communicated  for  the 
good  of  others.     Knowledge  that  is  not  freely  circulated  is  valueless ;  it  is  so 

427 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.XL. 


HOMILBriC  COMMBNTAMY:  BZEKIEL 


much  useless  lumber;  and  the  mind,  like  an  overloaded  boat,  is  in  constant 
danger  of  bein^  swamped.  The  most  highly  gifted  teacher  delights  to  give 
of  his  b€«t^  and  is  often  as  modestly  unconscious  that  he  is  doing  so  as  the 
loveliest  flower  is  unconscious  of  the  beauty  it  displays  and  the  delicious 
perfume  it  scatters.  The  man  who  is  Divinely  inspired  to  see  a  truth  is 
irresistibly  impelled  to  make  it  known. 

LBSSON& — 1.  The  grandest  iruihs  am  Dwindy  revealed.  2.  The  revelatiant  of 
Ood  are  not  appreciated  without  diligent  study,  3.  The  superior  knowledge  of  the 
few  is  intended  for  the  good  of  the  many. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEB8E8. 


Vers,  1-4.  "We  observe  so  far  a 
resemblance  between  the  commence- 
ment and  the  close  of  the  book,  that 
in  each  alike  the  prophet  is  borne 
away  by  a  Divine  band  and  placed 
amid  the  visions  of  God.  There  are, 
however,  two  characteristic  differences 
between  the  earlier  and  the  later. 
First,  in  respect  to  the  region  where 
these  ideal  manifestations  of  Divine 
truth  and  glory  were  given — formerly 
on  the  banks  of  the  Chebar,  as  if  the 
glory  of  Jehovah  had  forsaken  its  old 
haunts;  and  now  on  what  was  em- 
phatically the  mount  of  God,  as  if  He 
were  again  returned  thither  and  had 
already  raised  it  to  a  far  nobler  eleva- 
tiom  The  substance  of  the  visions, 
too,  very  strikingly  differs ;  for,  while 
that  on  the  Chebar  was  fitted  chiefly 
to  awaken  thoughts  of  terror  and 
solenm  awe,  this  was  calculated  to 
produce  feelings  of  the  liveliest  confi- 
dence and  the  most  exalted  hopes. 
The  heavens  seemed  now  cleared  of 
all  their  stormier  elements  and  were 
radiant  with  the  sunshine  of  the  Divine 
favour." — Fairbaim. 

—  "  The  vision  beginning  here  and 
continued  to  the  end  of  this  book  is 
one  impossible  as  yet  to  understand 
fully,  and  for  the  clear  explanation  of 
which  we  must  wait  untU  the  event 
makes  the  whole  plain.  There  are 
difficulties  about  a  literal  interpreta- 
tion ;  but  these  may  all  vanish  when 
the  fulfilment  takes  place:  and  there 
is  the  difficulty  about  explaining  the 
whole  figurativdyy  that  thus  the  minute 
and  accurate  details  seem  meaningless 
and  needless,  whereas  faith  assures  us 
428 


that  all  the  most  minute  parts  of  God's 
Word  have  their  purpose  and  aim.'* — 
Fausset. 

—  "There  is  nothing  in  Holy  Scrip- 
ture that  is  not  useful  and  profitable, 
though  at  first  sight  it  may  seem 
otherwise.  Metals  lie  hid  in  hardest 
quarries;  wholesome  herbs  are  found 
oft  in  roughest  places,  and  precious 
stones  in  barren  sands.  Hippocrates 
says  that  in  the  faculty  of  physic 
there  is  nothing  small,  nothing  con- 
temptible. Aristotle  says,  in  all  nature 
nothing  is  so  mean,  vile,  and  abject 
that  deserves  not  to  be  admired ;  and 
the  Rabbins  have  a  saying  that  a 
mountain  of  sense  hangs  on  every  apex 
of  the  Word  of  GoiV*—Trapp. 

—  Divine  Ck>mmuidcationa  to  Man. 
"  1.  The  Lord  keeps  an  exact  account  of 
the  time  of  His  Church  and  people^s  suffer- 
ing (ver.  1).  He  is  the  best  and  most 
punctual  chronologer  of  all  in  heaven 
and  earth.  Men  and  angels  may  mis- 
take, misreckon,  but  the  Lord  doth 
not,  cannot.  When  we  are  in  misery 
we  think  God  forgets  us  (Ps.  Ixxix.  5 ; 
Ixxxix.  46);  but  He  takes  notice  of 
every  hour,  day,  month,  and  year. 
2.  JFIien  the  Church  is  loWy  in  the  loorst, 
most  desperate  and  deplorable  condition, 
even  then  the  Lord  hath  a  care  of  His 
Church  (ver.  1).  When  the  Church  is 
in  the  wilderness,  under  persecution  in 
Egypt  or  Babylon,  the  Lord  is  solici- 
tous for  it  3.  The  Church  is  Mount 
Zion,  or  Mount  Zion  is  the  Church 
wherein  Ood  makes  knoum  His  mind 
for  the  comfort  of  His  people  (ver.  2). 
Mountains  are  high,  conspicuous,  and 
strong,  and   so   is   the  Church;   on 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIEI. 


CHAP,  tti 


mountains  is  good  air,  so  likewise  is 
in  the  Church ;  hills  are  nearer  heaven 
than  other  places;  they  are  helow, 
the  Church  is  above  the  world.  4. 
The  Church  is  well  seated  and  well  ordered. 
*  Upon  which  was  the  frame  of  a  city ' 
(ver.  2).  It  is  seated  upon  a  mountain, 
the  mountain  of  God's  decree,  power, 
and  truth ;  it  is  well  ordered,  for  it  is 
as  the  frame  of  a  city,  where  every- 
thing is  in  its  right  place  and  all  fitly 
joined  together.  5.  The  Man  Christ, 
who  is  sinless  and  glorious,  is  the  chief 
builder  and  exact  measurer  of  the  Churd^ 
and  things  belonging  to  it  (ver.  4).  The 
line  and  reed  are  in  His  hand;  He 
measures  all  the  trees  and  stones  used 
in  this  buildiug,  the  outward  and  in- 
ward courts,  with  all  their  appurte- 
nances. He  was  the  son  of  Joseph,  a 
carpenter,  and  some  mystery  might  lie 
in  that  6.  The  way  into  Zion  and  unto 
the  Father  is  by  Christ  ^ver.  3).  He 
stands  in  the  gate  of  the  Temple  ready 
to  receive  any  that  should  come  and 
be  found  fit  for  entrance :  He  had  His 
line  and  reed  in  His  hand  to  measure 
them.  None  unmeasured  might  enter. 
7.  The  Lord  Jesus,  when  Divine  things 
are  presenied  to  us^  would  have  us  attent, 
intent,  and  apply  the  whole  heart  unto 
them  (ver.  4).  Let  us  mind,  and  mind 
to  purpose,  all  things  shown  us  of 
Christ;  let  us  set  our  senses  and 
whole  heart  upon  them.  8.  What  the 
Lord  Christ  reveals  unto  Eis  servants,  the 
prophets  and  ministers,  they  must  not 
reserve  to  themselves,  but  communicate  to 
others  for  their  instruction,  edification^ 
and  comfort.  'Declare  all  that  thou 
seest'  (ver.  4).  They  must  not  only 
utter  what  they  receive,  but  utter  all 
they  receive  (Acts  xx.  27)." — Cheenhill. 

Ver.  1.  ••The  Word  of  God  counts 
the  years  and  months  and  days  of  our 
distress  to  make  us  understand  that  it 
is  not  unknown  to  God  how  long  we 
hare  borne  the  yoke  of  the  cross  and 
the  oppression  of  tyrants." — Starck 

—  "  Ezekiel  was  already  five-and- 
twenty  years  in  a  foreign  land.  We 
must  be  prepared  and  purified  in  many 
ways  by  Gbd's  Spirit  before  we  can 
rightly  understand  the  consolations  of 


God ;  and  one  grows  in  God  when 
one  learns  under  present  suflferings 
to  see  more  and  more  of  the  eternal 
comfort." — Diedrich, 

—  "  The  vision  of  the  Temple  a  tri- 
logy of  thoughts.  1.  From  judgment 
to  mercy.  2.  From  prison  to  freedom. 
3.  From  the  world  to  Christ  and  inta 
the  community  of  God." — Lange. 

Ver.  2.   The  Visions  of  Ood  — 1. 

Need  a  highly  sensitised  spirituality  to 
appreciate.  2.  Are  on  a  scale  of  un- 
exampled magni6cence.  3.  Have  a 
close  connection  with  the  supreme  in- 
terests of  humanity.  4.  Are  a  revela- 
tion of  His  character  and  purposes. 
5.  Should  be  reverently  and  earnestly 
contemplated.  6.  Flevate  the  spectator 
to  a  lofty  moral  standard. 

—  "  To  human  eyes  Canaan  was  lost 
for  Israel,  to  human  eyes  Jerusalem 
lay  in  the  dust ;  but  the  prophet  sees 
it  again  far  more  glorious.  Such  seeing 
is  truly  given  by  God  in  the  Spirit 
Land,  city,  and  Temple  had  been  lost 
through  tlie  sins  of  the  people;  yet 
Israel  must  remain  and  fulfil  its  eternal 
purpose  for  the  glory  of  God.  A  fairer 
and  loftier  Jerusalem  and  Temple  must 
be  still  in  store  for  Israel,  which  the 
prophet  represents  entirely  by  figures 
taken  from  the  old  land,  the  old  royal 
seat,  and  the  old  Temple.  Yet  he  does 
not  merely  make  the  old  be  renewed ; 
everything  becomes  quite  different  in 
order  to  indicate  that  the  Kingdom  of 
God  will  in  its  completion  present  a 
quite  different  figure." — Diedrich. 

—  •*  The  land  of  Israel  is  the  hiero- 
glyph of  the  inheritance  which  God  will 
give  to  His  people  from  the  whole  world, 
which,  in  contrast  thereto,  is  called  the 
sea  or  the  wilderness." — Lange, 

—  "This  is  indeed  a  place  to  sit 
down  in  and  meditate.  Jerusalem 
in  the  old  covenant,  the  Jerusalem 
which  is  the  Christian  Church  and 
the  Jerusalem  above — what  a  theme 
for  contemplation  throughout  time  and 
eternity  I — Jerusalem  a  Sabbatic  place 
in  the  working  days  of  the  world's 
history." — Lange. 

Ver.  8.  The  Architect  of  the  Divine 

42» 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CRAP.  XL. 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  SZSKIBL. 


Templfl  —  L  Ib  illumined  with  the 
lustre  of  His  unique  qualifications. 
"Whose  appearance  was  like  the  ap- 
pearance of  brass."  2.  Possesses  the 
means  of  constructing  an  exact  and 
symmetrical  building.  *'  With  a  line  of 
flax  in  his  hand  and  a  measuring  reed.'' 

3.  Has  absolute  control  of  the  structure 
which  He  rears.  "  He  stood  in  the  gate.* 

4.  Is  Himself  an  illustrious  pattern  of 
the  glorious  edifice  into  which  man  may 
be  morally  built  up  (Eph,  il  20-22). 

—  "Like  bright  polished  brass  which 
strongly  reflected  the  rays  of  light 
Probably  he  had  a  nimbus  or  glory 
round  his  head  This  was  either  an 
angely  or,  as  some  think,  a  personal 
appearance  of  our  blessed  Lord." — A. 
Clarke. 

—  *•  With  a  line  in  his  hand  and  a 
measuring  reed."  The  Law  of  Qod — 
L  Is  the  unchanging  standard  of  moral 
actions.  2.  Regulates  the  form  and 
constitution  of  the  Church.  3.  Is  un- 
erringly applied  by  the  hand  of  the 
great  Master  Builder  in  every  stage  of 
the  Church's  upbuilding.  4  Is  clearly 
defined  in  the  Divinely  inspired  Word. 

—  "The  measurements  are  —  1. 
Exact,  to  show  that  the  promise  is  not 
vague,  but  certain.  2.  Equal,  to  denote 
harmony.  3.  Fast,  to  mark  majesty 
and  grandeur.  The  extraordinary 
massiveness  of  the  walls  may  have  had 
reference  to  the  enormous  structures 
raised  at  this  time  by  Nebuchadnezzar, 
who  was  not  only  the  greatest  con- 
queror but  the  greatest  builder  in  the 
world." — Speaker's  CommerUary. 

—  "  Let  every  man  examine  himself 
by  this  measuring-rod  how  far  he  has 
advanced." — Oregorv. 

—  <'  Christ  is  indeed  the  foundation 
and  corner-stone  of  His  Church;  but 
He  is  also  the  Builder,  and  brings  the 


building  erected  thereon  always  more 
and  more  to  perfection.  The  brass 
signifies  holiness  and  purity,  also  life 
and  permanent  strength.  Christ  is  the 
strong  and  invincible  Hero." — Lange. 

—  "  He  stood  in  the  gate."  Else- 
where also  Christ  stands  at  the  door 
and  calls,  invites  in,  shows  the  way 
and  opens  the  entrance  to  the  Temple 
and  into  the  inner  sanctury. 

Yer.  L  High  Spiritual  Attainments 

— 1.  Not  reached  without  the  diligeht 
exercise  of  all  our  powers.  2.  The 
outward  senses  are  the  gateways  of 
spiritual  knowledge.  3.  Only  that 
which  afiiects  the  heart  interests  and 
influences  the  wliole  man.  4.  High 
spiritual  attainments  the  best  qualifica- 
tion for  instructing  others. 

—  ^  This  building  of  Ezekiel's  is  not 
to  be  understood  of  a  new  material 
building,  but,  like  the  chariot  at  the 
beginning  and  also  the  building  at  the 
end,  is  nothing  else  than  the  Eangdom 
of  Christy  the  holy  Church  of  Christen- 
dom here  on  earth  even  to  the  last 
day.  But  how  all  the  parts  are  to 
be  properly  interpreted  and  placed, 
that  we  will  defer  until  we  shall  see 
the  whole  building  prepared  and  ready. 
Although  it  is  a  mystery,  it  ought  not 
to  remain  a  mystery." — Lange, 

—  "  The  threefold  summons  to 
attention  intimates  that  a  matter  is 
here  treated  of  which  is  of  the  greatest 
importance  to  the  community  of  God. 
To  this  it  is  essential  that  faith  in 
the  indestructibility  of  the  Kingdom  of 
God,  and  in  its  resurrection  from  every 
death,  live  in  it  in  full  power.  It  is 
this  alone  which  is  here  treated  of, 
however  dense  may  be  tlie  veil  of 
architectural  details  behind  which  it  is 
concealed." — HengsUnberg. 


HOMILETICS. 

Tee  Chuboh  of  God  a  BuiLDiiia 

(Vers.  5-49.) 

L  Strongly  guarded.    **  Behold  a  wall  on  the  ontside  of  the  honse  round 
ai>out "  (ver.  5).    The  first  and  second  Temples  were  surrounded  by  a  massive 
480 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL  OfiAP.  XL. 


wall  This  wall  denoted  not  only  the  separation  of  the  Cluirch  from  the  world, 
but  also  the  Divine  power  that  protected  the  Church  at  every  point.  The  Lord 
is  said  to  be  a  wall  of  fire  and  a  shield  encompassing  and  guarding  His  people 
(Zech.  iL  5  ;  Ps.  v.  12V  Both  the  pre-and-post-exiliau  Temples  have  perished  ; 
but  the  Ghurch  of  Qod  remains,  and  is  more  firmly  established  than  ever.  The 
Lord  is  its  invulnerable  defence. 

IL  Accessible  to  every  sincere  inquirer.  There  are  ample  gates  east,  north, 
and  south  (vers.  6-19,  20-23,  24-26,  32-35).  1.  There  are  gates  to  show  that  all 
are  welcome,  Fronf  whatever  quarter  they  come,  the  gates  are  invitingly  open. 
All  earnest  seekers  after  God,  of  whatever  nationalit}^  may  find  an  entrance 
into  the  Divine  Temple  (Matt  viii.  11).  2.  There  are  gates,  to  indicate  that  only 
those  who  come  by  those  gates  can  be  admitted.  The  Lord  of  the  Temple  has  the 
absolute  right  to  formulate  His  own  conditions  of  entrance.  There  is  to  be  a 
moral  fitness  in  the  applicant  (Rev.  xzL  27).  None  who  come  with  a  broken 
and  contrite  heart— a  sense  of  self-helplessness  and  need — shall  be  torned  away 
(Ps.  miv.  18 ;  John  vi.  37). 

TIL  SufEtised  with  light.  There  are  windows,  narrow  without,  but  widened 
within  to  difi^use  the  light  more  copiously  (ver.  16).  The  little  chambers  had 
windows :  so  little  Churches,  little  saints,  have  their  measure  of  light.  The 
Church  of  God  is  the  light  and  instructor  of  the  world  (Matt  v.  14).  If  that 
light  were  quenched,  myriads  would  be  doomed  to  grope  their  aimless  way  in 
hopeless  darkness.  The  Church  is  bright  and  clear  only  as  it  is  constantly 
bathed  in  the  light  of  Qod. 

lY.  With  ample  proyision  for  acts  of  highest  worship.  1.  There  is  the  altar  of 
sacrifice  (vers.  47,  39-43).  The  sacrifices  were  intended  to  point  out  the  desert 
of  sin,  the  need  of  repentance  and  expiation,  to  acknowledge  that  the  goods  of 
the  offerer  belonged  to  God,  and  to  be  a  type  and  memorial  of  the  coming 
sacrifice  of  Christ  to  be  ofiered  once  for  all.  They  were  a  pledge  of  the  sincerity 
of  the  worshipper.  There  is  no  true  worship  without  sacrifice.  2.  There  is  Hie 
offering  of  praise.  There  is  a  special  place  in  the  Temple  for  the  singers  (ver.  44). 
The  music  was  assigned  to  the  Levites,  and  to  those  Israelites  of  note  whose 
dau<:hters  had  married  into  the  priesthood.  But  these  Israelites  were  allowed 
to  take  part'  only  in  the  instrumental  part  of  the  service ;  the  vocal  part  was 
sung  by  the  Levites  only.  Wind  and  stringed  instruments  were  used — ^tmmpets, 
pipes  or  hautboys,  viols,  lutes,  harps,  and  cymbals.  Psalms  were  sung  and  were 
arranged  according  to  the  character  of  the  service,  on  ordinary  or  special  occasions. 
Music  reaches  its  highest  consecration  when  it  is  devoted  to  the  worship  of  God. 
Praise  is  the  essence  of  true  worship.  3.  There  is  the  duty  of  prayer  (vers.  46, 46). 
Prayers  were  offered  by  the  priests  at  the  morning  and  evening  services,  and 
were  expressed  in  well-known  and  constantly  repeated  forms,  in  some  of  which 
prayers  the  people  joined  the  priests.  After  prayers,  they  rehearsed  the  ten 
commandments  and  repeated  the  portions  of  the  Law  written  on  their  phylacteries. 
The  phylactery  sentences  were  repeated  daily,  the  time  of  the  morning  at  which 
this  duty  was  to  begin  being  stated  by  the  Jewish  Rabbis  as  '*  from  such  time 
as  a  man  can  see  to  distinguish  between  blue  and  green,  even  until  sunrising." 
The  chambers  of  the  priests  were  conveniently  situated  for  their  duties.  It 
was  their  privilege  to  come  near  to  the  Lord  to  minister  unto  Him  (ver.  46). 
Prayer  brings  the  soul  into  the  immediate  presence  of  GU>d,  and  is  an  essential 
element  in  genuine  worship. 

Y.  With  an  imposing  and  conspicnons  entrance.  ^  The  porch  of  the  house  * 
(vers.  48,  49).     The  porch  was  an  elevated  building,  rising  higher  than  the 

431 


Digitized  by 


Google 


mup.it. 


ttOMtlEfrO  COMMENTARY:  EiEKTtL. 


Temple  itself,  and  was  approached  by  a  flight  of  steps.  Tt  wjis  a  prominent  and 
imposing  object  as  soon  as  you  entered  the  inner  court,  or  court  of  sacrifice.  It 
admitted  to  the  Holy  Place,  and  led  ultimately  to  the  most  Holy  Place.  While 
the  porch  seemed  to  invite  the  worshipper  to  enter,  it  also  taught  that  we 
are  not  to  rush  into  the  Divine  presence  with  indecent  baste,  but  draw  near 
thoughtfully  and  by  slow  and  solemn  stages — passing  first  through  the  outer 
court,  then  the  inner,  and  through  the  porch  into  the  house  itself.  Christ  is 
the  door  of  the  heavenly  Temple  (John  x.  9 ;  Rev.  iv.  1),  and  through  Him  the 
soul  is  conducted  into  the  midst  of  its  imperishable  treasures  and  endless 
revelations. 

LBSSON& — 1.  The  Church  of  Ood  is  securely  founded  in  wnchanging  trtUk     8»  1$ 
composed  of  indestructible  material.    3.  Invites  all  men  to  share  in  UsprmlegcL 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Ver.  5.  The  Divine  Protection^!. 

Surrounds  the  Church  like  a  wall.  2. 
Is  invincible.  3.  Secures  the  ever- 
lasting safety  of  the  faithful.  4. 
Cannot  be  pleaded  as  an  excuse  for 
personal  unfaithfulness. 

—  "  The  Church  has  a  triple  wall — 
1.  God  as  protection.  2.  The  angels 
as  guardians.  3.  Believers — in  other 
words,  their  prayers." — A.  Lapide, 

—  "  The  object  of  the  wall  is  to 
draw  the  boundary  between  the  sacred 
and  the  profane.  This  boundary  had 
a  double  meaning.  To  the  community 
it  was  a  warning  not  to  draw  near 

•  the  sanctuary  with  unrenewed  hearts. 
With  respect  to  God,  it  guaranteed 
that  He  would  eventually  separate 
His  people  from  the  world.  Because 
the  people  of  God  had  neglected  the 
warning  implied  in  the  boundary,  as  a 
just  punishment  the  boundary  was  also 
in  the  latter  respect  destroyed.  To 
the  desecration  as  guilt  succeeded  the 
desecration  as  punishment.  In  the 
pierced  wall,  the  smitten  city  lay  an 
image  of  the  abandonment  of  the  people 
of  God  to  the  world.  That  this  re- 
lation will  be  altered  again  in  the 
futare,  that  God  will  a.:aiu  raise  His 
reformed  people  to  independence,  is 
figured  by  the  erection  of  the  new 
wall,  which  in  this  respect  is  an  em- 
bodiment of  God's  help  and  grace  that 
are  to  be  imparted  to  the  covenant- 
people  renewed  in  spirit." — Hevgsten- 

—  "A  measuring-reed  of  six  cubits 

432 


long  by  the  cubit  and  a  handrbreadth. 
The  larger  measure  of  the  sanctuary — 

1.  From  the  love  wherewith  God  lovet 
us.  2.  According  to  the  love  where- 
with we  ought  in  return  to  love  God 
in  the  brethren." — Coceeius, 

Ver.  6.  "And  went  up  the  stairs 
thereof."  (See  also  vers.  22,  26,  31, 
34,  37,  49).  Progress  in  Divine 
Things.  "  1.  JFe  come  to  the  know- 
ledge of  spiritual  things  by  degrees  ;  they 
are  not  known  at  once,  but  successively. 
Temple  myst<^ries  we  come  unto  by 
steps.  Christ  leads  His  people  on  from 
one  thing  to  another,  from  faith  to 
faith,  from  strength  to  strength.  2. 
The  knowledge  of  Divine  things  is  not 
attained  without  labour  and  difficulty. 
There  are  steps  and  stairs  in  this 
Temple,  and  those  that  will  behold  the 
^lory  and  understand  the  mysteries  of 
it  must  go  upward,  first  one  step  and 
then  another.  It  is  difficult  to  go  up 
steps  and  stairs.  3.  In  Temple  work  we 
must  make  progress.  It  is  not  sufficient 
to  go  up  a  step  or  two  and  then  stand 
still  or  descend  :  we  must  go  forward, 
higher,  to  the  top.  Christ  overcame 
all  difficulties ;  He  went  up  all  the 
stairs,  and  persevering  to  the  end,  was 
crowned  (Rev.  iii.  2\)."—0reenhill. 

—  "  When  believers  enter  they  have 
— 1.  A  guide  with  them  into  all  truth. 

2.  Without  Him  they  can  do  nothing. 

3.  Progress  is  made  toward  full  know- 
ledge of  God  and  Christ.** — Coceeius. 

—  "The  east  gate  as  model  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OHAP.  XL. 


pattern  gate  in  its  horoiletical  signifi- . 
eance :  every  sermon  ought  to  lead  to 
the  Father  through  Christ." 

—  "  The  Jews  called  the  east  the 
fore-part  of  heaven ;  the  west  the  back- 
part  :  by  the  first  they  denote  spiritual 
things;  by  the  second  temporal  and 
earthly  things.  Those  that  come  into 
this  Temple  must  mind  spiritual  things; 
they  must  not  let  out  their  hearts  to 
the  world  and  worldly  delights — they 
are  western  things,  and  there  was  no 
door  in  the  west.  They  must  go  up- 
wards, not  downwards ;  keep  within, 
not  go  out.*' — OreenhUl. 

—  "  One  must  not  so  thoughtlessly 
imagine  that  only  a  single  leap  is 
required  to  come  into  heaven,  but 
constant  ascent  is  requisite  and  neces- 
sary in  order  to  seek  after  the  things 
that  are  above." 

Yer.  7.  The  Ohambers  of  the  Temple 

— "1.  Represent  the  mansions  which 
are  in  heaven.  2.  The  entertainment, 
rest,  and  comfort  the  saints  enjoy  in  the 
Church  under  Christ.  3.  The  several 
congregations,  or  churches,  of  Qospel 
times,  be  they  little  or  great,  all  which 
art  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  as  these 
chambers  were  in  this  visional  Temple." 
— QreenhUl. 

—  In  the  Lord's  House  are  many 
mansions,  according  to  the  distinction 
of  offices  and  gifts:  each  mansion 
serves  to  ornament  the  house. 

Ver.  8,  "The  porch  reminds  us  of 
the  peace  and  repose  connected  with 
the  consciousness  of  the  grace  of  Qod." 
— (Ecolampadius. 

—  "Truly  they  who  are  preparing 
for  the  holy  office  of  the  ministry  are 
measured  in  many  ways,  and  they 
should  still  further  test  themselves  by 
the  measure  of  the  sanctuary." — Siarek 

Vers.  13-15.  "  Thus  those  who  are 
in  this  way  are  walled  around,  covered 
and  protected  on  all  sides;  so  that 
nothing  can  befall  them  in  Him  who 
is  the  VooT  and  the  Way,  but  every- 
thing leads  forward  to  the  sanctuary 
when  we  walk  in  Christ  Jesus." — 
Cocceius. 


Ver.  16.  The  Lijht  of  the  Ohurch — 
1.  Is  borrowed  ligiit  that  comes  through 
the  windows  of  iis  ordinances.  2.  An 
evidence  of  its  joyous  experiences  (Ps. 
xcvii.  11).  3.  A  testimony  to  the 
world  wrapped  in  moral  darkness. 

—  "  By  these  windows  ii  signified 
the  spiritual  light  which  shoula  be  in 
the  Church  of  Christ.  He  is  called 
The  Sun  (Mai.  iv.  2),  A  Great  Light 
(Isa.  ix  2),  and  The  Light  of  the 
World  (John  viii.  12).  And  by  those 
windows — the  apostles,  prophets,  evan- 
gelists, pastors,  and  teachers — He  hath 
and  still  doth  let  in  light  into  the 
Church.  The  least  churches  and  the 
least  saints  shall  not  be  without  win- 
dows; they  shall  have  light  and  joy, 
teaching  and  comfort." — GieenhiU, 

—  "In  the  Ohurch  of  God  darkness 
has  no  place,  but  the  light  of  truth 
and  faith  shines  everywhere;  yea, 
believers  themselves  are  a  light  in  the 
Lord,  whose  works  shine  before  men. 
They  who  walk  in  the  ways  of  the 
Lord  have  the  true,  cheerful  and  clear 
light ;  while  the  natural  soul  is  a  gate- 
way without  windows." — Lange. 

Vers.  17-19.  The  Outer  and  Lmer 
Oourts  of  the  Temple.  "  In  the  out- 
ward court  the  people  stood;  and  it 
represented  the  nations  oatside  the 
Ohurch.  The  inward  court  repre- 
sented the  Church,  where  the  Word 
of  Gk>d  enlightens  and  nourishes  us, 
and  Christ  is  our  altar  of  perfumes. 
The  Holy  of  Holies  represented  heaven; 
into  it  the  high  priest  only  entered — 
typifying  our  High  Priest,  the  Lord 
Jesus,  His  entrance  in  there  alone 
by  His  own  power,  to  bring  us  thither. 
So  that  the  first  signified  the  state  of 
nature ;  the  second  the  state  of  grace ; 
the  third  the  state  of  glory.  Hereby 
the  greatness  of  the  Church  in  the 
time  of  the  Gk)spel,  and  especially  in 
the  time  of  the  New  Jerusalem,  is 
pointed  out  These  courts  were  of 
great  compass,  and  had  gates  looking 
to  the  several  parts  of  the  world*"-^ 
OreenhUl. 


Ver.  17.  "Those  who  are  employed 
in  God's  House  ought  to  keep  even 
as  438 


Digitized  by 


Google 


nOMILBTIC  OOMMBNTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


iheir  feet  clean,  for  holineu  is  the 
ornament  of  HU  House." — StairdL 

Ver.  30.  "By  the  diversity  of  the 
gates  you  may  recognise  the  diyersity 
of  those  who  enter.  As  in  our 
cathedrals  every  part  tells  something 
to  the  deeper-seeing  connoisseur,  so 
this  is  still  more  the  case  in  Ezekiel's 
Temple.  Everything  here  is  in  har- 
mony and  mutual  correspondence,  like 
the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments, 
Moses  and  Christ,  the  prophets  and 
the  apostles." — Lange. 

Yer.  84.  When  we  are  in  Temple 
work,  we  must  move  according  to  the 
mind  of  the  Master  Builder,  and  not 
of  our  own  heads. 

Yer.  28.  '<  The  courts  are  separated, 
for  the  covenant  of  Abraham  is  one 
things  the  covenant  of  Moses  another, 
and  the  covenant  of  Christ  still  another. 
Yet  they  only  mutually  confirm  one 
another.  For  are  not  the  contents  of 
the  covenant  the  promises  of  God,  who 
graciously  forgives  sint  One  courts 
however,  is  nearer  than  another  to  the 
sanctuary.  Walkest  thou  unhindered 
in  the  court  of  the  priests,  busied  with 
spiritual  sacrifices;  then  thank  the 
Lord,  and  extend  the  hand  to  others 
that  by  thy  support  they  may  over- 
come difficulties." — OScolampadius. 

Yer.  81.  "And  the  going  up  to  it 
had  eight  steps."  (See  also  vers.  34, 
37,  49 ;  comp.  with  vers.  22,  26).  A 
Step  Highar — 1.  An  important  quali- 
fication for  every  leader  of  religious 
thought.  2.  Should  be  the  constant 
ambition  of  every  student  of  Scripture 
truth.  3.  Should  mark  the  steady  ad- 
vance of  individual  spiritual  experience. 

Yer.  87.  "The  people  that  came 
thither  were  to  be  holy,  but  the  priests 
who  came  into  the  inner  court  were  to 
be  more  holy.  They  who  are  nearest 
God  should  be  most  holy ;  they  are  to 
be  a  step  at  least  above  others." — 
Oreenhill. 

Yer.  38.  "This  signifies  that  our 
434 


hearts  may  remain  unclean,  even  when 
we  give  our  bodies  to  be  burned  for 
the  glory  of  God.  The  constant  morti- 
fication of  the  flesh  must  ground  itself 
on  Christ,  otherwise  we  will  lose  cour- 
age.— The  believing  soul  presents  its 
heart,  as  one  sets  a  table,  on  which 
Christ  as  sacrifice  is  beheld,  for  faith 
lays  hold  of  this  alone." — Lange. 

Yers.  39-43.  A  Place  of  Sacrifice 
— 1.  May  be  found  everywhere.  2. 
Essential  to  acceptable  worship.  3. 
A  constant  reminder  of  sin.  4.  Con- 
stantly points  to  the  All-efficacious 
Sacrifice. 

—  It  is  not  to  be  imagined  that 
under  the  times  of  Christ  the  Jewish 
worship  should  be  revived.  These 
expositions  of  tables,  offerings,  and 
sacrifices  import  some  other  thing — 
the  good  and  plentiful  provision  which 
should  be  in  the  Gospel  Church. 

—  "  The  return  to  literal  sacrifices 
would  seem  to  be  a  return  to  the 
beggarly  elements  of  legal  types  after 
we  have  got  the  antitype.  We  are 
sure,  therefore,  that  the  Temple-sacri* 
fices  in  restored  Jerusalem,  of  whatever 
nature  they  may  be,  will  not  set  aside 
the  fixed  principle  that  the  one  sacrifice 
of  Christ  is  final  and  complete.  Two 
considerations  may  help  to  lessen  the 
difficulty.  1.  The  Jews,  as  a  nation, 
stand  to  God  in  a  peculiar  relation, 
distinct  from  that  of  Chrisitians  of  the 

5 resent  elect  Church,  gathered  out  of 
ews  and  Gentiles  indiscriminately. 
The  same  principle,  therefore,  of 
the  non-existence  of  sacrifice  in  any 
form  may  not  hold  good  in  that  dis- 
pensation to  be  ushered  in  by  the 
advent  of  Messiah  and  His  reign  over 
the  restored  Israelite  nation  as  holds 
good  in  our  present  Gentile  times. 
That  shall  be  the  period  of  public 
liturgy,  or  perfect  outward  worship  of 
the  great  congregation  on  earth,  as  the 
present  time  is  one  of  gathering  out 
spiritual  worshippers  one  by  one.  Be- 
sides Israel's  relation  to  Christ  as  her 
spiritual  Saviour,  she  will  then  also 
perform  a  perfect  outward  service  of 
sacrifice,  prayer,  and  praise,  as  a  nation, 
to  her  manifested  Divine  King  reigning 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIG  COMMENTARY:  BZEKTEL. 


in  the  midst  of  her ;  and  all  nations  of 
the  earth  shall  take  a  part  in  that  ser- 
vice as  recognising  His  Divine  King- 
ship over  them  also.  S.  The  Israelites 
shall  probably  also  set  forth,  in  all  its 
harmonious  parts,  the  outward  beauty 
and  inward  sanctity  of  the  Temple- 
service,  which  in  their  palmiest  days 
of  old  they  had  never  euibited  in  its 
full  perfection.  The  full  excellence 
and  antitypical  perfection  of  all  the 
parts  of  the  ancient  Temple-service, 
which,  from  ignorance  of  its  hidden 
meaning,  seemed  a  cumbersome  yoke 
and  unintelligible  to  the  worshipper, 
shall  then  be  fully  understood,  and 
therefore  shall  become  a  delightful  ser- 
vice of  love,  instead  of,  as  formerly, 
a  burdensome  task.  Israel's  province 
will  be  to  exhibit,  -in  the  minutest 
details  of  sacrifice,  the  essential  unity 
of  the  Law  and  Gospel,  which  now 
seem  opposed.  The  iaeal  of  the  theo- 
cratic Temple  and  its  service  shall  then 
first  be  realised." — Fausset. 

Ver.  44,  "  These  set  out  the  spiritual 
joy  and  songs  which  should  be  in  the 
Church  of  Christ  (Isa.  Ixv.  14, 17, 18). 
In  this  Jerusalem  will  be  a  holy  priest- 
hood to  ofifer  up  spiritual  praise  (1  Pet. 
iL  6^.  Conquerors  are  full  of  joy  and 
mucn  in  singing  praises,  especially 
spiritual  conquerors." — QreenhUl. 

—  *'  A  place  in  the  House  of  God  is 
justly  due  to  them  who  sing  the  praise 
of  Ood  in  spiritual  and  heavenly  songs, 
which  contribute  so  powerfully  to 
spiritual  edification.  In  these  corrapt 
days  music  is  used  more  for  sin  and 
vanity  than  for  the  praise  of  Gk)d. 
When  will  it  be  free  from  this  service 
to  vanity  1  He  who  draws  near  to 
God  sings  to  Him  also  in  His  heart : 
they  sing  best  who  in  the  midst  of 
troubles  are  full  of  joy.  They  incite 
others  to  sing." — Lange, 

—  ''  That  the  singers  are  here  so 
prominent  is  explained  by  this,  that  in 
die  exalted  position  of  the  community 
of  Gk>d  more  ample  material  was  given 
them  for  new  songs,  so  that  the  singing 
in  the  worship  of  the  new  Temple  must 
play  a  chief  part^  as  indeed  the  multi- 
plication of  the  singers  and  musicians 


under  David  stood  connected  with  the 
advance  which  the  people  of  Ood  had 
then  made.  Even  in  the  times  soon 
after  the  return  from  the  exile  singing 
revived  in  a  degree  that  had  not  been 
since  David." — Eengstenberg. 

Vers.  45, 46.  *'  By  these  priests  may 
be  understood  the  ministers  of  the 
Gospel  who  have  charge  of  the  holy 
things  and  persons  (1  Tim.  vi.  13,  14 ; 
Acts  XX.  28).  They  are  the  watchmen ; 
the  charge  of  souls  is  committed  to 
them,  and  they  must  be  accountants 
for  them  (Heb.  xiii.  17).  So  true 
Christians  are  priests  in  this  Temple, 
and  some  have  charge  of  the  holy 
things  and  persons  therein  (Rev.  v. 
lOy—OreenhUl. 

Ver.  46.   The  Priestly   Oflloe— 1. 

Gains  its  distinction  more  by  moral 
fitness  than  sacerdotal  lineage.  2.  A 
solemn  responsibility.  3.  Brings  the 
ministrant  into  the  immediate  presence 
of  God.  4.  Is  the  honoured  privilege 
of  the  truly  godly. 

—  "  Since  *  sons  of  Zadok '  is  in  our 
language  equivalent  to  '  sons  of  right- 
eousness,' this  implies  that  only  those 
duly  keep  the  charge  who  are  justified 
by  faith  and  born  of  God,  whom  Jesus 
Christ  has  begotten  and  upholds  by 
the  word  of  His  power." — (Eeolam- 
padius. 

Yer.  47.  '*  Christ  doeth  all  things  in 
His  Church  in  number,  weight,  and 
measure.  By  His  Spirit  He  ordereth 
the  length,  breadth,  and  depth  of  His 
spirituid  House,  and  bestoweth  His 
gifts  by  measure  to  each  member 
(Rom.  xii. ;  2  Cor.  x. ;  Ephes.  iii.  4)." 
— Trapp. 

—  **  The  true  Temple  is  the  body 
of  Christ  as  He  took  it  out  of  the  grave 
on  the  third  day,  for  it  surpasses  all 
figures  and  is  pure  life.  The  prophet 
here  prophesies  of  it ;  but  he  does  so 
in  b'sping  words,  and  for  the  sake  of 
his  contemporaries  his  understanding 
of  Christ  in  these  chapters,  where  he 
speaks  of  Christ's  Ean^dom  and  sanc- 
tuary, is  still  in  swaddling-dothes."'- 
Diedtieh, 

435 


Digitized  by 


Google 


*.  in. 


IIOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBt, 


Vew.  48,  49.  "The  porch  of  the 
hoase.''  The  Entrance  to  the  Ohnrch. 
— 1.  Stands  invitingly  open  to  the 
penitent  2.  Must  he  passed  to  enjoy 
the  highest  spiritual  privileges.  S.  Is 
hroad  enough  to  admit  the  worst  who 
are  trnly  contrite,  and  narrow  enough 
to  exclude  the  incorrigible.  4.  A 
joyous  spectacle  to  angels  and  God 
when  thronged  with  sincere  in- 
quirers. 

Yer.  48.  "  It  was  of  the  nature  of 
the  porch  to  be  open,  being  an  open 
approach  to  a  space  that  is  or  may  be 
closed,  which  shelters  from  the  incle- 
mency of  the  weather  those  who  must 
wait  for  the  opening.  A  door  is  not 
mentioned  here,  as  otherwise  generally 
in  the  closed  rooms  of  the  Temple. 
The  words,  *  three  cubits  on  this  side, 
and  three  cubits  on  that/  indicate  that 
an  open  space  was  left  in  the  midst. 
In  the  porches  of  the  court,  that 
had  a  large  thoroughfare,  the  whole 


space  within  must  have  been  open.** — 
Hengslenberg. 

—  Christ  is  a  porch  to  His  peopla 
Jerome  once  said  that  while  we  are 
in  this  life  we  are  in  a  porch-state. 
Here  we  hare  a  body  of  death,  see  all 
things  imperfectly ;  but  when  we  enter 
into  the  hearenly  Temple  we  shall  be 
free,  and  know  as  we  are  known. 

Ver.  49.  "There  were  pillars,  one 
on  this  side  and  another  on  that* 
"  The  proportion  in  height  agrees  with 
the  thickness  of  the  comer  pillars, 
which  in  the  court  amounts  only  to 
two  cubits,  here  to  five.  In  a  building 
which  was  consecrated  to  the  Lord  of 
heaven,  and  was  to  effect  a  connection 
between  heaven  and  earth,  the  most 
emphatic  reference  to  heaven  could 
not  be  wanting ;  as  far  as  it  was  pos- 
sible for  man,  the  head  of  the  building 
must  point  to  heaven;  humility,  no 
less  than  pride,  has  need  of  a  tower 
whose  top  is  in  heaven." — HengsUnberg. 


Thb  TfiMPLE  AND  ITS  Obnaments.    (Ohap.  xli) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1. 
"The  temple" — the  holy  place,  the 
Temple  proper,  as  distinguished  from 
the  porch,  described  in  chap.  xl.  48,  49, 
and  from  the  Holy  of  Holies  (1  Kings  vi, 
1 7 ;  vii.  50).  *"  Which  was  the  breadth 
of  the  tabernacle."  WTiichuxisi^XLOx,  in 
the  original,  and  should  be  omitted.  As 
in  the  measurement  of  the  porch  the 
angel  had  pointed  to  Solomon's  Temple, 
so  here  in  the  edifice  itself  he  points  to 
the  old  Tabernacle.  Worship  is  pro- 
gressive, and  ex])resses  itself  in  har- 
mony with  the  culture  of  every  age. 

Ver.  2.  ''The  breadth  twenty  cubits." 

The  measurements  are  internal,  the 
same  as  in  the  Temple  of  Solomon. 

Ver.  8.  ''Then  went  he  inward." 

Towards  the  Holy  of  Holies.  It  is 
significant  that  in  this  case  it  is  not 
said  he  brought  me  in,  but  he  went  in^ 
because  the  Holy  of  Holies  was  not 
to  be  entered  even  by  a  priest  like 
Esekiel,  but  only  by  the  nigh  priest 
4S6 


once  a  year.  So  the  angel  enters,  and 
announces  the  measurements  to  Ezekiel 
whilst  he  stood  in  front  of  the  Temple. 
"  The  door  six  cubits,  and  the  breadth 
of  the  door  seven  cubits."  The  first 
measurement  of  the  door  was  from 
post  to  post  six  cubits,  and  the  second 
measurement,  ihe  breadth  of  the  door^ 
was  the  breadth  of  the  actual  doors 
which  shut  off  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and 
which  may  have  been  so  hung  that 
each  of  the  posts  projected  half  a  cubit 
beyond  the  hinge  of  the  door,  which 
opened  inwards. 

Yer.  4.  "So  he  measured  the  length 
thereof"  The  measurements  of  the 
Holy  of  Holies  exactly  correspond  with 
those  in  Solomon's  Temple  (1  Kings 
vl20). 

Yer.  5.  "The  wall  of  the  house" — 

the  outer  wall  of  the  Temple  itself. 
Its  thickness  of  six  cubits  corresponds 
with  the  colossal  proportions  of  the 
architecture  of  the  East.    "  Every  side 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMBNTART:  EZBKIEL. 


OHAP.  xu. 


ehamber" — the  singular  need  collec- 
tively for  the  plural,  to  denote  the 
whole  series  of  side  chamhers. 

Yer.  6.  ^  Three,  one  over  another, 
and  thirty  in  order."  Literally,  "three, 
thirty  times."  That  is,  there  were 
three  stories,  and  each  story  was 
divided  into  thirty  chambers.  **  They 
entered  into  the  wall  which  was  of 
the  house  for  the  aide  duunbers." 
The  wall  here  described  is  not  the 
wall  of  the  Temple,  which  was  six 
cubits  (ver.  5),  but  another  wall,  which 
was  five  cubits  (ver.  9),  parallel  to  it, 
built  for  the  side  chambers,  and  may 
be  said  to  be  of  the  house— i«.,  be- 
longing to  it. 

Ver.  7.  ''There  was  an  enlarging." 
This  wall  had  for  the  ground-story  its 
full  thickness  of  five  cubits;  then  it 
was  diminished  one  cubit,  so  as  to 
form  a  ledge  whereon  to  rest  the 
beams  of  the  floor  of  the  second  story, 
and  again  was  further  diminished  one 
cubit  for  the  floor  of  the  third  story. 
Thus  there  was  an  enlarging  of  the 
second  story  of  the  chambers  by  one 
cubit^  and  of  the  third  story  by  two 
cubits  beyond  the  breadth  of  the  cham- 
bers on  the  ground-floor.  **  A  winding 
about  still  upwards."  The  upper 
stories  were  approached  by  winding 
stairs,  still  upward  from  one  story  to 
another. 

Ver.  8.  -Great  cubits."  "Literally, 
to  the  extremity  or  root  of  the  hand.** 
— Henderson.  **  To  the  joining  or  point 
where  the  foundation  of  one  chamber 
ceased  and  another  began." — Fairbaim. 
"  To  the  wing  of  the  house." — Buxtorf. 
"  The  Hebrew  word  signifies  in  the 
first  instance  joining,  and  is  probably 
used  as  an  architectural  term  to  denote 
line  of  junction  between  two  stories, 
which  would  be  that  of  the  ceiling  of 
the  lower  and  the  floor  of  the  upper 
story." — Speaker^s  Commenia/ry. 

Yer.  9.  ''And  that  which  was  left" 
— the  passage  between  the  side  cham- 
bers and  the  Temple  wall,  implying 
that  no  place  was  to  be  left  which 


was  to  be  held,  as  of  old,  not  sacred. 
The  verb  I  saw  governs  the  whole  of 
the  eighth  and  ninth  verses. 

Vers.  12-17.  In  these  verses  we 
hare  a  summary  of  the  measurements 
and  details  of  buildings  already  men- 
tioned. The  buildings  measured  had 
been  the  gates  of  the  courts,  the  Temple, 
and  the  building  on  the  separate  place. 
All  the  overlaying  was  done  by  care- 
ful measurement^  accuracy  of  measure 
being,  according  to  Hebrew  ideas,  an 
ingredient  of  perfection. 

Ver.  18.  "Made  with  cherubim  and 
palm  trees."  Cherubim  a  symbol  of 
Divine  life;  palm-trees  of  life  in 
general.  "Every  cherub  had  two 
faces."  Being  in  sculpture  or  carving, 
two  faces  only  would  be  visible  to 
the  spectatoi;  The  cherubim  have 
each  four  faces  (chap,  i  10^.  They 
indicate  that  the  house  is  dedicated 
to*  the  God  of  the  whole  terrestrial 
creation;  not  to  a  national  god  of 
limited  power. 

Ver.  19.  "The  Amm  of  a  man  wai 
toward  the  palm  trees."  The  faces 
of  the  cherub  look  to  the  palms,  to 
indicate  that  all  creation,  animate  and 
inanimate,  is  a  whole— a  harmonious 
work  of  the  creative  power  of  Ghxi. 

Ver.  21.  "The  appearance  of  the  one 
as  the  appearance  of  the  other."  The 
appearance  in  this  vision  was  the  same 
as  in  other  visions :  the  appearance  of 
the  sanctuary,  or  Holy  of  Holies,  was 
similar  to  that  of  the  Temple.  They 
differed  only  in  magnitude. 

Ver.  22.  "The  altar  of  wood— the 
table  that  is  before  the  Lord."    The 

altar  of  incense  (chap.  xliv.  16) :  at  it^ 
and  not  at  the  table  of  shew-bread,  the 
priests  daily  ministered.  Table  and 
altar  are  convertible  terms.  It  stood 
in  front  of  the  vail,  and  is  therefore 
said  to  be  before  the  Lord.  It  is 
called  a  table,  as  being  that  at  which 
the   Lord   will    take   delight   in   His 

Kople,  as  at  a  feast.      It  is  not  to 
confounded  with  the  eight  tables 
43T 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHIP.  XLL  HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY :  EZERIBl 


outside  at  the  north  gate,  which  are  context — **  And  there  toere  leaves  in  wood 

to  be  altars  for  sacrifice  of  the  burnt-  on  the  face  of  the  porch  wUhouL* 
offering    and    sin-offering    (chap.    xL 

49).  Yer.  26.  ''Palm  trees  on  the  one 

aide  ftnd  on  the  other  aida"    The 

Yer.  25.   ''And  there  were  thick  porch  and  likewise  the  wings  take  the 

planks  npon  the  fiace  of  the  porch  character  of  the  subordinate  from  this, 

without.''     Ewald  translates  it  leaf-  that  only  palms  are  figured  on  them, 

wofk^  which  agrees  verj  well  with  the  and  not  cherubim  also. 

E0MILETIC8. 

Thb  TiMPLB  A  Symbol  of  the  Christian  Ghuboh. 

(Yers.  1-26.) 

L  As  it  is  the  haUtation  of  the  Divine  presence.  "  This  is  the  most  holy 
place  "  (ver.  4) ;  so  called  because  in  the  Tabernacle  and  in  Solomon's  Temple 
it  was  in  this  place  that  the  Shekinaii  dwelt — the  visible  manifestation  of  the 
Divine  glory.  It  was  also  called  the  orade  (1  Kings  vl  16),  because  from 
thence  Jehovah  declared  His  will.  Into  this  sacred  adytum  even  Ezekiel 
was  not  admitted.  The  angel  entered  alone.  '^Then  went  he  inward  and 
measured''  (ver.  3),  and  reported  the  dimensions  to  the  seer,  as  he  stood 
awe-struck  at  the  door.  The  hallowed  presence  of  Gtod  is  unapproachable  but 
to  the  holiest.  The  Christian  Church  to-day  is  the  spiritual  Temple  of  Jehovah, 
His  home  and  resting-place;  it  is  filled  with  His  living  presence,  aud  that 
presence,  growing  more  luminous  and  satisfying,  will  be  the  imperishable  gloiy 
of  the  Church  for  evermore. 

IL  As  it  is  a  comhination  of  strength  and  beauty  (Ps.  xcvL  6).  1.  It  is 
constructed  in  harmony  with  weU-known  laws  (vers.  1-17).  Its  walls  are  strong 
and  massive,  its  buildings  symmetrical,  exact  in  measurement^  every  detail 
minutely  developed,  and  the  whole  edifice  constructed  according  to  the  laws 
of  proportion.  Everything  about  the  building  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  the 
ereat  end  proposed — to  reveal  the  character  of  the  Master  Builder  and  to 
foster  and  promote  the  loftiest  worship.  The  indestructible  stability  of  the 
structure  is  assured,  as  it  is  built  on  the  incorruptible  laws  of  righteousness  and 
love.  The  grandest  fabrics  of  the  world-empire  are  gnawed  and  crunched  by 
the  destructive  teeth  of  time.  The  colossal  piles  of  architecture  which  filled 
the  soul  of  Ezekiel  with  wonder  and  fear  in  his  Assyrian  captivity  are  now 
dust  and  ruins,  monuments  in  their  decay  of  the  unfailing  truth  of  G^d's  Word 
and  significant  studies  of  the  pious  antiquarian ;  but  the  Temple  of  Jehovali 
remains,  and  shall  from  age  to  age  endure.  2,  It  is  ornamented  with  artistic 
suggestiveness  (vers.  lS-20,  25).  Doors,  posts,  pillars,  and  walls  were  chastely 
decorated  with  the  figures  of  cherubim  and  palm-trees — symbols  of  life,  life 
in  its  manifold  and  highest  forms,  life  traced  upwards  to  its  graud  creative 
source.  The  charm  of  all  art  is  in  its  power  to  delineate  life  in  its  endless 
manifoldness.  The  painted  canvas  or  chiselled  stone  is  of  no  value  unless  it 
contains  those  inimitable  touches  of  genius  that  are  full  of  the  suggestiveness 
of  life.  The  joy  of  a  picture  is  in  what  it  suggests  rather  than  in  what  it 
portrays ;  the  artist  may  see  more  in  a  theme  than  he  has  power  to  represent 
The  dewdrop  that  glitters  on  the  end  of  every  leaf  after  a  shower  is  beautiful 
even  to  a  child ;  but  to  a  Herschel,  who  knows  that  the  lightning  itself  sleeps 
within  it,  and  understands  and  feels  all  its  mysterious  connections  with  earth 
438 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL.  ohap.  xll 


ftnd  sky  and  planets,  it  is  suggestive  of  a  far  deeper  beauty.  The  eye  sees  only 
what  it  brings  with  it  the  power  to  see.  The  Temple  of  God  is  a  living 
Temple,  quivering  with  the  Divine  life  that  pervades  every  part,  and  to  the 
spiritually  cultured  senses  it  teems  with  radiant  forms  of  divinest  beauty. 

III.  As  it  makes  ample  provision  for  the  highest  needs  of  the  sonl  (ver.  22). 

The  altar  of  incense  is  here  significantly  called  "  the  table  that  is  before  the 
Lord."  The  greatest  need  of  the  soul  is  God  ;  but  God  can  be  approached  and 
known  only  through  sacrifice,  God  Himself  provides  the  altar  of  sacrifice  and 
the  victim  too  (Heb.  ix.  11-14  ;  x,  10-14).  The  Divine  provision  is  a  well-spread 
bknquet,  over  which  God  Himself  presides.  All  are  invited  to  freely  partake, 
and  the  joy  of  the  feast  is  found  in  the  presence  of  God  at  the  table.  The  altar 
of  the  heavenly  Temple  is  an  altar  of  incense,  but  it  is  the  incense  of  praise  ;  and 
as  the  incense,  daily  rising,  diffused  itself  and  perfumed  the  earthly  Temple,  so 
the  sweet  odour  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  shall  continually  ascend  before  the 
Lord  in  the  celestial  banqueting-house.  There  is  no  sacrifice  too  great  for  us  to 
offer  to  Him  who  has  done  and  suffered  so  much  for  us.  In  an  Italian  hospital 
was  a  soldier  lying  severely  wounded.  A  lady  visitor  spoke  to  him,  dressed  his 
wound,  smoothed  his  pillow,  made  him  all  right  for  the  day,  and  before  leaving 
placed  a  bouquet  of  flowers  beside  his  head.  The  grateful  soldier,  with  his  pale 
face  and  eyes  full  of  tears,  looked  up  and  said,  "  That  is  too  much  kindness." 
IShe  was  a  lady  with  a  true  Italian  heart,  and  looking  back  to  the  soldier  she 
quietly  replied,  "  No,  not  too  much  for  one  drop  of  Italian  blood  I "  And  shall 
we  not  freely  own  that  the  consecration  of  all  our  powers  of  body  and  soul  is 
not  too  much  to  give  in  return  for  the  shedding  of  our  Emmanuel's  blood  on 
our  behalf  t 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Temple  ofOoda  spirUwU  fabric.    2.  The  everlading  home  of  the 
holy.    3.  BeeplenderU  with  Divine  glory. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEESE3. 

Vers.  1-26.  "  Esekiel  never  intended  the  Church  of  Gk)d,  the  Temple  of  the 

that   a    structure    should    be   reared  Holy  Ghost^  as  it  shall  hereafter  be 

precisely  according  to  the  plan  and  manifested  on  earth,  shall   be  on  a 

measurements  he  furnishes^  otherwise  scale  of  grandeur  such  as  has  never 

he  would  have  been  still  more  minute  yet  been  witnessed,  and  its  worship 

in   his  delineations.      He   has  given  shall  be  on  a  corresponding  scale  of 

enough,  however,  for  his  great  object,  glory,  beauty,  and  blessedness.     Not 

which  was  chiefly  to  show  that  in  the  till  then  shall  the  Lord  be  worshipped 

Divine  purpose  respecting  the  future  visibly  in  the  beauty  of  holiness  by  the 

there  was  to  be  a  full  and  every  way  whole  congregation  of  earth,  led  on 

complete  reconstruction  of  the  House  by  Israel  as  the  leader  of  the  mighty 

of  God,   if  not  in  the   outward   and  choir.      None   of   the   defects   which 

material  sense,  yet  in  the  higher  things,  attend  our  present  liturgical  worship 

which  that  represented  and  symbolised,  shall  alloy  the  perfection  of  the  public 

and  with  the  effect  of  securing  a  far  services  of  God  which  shall  then  be 

purer  and  more  elevated  condition  for  rendered    to    Him    through    Ghrist. 

the  covenant-people.     It  is  this  last  There  shall  be   no   divisions.      Now 

point  which  throughout  he  seeks  to  the  catholicity  of  the  Church  is  but 

render  prominent  by  the  nature  of  his  partially  seen,  though  it  is  a  blessed 

descriptions." — Fairbaim.  reality,  and  its  unity  is  hardly  to  be 

—  ''The  spiritual  lesson  to  be  learned  recognised  at  all,  split  up  as  it  is  into 

by  us  from  the  description  here  is,  that  a  hundred  denominations  with  varying 

439 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


♦. 


cnAP.  zii. 


EOMILBTW  COMMENTARY  I  EZBKIBL. 


confessions  of  faith  and  different  forms 
of  worship;  then  all  shall  be  one  in 
outward  worship,  as  well  as  in  inward 
unity  of  the  spirit,  an<i  the  world  will 
in  consequence  l)e  attracted  to  believe 
the  Divine  niisson  of  Messiah  (John 
xvii.  2\y—FawseL 

—  The  Temple  a  Representation  of 
Ohriat  and  His  Ohurck  **  \.  It  is  a 
rejtreseniation  of  the  humaniiy  of  Christ. 
(1.)  The  Temple  was  holy ;  so  was  Christ 
(Luke  L  35 ;  Acto  xiil'  35 ;  1  Pet  i. 
19,  ii  22 ;  Heb.  viL  26).  ^2.)  The 
Temple  was  light  and  beautiful  within ; 
so  was  Christ  (CoL  il  3 ;  John  i  14 ; 
Cant.  V.  10 ;  Ps.  xlv.  2).  (3.)  By  the 
Temple  they  came  to  know  the  mind 
of  G^ ;  so  by  Christ  Gk>d  is  known 
(Heb.  I  2 ;  John  xv.  15).  (4.)  The 
Temple  was  (Jod's  delight :  there  God 
dwelt  and  manifested  His  glory  (chap, 
xliil  4,  5).  So  Christ  (John  i  14  ; 
Matt.  uL  17  ;  1  Tim.  iil  15).  2.  //  is 
a  representation  of  tJie  Church  of  Christ, 
(1.)  All  things  in  this  Temple  were 
measured ;  so  in  the  Church  (Ephes.  iL 
2 1 ;  Rev.  xi.  1).  (2.)  Christ  was  in  this 
Temple,  did  all  therein  and  showed 
all  to  the  prophet;  so  in  the  Church 
(Col.  L  18 ;  Rev.  ii.  1,  xxi.  3).  (8.)  In 
this  Temple  were  chambers,  galleries, 
and  stories,  one  above  another ;  so  in 
the  Church  there  are  several  ranks 
and  degrees  of  officers  and  members 
(1  Cor.  xil  28;  Ephes  iv.  11  ;  1  Tim. 
V.  17,  iii.  8;  1  John  ii  12,  13)."— 
OreenhiU. 

Ver.  1.  "If  we  diligently  attend  to 
the  instructions  given  ns  in  the  plainer 
parts  of  religion,  and  profit  by  them, 
we  shall  be  led  further  into  an  acquaint- 
ance with  the  mysteries  of  the  King- 
dom of  Qod.  They  that  are  willing  to 
dwell  in  Qod's  courts  shall  at  length 
be  brought  into  His  Temple.  Ezekiel 
was  himself  a  priest,  but  by  the  iniquity 
and  calamity  of  the  times  was  cut 
short  of  his  birthright  privilege  of 
ministering  in  the  Temple ;  but  God 
makes  up  the  loss  to  him  by  intro- 
ducing him  into  this  prophetical,  evan- 
gelical, celestial  Temple,  and  employing 
him  to  transmit  a  description  of  it  to 
the  Church,  in  which  he  was  dignified 

440 


above  all  the  rest  of  his  order.* — M. 
Henry. 

—  "  We  ought  to  go  forward  under 
God's  guidance  in  the  ways  of  the 
Lord  from  glory  to  glory,  but  not  to 
go  backward  or  stand  still  except  in 
meditation.  The  good  spirit  leads 
men  to  the  Church,  there  to  listen 
devoutly  to  the  Word  of  God ;  the 
evil  spirit  keeps  them  back  from  if — . 
Starke. 

Ver.  S.  **  Then  went  he  inward  and 
measured.''  The  Highest  Tmthi — 1. 
Often  a  lonely  quest.  2.  Seen  only  by 
the  morally  pure.  3.  Fill  the  soul 
with  profound  awe.  4.  Are  to  be  com- 
municated to  others  with  the  utmost 
eoBBCtitude. 

Ver.  4  "And  he  said  unto  me, 
This  is  the  most  holy  place.''  The 
Most  Holy  Place — 1.  Is  where  God 
manifests  His  presence.  2.  Is  not 
now  confined  to  any  one  spot  under 
heaven.  S.  What  a  privilege  to  meet 
with  one  who  can  direct  us  to  the 
holiest  place!  '<He  said  unto  me, 
This  is  the  most  holy  place." 

—  "The  most  holy  place  is  set 
before  us  as  the  goal,  and  we  under- 
stand thereby  a  heavenly  state  on 
earth,  namely,  the  Church  of  the  New 
Testament.  Accordingly,  in  chap,  xliii. 
the  entire  circuit  of  the  mountain  is 
called  most  holy,  from  which  it  is 
evident  that  no  one  is  truly  inside 
this  Temple,  or  even  in  its  courts,  who 
is  devoid  of  the  New  Testament  per- 
fection— Heavenly  glory,  or  eternal 
bliss,  is  no  doubt  the  only  complete 
Holy  of  Holies,  yet  he  who  has  entered 
the  kingdom  of  grace  has  come  to  a 
glory  which  eye  hath  not  seen  nor 
ear  heard,  neither  hath  entered  into 
the  heart  of  man,  to  praise  and  glorify 
God  for  ever." — Lcmge. 

Ver.  6.  "The  chambers  are  not  all 
of  the  same  sice,  but  they  are  al) 
connected  with  the  sanctuary;  the 
same  is  the  case  with  the  progress 
and  growth  of  the  members  of  the 
body  of  which  Christ  is  the  Head — 
The  saints  of  Qod  are  also  measured 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIO  COMMBNTAnr:  EZEKIEL. 


OHAF.  XII. 


round  and  round;  no  heavier  task  is 
laid  upon  them,  no  greater  tempta- 
tion befalls  them,  than  what  is  their 
Father's  will.  That  the  chambers  are 
connected  denotes  the  brotherly  rela- 
tion in  the  sanctuary  (Ps.  cxxxiii. ;  1 
John  iii). — God  provides  for  His  ser- 
vants covert  and  shelter  in  the  world." 
— Langt. 

Ver.  6.  "There  is  a  threefold  rank 
or  order  of  the  members  of  the  Church ; 
there  are  lowermost,  middlemost,  and 
uppermost.  These,  as  they  have  their 
several  offices  and  gifts  accordingly,  so 
they  must  keep  to  their  own  stations, 
do  their  own  business,  live  in  love, 
and  wait  till  called  into  a  higher 
room." — Trapp. 

—  "Those  in  the  Church  are  not 
all  of  one  rank,  whether  officers  or 
others;  some  are  of  the  lower  rank, 
some  in  the  middle,  and  some  upper- 
most :  there  are  children,  young  men, 
and  old  men ;  and  the  higher  any  get^ 
the  more  enlargement  and  greater 
breadth  do  they  see  in  the  things  of 
God  and  this  Temple;  and  notwith- 
standing this  difference  among  them, 
there  is  a  sweet  harmony  between 
them,  and  they  serve  one  another." — 
QreevMU, 

—  "  That  they  might  have  hold, 
but  they  had  not  hold  in  the  wall  of 
the  house,"  Temple  Workers — 1. 
Find  much  of  their  work  lies  outside 
the  Temple  itself.  2.  Their  work  gains 
its  significance  and  worth  by  being  in 
connection  with  the  Temple.  3.  Their 
nearness  to  the  Temple  no  guarantee 
of  the  permanence  of  their  labour. 
4.  Their  sphere  of  work,  like  these 
side  chambers  resting  on  a  separate 
wall,  may  be  removed  without  affect- 
ing the  stability  of  the  Temple.  5. 
Should  be  careful  in  all  their  work 
to  maintain  the  inviolability  of  the 
Temple. 

—  "Leaning  upon  God,  upheld  by 
Him,  but  not  mixed  up  with  Him  in 
our  affairs. — Of  ourselves  we  cannot 
stand  a  single  moment,'' — Lange. 

Ver.  7.  StiU  Upward.  "L  Stm  up- 
ward and  stm  larger  is  the  plan  of 


Divine  procedure.  1.  The  work  of 
creation  was  in  full  harmony  with 
this  method.  2.  The  same  in  revela- 
tion. 3.  The  same  feature  in  Divine 
architecture  in  our  Lord's  history.  4. 
Same  in  the  history  of  the  Church. 
IL  The  text  illustrates  the  saints  ex- 
perience. 1.  It  is  so  in  a  man's  views 
and  thoughts  of  God.  2.  In  a  saint's 
apprehension  of  the  blessings  bf  salva^ 
tion.  3.  In  his  spiritual  growth  4. 
So  too  with  his  love.  5.  So  in  aspira- 
tion and  communion.  HI.  The  text 
sets  forth  the  sainfs  destiny.*' — Homiietic 
Monthly, 

—  "  The  higher  we  build  up  our- 
selves in  our  most  holy  faith,  the  more 
should  our  hearts,  those  living  temples, 
be  enlarged." — M.  Henry. 

—  "  This  miglit  remind  God's 
people  of  heaven  ly-mindedness  where- 
by their  hearts  will  be  enlarged  when 
once  got  above  the  world,  as  birds  sing 
sweetly  when  aloft  in  the  Bir^-^Trapp. 

—  "In  God's  House  we  must  go 
upward  by  growth  in  grace,  that  the 
mind  may  be  always  the  more  firmly 
directed  heavenward. — The  breadth  in 
the  top  part. — Christians  ought  not  to 
contract  but  to  expand  as  they  grow 
older.  Higher  grace  gives  expansion 
in  width  and  breadth.  The  narrower 
points  of  view  with  which  we  ascend 
gradually  disappear. — The  broader 
heart  on  the  height  of  the  Christian 
life  in  theory  and  practice. — Prayer  an 
ascending  stair. — But  let  us  not  for- 
get that  which  lies  in  the  middle.  In 
the  middle  is  tlie  means,  the  way  of 
mediation." — Lange* 

Ver.  8.  The  secret  of  the  height 
depends  on  the  foundation. 

Ver.  10.  "  In  the  Church  much  more 
room  is  taken  up  by  such  as  are  void 
of  the  treasure  of  God's  grace  than  by 
better  men,  rich  in  faith  and  heirs  of 
the  Kingdom  of  Christ." — Trapp, 

Ver.  12.  The  history  of  dogmas  is  in 
many  respects  the  off-place  in  Ezekiel'a 
Temple. 

Ver.  16.    "Enlightenment  is  from 
441 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OlAf.XU. 


BOMJLETJC  COMM  Birr  AMY:  EZSKTSL, 


aboTe ;  only  tbas  do  we  obtiin  a 
oonoeptioD  of  heavenly  things. — ^Faith 
is  a  window,  and,  as  compared  with 
▼ision,  a  narrow  one. — Through  His 
wounds  we  see  into  the  heart  of  Christ 
as  through  a  window.** — Lange. 

Ver.  17.  "The  Lord  Christ  will 
measure  Christians  of  what  height, 
breadth,  and  depth  they  are;  their 
actions,  affections,  and  graces  will  be 
measured  (Bev.  xi.  l).** — Oreenhill 

Vers.  18-20,  26.  The  NoUeat  F»o- 
Tinoe  of  Art — 1.  To  idealise  the 
manifold  forms  of  the  highest  life. 
2.  Is  consecrated  to  the  holiest  ends 
in  the  senrice  of  God.  3.  Finds  scope 
for  the  most  gifted  genius  in  beautify- 
ing the  Temple  of  God. 

Ver.  18.  **  Cherubims  are  generally 
taken  for  the  portrait  of  angels  and 
framed  to  the  beauty  of  young  men 
with  wings.  Tet  is  the  description  of 
them  different  in  different  places,  as  in 
Ezekiel's  vision  chap,  i.,  Isaiah's  vision 
chap,  vi,  John's  vision  Kev.  iv.,  and 
in  Solomon's  Temple.  Palm-trees — a 
very  beautiful,  upright  tree  from  a 
straight,  well-grown  body,  spreading  its 
head  with  large  boughs  and  branches, 
which  were  used  on  occasions  of  joy 
and  were  emblems  of  victory  (John  xii. 
13 ;  Kev.  vii.  9)."— Pod. 

—  "This  was  to  teach  Christians 
who  are  the  temples  of  God.  1.  To 
live  like  angels  for  holiness.  2.  To 
suffer,  as  palm-trees,  any  pressures  or 
pains  for  His  sake  with  invincible 
patience.  By  their  piety  in  their  lives 
and  patience  at  their  death  the  primi- 
tive Christians  won  much  upon  their 
persecutors." — Trapp. 

Ver.  19.  "These  seem  to  represent 
the  angels  who  have  more  than  the 
wisdom  of  a  man  and  the  courage  of  a 
lion;  and  in  both  they  have  an  eye 
to  the  palms  of  victory  and  triumph 
which  are  set  before  them,  and  which 
they  are  sure  of  in  all  their  conflicts 
with  the  powers  of  darkness." — M. 
Eenry, 

—  "  Teachers  ought   to  be  men, 

442 


especially  to  humbled  consciences,  but 
lions  against  enemies." 

Ver.  22.  "  The  table  before  the 
Lord."  The  Divine  Generoaity — 1. 
Provides  a  rich  and  varied  feast  for 
His  people.  2.  His  presence  at  His 
own  table  is  the  choicest  feast  3.  His 
table  is  also  an  altar  from  which  the 
incense  of  thanksgiving  and  praise 
rises  acceptably  before  Him. 

—  '*  The  altar  is  designated  as  the 
table  or  board  before  the  Lord  because 
that  which  is  set  on  it — the  incense, 
denoting  the  prayers  of  the  saints  (Ps. 
cxli.  2;  Kev.  v.  8,  viii.  3) — is  re- 
garded as  spiritual  food  which  the 
people  present  to  their  heavenly  King. 
The  altar  appears  as  the  table  of  the 
Lord  also  in  chap.  xliv.  16.  The 
offering  ap{)ear8  as  the  food  of  God 
Mai.  L  7.  Not  without  cause  is  the 
altar  in  1  Kings  viL  48  compared  with 
the  table  of  shew-bread ;  the  bread 
laid  on  the  latter  denoted  the  spiritual 
nourishment  which  the  people  are  to 
present  to  their  heavenly  King,  which 
is  good  works." — Hengstenberg. 

—  "This  altar  is  at  the  same  time 
a  table,  as  Christ  is  to  our  souls  in  the 
Holy  Supper." 

—  "This  altar  of  wood  and  four- 
square was  a  type  of  Christ,  in  whom 
our  prayers  come  before  God  as  in- 
cense, and  He  is  the  propitiation  for 
our  sins  (1  John  it  2  ;  Ex.  xxx.  1 ;  Pa. 
cxli.  2 ;  Rev.  v.  8).  The  largeness  of 
this  altar  above  that  of  old  shows  that 
the  saints  under  the  Gospel  would  make 
much  more  improvement  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  prayer,  and  make  use  of  His 
mediation  and  intercession  by  faith 
in  their  heavenly  subliiuated  supplica- 
tions, than  the  saints  of  old  were 
ordinarily  wont  to  do." — Irapp. 

—  This  Altar  a  Representation  of 
Ohrist  *'  1.  Though  the  altar  was- of 
wood,  it  was  shittim  wood — incorrup- 
tible; so  Christ's  human  nature  was 
incorruptible;  it  saw  no  corruption 
(Acts  xiii.  36).  2.  It  was  larger  than 
that  under  the  Law;  so  the  worship 
of  Grod  in  Christ's  time  should  be  en- 
larged (MaL  i.  2).  3.  Sweet  incense 
was  offered  to  Qod    on    this    altar. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMJLETW  COMMBNTART:  EZEKIEL. 


OBAP.  XUt. 


"Where  the  people  prayed  the  priest 
offered  inceDse  Hjuke  i.  9,  10),  and 
when  we  pray  Christ  offers  up  our 
prayers  with  the  incense  and  perfume 
of  His  merits  (Rev.  viiL  3,  4 ;  Ephes. 
T.  2).  4.  On  this  altar  was  incense, 
morning  and  evening ;  it  was  a  per- 
petual incense;  so  Christ,  our  altar, 
offers  up  prayers  perpetually  for  us 
(Heb.  viil  25).  6.  This  altar  is  the 
table  before  the  Lord.  There  is  some- 
thing in  this  expression  worthy  con- 
sideration. (1.)  That  poor,  sinful, 
weak,  unworthy  creatures  may  come 
to  Christ  not  only  as  an  altar  to  have 
their  prayers  presented  to  Qod,  but 
as  a  table  to  have  refreshing  to  their 
souls  (John  vi.  35, 55  ;  Luke  xxii.  30 ; 
Rev.  vii.  17,  ii.  7,  17>  (2.)  That 
the  Lord  Himself  is  delighted  and 
satisfied  in  and  with  Christ,  as  we  are 
with  a  table  full  of  dainties,  having 
the  choicest  meats  and  drinks  (Matt, 
iii.  17 ;  Isa.  xliL  1).  Christ  is  the  altar, 
the  table,  the  sacrifice,  and  the  meat 
and  drink  upon  the  same.''— (Tr^^iU. 

Yer.  23.  ''  Doors  let  in  and  shut  out ; 
80  also  does  the  Church. — Ornament  is 
here  combined  with  solemness.  We 
have  not  here  the  joyous  worldly 
beauty  of  Qreece,  but  neither  have 
we  the  solemness  dark  as  death  as  in 
Egyptb    The  world  opens  its  doors  half 


to  frivolity  and  half  to  despondency, 
— ^The  sanctuary  of  the  heart  also  must 
be  shut,  and  not  with  one  door  only. 
Our  treasure  is  incomparable,  and  ought 
to  be  preserved  with  much  watchful- 
ness and  strong  exhortation.'' — Lange. 
—  "  The  Gospel  and  its  ordinances 
— faith,  repentance,  and  baptism — are 
the  means  to  salvation ;  by  them  we 
obtain  entrance  to  the  communion  of 
saints,  the  favour  of  God,  and  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.  Christ  is  the 
way  and  the  door  ^John  xiv.  6  ;  x.  7), 
because  He  has  given  us  the  means 
which  are  the  way  and  door  to  the 
Church  and  unto  life :  these  doors  are  to 
be  open  for  the  sheep  and  to  be  shut 
against  the  goats.  We  may  also  under- 
stand by  these  doors  the  ministers  dis* 
pensing  the  €k)spel  and  the  ordinances 
thereof;  they  are  to  be  holy,  vigilant, 
and  sealous  as  the  cherubims,  and  con- 
stantly green,  growing,  and  flourishing 
as  the  palm-trees." — Oreenliill. 

Ver.  26.  "They  had  palm-trees 
wrought  or  engraven  on  both  sides, 
implying  that  the  materials  of  Christ's 
Temple  must  not  be  common,  but 
beautifully  carved  work.  The  House 
of  Christ  and  everything  in  it  must 
be  decorated  with  the  engravings  of 
God's  Spirit  (Ps.  xlv.  IS ;  Eev. 
18,  Idy—GreenhUL 


The  Chambers  aw  thb  Prusib.    (Chap.  xBi) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1. 
^Into  the  chambetr" — ^to  the  cham- 
bi^rs;  the  Hebrew  is  a  collective  noun. 
^The  building  towards  the  north." 
The  direction  in  which  the  chambers 
lay.  Place  a  comma  between  building 
and  tatoard. 

Yer.  2.  ''Before  the  length  of  a 
hundred  cnhits  was  the  north  door " 
— i«.,  before  the  separate  place,  which 
was  that  length.  The  seer  had  before 
spoken  of  chambers  for  the  officiating 
priests  on  the  north  and  south  gates 
of  the  inner  court  (chap.  xL  44-46). 
He  now  returns  to  take  a  more  exact 
view  of  them. 


Yer.  4.  **  And  before  the  duunhers 
was  a  walk  of  ten  enbits  breadth 
inward."  The  word  for  walk  may 
mean  gangway^  and  there  may  have 
been  in  the  middle  of  the  chambers  a 
gangway  leading  inward,  with  stairs 
to  the  upper  stories,  ten  cabits  wide, 
while  along  the  north  front  of  the 
building  there  was  a  kerb  of  one  cubit, 
as  before  the  guard-chambers  (chap. 
xL  12),  on  wmch  kerb  the  north 
doors  (leading  to  the  basement)  opened. 
Eengstenberg  calls  the  walk  a  sireeL 

Yer.  5.  ''  New  the  npper  ehambers 
were  shorter.**  **  To  be  rendered 
thus : — ^And  the  upper  chambers  were 

443 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.XUL 


BOMILETIC  COMMENT  ART:  BZSKIBU 


shortened,  for  galleries  took  off  from 
them  (literally^  did  eat  of  them),  from 
the  lower  and  from  the  middlemost 
chambers  of  the  building.  The  build- 
ing rose  in  terraces,  as  was  usual  in 
Babylonian  architecture,  and  so  each 
of  the  two  upper  stories  receded 
from  the  one  below  it," — Speaker's 
CommmUatrj^ 

Yer.  7.  ''The  waU  that  was  with- 
out." The  wall  here  must  be  one 
from  north  to  south,  fencing  off  from 
the  outer  court  the  passage  along  the 
east  side  of  the  chambers,  and  therefore 
fifty  cubits  long. 

Yer.  8.  ''And,  lo,  before  the  Temple.'' 

This  describes  their  position  in  a 
general  way ;  more  precisely,  they  lay 
over  against  partly  the  separate  place 
and  partly  the  Temple  court. 

Yer.  9.  "As  one  goeth  into  them 
from,  the  outer  coort''  There  was  an 
entrance  at  the  north  of  this  passage 
by  which  the  priests  entered  into 
the  chambers  and  into  the  Temple 
court. 

Yer.  10.  "The  chambers  were  in 
the  thickness  of  the  wall''  The 
verse  should  be  rendered : — Breadth- 
wise was  the  wall  towards  the  east; 
in  front  of  the  separate  place  and  of 
the  building  were  the  chambers. 

Yers*  11,  12,  assert  that  on  the 
south  side  of  the  separate  place  was 
a  block  of  chambers  precisely  similar 
to  that  on  the  north. 

Yer.  13.  "Where  the  priests  shall 
eat  the  most  holy  things.''  In  Ley. 
X.  13  it  was  prescribed  that  the  priests 
siiould  eat  of  the  sacrifices  in  the  holy 
place.  This  was  originally  before  the 
altar  in  the  inner  court — now  separate 
chambers  are  assigned,  and  these  be- 
come the  holy  place  for  this  purpose. 


Only  the  meat-offerings — the  sin  and 
guilt  offerings—are  mentioned,  not  the 
slain  or  peace  offering,  because  only  in 
the  former  were  the  portions  falling  to 
the  priests  most  holy,  and  as  such  to 
be  consumed  by  the  priests  alone,  in 
their  official  function ;  whereas  in  the 
peace-offerings  the  priestly  portion  was 
consumed  by  the  priests  with  their 
whole  family,  including  even  the 
females  (Lev.  x  14). 

Yer.  14.  ''When  the  priests  enter 
therein."  Another  purpose  for  which 
these  chambers  were  to  be  used  was 
for  the  unrobing  of  the  priests.  Only 
after  they  have  changed  their  garments 
which  they  have  used  in  the  service 
of  (Jod  are  they  to  enter  into  inter- 
course with  the  people  in  the  outer 
court 

Yer.  15.  "Measuring  the  inner 
house."  Not  the  Temple,  but  the 
Temple  and  its  courts,  all  that  lay 
within  the  wall  on  the  outside  of  the 
house  (chap.  xL  5). 

Yer.  16.  "He  measured  the  east 
side — Hve  hundred  reeds."  The  vast 
extent  is  another  feature  marking  the 
ideal  character  of  the  Temple.  It 
symbolises  the  great  enlargement  of 
the  Kingdom  of  Qod  in  the  times  of 
the  Messiah. 

Yer.  20.  "To  make  a  separation." 

The  sanctuary  proper  was  the  Most 
Holy  Place  as  distinguished  from  the 
rest  of  the  Temple ;  but  the  term  was 
capable  of  extension,  first  to  the  whole 
Temple,  then  to  all  the  ground  that 
was  separated  to  holy  as  distinguisheil 
from  profane  or  common  uses.  No 
longer  shall  the  wall  of  partition  be  to 
separate  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile,  for 
Christ  hath  broken  down  the  middle 
wall  of  partition  between  us  (Ephesw  ii. 
14),  but  to  separate  the  sacred  from 
the  profane. 


444 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMTLETW  COUMSNTART:  EZBKIEL  chap,  sxii, 

HOMILETIOS. 

Workers  vob  Qodi  their  Privilegbs  and  Distinction. 

(Vers.  1-20.) 

I.  That  workeni  for  Ood  have  ample  provision  for  all  their  needs.    These 

chambers  were  intended  for  shelter,  rest,  and  refreshment  for  those  who  waited 
on  God  in  worship;  every  necessary  comfort  and  convenience  was  provided. 
The  priests  were  wholly  devoted  to  their  sacred  calling ;  they  renounced  the 
world  and  all  its  most  tempting  prises,  and  gave  themselves  up  body  and  soul 
to  a  life-long  consecration  to  the  work  of  the  Temple.  The  law  of  worship 
demanded  this  complete  self-renunciation ;  and  at  the  same  time  it  secured  to 
the  servant  of  God  everything  that  was  essential  to  his  well-being  and  to  help 
him  in  his  hallowed  work.  The  minister  of  the  Divine  Word  must  be  relieved 
from  the  fret  and  care  of  worldly  things,  that  he  may  be  free  to  apply  himself 
with  a  whole-hearted  abandon  to  the  study  and  interpretation  of  spiritual 
things  (1  Tim.  iv.  15).  Let  him  take  care  of  the  sacred  deposit  committed  to 
his  trust,  and  Gkni  will  take  care  of  him.  The  faithful  worker  for  God  need 
have  no  anxiety  about  the  future :  his  anxiety  should  be  nndividedly  centred 
on  the  duties  of  the  present  (Luke  x.  7;  PhiL  iv.  19). 

II.  That  workers  for  Ood  should  prepare  by  devotions  in  private  for  the 
profitable  worship  of  God  in  public.  The  chambers,  though  near  the  Temple, 
were  separate  from  it,  were  strictly  private,  placed  in  the  midst  of  stillness  and 
retirement  favourable  to  meditation  and  prayer.  The  power  of  the  worker  for 
God  in  public  is  acquired  by  diligent  devotion  in  private.  God  is  known  in 
the  greatness  and  glory  of  His  character  and  the  wisdom  and  righteousness  of 
His  wa^s ;  not  in  the  midst  of  noise  and  uproar,  but  in  quietness  and  solitude. 
The  thinker  must  isolate  himself  for  the  time  being  from  all  distraction,  and 
quietly  and  prayerfully  wait  on  QoA.  ''  Be  still,  and  know  that  I  am  God " 
(rs.  ^vL  10).  Not  in  the  wild  commotion  and  brazen  clangour  of  the  battle- 
field, not  in  the  whizzing  hurricane  of  national  strife  and  uproar,  not  in  the 
rush  and  woiry  of  excessive  worldly  care,  are  the  holy  secrets  of  Divine  things 
divulged  to  the  soul,  but  in  the  solitude  of  retirement,  in  the  hush  and  stillness 
of  some  meditative  retreat^  where  the  tocsin  of  war  is  never  heard  and  the  peal 
of  cannon  and  crash  of  arms  never  penetrate.  Not  that  we  are  to  indulge  in 
a  life  of  useless  quietism  and  inactivity.  We  must  ilence  our  meaningless 
clamour  and  pause  in  our  demonstrative  activities  in  order  that  (}od  may 
speak  and  may  work  His  purpose  in  us :  then  we  receive  our  commission  and 
are  inspired  to  speak  and  work  for  Him.  On  the  quiet  pastoral  slopes  of 
Midian,  Moses,  in  stillness  and  awe,  witnessed  the  splendours  of  the  Divine 
revelation;  and  then  went  forth  to  work,  and  his  hfe  thenceforward  was  a 
continuous  scene  of  tireless  and  prodigious  activity  Among  the  rugged  crags 
of  Horeb,  Elijah  was  favoured  with  a  fuller  revelation  of  the  Divine  character — 
not  in  the  roaring  tempest,  the  crashing  earthquake,  or  the  devouring  fire,  but 
in  the  subduing  whisper  of  the  still,  small  voice — and  he  rose  up  to  do  the 
will  of  God  with  a  tenderer  and  a  nobler  spirit  than  he  had  known  before. 
In  the  dreary  solitudes  of  Patmos  the  beloved  John  beheld,  in  enraptured 
stillness,  visions  of  the  future  history  of  the  Church  as  they  rolled  before  him 
in  panoramic  splendour,  and  then  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  in  writing  and  speak- 
ing about  them  for  the  benefit  of  the  ages  to  come.  And  so  the  workers  for 
God,  in  the  quietness  and  secrecy  of  the  closet^  receive  the  blessing  of  the  Lord 

445 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OMAI'.  xtn.  HOMILETW  COMMENT  A  It  Y :  EZEKISL 


that  they  maj  bear  it  forth  to  the  public  sanctuary  and  make  their  fellow- 
worshippers  idl  the  richer  for  sharing  with  them  the  outpoured  endowments 
of  Hearen. 

IIL  That  workers  for  €k>d  should  be  distinguished  by  superior  sanctity. 
1.  The  eharaeier  of  their  work  demands  iL  It  ia  holy  work ;  it  has  to  do  with 
holy  things  (ver.  13).  In  connection  with  the  Temple  of  God  a  clear  and 
unmistakable  distinction  is  made  between  things  sacred  and  profane  (ver,  20). 
The  law  of  cleansing  observed  in  the  Levitical  ritual  wiiii  such  scnipnlous 
minuteness  was  intended  to  set  forth  the  absolute  necessity  of  purity  in  all 
who  took  part  in  the  ministrations  of  the  Temple  (Isa,  Hi.  11).  Only  the  holy 
can  comprehend  and  teach  holiness.  To  understand  philosophy  we  must  be 
philosopnici  to  appreciate  a  poet  we  must  be  poetical,  and  to  understand  purity 
we  must  be  ourselves  pure.  2.  The  success  of  their  work  trill  be  influenced  by  U. 
It  will  be  seen  in  its  effects  both  upon  themselves  and  upon  others.  How 
often  is  the  best  work  for  Qod  marred  by  the  intrusion  into  it  of  human 
imperfection  and  sin !  It  is  said  that  Michael  Angelo  was  once  seen  absorb- 
ingly engaged  on  an  important  painting  witli  a  lighted  lamp  fastened  across 
his  foreheaid,  so  that  no  shadow  from  himself  might  fall  upon  his  work.  £ven 
so  ought  we  to  lift  up  the  light  of  a  Goil-given  holiness  that  no  shadow  of 
self  may  darken  and  disfigure  the  work  we  are  doing  for  Him.  Man  is  never 
so  great,  so  luminous,  so  grand,  as  when  he  is  doing  holy  work  with  the  light 
and  help  of  the  holy  God. 

Lessons. — 1.  To  do  the  best  work  for  Ood  needs  prayerful  preparaHon.  2.  fFork 
done  for  Ood  has  its  own  special  rewards,  S.  Personal  hdiness  rejuisUe  for  the 
highest  kind  of  success  in  work  for  God. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.   1-20.    "By  these  buildings  Ver.  3.    **The  inner  court.    This 

connected  with  the  Temple  and  per-  was  a  figure  of  the  Church  invisible, 

taining  to  its  outward  economy  we  as  the  outer  court  was  of  the  visible 

should  be   reminded  that  the  Lord  and  external'' — Trapp. 
bestows    upon   the  pious    the    other 

necessaries  of  life  also.     In  Him  they  Ver.  4.  The  Social  Instinct — 1.  Leads 

find  their  entire  satisfaction  ;  but  they  to  the  place  where  congenial  company  is 

use  food,  drink,  intercourse  with  men  to  be  found.    2.  Delights  in  the  fellow- 

and  this  world,  as  if  they  did  not  use  ships  associated  with  the  House  of  God. 

all  this.     Thus  to  the  pure  all  things  3.  Finds  its  supreme  satisfaction  in 

are  pure  that  they  do  with  pure  and  spiritual  comiuunion  with  the  highest, 

upright    heart.     The   Word   of  God  —  "Before  the  chambers  was  a 

makes  us  strong  when  it  is  with  us,  walk  of  ten    cubits — a  way  of  one 

and  blesses  also  outward  things.     The  cubit."     "There  is  a  broad  way  and 

Lord    has  ordained    that    they  who  a  narrow  way ;  a  ten-cubit  way  and  a 

preach  the  Gospel  shall   live  of  the  one-cubit  way.      The  Church  at  one 

Gk)spel." — (Ecolampadius,  time  has  prosperity  and  freedom  ;  it 

is  in  '  a  walk  of  ten  cubits ; '  and  the 

Ver.  1.  '*As  this  Temple  was  pro-  time  will  come  when  it  shall  have 
yidedwith  many  chambers,  but  each  had  greater  latitude,  liberty,  and  pros- 
its  own  purpose,  so  believing  Christians  perity.  At  another  time  the  Church 
must  be  sanctified  chambers  for  the  is  in  straits,  afflictions,  temptations, 

S^loryofGod — one  for  this  use,  another  and  persecutions:  it  is  in  'a  way  of 

or  that  (2  TiuL  ii  2\yStarck.  one  cubit'"— OfwirtiB. 


446 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILETIO  COMUnfrTAltT'  EZEKIEL. 


CBA?.  XUt 


—  "A  way  of  one  cubit**  "A 
narrow  way,  but  such  as  led  into 
spacious  walks  of  ten  cubits  breadth 
inward.  Strait  is  the  gate  and  nar- 
row the  way  that  leadeth  unto  life 
eternal;  but  they  that  hit  it,  hold 
it,  shall  walk  arm-in-arm  with  angels 
(Matt.  vii.  14 ;  Zech.  iii  7).  Through 
many  tribulations  we  enter  the  King- 
dom ;  but  there  God  v/ill  set  our  feet 
in  a  large  room  (Acts  xiv.  22;  Ps. 
xxxi.  8).  Let  it  be  remembered  that 
this  narrow  way  is  but  short ;  it  is  of 
but  one  cubit." — Trajpp, 

—  "  We  are  not  to  spend  all  our  time 
between  the  church  and  the  chamber, 
though  a  great  deal  of  time  may  be 
spent  to  very  good  purpose  in  both; 
but  man  is  made  for  society  and 
Christians  for  the  communion  of  saints, 
and  we  must  make  conscience  of  the 
duties  of  that  communion  and  take 
the  comfort  of  its  privileges  and  plea- 
sures.'*— M,  Henry. 

Vers.  5, 6.  The  Law  of  Oradation — 

1.  Recognised  in  the  various  duties 
and  offices  in  the  Church  of  Qod.  2. 
Regulates  the  distribution  of  intel- 
lectual and  spiritual  endowments.  3. 
Limits  responsibility  to  gifts  and 
opportunitiea 

Ver.  5.  "  While  in  the  previous 
chapter  the  breadth  increased  with  the 
elevation,  it  here  becomes  narrower. 
The  progressive  growth  in  grace  is 
a  wider  consciousne^^s  of  Christ,  but 
a  constantly  narrowing  self-conscious- 
ness (1  Cor.  XV.  9V  So  is  the  service 
in  the  gospel,  wnen  with  increasing 
years  our  view  into  eternity  expands 
and  similarly  contracts  in  temporal 
matters  ;  the  nearer  the  day  of  reckon- 
ing is,  our  responsibility  becomes  the 
dearer  to  us  and  the  more  clearly  do 
we  see  our  many  mistakes  and  dis- 
loyalties.— There  are  three  stages  of 
life :  youth,  manhood,  and  old  age, 
and  the  last  is  the  narrowest  of  all" — 
Lcmge. 

Ver.  6.  "  Had  not  pillara**  «*  The 
strength  of  this  Temple  was  not  every- 
where alike;  some  parts  had  pillars, 


others  had  none»  or  not  equal  to 
others.  So  in  the  Church  of  Christ, 
some  parts  of  it  have  strong  pillars, 
eminent  teachers,  whereas  other  parts 
are  wholly  destitute,  or  have  such  aa 
are  weak.'* — GreenhiU. 

Ver.  7.  "God  is  able  to  set  walls 
around  those  who  desire  to  keep  them- 
selves pure  from  the  stains  of  the 
flesh  and  to  protect  them  in  the  hour 
of  trial  and  temptation.  True  be- 
lievers are  protected;  no  one  can 
injure  them  (John  x.  27)." — Starke, 

—  "The  wall  of  God's  protection 
extends  as  far  as  the  Church,  or  any 
part  of  it." 

Vers.  8, 9.  Public  and  Private  Wor- 
ship—  L  Mutually  helpful  in  the 
culture  of  spiritual  life.  2.  The  use 
of  the  one  does  not  supersede  the 
use  of  the  other.  3.  Public  worship 
a  solemn  testimony  and  the  sphere 
where  the  most  memorable  blessings 
are  realised.  4.  Private  worship  an 
essential  preparation  for  successful 
public  worship.  5.  Public  worship  a 
privilege,  to  be  preferred  before  and 
above  private  worship. 

Vers.  13,  14.  The  Blessing  of  Food 
and  Clothing —  1.  Abundantly  pro- 
vided for  ail  the  creatures  of  God.  2. 
Not  sufSciently  appreciated.  3.  Eat- 
ing and  drinking  a  holy  refection  to  be 
enjoyed  with  a  thankful  hearty  which 
should  be  suitably  expressed  before 
and  after  partaking.  4.  A  proof  of 
the  universality  of  the  Divine  care  and 
goodness. 

—  "If  we  have  to  understand  by 
the  priests  those  brought  up  from 
childhood  in  the  faith  of  Chnst  and 
walking  in  this  way,  then  in  these 
verses  is  figured  their  fellowship  with 
one  another  in  particular,  their  united 
inquiry  into  the  Word  and  meditation 
thereon,  and  on  the  mystery  of  Christ, 
for  growth  of  knowledge  and  increase 
of  joy,  so  that  they  are  prepared  and 
adorned  in  one  and  the  same  faith, 
always  to  return  to  and  worship  at 
the  altar,  which  is  Christ, — Glory  and 
holiness  in  their  connection ;  how  this 

447 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OttAP.  XUL 


HOMlLBTia  OOMMSHTART:  BZBKIBL, 


connection  \b  stamped  on  this  Temple 
and  its  arrangements  and  purposes^ 
even  to  the  most  minnte  particulars. — 
Profane  ministers  profane  the  sano- 
toary. — We  ought  not  to  approach  the 
holy  table  of  the  Lord  with  worldly, 
impenitent  hearts." — Lange. 

—  Ministerial  Duties  and  Privi- 
lege&  ''  1.  The  priests  approached  wUo 
the  Lord.  In  all  administrations  of 
the  Qoipel  ministers  approach  near 
to  (}od,  and  in  all  their  approaches 
He  looks  to  be  sanctified  by  them. 
2.  The  priests  in  Ood^s  service  had 
good  accommodation.  Here  is  a  Divine 
ordinance  for  ministers'  maintenance. 
Whatever  good  things  people  possess, 
they  ought  to  communicate  a  part  to 
their  teachers  (GaL  vi.  6;  1  Oor.  ix. 
13,  14).  3.  Holy  things  are  to  be  laid 
in  holy  places.  Holy  hearts  are  fit 
places  for  Ood,  Christ,  the  Spirit,  the 
Gk>spel  and  all  the  ordinances  of  it 
4.  Ministers  ought  to  have  other  frames 
of  spirit  in  them  when  they  are  nea/rer  to 
Ood  in  the  duties  of  His  worship  than  at 
other  times  (ver.  14).  Then  they  are 
to  put  on  holy  garments,  be  clothed 
with  zeal,  fear,  and  all  holy  affec- 
tions. They  are  to  discharge  their 
office  with  gravity  and  authority,  that 
their  ministry  be  not  despised." — 
OreenhUL 

Ver.  13.  "  Ministers  must  eat  as  well 
as  other  they  are  not  of  the  chameleon 
kind — cannot  live  on  air;  and  the 
Lord  Christ  hath  ordained  that  they 
which  wait  at  the  altar  are  partakers 
of  the  altar  (1  Cor.  ix  13,  14)."— 
Trapp. 

—  "  The  chambers,  though  private, 
are  to  be  near  the  Temple,  which 
teaches  us  that  our  communion  with 
God  in  our  secret  chambers  is  to  pre- 
pare us  for  public  devotions  in  the 
sanctuary,  and  to  enable  us  to  derive 
all  the  benefits  from  them  which  God 
has  designed.  There  can  be  no  real 
worship  in  public  if  there  be  not  also 
worship  in  private.  In  the  Temple  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Church,  there  are 
multitudes  dwelling  by  faith,  and  yet 
there  is  room  for  more." — Faussei 

—  •'Those  that  have  public  work 

M8 


to  do  for  Gk>d  and  the  souls  of  men 
have  need  to  be  much  in  private  to 
fit  themselves  for  it.  Ministers  should 
spend  much  time  in  their  chambers, 
in  reading,  meditation,  and  prayer, 
that  their  profiling  may  appear;  and 
they  ought  to  be  provided  with  con- 
veniences for  this  purpose." — M.  Henry. 

Ver.  14.  "  The  clerical  coat  does  not 
make  the  clergyman,  yet  it  is  a  defence 
and  an  admonition.  The  best  clerical 
garment,  and  one  which  we  may  always 
put  on  and  wear  everywhere,  is  our 
sanctification  in  Christ  It  is  as  great 
a  mistake  to  carry  about  the  clerical 
coat  everywhere,  like  a  monk,  aa  to 
leave  it  at  home  from  anclerical  frivolity 
or  woridly-mindedness.  Paul  became 
all  things  to  all  men,  but  not  at  the 
expense  of  his  ministerial  office. ''—- 
Lange, 

—  "  Ministers  may  not  leave  their 
station,  lay  aside  their  holy  calling,  en- 
tangle themselves  with  worldly  cares 
and  businesses,  but  make  their  ministry 
their  business,  giving  themselves  wholly 
to  it  As  in  doing  their  office  they 
must  use  all  becoming  gravity  and 
authority  as  the  ambassadors  of  Christy 
so  at  other  times  they  must  familiarise 
themselves  with  their  people,  becoming 
all  things  to  all  men,  in  Paul's  sense, 
that  they  may  win  some." — Trapp. 

Ver.  15.  ''So  wide  and  spacious 
will  the  New  Testament  Church  be, 
in  distinction  from  the  Old  Testament 
Church.  A  greater  than  Solomon  in 
all  his  pomp  and  glory  is  here,  for 
Jesus  is  the  Light  of  all  nations.  The 
true  Church  is  the  collection  of  the 
scattered  believers  that  are  in  the 
world. — Ohserve,  only  after  he  ha<l 
learned  exactly  the  internal  magnitude 
did  the  prophet  learn  the  external.  It 
is  labour  in  vain  to  labour  in  investi- 
gating nature  until  we  have  first  laid 
a  good  foundation  in  godliness.  With- 
out this  we  contiuue  too  much  devoted 
to  the  contemplation  of  visible  thini^ 
and  make  them  our  idols,  so  that  they 
become  a  stumbling-block  and  a  snare 
to  ourselves  and  other  inexperienced 
people.     But  when  thou  hast  come  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILSTia  COMMBNTART:  EZEKIEL. 


OBAfIt  *M1 


know  the  inner  meaning  of  spiritual 
things,  and  hast  tasted  the  length, 
neight,  and  depth  of  the  love  of  God, 
then  thou  majest  busy  thyself  with 
all  visible  things.  Thou  wilt  every- 
where pause,  and  contemplating  things 
with  the  spiritual  eye,  say,  *0  Lord 
our  Lord,  how  excellent  is  Thy  name 
in  all  the  earth  1 ' " — JUtnge, 

Vers.  15-20.  The  Messianic  Ohnrcli. 
''  1.  Its  extent  and  latitude.  It  is  in  all 
quarters  of  the  world.  2.  Its  stability 
and  firmness.  The  buildings  of  this 
Temple  are  four-square — stable,  firm, 
and  lasting.  So  t)ie  Church  is  strong 
and  permanent  (Ephes.  ii.  20 ;  Isa.  liv. 
14;  Matt.  xvi.  18).  3.  Its  lustre  and 
beauty,  Qreat  buildings  in  the  form 
of  a  square  are  beautiful  and  glorious. 
So  the  Church  (Cant.  vi.  4).  4.  Its 
safety.  This  Tem])le  had  a  wall  round 
about  (ver,  20).  The  wall  of  the  New 
Jerusalem  is  great  and  high,  sufficient 
to  secure  all  who  are  within  (Rev.  xxi. 
12).  5.  Its  sanctity.  This  wall  was  to 
separate  between  the  sanctuary  and 
the  profane  place  (ver.  20).  The 
Church  is  a  company  called  out  of  and 
separate  from  the  world,  who  have 
given  up  themselves  to  Qod  and 
Chn6t.''—GreenkilL 

Vers.  16^20.  The  Grandeur  of  the 
BiTine  Temple.  I.  It  is  of  vast  extent. 
He  measured  the  east^  north,  south, 
and  west  sides,  each  side  being  500 
reeds  (vers.  16-19) — in  all  a  square 
of  \\  of  a  mile — exceeding  the  limits 
of  all  ancient  Jerusalem.  This  signifies 
the  great  enlargement  of  the  Church  of 
Gk)d  in  future  times.  2.  //  is  immov- 
ably secure.  "  He  measured  by  the  four 
sides."  Its  square  form  betokened 
the  strength  and  solidity  of  the  whole 
emblem  of  the  kingdom   that 


cannot  be  moved.  3.  It  marks  off  an 
unmistakable  distinction  between  the  holy 
and  pofane,  *'  To  make  a  separation 
between  the  sanctuary  and  the  profane 
place"  ^er.  20). 

—  **Thus  every  way  it  exhibits  to 
the  eye  of  faith  the  true  ideal  of  that 
pure  and  glorious  Temple  which,  resting 
on  the  foundation  of  the  eternal  Son 
and  girt  round  with  all  the  perfections 
of  Godhead,  shall  shine  forth  the  best 
and  noblest  workmanship  of  Heaven** 
— Fairbaim, 

Ver.  20.  *'  In  Christ  all  has  assumed 
such  a  shape  that  through  Him  the 
sanctuary  now  always  continues  pre- 
sent in  humanity  ;  and  the  true  altar 
of  burnt-offering,  (lolgotha,  is  always 
before  the  eyes  of  the  Most  Holy 
Father,  in  order,  for  the  sake  of  the 
sacrifice  thereon  offered,  to  love,  sanc- 
tify, and  protect  us  all" — Diedrich, 

—  "  Gold  is  purged  in  the  fire, 
shines  in  the  water ;  as,  on  the  other 
side,  clay  is  scorched  in  the  fire,  dis- 
solved in  the  water." — Trapp, 

—  "  The  Jews  accounted  the  whole 
earth  profane — common  or  unclean — 
compared  with  Canaan,  and  Canaan 
common  or  less  holy  than  Jerusalem, 
and  every  part  nearer  the  Temple  the 
more  holy ;  and  so  here  the  outward 
court  was  enclosed  to  distinguish  it 
by  its  comparative  holiness;  it  was 
more  holy  than  all  without  it." — Pool. 

—  **A  difference  is  to  be  put 
between  common  and  sacred  things, 
between  (Jod's  name  and  other  names, 
between  His  day  and  other  days,  His 
Book  and  other  books,  His  institutions 
and  other  observances ;  and  a  distance 
to  be  put  between  our  worldly  and 
religious  actions,  so  as  still  to  go  about 
the  worship  of  God  with  a  solemn 
pause.'* — M.  Henry. 


The  Consecration  of  the  TEifPLS.    (Chap.  ziiiL) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  2. 
**  Behold,  the  glory  of  (^od."  As  the 
Shechinah-glory  was  the  peculiar  dis- 
tmction  of  the  old  Temple,  so  it  was 
to  be  in  the  new  in  a  degree  as  much 


S7 


more  transcendent  as  the  proportions 
of  the  new  exceeded  those  of  the  old. 
The  fact  that  the  Shechinah-glory  was 
not  in  the  second  Temple  proves  that 
it  cannot   be  that  Temple  which   i( 


449 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILBTia  OOMMSNTART:  BZEKJSL. 


meant  in  the  prophecy.  **  The  glory 
came  Iqr  the  waj  of  the  eaet"    The 

Bame  way  by  which  Jehovah  had  left 
the  house  to  destruction  becau^^e  it  had 
been  polluted  and  profaned  (chap.  xi. 
22,  23).  He  now  returns  to  take 
possession  of  His  holy  habitation,  pre- 
pared and  sanctified  for  His  reception. 
^  His  voice  was  like  a  noise  of  many 
waters."  The  creature  has  its  voice 
only  from  the  Creator,  and  therefore 
must  His  voice  sound  above  its  voice, 
loud  though  it  be  (Ps.  xciiL  3, 4 ;  Rev. 
i.  15).  ''The  earth  shined  with  His 
glory."  He  wh«i  said,  "  Let  there  be 
light,"  shines  forth,  when  He  appears 
in  the  clearest  light,  as  He  who  dwells 
in  inaccessible  light  (1  Tim.  vi.  16; 
Ps.  1.  2  ;  Rev.  xviii.  1).  By  this  burst 
of  light  extending  far  beyond  Israel  is 
symbolised  an  enlightenment  of  the 
face  of  the  whole  earth — the  entire 
region  of  humanity  thus  shown  to 
have  been  in  itself  and  hitherto  dark. 

Yer.  3.  <'  When  I  came  to  destroy 
the  city" — i.e.,  to  pronounce  God*s 
word  for  its  destruction :  so  completely 
did  the  prophets  identify  themselves 
with  Him  in  whose  name  they  spake. 
"  I  UiXi  npon  my  fieu^."  As  in  chap.  L 
28  the  pi  ophet  fell  down  upon  his  face 
before  the  majesty  of  an  angry  God,  so 
here  before  that  of  God  appearing  in 
His  grace. 

Ver.  5.  "The  glory  of  the  Lord 
filled  the  honse."  So  when  Jehovah 
took  possession  of  the  Tabernacle  (Ex. 
xl.  34,  35),  and  of  Solomon's  Temple 
(1  Kings  viii.  10,  11). 

Yer.  7.  ''And  he  said  unto  me." 
''  The  speaker  is  designated  as  a  man 
(yer.  6),  and  yet  he  here  speaks  as 
God  and  applies  to  himself  that  which 
can  belong  only  to  Jehovah.  We 
have  thus  without  doubt  the  angel  of 
God  before  us,  the  only  one  in  whom 
the  opposition  of  God  and  man  is 
mediated  and  removed." — Hengstmberg, 
*'  The  place  of  My  throne."  God  from 
the  first  claimed  to  be  their  King 
politically  and  religiously,  and  had 
resisted  their  wish  to  hare  a  human 
450 


king  as  implying  a  rejection  of  Him  as 
the  proper  Head  of  the  State.  The 
Messiah-ELing  shall  realise  the  original 
idea  of  the  theocracy,  with  its  at  once 
Divine  and  human  King  reigning  in 
righteousness  over  a  people  all  right- 
eous (Isa.  Ill  1 ;  liv.  13 ;  Ix.  21). 

Ver.  7.  "Por  erer."  Obserre  that 
the  words  for  ever  mark  the  distinc- 
tion between  the  new  and  the  former 
sanctuary. 

Yer.  9.  "  Put  away  their  wheredom, 
and  the  carcasses  of  their  kings." 

*'  As  whoredom  designates  idolatry  in 
general,  so  what  is  meant  to  be  said 
by  the  corpses  of  their  kings  applies 
to  the  worship  of  kings,  the  forgotten 
subjection  to  Jehovah  under  them, 
who,  if  kings,  yet  are  perpetuated  only 
as  corpses." — Lange*  Ahaz  brought 
in  an  idolatrous  altar  from  Damascus 
(2  Kings  xvi.  11),  and  Manasseh  built 
altars  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  (2 
Kings  xxL  4). 

Yer  10.  "That  they  may  be  ashamed 
of  their  inianities."  When  the  holy 
significance  of  the  Gospel  is  shown 
to  men  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  they 
are  ashamed  of  their  sins.  ^Lcrt 
them  measnre  the  pattern."  Devia- 
tion /rom  the  exact  iniles  of  the 
Mosaic  ordinances  was  connected  with 
the  transgression  of  the  people.  So 
the  restoration  according  to  the  pattern 
of  the  Law  was  symbolical  of  their 
return  to  obedience. 

Yer.  12.  '<The  whole  limit  thereof 
shall  be  most  holy."  This  superlative 
most  Iwly  which  had  been  used  exclu- 
sively of  the  Holy  of  Holies  was  now 
to  characterise  the  entire  building; 

Yer.  13.  ''These  are  the  measures 
of  the  altar'' — the  altar  of  burnt 
offering,  the  appointed  means  of  access 
to  God.  God  is  about  to  instruct  the 
seer  as  to  the  sacrifices  of  inauguration 
whereby  places,  services,  priests,  and 
people  were  to  be  dedicated  anew  to 
the  Lord,  as  of  old  under  Solomon 
(1  Kings  viii). 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTia  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL. 


Yer.  18.  ''  These  are  the  ordinancee 
of  the  altar."  *'  The  consecration  of 
the  altar  corresponds  to  the  consecra- 
tion of  the  people  to  Jehovah,  their 
entire  surrender  and  presentation  of 
themselves  to  Him.  The  barnt-offer- 
ings  usher  in  the  class  of  offerings 
which  obtains  in  the  state  of  grace. 
Tlie  justified  man  lives  hencefortli  not 
to  himself;  the  service  of  the  Lord 
which  is  ministered  in  the  Church  is 
symboli-^ed  by  this  purpose  of  the 
altar  of  Imrnt-offering ;  hence  there 
is  no  ucL  of  worship  without  burnt- 
offering.  The  self-surrendering  reliance 
on  grace  continues  to  be  taken  into 
account,  as  in  the  past  so  for  the 
future,  and  so  the  burnt-offering  may 
be  called  the  perpetual  offering  of  the 
Church  of  God." — Lange, 

Yer.  24.  ''Shall  cast  salt  upon 
them."  "Salt  was  to  be  cast  on 
every  meat-offering  (Lev.  ii.  13).  Here 
it  is  added  to  the  burnt-offering  to 
express  still  more  the  idea  of  purifica- 


tion. In  the  second  Temple  no  sacri- 
fice was  complete  without  the  use  of 
salt,  and  the  Rabbis  tell  us  that  there 
was  a  great  heap  of  salt  close  to  the 
altar  always  ready  for  use,  and  that 
the  inclined  plane  to  the  altar  was 
kept  covered  with  salt" — EdersheMs 
Temple. 

Yer.  26.  "And  they  shall  conse- 
crate themselyes '' — literally,  Jill  Aeir 
hands;  the  conferring  of  office  upon 
persons  in  whose  han<l  is  laid  what  they 
have  forthwith  to  offer  and  what  thev 
have  to  handle,  referring  to  Lev.  viii. 
27 ;  Ex.  xxix.  24,  25. 

Yer.  27.  "And  I  will  accept  yon." 

After  this  inauguration  the  regular 
service  is  resumed,  and  will  be  accept- 
able to  God.  Under  the  guidance  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  we  cannot  fail 
to  recognise  in  this  vision  the  symbol 
of  the  purification  of  the  Church  of 
God  by  the  cleansing  blood  of  Christy 
Yictim  and  Priest  (Heb.  viii,  ix.,  x.). 


HOMILETICS. 

Thb  Sevslation  of  the  Glory  of  Jehovah; 

(Yers.  1-6.) 

I.  It  was  a  revelation  possessing  some  remarkable  featoxes.    1.  It  wot  a 

revelation  af  the  Divine  Woid,  **  His  voice  was  like  a  noise  of  many  waters* 
(ver.  2).  The  dreamy  murmur  of  summer  streams  soothes  the  soul  into  peace; 
but  the  roar  of  the  ocean-storm  fills  it  with  dread.  So  God  can  speak  to  man 
in  a  whisper  tliat  comforts,  or  in  a  voice  that  alarms  the  soul  with  its  trumpet- 
like tones.  The  Word  of  God  is  His  voice ;  it  is  powerful,  and  is  intended  to 
be  heard  afar.  In  the  constant  declaration  of  the  Gospel-message  that  voice 
is  ever  pealing  in  the  ears  of  the  nations,  and  is  distinctly  heard  above  the  din 
of  loudest  opposition,  2.  It  was  a  revelation  of  visible  splendour,  "  The  earth 
sliiued  with  His  glory  "(ver.  2).  The  works  of  God  are  a  revelation  of  His 
glorious  character.  He  is  said  to  ^*  clothe  Himself  with  light  as  with  a 
garment,"  and  His  works  are  a  garment  jewelled  with  stars,  embroidered 
with  constellations,  and  glittering  with  the  riches  of  all  worlds,  at  once  hiding 
and  revealing  the  Divine  form.  **  His  glory  is  the  fulness  of  the  whole  earth" 
(Isa.  vi.  3).  3.  //  was  a  revelation  of  ovenolielming  majesty.  "  And  I  fell  upon 
my  face  "  (ver.  3),  overpowered  with  the  awful  grandeur  of  the  vision.  The 
greatness  of  the  Creator  rises  sublimely  above  His  mightiest  works;  and  a 
sight  of  the  peerless  majesty  of  Jehovah  prostrates  the  soul  with  a  humbling 
consciousness  of  imperfection  and  sin. 

II   It  nas  a  rr^Telation  of  the  ^pUny  of  Jeborali  conaecratinf  His  Temple. 

451 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBAF.  TT.TTT, 


EOMILBTia  COMMENTARY :  EZEKIBL. 


**  The  glorj  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house  "  (vers.  4,  8).  So  it  filled  the  ancient 
Tabernacle  and  the  Temple  of  Solomon  (Ex.  xl.  34  ;  I  Kings  viii.  10).  No  such 
visible  glory  filled  the  second  Temple.  It  it  to  be  seen  again  only  in  the 
completed  Temple  of  the  future.  The  manifested  pretence  of  God  in  the 
beliering  soul,  as  in  the  perfected  Church,  is  its  holiest  consecration.  The 
glory  of  the  new  Temple  shall  never  fade,  because  the  Divine  presence  will 
never  be  withdrawn. 

IIL  It  was  a  revelation  requiring  spizitual  help  to  tee  and  understand. 

1.  The  help  of  the  Spirit  is  mcessary  to  see  the  viHons  of  Ood.  "  So  the  Spirit  took 
me  up,  and  brought  me  into  tlie  inner  court ;  and,  behold,  the  glory  "  (ver.  5). 
The  unaided  intellect  is  incapable  of  perceiving  spiritual  realities  ;  they  must  be 
Divinely  unfolded  (1  Cor.  ii.  9,  10,  14).  The  Spirit  throws  around  the  soul  a 
heavenly-tempered  atmosphere,  through  which  are  sifted  the  glorious  visions  of 
God.  2.  The  help  of  the  Spirit  is  necessary  to  interpret  the  Word  ^  Ood.  "  And  I 
heard  Him  speaking  to  me  out  of  the  house ''  (ver.  6).  The  Sible  is  a  closed 
book  to  the  unspiritual.  The  literary  student  may  find  pleasure  in  its  history 
and  poetry ;  but  its  inner  meanings  are  a  hidden  secret  until  the  soul  is 
anointed  with  the  unction  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  in  the  Temple  that  the  Spirit 
delights  to  interpret  to  the  devout  worshipper  the  transcendent  revelations  of 
the  Divine  WordL 

LESSONa — The  glory  of  Jehovah — 1.  Shines  in  aU  His  worts.    2L  Should  be 
prayerfvUy  sought  out,     8.  Is  aimndanUy  satisfying. 


QERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  1-6.  "  The  glory  of  the  God 
of  Israel  must  take  possession  of  the 
new  Sanctuary,  as  in  time  past  of  the 
Tabernacle  and  of  Solomon's  Temple. 
But  it  is  in  a  different  form.  The 
glory  was  of  old  veiled  in  a  cloud 
resting  on  the  mercy-seat  of  the  Ark 
between  cherubim  of  carved  wood, 
lifeless  and  motionless,  as  though  the 
mercy  and  the  power  of  God  were  in 
some  sort  restricted  to  the  material 
building  and  the  people  to  whom  it 
belonged.  Now  a  personal  and  living 
God  enters  the  Sanctuary,  condescend- 
ing to  occupy  it,  not  merely  as  a  fixed 
dwelling-place,  but  as  a  centre  from 
whence  His  power  and  mercy  radiate 
freely  to  the  utmost  ends  of  the  earth. 
Hence  amidst  the  detailed  prepara- 
tions of  the  house  no  mention  is  made 
of  mercy-seat,  so  important  a  part  in 
the  former  Sanctuary." — Speaker's  Com- 
mentary. 

—  "  What  we  are  taught  here  is, 
that  Jehovah  would  renew  the  mani- 
festation of  His  favour  to  the  covenant- 
people,  which  He  did  pre-eminently 
452 


when  He  dwelt  among  them  in  the 
person  of  His  Incarnate  Son." — Hei^ 
derson. 

—  "  We  have  to  notice  the  essentially 
moral  character  of  all  that  was  here 
displayed  in  vision  respecting  the 
future  things  of  God's  Kingdom.  It 
was  not  a  pattern  which  God  was 
going  to  carry  out  anyhow  and  accom- 
plish as  by  a  simple  fiat  of  Omnipo- 
tence. It  depended  upon  the  condition 
of  the  people,  and  only  if  they  agreed 
to  put  away  sin  from  among  them 
and  give  God  the  supreme  place  in 
their  hearts  could  He  manifest  Himself 
toward  them  in  the  manner  described.* 
— Fairbaim. 

—  Divine  Manifestationa — 1.  Are 
always  made  at  the  right  time  and 
place  (ver.  1).  2.  Are  on  a  scale  of 
imposing  magnificence  (ver.  2).  3. 
Though  retaining  points  of  similarity, 
they  are  suited  to  special  emerKencies 
(ver.  3).  4.  Overawe  the  som  with 
their  grandeur  (ver.  3).  6.  Are  chiefly 
seen  in  connection  with  the  Sanctnaiy 
(vers.  4,  5).    6.  Have  a  distinct  aigni* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILMTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL. 


OBAP.  Tf-TfT, 


ficance  for  the  privileged  beholder 
(ver.  6).  7.  Are  more  highly  appre- 
ciated when  shared  with  a  sympathetic 
companion  (ver.  6). 

Ver.  1.  "The  prophet  saw  not  the 
glory  of  Qod  till  he  had  first  seen  the 
Mount  measured,  the  Temple  restored* 
Men  must  usually  wait  upon  Gkni  in 
the  use  of  means  ere  they  see  the  Kiug 
in  His  glory.  Men  must  awake  out 
of  the  west  of  wickedness  and  stand 
up  from  dead  courses  and  companies, 
if  Christ,  the  Day -Star  from  on  high, 
shall  give  them  light  (Eph.  v.  14; 
Luke  ii  28-32)."— Tropp. 

—  "Open  to  me  the  pearl  gates,  Thou 
who  art  the  ornament  of  heaven's  city, 
Light  from  Light,  chosen  as  the  light 
before  the  world  began.  The  entrance 
of  the  glory  from  the  east  for  lighting  the 
Temple  took  place  when  the  apostles, 
on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  were  endued 
with  power  from  on  high." — Lange. 

Ver,  2.  "  The  glory  of  God  which 
shines  in  the  Church  shines  on  the 
world.  When  God  appeared  for  David 
the  brightness  that  was  before  him 
dispersed  the  clouds  (Ps.  xviii.  12)." 

—  "All  knowledge,  all  religion,  and 
all  arts  and  sciences  have  travelled 
according  to  the  course  of  the  sun, 
from  east  to  west.  From  that  quarter 
the  Divine  glory  at  first  came,  and 
thence  the  rays  of  Divine  light  con- 
tinue to  diff'use  tlieraselves  over  the 
face  of  the  earth.  From  thence  came 
the  Bible,  and  through  that  the  new 
covenant.  From  thence  came  the  pro- 
phets, apostles,  and  first  missionaries 
that  brought  the  knowledge  of  God  to 
Europe,  to  the  isles  of  the  sea,  and  to 
the  west  firsts  and  afterwards  to  these 
northern  regions." — A.  Clarke, 

—  "  This  glory  of  the  Lord  seems 
to  have  been  intended  as  an  emblem 
of  the  light  of  the  Gospel,  which  is  the 
glory  of  Christ,  and  which  spread  from 
the  eastern  part  of  the  world  into  the 
western  ;  and  which  has  been,  and  still 
is,  powerful  and  mighty  in  operation  in 
saving  mankind  and  enlightening  the 
earth  with  abundance  of  knowledge, 
holiness,  and  comfort." — Benson, 


—  "Where  the  Gospel  is  preached 
the  waters  of  life  make  a  noise,  not 
only  of  themselves,  but  also  from  the 
stones  which  men  cast  in,  and  from 
the  rocky  banks  of  worldly  hearts 
which  maJce  resistance ;  but  the  glory 
of  eternity  shines  on  earth.  Tiie  loud 
noise  of  the  glory  is  the  voice  of  them 
who  praise  the  Lord  with  one  heart 
and  one  voice,  here  on  earth  as  there 
in  heaven  ^Rev.  xiv.  1).  Let  us  pray 
Qod  to  enlighten .  the  dark  earth  of 
our  heart  with  that  holy  Ught  of  His 
glory." — Lange. 

—  "And  the  earth  shined  with 
His  glory."  "How  can  it  do  other- 
wise when  the  Sun  of  Righteousness 
Cometh  in  place  and  irradiateth  both 
organ  and  object  f  (2  Cor.  iv.  6).  Into 
Solomon's  Temple  God  came  in  a  thick 
cloud;  not  so  here.  Light  is  now 
more  diffused  than  ever.  Woe  be  to 
those  who  wink,  or  who  seek  straws 
to  put  out  their  eyes  withal." — Trapp. 

—  "Before  the  coming  of  Christ 
the  world  was  full  of  heathenish  dark- 
ness, and  Canaan  ftill  of  types,  cere- 
monies, and  shadows ;  there  was  little 
light  or  lustre  there.  But  when  Christ 
came  the  oracles  of  the  heathen  ceased, 
the  Jewish  shadows  vanished,  and  the 
earth  shined  with  the  glory  of  the 
Gospel  (Matt  iv.  16)."— Or^enAifl. 

Ver.  3.  "God  appeared  in  the  same 
manner  when  He  sent  him  to  speak 
words  of  terror,  and  when  He  sent  him 
to  speak  words  of  comfort,  for  in  both 
Gbd  is  and  will  be  glorified." 

—  "  The  knowledge  of  God  never 
causes  pride  but  humility,  because  it 
at  the  same  time  discovers  the  corrup- 
tion of  the  heart.  The  more  modest  a 
man  is  and  the  less  he  trusts  to  himself, 
the  more  he  is  endowed  with  the  know- 
ledge of  €k)d.  The  bowed  down  are 
revived  by  the  Lord,  and  led  by  the 
Spirit  to  the  place  where  the  majesty 
of  the  God  of  glory  shines." — Lange. 

Ver.  4.  ''The  sins  of  impenitent 
Israel  caused  the  glory  of  the  Lord  to 
go  out  of  His  house,  but  now  the 
repentance  of  Israel  is  blessed  with 
the  return  of  this  glory." — PooL 

463 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBAF.  xun.  BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL. 


—  "  What  hinders  this  glory  from  ^'lory,  speaks  to   His  people  oat  of 

filling  also  thy  heart,  provided  it  is  His  Temple." — Pod. 

not   lull  of  other  things,  and   needs  —  *'  The  Lord  Christ,  who  if  the 

first  to  become  empty,  that  thy  hunger  chief  Architect  in  Temple  work,  stands 

and  desire  may,  by  tlie  breath  of  the  by  His  prophets  and  servants  who  are 

Spirit,  seek  and  find  satisfaction  in  its  employed  therein.     When  the  Temple 

fulness  f — Lange.  was  first  built  many  were  employed 

therein,  but  they  were  not  left  to  their 

Ver.  5.  Hmnility — 1.  The  true  atti-  own  wisdom  and  skill     Solomon  was 

tude  of  the  soul  in  the  revealed  presence  principal ;  he  was  present,  counselled, 

of  God.     2.  The  result  of  conscious  directed,  and  assisted;  therefore  it  is 

pei-sonal  unworthiuesg.     S.  Leads  to  said  he  built  the  house.    So  in  Ezekiel's 

exaltation.  Temple,  a  type  of  the  Grospel  Temple, 

Christ  was  present;    He  counselled, 

Yer.  6.  ^  I  heard  distinctly,  intelli-  directed,  assisted,  and  stood  by  the 

gibly,  so  that  I  am  sure  it  was  no  prophet," — OreenhilL 
delusion.    The  Lord,  who  was  in  that 


S0MIZJSTIC8. 
HoLiNflSS  TH£  Law  of  the  New  Temtul 
(Vers.  7-12.) 

L  The  IMTine  goyemment  is  based  in  holiness  (ver.  7).    The  throne  of 

God,  the  symbol  of  regal  and  governmental  authority,  is  firmly  established  in 
righteousness.  God  is  holy,  His  throne  is  holy.  His  law  is  holy,  and  every 
single  act  of  His  universal  administration  is  pervaded  and  beautified  by  His 
immaculate  holiness  (Ps.  xlvil  8).  The  perfected  Temple  will  be  the  ever- 
lasting home  and  resting-place  of  Jehovah,  and  holiness  will  be  the  unchanging 
law  of  the  house  (Ps.  xciii.  5). 

II.  The  transgressions  of  God's  people  against  the  law  of  holiness  was  the 
csnse  of  their  ruin  (vers.  7,  8).  Nothing  is  more  plainly  revealed  or  more 
frequently  and  emphatically  repeated  than  this  truth,  that  the  sufferings  of 
God*s  people  were  brought  upon  themselves  by  their  disobedience.  Sin  is  so 
deceptive  in  its  lure  and  so  demoralising  in  its  subtle  action,  that  when  its 
inevitable  punishment  comes  the  transgressor  is  surprised  and  aggrieved,  as  if 
some  undeserved  injustice  had  been  done  to  him.  It  is  the  nature  of  sin  to 
blind  the  soul  to  its  real  enormity.  Sin  cannot  reveal  itself  as  sin  :  it  is  only 
as  the  light  of  Divine  holiness  is  flashed  into  it  that  its  terrible  havoc  is 
exposed.  Therefore,  in  vindication  of  His  holy  name  and  to  produce  genuine 
repentance  in  the  defaulter,  God's  denunciations  of  sin  are  incessant. 

III.  The  blessings  of  the  law  of  holiness  may  be  enjoyed  by  all  who  truly 
repent.  I  True  repentance  is  a  humbling  consciousness  of  sin  (ver.  10).  The  seer 
is  instructed  to  reveal  to  Israel  the  glorious  character  of  the  new  Temple  in 
order  to  make  them  ashamed  of  their  iniquities.  A  revelation  of  the  goodness 
of  God  in  what  He  provides  for  us,  of  the  purity  of  God  in  what  He  demands, 
prostrates  the  soul  in  humiliation  and  sorrow.  A  sense  of  shame  is  the  first 
hopeful  sign  towards  moral  reform.  A  teacher  of  the  deaf  and  dumb  once  asked 
his  pupils  to  write  down  what  they  thought  was  the  most  delightful  emotion. 
One  wrote  joy,  another  ?M]f>e,  another  gratitude^  another  love  ;  but  one  peaceful- 
looking  pirl,  with  eyes  shining  with  tears,  wrote,  *'  Bepeniance  is  the  most 

454 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIO  aOMMBNTART:  EZEKIBL. 


delightful  emotion;*  and  when  asked  wliy,  answered,  "Because  it  is  so  delight- 
ful to  be  humbled  before  Ood  1  ^  2.  Ti-ue  repentance  is  the  putting  away  of  sin 
(yer.  9).  Sorrow  for  sin  is  puerile,  weak,  illusive,  unless  accompanied  by  a 
sturdy  resolution  to  amend.  Sin  must  not  only  be  grieved  over,  but  forsaken. 
Maudlin  tears  reform  nothing.  3.  True  repmtance  is  evidenced  by  obedience. 
**  That  they  may  keep  all  the  ordinances  and  do  them  "  (ver.  11).  The  proof 
of  genuine  sorrow  is  seen  in  an  honest  endeavour  to  observe  the  laws  over 
whose  violation  we  grieve.  It  is  not  enough  to  know  the  right ;  we  must  do  it 
Grod  reveals  His  laws,  not  that  they  may  be  admired  and  praised,  still  less  trans- 
gressed, but  that  they  may  be  observed  and  practisedl  Let  sorrow  for  the  past 
urge  to  prompt  and  faithful  service. 

IV.  The  law  of  holinesB  is  all-comprehensiye  in  its  operation  (ver.  12). 
In  the  old  Temple  only  one  spot  was  accounted  the  Holy  of  Holies ;  but  in  the 
new  Temple  every  part  is  most  holy  :  the  law  applies  with  equal  force  to  each 
portion  of  the  consecrated  house.  The  law  of  God's  Temple  is  the  law  of  the 
universe,  and  furnishes  the  standard  by  which  all  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds 
will  be  unerringly  estimated. 

Lessons.— I.  Holiness  is  the  law  of  the  highest  Ufe,  2.  Holiness  is  the  glory  qf 
aperfed  character.    2.  Holiness  is  the  organ  of  the  grandest  spiritual  visiam. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  7-9.  The  Bivine  Ruler— 1.  Is 
enthroned  in  the  midst  of  His  people 
(ver.  7).  2.  Cannot  tolerate  a  rival 
(ver.  8).  3.  Ensures  the  everlasting 
happiness  of  the  obedient  (ver.  9). 

Yer.  8.  Spurious  Beligion.     1.  lis  in- 

siituiions  a  poor  imitation  of  the  genuine. 
**  Setting  their  threshold  by  My  thresh- 
olds, and  their  post  by  My  posts.f 
2.  GaiTis  no  authority  by  its  proximity  to 
the  genuine.  **The  wall  between  Me 
and  them."  3.  Is  an  aggravated  pro- 
fanation of  the  genuine.  "  Thoy  have 
even  defiled  My  holy  name  by  their 
abominations  that  they  have  com- 
mitted." 4.  Incurs  the  Divine  displea- 
sure and  punishment,  "Wherefore  I 
have  consumed  them  in  Mine  anger. '^ 

—  "  The  palace  of  Solomon  abutted 
upon  the  southern  side  of  the  embank- 
ment of  the  Temple  jjhitform.  Thus 
the  threshold  of  the  King's  dwelling 
was  set  by  the  thresliold  of  Jehovah, 
and  their  posts  by  His  posts,  and  there 
was  but  a  wall  between  Jehovah  and 
them.  It  was  not  that  the  act  of 
building  a  palace  close  to  the  Temple 
was  in  itself  profane,  but  when  the 
kings  gave  themselves  up  to  idolatry 


this  vicinity  was  to  the  Temple  a 
pollution  and  defilement.'^ — Speaker's 
Commentary. 

Ver.  9.  "  God  now  first  returns  to 
the  apostates ;  but  His  grace  is  de- 
signed to  woik  repentance,  and  then 
He  will  never  more  depart  from  them.** 
— Diedrich. 

Vers.  10-12.  The  Vision  of  DiTine 
Things — 1.  Humbles  the  soul  under 
a  sense  of  ingratitude  and  sin  (ver.  10). 
2.  Stimulates  to  a  more  earnest  and 
practical  obedience  (ver.  11).  3,  Re- 
veals the  exalted  sanctity  of  the  Divine 
law  (ver.  12). 

Vers.  10,  11.    The   New   Temple. 

**  The  Israelites  of  tlie  Captivity  might 
see  the  pattern  when  they  had  re- 
pented of  their  iniquities ;  till  then  it 
was  impossible.  The  idea  of  a  spiritual 
society  could  not  unfold  itself  to  them 
while  they  were  living  in  a  heartless, 
divided,  self-righteous  state.  They 
must  be  humbled  before  they  could 
feel  the  possibility  of  such  a  society; 
still  more  before  they  could  confess 
it  to  be  real.     The  hindrance  to  the 


455 


Digitized  by 


Google 


COUP.  xun. 


EOMTLETTC  COMMENTARY :  EZBKIEL, 


discernment  of  it  was  not  an  intel- 
lectual one;  it  was  not  that  they 
wanted  the  intuition  and  the  foresight 
of  the  prophet;  it  was  wholly  moral 
It  was  their  baseness  and  selfishness 
which  made  their  eyes  dim  that  they 
could  not  see,  and  their  ears  heavy 
that  they  could  not  hear.  It  was  so 
then;  it  was  so  in  every  generation 
afterwards.  'Repent/  said  John  the 
Baptist,  *for  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
is  at  hand.'  The  pattern  of  the  house 
is  about  to  be  presented  to  you.  The 
spiritual  society,  of  which  your  Temple 
is  the  imperfect  outward  embodiment, 
is  going  to  be  manifested.  The  Head 
of  it  is  among  you,  but  you  cannot  see 
it>  you  cannot  see  Hinu  Repent;  turn 
round  to  God,  that  He  may  remove 
the  film  from  your  eyes  and  enable 
you  to  receive  the  revelation  which 
He  is  making  to  you.  The  same 
language  goes  through  the  Gospels. 
All  the  blindness  which  is  ascribed  to 
the  Jewish  nation  is  mainly  this,  that 
they  would  not  accept  it  as  the  mani- 
festation of  a  kingdom  for  human 
beings,  of  a  society  grounded  upon 
the  name  of  the  Son  of  God  and  the 
Son  of  Man;  that  they  would  have 
only  a  Jewish  society.  And  that 
Jewish  society  proved  itself  not  to  be 
Jewish,  but  a  miserable  collection  of 
sects,  hating  each  other  and  contrary 
to  all  men,  not  claiming  to  be  children 
of  God,  and  therefore  not  able  to  assert 
their  title  as  children  of  Abraham; 
essentially  inhuman,  and  therefore  ne- 
cessarily given  up  to  the  worship  of 
a  false  god — of  Mammon  instead  of 
Jehovah.  Ezekiel  was  to  show  his 
countrymen  the  form  of  the  house 
when  a  confession  of  their  iniquities 
should  enable  them  to  discern  the 
pattern  after  which  it  was  to  be  built 
The  law  must  hold  good  for  all  time 
to  come.  There  may  be  such  a  house 
yet  built  in  Jerusalem.  But  it  must 
be  built  by  a  people  who  are  capable 
of  giving  the  outward  expression  to 
an  inward  truth  that  is  possessing 
them;  who  have  humbled  themselves 
in  dust  and  ashes  before  God  for  their 
selfishness,  their  exclusiveness,  their 
worship  of  gold ;  who  have  confessed 
456 


the  Cross  to  be  the  highest  manifesta- 
tion of  the  wisdom  ana  power  of  GU>d ; 
who  have  rejoiced  in  that  manifesta- 
tion because  it  is  universal,  and  who 
have  perceived  that  the  Divine  Unity 
is  not  a  narrow,  selfish  individuality, 
but  the  unity  of  a  Father  with  a  Son 
in  one  Spirit.** — F.  D,  Maurice, 

Ver.  10.  "  Solomon's  Temple  left  the 
people  in  their  disobedience  and  wor- 
ship of  idols ;  but  this  house  belongs 
to  a  higher  order.  He  who  lays  it 
to  heart  will  cease  sinning  and  duly 
examine  the  Temple  and  its  measure- 
ments. The  shame  ot  the  poor  sinner 
finds  in  the  Temple — which  is  Christ — 
exactly  the  right  measure." — Lange, 

—  "  Nothing  so  effectually  makes 
men  ashamed  of  their  sins  as  the 
revelation  to  them  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
of  Christ  crucified  and  Christ  glorified 
in  the  hearing  of  the  Word.  The  height, 
depth,  length,  and  breadth  of  the  love 
of  Christ  to  His  spiritual  Temple,  the 
elect  Church,  causes  the  believer  to 
loathe  his  past  course  of  life  and 
henceforth  aesire  to  live  wholly  to 
Christ.  Thus  believers  are  prepared 
for  further  discoveries  of  the  blessed 
laws  of  God's  spiritual  house." — 
FausseL 

—  "1.  When  God  reveals  mercy 
and  shows  kindness  to  a  sinful  people, 
they  ought  to  be  ashamed  and  repent 
of  all  their  former  iniquities.  (1.)  As 
acts  of  filthiness.  (2.)  As  acts  of 
folly.  (3.)  As  acts  of  unkindness  and 
ingratitude.  (4.)  As  fearing  a  just 
reproof.  (5.)  As  fearing  God's  cause 
and  name  will  suffer  by  them.  2. 
Those  who  have  humbled  themselves 
for  their  former  sins  are  fit  to  be 
spiritual  mathematicians." — GreenhUL 

—  "And  let  them  measure  the 
pattern."  "  That  by  a  holy  geometry 
they  may  in  the  spirit  of  their  minds 
take  all  the  dimensions  of  it  and  be 
transformed  into  the  likeness  of  the 
heavenly  pattern.  These  are  those 
holy  and  heavenly  mathematics  which 
none  can  learn  but  those  that  are 
taught  of  God,  and  without  which 
none  can  be  Christ's  disciple;  like  as 
none  might  be  scholar  to  Plato  that 


Digitized  by 


Google  I 


BOMILETIC  OOMMBNTART:  SZSKIBL, 


had  not  the  groands  of  geometry." — 
Trapp, 

Ver.  11.  "  They  who  repent  of  their 
sins  are  capable  of  knowing  the  Temple 
and  its  arrangements,  while  those  who 
wantonly  pursue  fleshly  desires  receive 
not  the  spirit  of  wis<lom,  and  are  in- 
capable of  knowing  the  law  of  the  Lord 
(2  Tim.  ii.  19  ;  1  John  iii.  Sy*—Ijange, 

—  The  Ordinances  of  the  Temple. 
"1.  'I'hat  to  repentant  men,  ashamed 
of  all  their  evil  doings,  the  ways  of 
God's  house  are  to  be  made  known  by 
the  prophets  and  ministers.  2.  Temple 
and  Church  work  must  not  be  accord- 
ing to  men's  fancies,  but  according  to 
the  mind  of  God  and  that  pattern  He 
gives  forth.  3.  That  the  Temple  and 
Church  of  Christ  has  distinct  and 
peculiar  laws  of  its  own.  4.  The 
Church  in  due  time  shall  be  such  a 
Temple  as  is  represented  by  this  vision. 
5.  The  end  of  making  known  the  laws 
and  ways  of  God's  house  is,  that  they 
may  be  observed  and  practised." — 
Oreenhill, 

Yer.  12.  The  Law  of  €k>d's  Ohnrch. 
"1.  The  Cliurch  of  God  has  a  good 
foundation.    *  Upon  the  mountain.'    2. 


The  Church  of  God  is  eminent  and 
conspicuous.  'Upon  the  top  of  the 
mountain.'  3.  The  whole  Church 
of  God  is  to  be  made  up  of  holy 
materials.  *The  whole  limit  thereof 
round  about'  4.  The  law  of  this 
house,  which  is  holiness,  is  specially 
to  be  observed.  *  Behold,  this  is  the 
law  of  the  house.' " — OreenhUl, 

—  **The  law  of  the  house— which 
was  pre-eminently  entitled  to  be  called 
the  law—  consisted  in  the  whole  region 
of  the  Temple-Mount  being  most  holy. 
Not,  as  hitherto,  was  this  characteristic 
to  be  confined  to  a  single  apartment 
of  the  Temple ;  it  was  to  embrace  the 
entire  circumference  occupied  by  the 
symbolical  institutions  of  the  kingdom, 
the  chambers  allotted  to  the  priests, 
and  even  the  courts  trodden  oy  the 
people,  as  well  as  the  immediate 
dwelling-place  of  Jehovah.  So  that 
the  pattern  delineated  is  that  of  a 
true  theocracy,  having  (Jod  Himself 
for  King,  with  the  community  in  all  its 
members  for  true  denizens  of  the  king- 
dom and  acceptable  ministers  of  right- 
eousness before  the  Lord." — Fairbaim. 

—  Let  none  expect  the  protection 
and  blessings  of  it  that  will  not  sub- 
mit to  this  law. 


H0MILETIO8. 
Thb  Altar  an  Emblem  of  True  Worship. 


(Vers.  13-27.) 

L  That  tme  worship  mnst  be  offered  at  the  Divinely  consecrated  shrine 
(vers.  13-26).  The  importance  attached  to  the  altar  here  described  is  seen  in 
the  minute  particulars  given  concerning  its  measurements  and  structure,  and 
the  elaborate  ceremonial  observed  in  its  dedication  to  the  service  of  Jehovah. 
It  was  not  like  one  of  the  portable  altars  that  idolatrous  worshippers  were 
accustomed  to  carry  about  with  them  in  their  journeys  and  wars,  but  was  a 
fixed  shrine  having  a  permanent  place  in  the  Temple,  aud  was  the  recognised 
medium  of  access  to  God.  Here  the  worship  of  the  Temple  must  be  offered. 
The  Jewish  system  being  a  theocracy,  a  visible  representation  of  the  reign  of 
Gml,  Jehovah  was  worshipped  by  them  as  both  (Jod  and  King.  This  twofold 
character  was  observable  in  all  the  arrangements  of  the  ancient  cultus.  The 
Temple  was  at  once  the  shrine  of  God  and  the  palace  and  throne  of  the  King. 
Christ  is  the  Altar  of  the  new  dispensation,  the  Divine  shrine  consecrated  by 
suffering  and  death,  through  whom  alone  worship  can  be  offered  to  the  God  of 
heaven.  From  any  other  altar  worship  rises  no  higher  than  the  smoke  that 
ahcends  from  it^  and  its  effect  disappears  as  quickly. 

457 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAF.  XUIL  HOMILETIC  COMMENTARTi  EZJ^KJF.h 


II.  Tliat  trae  worsMp  is  a  sacrifice  (ver.  27).  As  soon  as  the  altar  was 
duly  consecnvte«l  sacrifices  were  j)('r[)etM.illy  offered  upon  it  "The  burnt* 
offering"  was  the  perfect  sacrifice,  because  the  victim  was  wholly  cunsumed 
by  fire  and  sent  up  to  God,  as  it  were,  on  the  wings  of  fire.  It  was  a  memorial 
of  Gotl's  covenant,  and  signified  that  the  offerer  belonged  wholly  to  God,  that 
he  dedicated  himself,  soul  and  body,  to  Him,  and  placed  his  life  at  His  disposal. 
Every  such  sacrifice  was  a  type  of  the  perfect  offering  made  by  Christ  on  behalf 
of  the  human  race.  "  The  peace-offering  "  was  not  an  atoning  sacrifice  to  make 
peace  with  God,  but  a  joyful  celebiation  of  peace  made  through  the  covenant. 
In  this  part  of  the  ritual,  more  than  in  any  other,  we  see  Jehovah  present  in 
His  house  inviting  the  worshipper  to  feast  with  Him.  Peace-offerings  were 
presented  either  as  a  thanksgiving,  or  in  fulfilment  of  a  vow,  or  as  a  free-will 
offering  of  love  and  joy.  True  worship  is  a  sacrifice,  a  free  offering  up  of  the 
worshipper  and  all  he  has  to  God,  and  is  expressed  in  devout  adoration  and 
thanksgiving  and  in  joyful  praise.  It  is  the  spontaneous  outburst  of  a  loving 
heart,  yearning  to  render  homage  to  the  great  object  of  its  love,  and  finding 
its  deepest  satisfaction  in  the  exercise. 

HI.  That  trae  worship  is  acceptable  to  God  (ver.  27).  It  is  acceptable 
when  and  as  it  is  offered  in  the  manner  and  spirit  God  has  Himself  prescribed. 
It  must  be  offered  through  Christ,  the  true  Priest  and  Altar,  and  with  the  aid 
of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Many  of  the  heathen  priests  acknowledged  the  moral 
element  in  worship,  as  when  one  counselled,  ''Sacrifice  to  the  gods,  not  so 
much  clothed  with  purple  garments  as  with  a  pure  heart.''  And  another  said, 
"  God  regards  not  the  multitude  of  the  sacrifices,  but  the  disposition  of  the 
sacrificer."  God  must  cease  to  be  Spirit  before  any  service  but  that  which  is 
spiritual  can  be  accepted  by  Him.  David  expresses  the  blessedness  and  help 
received  in  worship  by  men  of  all  ages,  in  that  earnest  invitation,  "0  come, 
let  us  worship  and  bow  down  "  (Ps,  xcv.  6,  7).  To  refuse  to  worship  (Jod  is 
as  great  a  folly  as  to  deny  His  existence.  He  who  denies  the  being  of  God 
is  an  atheist  to  His  essence ;  he  who  denies  His  worship  is  an  atheist  to  His 
honour.  The  instinct  of  worship  is  as  universal  as  the  notion  of  a  God,  or  else 
idolatry  wonld  never  have  gained  so  firm  a  footing  in  the  world.  Our  minds 
are  a  beam  from  (}od,  and,  as  the  beams  of  the  sun  when  they  tonch  the  earth, 
should  reflect  back  upon  God.  We  nnsoul  our  souls  when  we  neglect  the 
worship  of  G^  and  are  like  flies  that  are  foond  oftener  on  dnnghills  than 
among  flowers. 

Lessons. — I.  Worship  is  absolrddy  necessary  for  the  cuUture  of  the  samL  % 
Warship  is  acceptable  only  as  it  is  offered  according  to  Divinely  sanctioned  methods. 
3.  IdokUry  is  a  false  and  debasing  worship. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VER8E$. 

Vers.  13-27.  **  Now  that  the  Lord  coarse  was  the  altar,  at  which  all  gifts 

has  taken  possession  of  the  house,  the  and  sacrifices  were  to  be  presented 

prophet  goes  on  to  show  how  the  for  the  Divine  favour  and  blessing." 

work  of  fellowship  and   communion  — Fairbaim. 

with  Him  is  to  proceed  on  the  part  of  —  The  Divinely  Authorised  Altar 

the  people.     It  must  begin  anew,  and  — 1.  Is  minutely  described  that  there 

of  course  be  conducted  after  the  old  might  be  no  question  as  to  its  identity 

manner,  for  no  other  could  here  come  (vers.  13-17).     2.  Is  solemnly  conse- 

into  contemplation.     In  ancient  times  crated  that  there  may  be  no  doubt 

the  grand  medium  of  Divine  inter-  as  to  the  necessity  for  its  use  (vera 


458 


Digitizfed  by 


Google 


HOMILETIC  COMMBNTART:  BZERIBL. 


OBAP.  XUIL 


18-26).     8.  Provides  a  way  of  accept- 
ance to  every  penitent  seeker  (ver.  27). 

Ver.  13.  The  Jews  after  their  return 
from  captivity  had  an  altar  long  before 
they  had  a  Temple  (Ezra  iii.  3),  but 
the  altar  here  spoken  of  is  an  altar  in 
tlie  Temple,  the  mystical  Temple,  em- 
blematic of  the  (Jospel  Church  ;  and 
this  altar  is  mystical  too,  for  Christ  is 
our  Altar. 

—  "  No  one  could  go  into  the  Temple 
without  passing  by  the  altar,  and  so 
no  one  can  go  into  heaven  without 
the  sacrifice  of  the  death  of  Chrisf — 
Starck. 

Vers.  15-17.  "The  number  twelve 
was  symbolical  of  the  twelve  tribes, 
four  of  the  earth,  sixteen  is  the  square 
of  four,  and  fourteen  the  double  of 
seven — the  number  of  the  covenant  as 
being  composed  of  three,  the  number 
of  God,  an  I  of  four,  the  number  of  the 
world.  Thus  we  have  in  the  altar  a 
special  instance  of  Hebrew  symbolism." 
— Speaker^ s  CommetUanf. 

Ver.  15.  "'So  the  altar'— Heb^ 
(he  mourU  of  Ood.  'And  from  the 
altar' — Heb.,  from  the  lion  of  Ood. 
Perhaps  the  first  was  a  name  given  to 
the  altar  when  elevated  to  the  honour 
of  God,  and  on  which  the  victims  were 
offered  to  Him;  and  the  second,  the 
lion  of  God,  may  mean  the  hearth, 
which  might  have  been  thus  called 
because  it  devoured  and  consumed 
the  burnt-offerings  as  a  lion  does  his 
prey,"— ^.  Clarke, 

Ver.  16.  "Christ,  the  Christian 
Altar,  is  complete,  firm,  and  fixed." 

Ver.  17.  "  Toward  the  east." 
**  These  stairs  were  placed  eastward 
that  he  who  went  up  should  have  his 
face  to  the  west,  his  back  to  the  east : 
his  face  toward  God,  not  toward  the 
rising  sun,  as  they  who  made  the  sun 
their  idol."— Poot 

Ver.  la   "  Thus  Ood  comes  first 


and  gives  grace  ;  His  grace  ma&es 
ashamed,  chastises,  sanctifies,  recon- 
ciles, and  produces  intimate  eternal 
fellowship.  This  is  always  God's  way 
with  men,  provided  only  we  recognise 
it  aright  in  these  days  of  ours  when 
now  it  is  set  in  the  most  glorious 
light;  Christ  and  the  apostles  have 
given  additional  clearness  to  EzekieL'' 
—Diedrieh. 

Vers.  18-27.  "Although  the  chief 
scope  of  this  vision  be  to  set  out  the 
glory  and  greatness  of  the  Church 
under  the  Gospel  and  among  the 
Gt^ntiles,  yet,  because  the  Jews  at 
this  time  being  in  Babylon  were  to 
return  to  Jerusalem,  the  Lord  alludes 
to  ordinances,  rites,  and  ceremonies 
which  were  well  known  among  the 
Jews,  holding  out  under  them  the 
spiritual  worship  of  the  GospeL***- 
Oreenhm. 

Ver.  24.  The  Best  Efforts  of  Man 
— 1.  Are  tainted  with  impurity.  2. 
Need  to  be  cleansed  and  made  whole- 
some. 8.  Augmented  in  efiicacy  when 
salted  with  study,  prayer,  tears,  and 
suffering. 

—  Grace  is  the  salt  with  which  all 
our  religious  performances  must  be 
seasoned  (CoL  iv.  6). 

—  "True  Christians  are  sacrifices 
well  seasoned :  incorrupt  doctrines 
will  make  incorrupt  souls  and  bodies; 
the  salt  makes  both  immortal :  men 
soundly  salted  with  (Gospel  truths 
shall  never  perish.** — OreenhUl, 

Ver.  27.  As  to  the  future  sacrificial 
service  of  Israel,  we  can  well  afford  to 
wait  till  God  by  the  event  shall  clear 
up  every  difficulty  ;  and  throughout 
eternity  we  shall  adorindy  wonder  at 
the  beautiful  variety  and,  at  the  same 
time,  perfect  unity  of  the  several  parts 
of  the  mighty  scheme  of  redemption 
through  the  incarnate  Son  of  God." — 
FausseL 

—  "  Those  who  were  in  Christ  be- 
fore others  ought  in  this  to  serve  as 
priests  to  the  younger  believer*.*— 

469 


Digitized  by 


Google 


«UX.ZII?* 


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY.  KZEKIKL. 


Thb  Relation  of  Pbinob  akd  Priests  to  the  Temple.    (Chap,  xlir.) 


EXEGETIOAL  NOTES.— Ver.   1. 
''The  gate  of  the  oatward  sanctoary" 

— the  court  of  the  priests  as  distin- 
gaished  from  the  Temple  itself.  "  Thii 
gate  shall  be  thnt" — shut  to  the  people, 
but  opened  ou  certain  days  for  the 
prince  (chap.  xlvi.  1),  he  holding  the 
place  of  God  in  politiciU  concerns,  as 
the  priests  do  in  spiritual.  Only  a 
prince  of  the  Hoi^se  of  David  might 
sit  down  in  the  priests'  court.  As  a 
mark  of  respect  to  an  Eastern  monarch, 
the  gate  by  which  he  enters  is  thence- 
forth shut  to  all  other  persons. 

Ver.  8.  ^^It  is  for  the  prince."    The 

Babbis  understood  this  to  be  the 
Messiah ;  bnt  this  cannot  be,  as  He 
would  not  be  likely  to  offer  a  burnt- 
offering  as  the  prince  was  required  to 
do  (chap,  xlvl  4).  The  prince  must 
mean  the  civil  ruler  under  Messiah : 
he  represents  Messiah,  who  entered 
heaven,  the  true  Sanctuary,  by  a  way 
that  none  other  could.  "  Because  the 
Lord  hath  entered  in  by  it"  "  How 
glorious  must  the  entering  Lord  be 
when  the  prince  cannot  be  more 
highly  honoured  than  by  a  place  in 
the  gate  by  which  He  entered  !" — 
HengsUnberg,  ''To  eat  bread  before 
the  Lord  " — a  custom  connected  with 
sacrifices  (Oen.  xxxi.  54 ;  Ex.  xviii. 
12,  xxiv.  11 ;  1  Cor.  x.  18).  Accord- 
ing to  the  old  law,  these  feasts  be- 
longed only  to  the  priests  ;  none  of  the 
rest  of  the  congregation,  not  even 
the  king,  might  partake  of  them :  the 
new  system  gives  to  the  prince  a 
privilege  which  he  did  not  before 
possess,  he  standing,  as  the  represen- 
tative of  Messiah,  in  a  higher  position 
than  the  kings  of  old. 

Ver.  6.  ''The  rebellious  house  of 
Israel"  The  sins  of  the  priesthood 
acted  and  reacted  on  one  another : 
like  priest,  like  people  ;  and  like  people, 
like  priest  (Jer.  v.  31  ;  Hos.  iv.  9). 
Ood  expostulates  with  His  people  in 
the  seat  of  their  former  iniquity  (ver. 
4 ;  chap.  viii.  3). 
460 


Ver.  7.  "Strangers."  Here  the  people 
are  taught  that  unfaithful  priests  un- 
circumcised  in  heart  (Acts  viL  51), 
though  of  the  true  lineage,  are  re- 
garded as  strangers. 

Ver.  8.  "Ye  have  set  keepers" — 

according  to  your  own  pleasure,  not 
My  ordinances  (Num.  xvi.  40 ;  1  Kings 
xii.  31). 

Ver.  10.  "The  Levites  that  are 
gone  away  fiar  from  Me."  The  Levites 
as  a  body  had  remained  true  to  the 
Temple-service  at  Jerusalem  (2  Chron. 
xi.  13).  But  individuals  among  them 
deserted  to  Isi-ael.  These  apostate 
Levites  shall  bear  their  iniquities ;  they 
shall  not  be  restored  to  their  former 
rank  and  privileges. 

Ver.  11.  "Yet  they  shaU  be  minis^ 
ters  "  —  servants  performing  menial 
offices  for  the  ministering  priests — 
acting  as  porters,  helping  in  the 
slaughter  of  the  victims,  but  not  as 
sacrificing  priests.  They  shall  not 
be  excluded  from  all  service  in  the 
Sanctuary,  but  degraded  from  the 
functions  of  priests  to  those  of  simple 
Levites.  One  may  be  a  believer,  and 
that,  too,  in  a  distinguished  place, 
and  yet  lose  some  special  honour — 
be  acknowledged  as  pious,  yet  be  ex- 
cluded from  some  dignity.  "Having 
charge  at  the  gates."  Though  stand- 
ing as  mere  doorkeepers,  it  is  in  the 
house  of  Ood  which  hath  foundations ; 
whereas  they  who  dwell  with  the 
wicked  dwell  in  but  shifting  tents 
(Ps.  Ixxxiv.  10). 

Ver.  15.  "  The  priests,  the  Levitei, 
the  sons  of  Zadok.''  The  priests  of 
the  line  of  Ithamar  were  to  be  dis- 
charged from  ministrations  in  the 
Temple  because  of  their  corruptions. 
Zadok,  according  to  his  name,  which 
means  righteous,  and  his  line  were  to 
succeed,  as  they  did  not  take  part  in  the 
general  apostasy  to  the  same  degree 
(1  Kings  il  35 ;  1  Chron.  xjiv.  S).    It 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  aOMMBNTART:  BZEKIBL. 


OBAP.  nnr 


indicated  a  race  of  faithful  and  devoted 
•enrants — a  priesthood  serving  Go(i  in 
newness  of  spirit,  not  in  the  oldness  of 
the  letter,  as  the  people  whom  they 
represented  should  also  have  become 
true  Israelites,  themselves  a  royal 
priesthood  offering  up  spiritual  sacri- 
fices to  the  Lord. 

Ver.  17.  "  Olothed  with  linen  gar- 
ments." Four  vestments  were  worn 
by  the  ordinary  priest  —  the  linen 
breeches,  the  coat,  the  girdle,  and  the 
bonnet  The  material  of  which  they 
were  made  was  linen,  or,  more  accu- 
rately, byssus,  the  white  shining  cotton 
stuflF  of  Egypt.  These  two  qualities 
of  the  byssus  are  specially  marked 
as  characteristic,  being  symbolical  of 
purity. 

Yer.  20.  "  Neither  shaU  th«7  shave 
their  heads  " — as  mourners  used  to  do, 
and  as  the  Levitical  priests  were  for- 
bidden to  do  (Lev.  xxi.  1-5).  The 
worshippers  of  the  Egyptian  idols 
Serapis  and  Isis  shaved  their  heads — 
another  reason  why  the  priests  of 
Jehovah  are  not  to  do  so.  "Nor 
suffer  their  loekB  to  grow  long" — as 
the  luxurious,  the  barbarians,  and 
soldier  in  warfare  did. 

Yer.  21.  <<  Neither  shall  any  priest 
drink  wine  " — lest  the  holy  enthusiasm 
of  their  devotion  should  be  mistaken 
for  inebriation,  as  in  Peter's  case  (Acts 
ii.  13,  15,  18). 

Yer.  23.  "And  they  shall  teach"— 
to  spread  out  the  hand,  for  example, 


to  point  to  something,  to  teach.  The 
priestly  service  is  to  comi)rehend  wor- 
ship and  doctrine,  representation  of 
the  people  before  God,  and  representa- 
tion of  God  before  the  people — every- 
thing with  an  eye  to  sanctitication. 

Yer.  24.  "They  shall  stand  in 
judgment."  There  was  in  the  second 
Temple  a  council  of  priests  whose 
special  duty  it  was  to  regulate  every- 
thing connected  with  the  Sanctuary. 

Yer.  28.  "  It  shall  be  unto  them  for 
an  inheritance."  The  remains  of  the 
sacrifices  were  a  chief  source  of  the 
priests'  support.  "  I  am  their  inherit- 
ance— possession" — something  which 
one  grasps  and  retains.  Jehovah  is  the 
all-sufficing  possession  of  His  servants 
(Num.  xviii.  20 ;  Deut  xviii.  I). 

Yer.  30.  "And  every  oUation"— 

offering,  or  heave-offering,  whatever  is 
according  to  precept,  or  of  free  will, 
lifted  up  for  Jehovah  as  a  consecrated 
gift  to  the  Sanctuary.  "  That  he  may 
cause  the  blessing  to  rest  in  thine 
house.''  The  heaving  and  waving  of 
the  offering  involved  the  thought  that 
in  consequence  of  such  gifts  to  the 
priest  the  blessing  of  Qod  is  brought 
down  on  the  individual  house. 

Yer.  31.  "That  priest  shall  not 
eat  of  anything  that  is  dead  of  itself, 
or  torn.'*  This  was  defiling  for  any 
man  (Lev.  xvii.  15) }  how  much  more 
so  for  the  priests  of  Jehovah!  (Lev. 
xxii  8).  Thus  was  the  idea  of  holi- 
ness strictly  enforced. 


EOMIL£TIOS. 

Thb  Dionitt  or  thb  Civil  BuuBt 

(Yers.  1-3.) 

L  Arises  from  the  eocalted  character  of  His  regal  ftmctions.  The  king  is 
the  human  representative  of  Divine  justice,  both  in  its  administration  and 
maintenance;  he  is  God's  vice^i^erent  and  deputy.  The  word  that  describes 
his  office  indicates  his  power — King,  Konning,  Able- man.  He  is  the  summary  of 
all  that  is  sreat  and  noble  in  man.  ''  Priest,  teacher,  whatsoever  of  earthly  or 
of  spiritual  dignity  we  can  fancy  to  reside  in  a  man  embodies  itself  here,  to 

461 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMTtnTW  COMMENT  ART:  EZEKTEL. 


command  over  us,  to  furnish  us  with  constant  practical  teaching,  to  tell  us  for 
the  (lav  and  hour  what  we  are  to  do."  He  is  a  leader- and  guide  of  men,  and 
must  be  lifted  far  beyond  the  suspicion  of  selfishness  and  partiality.  He  must 
rule  in  equity  and  righteousness,  with  an  ear  deaf  to  the  flattery  of  the  rich, 
and  a  hand  ever  ready  to  help  the  oppressed  and  poor.  He  must  defend 
virtue  among  the  weakest,  and  punish  iniquity  among  the  strongest.  Every 
brave  and  honest  endeavour  to  act  the  king  adds  new  lustre  to  the  dignitj 
of  the  office.  The  king,  like  every  other  true  man,  is  not  above  acting  upon 
the  advice— 

**  Tlui  ftbove  all :  To  thine  own  self  be  tma^ 
And  it  muBt  follow,  as  the  light  the  dftj, 
Thoa  cftost  not  then  be  false  to  any  man.** 

IL  Bistingniahed  by  privileffed  access  to  tlie  Diyine  Temple  (vers.  1-S). 

The  east  gate,  through  which  the  glory  of  the  Lord  entered  the  Temple,  was 
to  be  shut,  to  be  a  perpetual  reminder  of  that  signal  honour  paid  to  the  building, 
and  to  induce  a  profound  reverence  for  the  Divine  majesty.  But  the  prince 
was  permitted  to  enter  the  porch  of  that  gate  to  indicate  that  his  office  brought 
him  into  nearer  contact  with  GU>d,  and  to  give  weight  and  authority  to  all  his 
royal  proceedings.  It  is  necessary  to  surround  and  support  the  throne  with 
the  sanctions  of  Divine  privilege  in  order  to  keep  up  the  king  to  the  loftiest 
standard  of  right  and  to  give  force  to  everj  act  of  justice  in  the  kinglj  ad- 
ministration. 

HL  llaintained  by  spiritual  communion  and  faUowsliip  with  the  Divine 
Ruler.  "He  shall  eat  before  the  Lord"  (ver.  3).  The  prince  is  permitted  to 
enter  the  porch  of  the  east  gate  that  he  may  worship  Gk>d.  It  is  thus  he  is 
constantly  reminded  of  his  high  duty  and  receives  moral  strength  to  act  in 
harmony  with  the  Divine  standard.  The  higher  we  rise  in  the  social  scale  the 
greater  are  our  responsibilities,  and  the  more  need  is  there  to  seek  Divine 
help  to  be  faithful  and  true.  The  loftiest  function  of  the  king  is  to  be  the 
patron  and  protector  of  religion.  He  must  seek  power  for  his  work  at  the 
same  source  to  which  the  humblest  believer  is  invited — ^in  communion  with 
God.  The  soul  finds  its  greatest  blessings  in  intense  fellowship  with  the 
highest.  Augustine  once  beautifully  said,  ''Thou  mayest  seek  after  honours 
and  not  obtain  them;  thou  mayest  labour  after  riches  and  yet  remain  poor; 
thou  mayest  doat  on  pleasures  and  have  many  sorrows.  But  our  Gk)d,  of  His 
supreme  goodness,  says,  *  Whoever  sought  Me  and  found  Me  not  t  Whoever 
desired  Me  and  obtained  Me  not  t  Whoever  loved  Me  and  missed  Me  t  I  am 
with  him  that  seeks  Me.  He  hath  Me  already  that  wishes  for  Me ;  and  he  that 
loveth  Me  is  sure  of  My  love.' "  Fellowship  with  God  is  the  secret  of  power  to 
govern  righteously  and  to  labour  with  pleasure  and  success. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  kingly  office  has  grave  re8p<m9ibilUies.  8.  The  highed  hmumt 
of  the  king  is  to  be  the  faUhfvl  servant  of  Ood.  3.  I%e  kimg  must  seek  Divine  ffraee 
iofulJU  the  duties  of  his  office. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEB8E& 

Yer.  1-S.  "The  spiritual  truth  to  ness  (Bom  L  4):  all  we  must  enter 

be  learned  here  is,  that  our  Messiah  as  sinners  savea  by  graca     Through 

entered  heaven,  the  true  Sanctuary,  Him  alone  believers  eat  before  the 

by  a  way  that  none  other  could,  on  Lord  in  the  c-ommunion  of  the  Holy 

the  ground  of  His  own  perfect  holi-  Supper,   and   shall  hereafter  eiperi* 
463 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OBAP.  XLIV. 


menially  realise  that  scripture,  'Blessed 
is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the 
kingdom  of  (Jod'  (Luke  xiv.  15)." — 

Ver.  1.  "And  it  was  shut,"  The 
Glories  of  Heaven — 1.  Are  Divinely 
secured.  2.  Are  open  to  all  penitent 
seekers.  3.  Are  inaccessible  to  the 
unbelieving. 

—  '*  Our  heart  too  should  be  shut 
to  the  world  and  the  devil  when  once 
the  holy  God  has  entered  into  it  and 
His  glory  has  swallowed  up  sin  and 
misery  in  us.  Alas!  if  the  door  of 
heaven  should  be  shut  I  ** — Lange. 

Ver.  3.  **  What  could  this  import 
but  that  the  prince  should  feel  he  now 
occupied  a  place  of  peculiar  nearness 
to  (lodt  As  God's  vicegerent  and 
deputy  among  the  people,  it  became 
him  to  be  the  most  distinguished  re- 
presentative in  public  life  of  God's 
holiness;  to  tread  the  higher  walks 
of  spiritual  communion  with  heaven, 
and  stand  pre-eminent  in  his  zeal  for 
the  interests  of  truth  and  righteous- 


ness. Far  now  from  usurping  the 
authority  that  belonged  to  God  and 
abusing  it  to  selfish  ends,  all  authority 
and  power  in  Israel  should  be  exer- 
cised— if  this  Divine  ideal  were  re- 
duced to  practice — in  a  solemn  feeling 
of  subordination  to  God's  majesty  and 
with  an  unfeigned  desire  for  His  glory." 
— Fairlaim, 

—  The  Kingly  Office —1.  Enjoys 
distinguished  privileges.  3.  Involves 
much  anxious  thought  and  onerous 
toil  3.  Needs  the  help  of  an  earnest, 
practicalpiety. 

—  "The  Christian  ruler  ought  to 
be  the  Christian  pattern  of  his  people. 
He  is  not  to  preach,  just  as  it  is  not 
his  office  to  offer  sacrifice ;  but  he  is 
to  nourish  and  protect  the  Church  and 
avow  its  faith.  He  ought  to  have  a 
good  conscience  and  joy  before  the 
Lord  because  of  his  princely  office, 
which  does  not  merely  consist  in  this, 
that  we  live  in  peace  and  quiet  under 
his  sceptre,  but  also  that  the  people 
may  hear  the  Word  of  Gk>d  and  without 
fear  offer  to  Him  the  sacrifices  of  their 
worship  " — Lamge, 


E0MILETI08. 

A  Holy  PRissTHOoa 

(Vers.  4-31.) 

L  Vxged  to  fidelity  \ff  admonitions  of  former  neglect  1.  Bmindeiqfihe 
lofty  standard  of  TempU^ervice  (vers.  4,  5).  Having  seen  the  exalted  position 
of  the  prince,  the  prophet  is  shown  the  character  of  the  priesthood  which  is  to 
minister  in  the  glorious  Temple.  A  vision  of  the  Divine  glory  filling  the  house 
is  again  flashed  upon  him,  and  he  is  earnestly  called  upon  to  observe  with 
special  care  the  ordinances  and  laws  of  the  priesthood  and  every  minute  detail 
of  the  Temple-ritual.  The  supreme  holiness  of  Jehovah  and  the  manifested 
splendour  of  His  majesty  demand  a  worship  of  the  highest  and  purest  order. 
He  can  be  ministered  unto  acceptably  only  by  a  holy  priesthood.  The  object 
of  worship  reacts  upon  the  worshipper;  and  our  conceptions  of  God  must 
necessarily  affect  and  mould  the  character  of  the  worship  we  offer  to  Him.  Our 
souls  should  be  continually  straining  after  enlarged  views  of  God,  that  our 
worship  may  be  intelligent,  reverent^  and  holy.  2.  The  apostasy  of  priests  and 
people  is  a  desecration  of  the  Temple  (vers.  6-10).  Priests  and  people  had  been 
unfaithful  to  covenant  engagements  and  rebelled  against  the  Divine  laws.  The 
corruption  of  the  one  class  reacted  upon  the  other^  and  their  conjoint  abomi- 
nations polluted  the  holy  Sanctuary.  The  old  adage,  ''Like  priest^  like  people," 
is  not  less  true  than  ''  Like  people,  like  priest"  The  priesthood  is  bound  by  its 
calling  always  to  be  ahead  of  the  people  in  teaching  and  morality.     8.  Unfaith- 

463 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  XUT.  SOMILETW  COM  ME  NT  A  R  Y :  EZEKlr.L 


ful  prissis  are  deposed  from  the  highest  service  (vers.  11-14).  The  Levitefl  who 
were  carried  awaj  with  the  idolatrous  tendency  of  the  times  are  degraded  in 
their  status.  Yet  their  punishment  is  mixed  with  mercy.  They  were  not 
utterly  exdnded  from  the  Temple.  While  they  were  not  allowed  to  take  part 
in  the  more  privileged  acts  of  worship,  they  were  permitted  to  perform  inferior 
and  menial  duties.  The  goodness  of  Gk>d  ever  provides  a  way  of  recovery  for 
the  erring ;  and  the  humblest  place  in  His  Temple  is  a  post  of  honour  that 
should  be  appreciated  the  more  it  is  undeserved. 

XL  Oompoaed  of  thoae  who  haye  been  faithful  in  tiine  of  trial  (vers.  15,  16). 
Amid  the  general  defection  the  descendants  of  Zadok  maintained  their  integrity, 
and  they  are  promoted  to  honour ;  they  become  a  type  of  the  holy  priesthood 
which  is  to  occupy  the  highest  place  in  the  newly  constituted  Temple  of  the 
future.  Trial  is  the  test  of  character,  and  every  resistance  to  evil  is  a  strengthen- 
ing of  the  moral  fibre.  The  men  who  are  to-day  wielding  the  mightiest  influence 
for  good  in  Church  and  State  are  those  who,  in  the  midst  of  obscurity  and  mis- 
representation, have  remained  true  to  their  conscience  and  their  God.  As  gold 
shines  the  brighter  when  submitted  to  the  fiercest  fire,  so  religious  principle 
glows  with  a  diviner  lustre  the  more  it  is  tried.  Trial  is  the  pathway  to  honour 
and  fame. 

III.  Must  observe  the  Divinely  sanctioned  laws  of  purity  (vers.  17-27). 
The  minute  directions  here  eiven  concerning  the  vestments  and  habits  ot  the 
priests  have  a  distinctly  morsd  significance.  They  must  wear  linen  garments, 
emblems  of  cleanliness  and  purity;  they  must  not  shave  their  heads — as  mourners 
did — nor  let  their  hair  grow  uncut — as  persons  unfit  for  active  service — nor 
drink  wine  when  engaged  in  Temple-service — lest  they  should  be  unfit  for  high 
spiritual  emotions — nor  do  anything  which  under  the  outward  restrictions  of  a 
symbolic  ritual  betokened  a  want  of  inward  purity.  The  holiness  that  pervades 
the  house  of  Grod  must  pervade  the  hearts  and  lives  of  those  who  are  called  to 
minister  in  its  hallowed  services.  The  spirit  in  which  the  holiest  acts  are  done 
is  a  sample  and  pattern  of  the  spirit  in  which  every  duty  should  be  done  (Luke 
xxii.  19 ;  comp.  CoL  iii.  17). 

lY.  Aiumred  of  adequate  maintenance  (vers.  2^-81^  Gh>d  takes  care  to 
make  ample  provision  for  those  who  work  for  Him.  What  they  may  lack  in 
worldly  afiQuence  He  makes  up  to  them  in  the  satisfying  comfort  of  His 
presence  and  in  the  riches  of  His  grace.  Poverty  has  its  temptations  and 
anxieties,  but  it  is  powerless  to  harm  the  soul  that  has  its  inheritance  in  Ood. 
Let  body  and  soul  be  wholly  devoted  to  the  service  of  Gknl,  and  He  will  not  fail 
to  furnish  all  necessary  supplies  (Ps.  zxzviL  3). 

Lessons. — 1.  PriesUy  sins  are  aggravated  because  of  the  privileges  and  opportumtMS 
of  the  priestly  office,  2.  Priestly  duties  demand  the  loftiest  puriij/,  S.  2%tf  priesi  i$ 
a  power  for  good  only  as  he  is  faithful  to  the  Dknne  law. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  4-Sl.  *'  All  who  are  engaged  should  be  especially  careful  in  forming 
in  the  ministry  should  be  blameless,  connections,  and  prudent  in  the  man- 
sound  in  the  faith,  full  of  good  agement  of  their  i  .milies,  observing 
works,  exemplary  in  their  lives,  walk-  and  teaching  others  u>  keep  the  statutes 
ing  humbly  before  Ood  and  circum-  of  the  Loni  They  should  delight  in 
spectly  in  the  sight  of  men.  They  every  part  of  their  saored  service,  jet 
464 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETia  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBL. 


ORAV.  XU?. 


do  all  in  humble  reliance  on  Christ. 
Their  wants  should  be  supplied,  so 
that  they  may  not  be  obliged  to  in- 
volve themselves  in  worldly  cares  and 
employments  for  a  maintenance." — 
Hemy  and  ScatL 

Vers.  4,  5.  Divine  Revelations — 1. 

Should  be  seen  from  different  points  of 
view,  "  Then  brought  he  me  the  way 
of  the  north  gate  before  the  house" 
(ver.  4).  2.  Overpower  the  earnest 
student  with  their  splendour.  <<  I  looked, 
and  behold  the  glory  filled  the  house, 
and  I  fell  upon  my  face  *'  (ver.  4).  3. 
Bcldly  challenge  the  most  minute  and 
earefvl  investigation.  "Mark  well  all 
the  ordinances,  the  entering  in  and 
every  going  forth  of  the  sanctuary  ** 
(ver.  5). 

Ver.  4.  "God  reveals  His  glory  to 
His  servants,  especially  when  He  calls 
on  them  to  make  known  His  will  to 
His  people  (Acts  xviii  9 ;  xxiii.  ll)." 

Ver.  5.  "Divine  things  are  not  to 
be  drowsily  listened  to  or  drowsily 
engaged  in.  In  everything  there  must 
be  heart — in  seeing,  in  hearing,  in 
doing. — ^The  goings  in  and  out  of  the 
Sanctuary  a  solemn  consideration  for 
every  one,  but  especially  for  those  who 
keep  the  charge  of  the  Sanctuary,  what- 
ever their  rank  in  the  service.** — Lange, 

Vers.  6-14.  God's  Treatment  of 
Bebels.  1.  Thevr  sins  are  accurately 
recorded — rebellion  (ver.  6),  abomina- 
tions (vers.  6,  7),  polluting  the  Sanc- 
tuary (ver.  7),  idolatry  (ver.  12), 
breaking  of  covenant  (ver.  7),  neglect 
of  duty  (ver.  8).  2.  They  are  faith- 
fully reproved  (vers.  6-13).  3.  They 
are  made  conscious  of  their  evil  doings. 
"They  shall  bear  their  iniquity  "  (vers. 
10,12).  4.  They  suffer  official  degrador 
tion  (vers.  11,  14). 

Ver.  7.  "The  voice  of  the  people, 
the  choice  of  the  people,  is  not  God's 
voice,  God's  choice,  but  frequently 
God's  judgment  to  the  full. — Self- 
chosen  Divine  service  is  an  abomina- 
to  the  Lord." — Lange, 

i 


Vers.  8,  14.  "Te  have  not  kept  the 
charge.  But  I  will  make  them  keepers 
of  the  charge."  The  Divine  Mercy— 
1.  Takes  note  of  every  act  of  unfaith- 
fulness. 2.  Does  not  fail  to  administer 
faithful  reproof.  3.  Does  not  utterly 
abandon  the  transgressor.  4.  Is  ever 
ready  to  restore  the  penitent. 

Ver.  8.  "  What  general  can  employ 
a  soldier  who  is  everything  else,  but 
no  soldier  t " 

Ver.  9.  "It  is  a  token  of  the  greatest 
decline  of  the  Church  when  the  wicked 
and  manifest  hypocrites  are  not  only 
not  expelled,  but  go  freely  in  and  out, 
and  even  have  the  ruling  power.* — 
Lange. 

Ver.  10.  "  Wliere  there  are  ungodly 
teachers  there  is  no  want  of  ungodly 
hearers  (Jer.  v.  31).  Degraded  priests 
a  mirror  for  pastors." — Starke, 

Ver.  11.  "Even  in  the  performance 
of  subordinate  service,  where  one 
originally  stood  higher,  the  grace  of 
God  may  be  with  us,  provided  we 
let  God's  humbling  of  us  issue  in  con- 
version of  heart  and  look  upon  the 
punishment  as  a  righteous  recompense. 
It  is  not  at  all  necessary  that  we 
should,  as  the  world  calls  it,  make  a 
successful  career  in  the  clerical  pro- 
fession."— Lange. 

Ver.  12.  "  The  sins  of  the  preacher 
in  their  consequences  as  regards  the 
life  of  the  community." 

Ver.  13.  "How  great  then  was  the 
love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  to  Peter  and 
the  rest  of  His  disciples  after  His 
resurrection,  as  in  sending  them  that 
sweet  message  (Mark  xvi.  7),  so  in 
readmitting  them  to  the  work  of  the 
ministry  after  so  foul  a  revolt  1  (John 
XX.  21-23).  And  doth  He  not  the 
very  same  still  for  His  poor  sinful 
servants  who  desire  indeed  to  fear 
His  name,  but  are  oft  overtaken  in  a 
fault  through  infirmity  of  the  flesh  t " 
— Trapp. 

—  "  Let  U8  beware  of  losing  precious 
a  465 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  XUT. 


HOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIBL 


opportunities  wherein  we  may  have 
tne  honour  of  doing  great  things  for 
God,  such  as  Mark  lost  in  leaving 
Paul  and  Barnabas  in  Pamphylia,  and 
in  not  going  forward  to  the  glorious 
work  through  love  of  ease  or  fear  of 
man ;  and  such  as  the  disciples  lost  in 
not  affording  Jesus  at  His  request  the 
sympathy  of  their  prayers  and  tears, 
through  drowsiness,  in  G^thsemane." 
— FausseL 

—  "The  ignominy  of  failure  in 
ministerial  life:  personal  access  to 
God  is  hindered,  and  the  office  be- 
comes a  torment." — Lange, 

Vers.  15,  16.  FideUty  in  God's 
Service  —  1.  Commen«labIe  in  times 
of  general  backsliding.  2.  Attracts 
the  Divine  notice  and  approval.  8. 
Rewarded  with  special  nonour  and 
blessing. 

—  "1.  The  Lord  takes  notice  of 
those  who  serve  in  His  house,  who  are 
false  and  who  are  faithful  in  corrupt 
and  apostatising  times.  2.  God  takes 
pleasure  in  and  honours  those  who 
are  faithful  and  constant  in  His  ser- 
vice. " — GreenhilL 

—  "The  promise  of  a  priesthood  of 
the  house  of  Zadok  entirely  corre- 
sponded to  the  promise  of  a  shepherd 
with  the  name  of  David.  It  is  the 
raising  up  of  a  people  who  should  be 
themselves  such  a  priesthood,  and  the 
sons  of  Zadok  came  into  notice  only 
because  in  connection  with  them  there 
was  an  historical  ground  for  taking 
them  as  representatives  of  a  right- 
hearted  spiritual  community.  All  was 
to  rise  into  a  new  and  higher  sphere, 
first  the  Kingdom  of  God  itself,  and 
then  the  people  who  enjoyed  its  dis- 
tinctive privileges  and  experienced  its 
blessings." — Fairbaim. 

Ver.  16.  "The  precepts  according 
to  the  law  should  remind  us  that 
preachers  particularly  run  within  lists, 
as  Paul  writes  of  the  Christians. 
What  is  fitting  for  any  one  else  may 
yet  be  far  from  seemly  in  a  preacher. 
— But  it  is  just  those  who  take  things 
easy  that  sjwak  most  of  their  severe 
toil  and  the  heavy  labour  they  have  to 
undergo."— Zan^tf. 

4eo 


Ver.  17.  "  The  reason  is  plain ;  wool 
is  more  apt  than  linen  to  contract  dirt 
and  breea  insects ;  linen  breeds  none : 
besides,  this  is  a  vegetable  and  the 
other  an  animal  substance.  It  was 
an  ancient  maxim  that  whatever  was 
taken  from  a  dead  body  was  impure 
in  matters  of  religion,  and  should  not 
be  permitted  to  enter  into  the  Temple. 
The  Egyptian  priests  always  wore  linen 
on  their  bodies  and  shoes  of  matting 
or  rushes  on  their  feet.  The  Moham- 
medans never  write  the  Koran  upon 
vellum  or  skin  of  any  kind,  as  they 
would  consider  that  as  a  defilemeuu" 
—A.  Clarke. 

Vers.  17-24.  "The  various  precepts 
respecting  the  purifications  and  the 
dress  of  the  priests  strikingly  impress 
our  minds  with  the  great  sanctity 
which  God  attaches  to  the  ministry. 
The  bodies  of  ministers  must  be  pre- 
served in  sanctification  and  in  honour. 
He  who  does  the  work  and  delivers 
the  Word  of  God  must  habitually  live 
the  servant  and  friend  of  God.  Nothing 
in  his  person,  in  his  food,  in  his  dress, 
or  in  his  conduct  must  revolt  the 
faithful  against  the  Word  and  ordi- 
nances of  the  Lord.  On  the  contrary, 
all  about  the  priest  must  be  inviting 
and  calculated  to  recommend  religion 
by  a  cloud  of  virtues  and  engaging 
qualities.  If  religion  do  not  make 
ministers  holy  and  happy,  what  hope 
can  remain  for  the  people  1 " — StUdiffe, 

Ver.  19.  "He  who  ministers  at  the 
Sanctuary  must  never  seem  profane, 
nor  a  fop  in  his  attire,  nor  comic  in 
his  speech,  nor  a  man  of  the  world  in 
his  transactions.  He  may  seem  ridicu- 
lous to  the  world,  only  never  conformed 
to  the  world." — Lange. 

Ver.  20.  "  Seemly,  but  not  remark- 
able either  in  defect  or  excess. — ^Men 
of  extremes  are  unfit  for  the  holy 
ministry," 

Vers.  23,  24.  Ministerial  Bntsr— 1. 

To  paini  otU  the  dear  disHndian  between 
the  false  and  the  true.  "They  shall 
teach  My  people  the  difference  between 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  00MMBNTAR7:  BZEKIBL. 


tmKt.jm. 


ihe  holy  and  profane,  and  cause  them 
to  diticern "  (ver.  23).  2.  To  be  just 
and  impartial  in  controversy.  "They 
shall  judge  according  to  My  judg- 
ments" (ver.  24).  3.  To  observe  and 
eaforu  obedience  to  the  Divine  laws, 
"  They  shall  keep  My  laws  and  statutes 
and  hallow  My  Sabbaths  "  (ver.  24). 

Ver.  23.  "As  their  life,  so,  above 
all,  their  teaching  ought  to  preserve  the 
people  from  defilement  and  train  them 
to  purity." 

Ver.  24.  "The  obligation  to  hallow 
the  Sabbaths  of  the  Lord  is  not  done 
away  with  by  the  advent  of  Messiah ; 
for  here,  in  a  passage  which,  in  any 
fair  interpretation,  can  only  apply  to 
Christian  times,  this  obligation  is  ez- 
piessiy  insisted  on." — Fausset. 

—  "  Otod*B  word  is  God's  judgment, 
the  righteous  Judge,  right  law  and 
upright  judgment. — The  servant  of 
€k>d  as  umpire  in  disputes.  He  must 
not  be  a  party  man,  but  stands  over 
the  parties." — Lange. 

Ver.  25.  "They  who  are  the  mes- 
sengers, heralds,  and  representatives 
of  an  eternal  life  shall  neither  have 
their  serenity  disturbed  by  the  death 
of  believers,  which  is  no  death,  nor 
their  pure  life  defiled  by  the  life  of 
the  spiritually  dead,  which  is  no  life. 
— We  too  are  allowed  to  wipe  our 
ejeB,  as  God  wipes  away  every  tear 
from  the  eyes  of  His  saints." 

Ver.  28.  God  the  Heritage  of  the 


Good  —  1.  Ensuring  all  necessary 
temporal  good.  2.  Supplying  all- 
sufficing  spiritual  blessing.  3.  Cures 
all  anxiety  as  to  present  aud  future 
maintenance. 

—  **  All  who  have  first  the  Kingdom 
of  God  for  their  possession  are  also 
truly  priests.  God  feeds  them  wholly 
on  what  is  hallowed,  and  he  who  will 
have  a  blessing  in  his  house  must 
evince  love  to  them.** — Diedrich, 

Ver.  30.  "That  he  may  cause  the 
blessing  to  rest  in  thine  house." 
Ministerial  Maintenance  a  Source  of 
Family  Blessing — 1.  As  it  is  liberally 
devised.  2.  As  it  is  cheerfully  be- 
stowed. 3.  As  it  is  gratefully  appre- 
ciated. 

—  "It  is  all  in  all  to  the  comfort  of 
any  house  to  have  the  blessing  of  Gh>d 
upon  it,  and  that  blessing  to  rest  in  it ; 
to  dwell  where  we  dwell  and  to  extend 
to  those  who  shall  come  after  us.  And 
the  way  to  have  the  blessing  of  Gh>d 
upon  our  estates  is  to  honour  God 
with  them,  and  to  give  Him  and  His 
ministers.  Him  and  His  poor,  their 
share  out  of  them.  God  blesses.  He 
surely  blesses  the  habitation  of  those 
who  are  thus  just  (Prov.  iii  33) ;  and 
ministers,  by  instructing  and  praying 
for  the  families  that  are  kind  to  them, 
should  do  their  part  towards  causing 
God's  blessing  to  rest  there." — Benson, 

Ver.  31.  "  In  God's  service  there  is 
no  filthy  lucre.  The  Lord  purifies 
everything  for  them  who  eat  with 
Bim.''—Diedrieh. 


The  Apportionment  of  Territory  Around  the  Templel    (Ohap.  xlr.) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1. 
**Di7ide  by  lot"— not  by  casting 
lots,  but  by  allotment,  the  severd 
portions  being  assigned  according  to 
rule.  "  Ye  shall  offer  an  oblation '' — 
from  a  Hebrew  root  to  heave  or  raise, 
because  when  anything  was  offered 
to  God  the  offerer  raised  the  hand. 
"Unto  the  Lord  an  holy  portion." 
The  Lord!s  portion  is  subdivided  into 
throe  parts — that  for  the  Sanctuary 


(vers.  2,  3),  that  for  the  priests  (ver. 
4^,  and  that  for  the  Levites  (ver.  5). 
This  provision  for  the  priests  and 
Levites,  out  of  proportion  in  any 
actual  arrangement,  is  no  doubt  in- 
tended to  symbolise  the  reverence 
and  honour  due  to  God  and  expressed 
by  liberality  to  His  services  and  His 
ministers.  "  The  length  five  and 
twenty  thonsand  reeds,  and  breadth 
ten  thousand."    The  Euj^lish  Verbiun 

467 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  ILT. 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIEL. 


fills  in  the  ellipsis  with  reedi^  accord- 
ing to  chap.  xliiL  16.  Cubits  are 
mentioned  in  ver.  2,  but  not  here, 
implying  that  there  cubits  alone  are 
meant.  Taking  each  reed  at  twelve 
feet,  the  area  of  the  whole  would  be  a 
square  of  sixty  miles  on  each  side. 
The  holy  portion  of  the  Lord  com- 
prised the  whole  length  and  only  two- 
fifths  of  the  breadth.  The  form  of 
a  square  indicates  the  settled  stability 
of  the  community  and  the  harmony  of 
all  classes. 

Yer.  5.  '<A  possession  for  twenty 
ehambers  "—meaning  that  the  Levites, 
who  live  in  twenty  out  of  the  thirty 
chambers  mentioned  in  chap.  xL  17, 
shall  have  the  portion  of  land  for  a 
possession. 

Yer.  6.  ''For  the  whole  house  of 
IsraeL"  This  portion  is  to  belong  to 
the  whole  people,  not  to  be  subject  to 
the  encroachments  made  by  the  later 
kings  of  Judah  (Jer.  xxii.  13). 

Yer.  7.  ''  A  portion  for  the  prince." 

"The  prince's  possession  is  to  consist 
of  two  halves,  one  on  the  west^  the 
other  on  the  east,  of  the  sacred  territory. 
The  prince  as  head  of  the  holy  com- 
munity stands  in  closest  connection 
with  the  Sanctuary;  his  possession, 
therefore,  on  both  sides  must  adjoin 
that  which  was  peculiarly  the  Lord's.* 
— Fairbaifik  The  definition  of  the 
prince's  territory  was  to  prevent  the 
oppressions  foretold  (1  Sam.  viii.  14), 
described  (2  Kings  xxiii.  35),  and 
reproved  (Jer.  xxii). 

Yer.  10.  ''Ye  shall  have  just  hoi- 
ances."  This  fitly  introduces  the 
strict  regulation  of  quantities  in  the 
prescribed  offerings. 

Yer.  11.  "  The  ephah  and  the  hath." 

The  ephah  was  in  use  for  dry  measure, 
the  bath  for  liquid.  The  homer  seems 
to  have  contained  abont  75  gallons. 
The  homer  was  employed  as  a  stan- 
dard, for  in  calculation  the  ephah  and 
bath  were  both  after  the  homer,  accord- 

469 


ing  to  the  standard  of  the  homer,  and 
were  to  be  equal  ^o  each  other 

Yer.  1 2.  "  The  shekel  shall  be  twenty 
gerahs."  "  The  standard  weights  were 
lost  when  the  Chaldeans  destroyed  the 
Temple.  The  threefold  enumeration 
of  shekels,  twenty,  twenty-five,  fifteen, 
probably  refers  to  coins  of  different 
value,  representing  respectively  so 
many  shekels,  the  three  collectively 
making  up  a  maneh.  By  weighing 
these  together  against  the  maneh  a  test 
was  afforded  whether  they  severally 
had  their  proper  weight ;  sixty  shekels 
in  all,  containing  one  coin  a  fourth  of 
the  whole  (fifteen  shekels),  another  a 
third  (twenty  shekels),  another  a  third 
and  a  twelfth  (twenty-five  shekels).'* — 
Menochius. 

Yer.  13.  "  This  is  the  oUation  that 
ye  shall  offer."  Here  the  offerings 
are  reduced  to  regular  order  and  the 
amounts  ordained.  In  later  days  there 
were  often  shortcomings  in  these  re- 
spects (Mai.  iii  8).  This  is  obviated 
and  regularity  ensured  in  the  new 
order  of  things. 

Yer.  16.  "  AU  the  people  shall  giye 
this  oblation  for  the  prince."  The 
people's  gifts  were  to  be  placed  in  the 
hands  of  the  prince,  so  as  to  form  a 
common  stock  out  of  which  the  prince 
was  to  provide  what  was  necessary  for 
each  sacrifice. 

Yer.  18.  "In  the  first  month,  in 
the  first  day  of  the  month."    It  is 

probable  that  this  celebration  is  the 
first  in  a  series  of  generally  recurring 
ordinances,  and  in  this  case  we  have 
an  addition  to  the  Mosaic  ritual 

Yer.  25.  "In  the  seyenth  month." 

This  is  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (Num. 
xxix.  12).  Of  the  other  great  festival, 
the  Feast  of  Weeks,  no  mention  is  made. 
Ordinances  that  are  literal,  though  not 
slavishly  bound  to  the  letter  of  the 
law,  will  set  forth  the  catholic  and 
eternal  verities  of  Messiah's  King- 
dom. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EOMILETIC  COMMENTARY: EZEKIEL,  chap.  xlv. 

EOMILETICS. 

Belioion  the  True  Basis  of  Equtet* 

(Vera.  1-26.) 

Hamanitarianism  professes  to  construct  a  morality  apart  Arom  religion.  It 
is  contended  that  man  has  within  himself  the  norm  or  rule  of  right,  and  by 
the  exercise  of  his  own  will-power  he  can  elect  to  do  that  which  he  ought  to 
do  and  whicli  it  is  best  to  do,  and  which  is  for  him  the  highest  good.  But 
who  is  the  man  referred  to  1  Is  it  the  man  formed  in  6od'i>  image,  who  fell 
into  sin,  which  must  necessarily  fetter  all  moral  actions,  and  who  is  redeemed 
by  Christ :  or  is  it  the  man,  the  pure  product  of  nature,  working  with  the  dim 
light  of  his  own  unaided  reason,  and  ignoring  every  other  god  but  the  one 
centred  in  his  own  egoism  t  The  notions  of  equity  in  the  natural  man  must 
necessarily  be  crude,  uncertain,  distorted.  Man  needs,  in  order  to  act  up  to  the 
highest  level  of  justice,  not  only  a  revelation  of  the  infallible  standard  of  right, 
but  the  aid  of  Divine  power  to  rectify  and  strengthen  his  moral  faculties.  We 
have  in  this  chapter  an  illustration  of  Religion  as  the  only  true  basis  of  Equity, 

L  Seen  in  the  impartial  distribution  of  land  (vers.  1-8).  Here  all  is  to 
be  fairly  and  unchangeably  allocated  and  according  to  the  unchallengeable 
principles  of  religious  equity.  The  form  of  a  square  for  the  land  apportioned 
to  the  priests,  the  prince,  and  the  people  indicated  the  perfect  harmony  and 
satisfaction  existing  among  these  classes.  There  was  no  ground  for  envy,  no 
temptation  or  disposition  to  invade  and  appropriate  the  territory  of  another. 
Nothing  has  exhibited  the  insatiable  avarice  of  man  more  strikingly  than  his 
treatment  of  the  land  question :  to  gratify  his  greed  for  possession  he  has  not 
hesitated  to  practise  duplicity,  fraud,  and  oppression.  The  tendency  has  been 
to  accumulate  the  bulk  of  the  land  of  a  nation  in  the  hands  of  the  few,  and 
scant  respect  has  often  been  paid  to  the  rights  of  the  many.  In  the  good 
time  coming,  when  religion,  and  not  simply  utility,  shall  be  universally  acknow- 
ledged as  the  true  basis  of  equity,  the  rights  of  king  and  people  shall  be  readily 
recognised,  and  all  occasion  for  lawless  interference  with  each  other's  posses- 
sions will  be  abolished  (ver.  8). 

II  Seen  in  the  accurate  adjustment  and  nse  of  weights  and  measores 
(vers.  9-13).  The  moral  degeneracy  of  the  Jews  was  apparent  in  their  business 
transactions.  They  tampered  with  weights  and  measures,  and  they  were  fre- 
quently charged  with  falsifying  balances  (Amos  viii.  5;  Hosea  xii.  7;  Micah 
vi.  11).  There  was  ample  ground  for  the  severe  reproof  of  the  prophet  that 
their  ways  were  not  equal  (chap.  xxxiiL  17).  Their  trickery  and  over-reaching 
was  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God  (Pro v.  xi.  1 ;  xx  23).  The  law  of 
the  land,  however  carefully  framed  and  wisely  administered,  does  not  always 
secure  perfect  justice  as  between  man  and  man,  even  when  that  law  is  inter- 
preted in  the  li^ht  of  equity.  The  morality  of  Christian  times  does  not  always 
reach  the  standard  of  JPagan  honesty.  When  valuable  presents  were  sent  to 
Epaminondas,  the  celebrated  Thebau  general,  he  used  to  say,  **If  the  thing 
you  desire  be  good,  I  will  do  it  without  any  bribe,  even  because  it  is  good  ;  if  it 
be  not  honest,  I  will  not  do  it  for  all  the  goods  in  the  world.**  It  is  dangerous 
to  tiifle  with  conscientious  scruples :  it  is  better  to  suffer  abuse  and  misrepre- 
sentation than  to  do  wrong.  The  tender  sensitiveness  of  the  conscience,  like 
the  delicate  bloom  of  ripe  fruit,  when  it  is  once  damaged  can  never  be  restored  : 
the  heart  sighs  in  vain  for  the  exquisite  experience  of  a  time  of  former  con- 

469 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAF.  JLf.  ffOMlLBTIO  OOMMENTART:  EZEKIEL. 


fcious  innocence.  It  does  not  pay  to  do  wrong.  A  merchant  one  day,  measar- 
ing  a  piece  of  cloth  and  finding  it  short,  asked  his  clerk  to  help  him  to  stretch 
it  to  the  required  length.  The  young  man  refused  on  conscientioas  grounds ; 
he  lost  his  situation,  hut  he  afterwards  rose  into  fame  and  greatness,  and  his 
praise  was  in  all  the  churches.  It  does  pa/^  to  do  right  Religion  is  the  only 
true  basis  of  equitable  dealing  as  between  man  and  man;  it  teaches  as  to 
render  to  each  other  that  which  is  just  and  equal 

III.  Seen  in  regnlatiiig  the  ordiiiaacaB  of  wonhip  (vers.  14-25).  The  exact 
directions  given  in  these  verses  regarding  the  sacrifices  indicate  that  everything 
oonneoted  with  Temple-serrice  must  be  regulated  according  to  the  strictest  laws 
of  equity.  Of  all  places,  the  Sanctuary  must  not  be  poUuted  or  its  worship 
marred  with  mutilated  offerings  and  half-hearted  devotion.  Morality  alone, 
mor.  Ity  divorced  from  true  religion,  does  not  inspire  worship— 4t  lacks  motive, 
Ufting  power.  We  cannot  worship  Ood  till  we  know  Him,  and  we  never  know 
Him  till  we  love  Him  and  the  whole  soul  is  swayed  and  thrilled  with  the 
influence  of  that  love.  The  laws  of  ethics  are  but  broken  lights  of  a  higher 
truth,  and  the  fragments  have  been  still  more  hopelessly  shattered  and  inextric- 
ably confused  by  the  infatuated  attempts  of  men  to  construct  them  into  a 
philosophy  of  religion  that  shall  be  independent  of  Divine  sanctions.  Vain 
dream  1  It  is  a  repetition  of  the  task  of  Sisyphus,  who  spent  his  time  in  rolling 
a  stone  up  a  hill,  which  as  soon  as  it  reached  the  summit  rebounded  again  to 
the  phdn.  The  equitable  demands  of  Divine  worship  can  alone  be  met  by  the 
aid  of  genuine  religion.  The  soul  most  be  made  good  before  it  can  be  just  to 
God  or  man. 

Lessons. — 1.  The  highest  ideal  of  equity  should  he  expressed  in  just  and  equal 
laws.  2.  Religiony  and  not  utilitarianism^  is  the  true  basis  of  equity.  8.  Worsh^  i$ 
acceptable  to  Ood  only  as  it  is  in  perfect  harmony  with  justice  and  equiif. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  1-9.  The  Land  Question— 1.  ligion,  according  to  the  measure  of  its 

Should  recognise  the  Divine  ownership  power  in  the  earth.* — M^Farlan. 
(ver.   I).     2.   Should  sanction  a  dis- 
tribution in  harmony  with  the  rights         Yer.    1.    ''A  portion  of  the  land 

and  claims  of  all  classes  (vers.  i-S).  was  first  reserved  for  the  Lord.     His 

3.  Should  not  allow  unjust  exactions,  Temple  required  an  ample  space  of 

or  the  oppression  of  the  weak  by  the  ground  and  His  poor  required  support, 

strong  (ver.  8).     4.  By  its  equitable  and  He  ever  lives  their  Guardian  and 

settlement    removes    temptations    to  constant  Friend.     If  we  expect  the 

robbery  and  wrong  (ver.  9).  Lord's  blessing   we    must  pay  Him 

homage  down   to  the   widow's  mite. 

Vers.  1-6.  "  The  frequent  occurrence  It  is  well,  therefore,  for  men  when 

of  the  number  five  in  these  measure-  they  come  to  their  inheritance  to  con« 

ments  is  remarkable,  and  if  we  consider  secrate  their  fortune  by  a  small  offering 

that  God  has  fitted  in  the  human  hand  to  Heaven  in  this  way,  as  it  seemed 

five  instruments  by  which  man  fashions  the  young  ruler  in  the  Gospel  wished 

to  his  will  the  materials  of  the  world —  to  da** — Sutdiffe. 
that  these  are  the  measure  of  his  power         —  **  Those  who  live  from  Ood*B  hand 

over  them — we  may  be  instructed  by  are  content  with  His  measure,  even 

this  passage  to  believe  that  every  Chris-  when  it  turns  out  small  and  modest. — 

tjan  State  is  bound  to  provide  for  the  It  ought  to  be  our  joy  to  be  near  God, 

maintenance  of  pure  and  undefiled  re-  to  be  associated  with  Him.'' — Stardx 


470 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTW  COMMBNTART:  BZBKIBL. 


CnAI».  XLV. 


Ver.  3.  "  Tlie  Sanctuary  was  situated 
in  the  centre  of  all ;  so  ought  religion 
to  he  the  central  point  of  life,  and 
Christ  the  centre  of  true  religion. — 
Religion,  faith,  Christianity,  ought  not, 
either  in  the  life  of  nations  or  of  indi- 
yiduals,  to  he  placed  in  a  comer  merely 
as  a  tolerated  piece  of  antiquity.** 

Ver.  4.  "The  Lord's  faithful  priests 
shall  dwell  heside  Him  and  be  with 
Christ  for  refreshment  and  revival  from 
the  strife  and  disquiet  of  men  among 
whom  they  are  scattered" — Lange. 

Ver.  7.  "Royalty  which  watches 
with  a  paternal  eye  for  the  puhlic 
weal  should  he  amply  supported  in 
return.  The  king  is  the  Lord's 
minister,  and,  next  to  a  lot  of  land 
for  the  Lord's  house,  his  support  is 
guaranteed  in  order  and  prior  to  tlie 
mrovision  for  ministers  of  religion. 
His  portion  was  adjacent  to  the  capital 
because  he  must  reside  contiguous  to 
the  court  and  the  bench  of  justice.** — 
Suidiffe. 

—  "  For  princes  to  have  their  do- 
mains is  not  unjust,  but  they  should 
not  seek  to  draw  everything  into  these 
domains.^ — Starke. 

Ver.  a  "To  protect^  but  not  to 
fleece. — Governments  ought  to  give 
good  heed  to  weights,  measures,  and 
coinage,  and  allow  no  inequalities  to 
creep  in. — Knowingly  to  pass  spurious 
coin  is  intentional  deceit^  and  so  is 
the  clipping  of  coins  in  order  to  lessen 
their  weight. — ^Unjust  gain  does  not 
profit  the  third  generation.  Lightly 
come,  lightly  gone." — Lange. 

Vers.9-1 2.  An  Ideal  Oommonwealth 
—1.  Where  God  is  acknowledged  and 
obeyed.  2.  Where  the  ruler  is  just 
and  powerful.  3.  Where  oppression 
and  violence  are  unknown.  4.  Where 
commerce  is  conducted  on  principles  of 
strictest  equity. 

—  "  1.  Princes  and  magistrates 
commonly  are  covetous  and  cruel.  2. 
Christianity  does  not  overthrow  but 
establish  magistracy.  3.  The  great 
thing  required  of  them  is  to  do  justice. 


executejudgment  and  justice,  do  wrong 
to  none,  neither  suffer  wrong  to  be  done. 
4.  Princes  are  not  to  rule  by  prero- 
gative in  an  arbitrary  way,  but  they 
themselves  are  tied  to  the  laws  of  God 
and  bound  by  them." — OreenhUL 

Ver.  9.  "Self-interest  and  avarice, 
that  have  hitherto  wrought  so  perni- 
ciously, shall  no  longer  prevail  among 
the  people  of  the  future,  but  rather 
righteousness,  a  spirit  of  willing  sac- 
rifice. " — Hengstenberg. 

—  "  How  happy  would  nations  be 
if  their  princes  ruled  in  justice,  not  for 
self-aggrandiBement,  but  for  the  glory 
of  God  and  as  holding  their  authority 
under  Christ;  and  how  happy  the 
people  so  governed  would  be,  living 
in  tranquillity,  prosperity,  and  true 
godliness  T' — FausseL 

—  "  This  is  the  voice  of  God  to  all 
the  rulers  of  the  earth — *Take  away 
your  exactions,  do  not  oppress  the 
people;  they  are  Mine.  Abolish  all 
oppressive  taxes.' " — A.  Clarke. 

Ver.  10.  Jnst  Balances— 1.  Bequi- 
site  as  between  man's  actions  and  his 
conscience.  2.  As  between  man  and 
man.  3.  As  between  man  and  God. 
4.  Will  be  used  in  the  final  judgment 

Ver.  13.  "  Even  the  small  gifts  of  the 
poor,  when  given  in  true  love,  ar»  an 
acceptable  offering  (Heb.  xiii.  16). — It 
is  reasonable  that  a  man  set  apart  a 
considerable  portion  of  his  income  for 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  support  of  true 
worship. — The  revenue  for  spiritual 
objects  is  most  defrauded." — Lange. 

Vers.  16-25.  A  Oood  King— 1.  Is 

interested  in  the  religious  welfare  of 
his  people  (ver.  16).  2.  Sustains  the 
ministers  of  the  truth  in  their  sacred 
work  (vers.  17-21).  3.  Makes  generous 
provision  fur  the  national  worship  of 
God  (virs.  17,  22-25). 

—  "  These  offerings  would  be  per- 
petual remembrancers  to  the  prince  of 
the  sacred  character  he  maintained  as 
the  head  of  such  a  people,  and  would 
supply  him  by  Divine  enactment  with 
what  was  needed  to  fulfil  this  part  of 

471 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  ZLT. 


HOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


his  office  without  resorting  to  arbitrary 
and  oppressive  measures.  Expressed 
more  generally,  it  was  a  symbol  of 
the  perfect  harmony  and  mutual  co- 
operation which  should  exist  in  such 
a  holy  communion  in  regard  to  the 
public  serrice  and  glory  of  Ood ;  with- 
out constraint  or  any  sort  of  jarring, 
the  several  classes  would  freely  and 
faithfully  do  their  parts.  They  were 
all  symbolical  of  the  spiritual  and 
eternal  truths  of  God's  Kingdom,  and 
may  be  variously  adjusted,  as  is  now 
done,  in  order  to  make  them  more 
distinctly  expressive  of  the  greater 
degree  of  holiness  and  purity  that  is 
in  future  times  to  distinguish  the 
people  and  service  of  God  over  all 
that  has  been  in  the  past** — FaW- 
hakfk 

Ver.  17.  When  Christ  on  the  cross 
consecrated  the  new  Temple,  He  can- 
celled our  sins. 

Vers.  18-25.  "This  order  of  solemn 
services  does  not  follow  exactly  the 
order  of  Moses,  of  Solomon,  or  of 
Ezra^  who,  on  the  return  from  cap- 
tivity, rearranged  the  festivals  on  the 
Mosaic  pattern.  Familiar  as  Ezekiel 
was  with  every  detail  of  the  Levitioal 
law,  this  deviation  can  scarcely  have 
been  accidental,  and  we  may  herein 
recognise  fresh  indications  that  the 
whole  vision  is  symbolical,  represen- 
tative of  the  times  when,  after  the 
oblation  of  the  one  Sacrifice,  recon- 
ciliation and  sanctification  were  effected 
for  man  througli  the  presence  of  Gk)d 
dwelling  in  the  midst  of  the  people." 
— Speakei^B  Commentary, 

Ver.  18.  "At  the  beginning  of  the 
new  year  of  grace,  and  with  the  newly 
rising  light,  the  Temple  was  again 
raised  up  or  opened,  and  the  true 
justification  and  sanctification  through 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  recognised  and 
proclaimed." — Lange. 

—  Let  us  bedn  our  years,  our 
months,  our  weeks,  and  days  with 
self-examination,  repentance,  faith, 
prayer,  and  devotedness  to  God,  and 
spend  them  in  like  manner. 
472 


Ver.  20.  "  Sin  as  error  and  seduction, 
and  error  and  seduction  as  sin. — We 
ought  to  attend  Divine  service  from 
beginning  to  end.** — Langs, 

Ver.  21.  "Every  solemnisation  of 
the  Lord's  Supper  a  fulfilled  paschal 
solemnity. — But  our  Passover  is  Christ 
— ^It  behoves  us  to  celebrate  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles  in  spirit  and  in  truth 
so  much  more  than  the  Jews  the  nearer 
we  approach  eternity. — Our  home  is 
above,  to  which  we  djTtw  nearer  every 
moment* — Lange, 

—  **  Hereafter  there  shall  be  a  new 
Passover  and  a  new  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles observed  in  Israel,  with  cere- 
monies vastly  exceeding  in  glory  those 
of  the  same  feasts  under  the  Old  Tes- 
tament The  antitypical,  perfect^  and 
eternal  realities  of  Christ's  manifeste<l 
Kingdom  shall  be  set  forth  with  obser- 
vances which,  though  literal,  are  not 
to  be  slavishly  bound  down  to  the 
letter  of  the  old  law,  but  which 
shall  bring  out  all  the  heretofore 
hidden  glories  and  excellences  of  that 
law  viewed  in  its  essential  spirit." — 
FaueseL 


Vers.  22-26.  "The  sin-oflFering  to  be 
sacrificed  first  of  all,  the  sins  of  prince 
and  people  being  transferred  to  it  as 
the  priest  confessed  them  with  his 
hands  on  the  head  of  the  victim,  to 
show  their  conviction  that  the  wrath 
of  Gbd  must  abide  on  them  till  trans- 
ferred to  another  who  should  die  in 
their  stead;  then  came  the  burnt- 
offerings,  to  show  that,  being  clear 
of  guilt  in  His  sight,  He  would 
accept  their  service  and  transfer  it 
with  themselves  into  His  heavenly 
glory  by  the  Spirit,  as  the  burnt- 
offerinsrs  were  by  the  fire  of  the  altar." 
—M'Farlan. 

Ver.  25.  "By  these  feasts  and  sac- 
rifices also  we  are  reminded  of  the 
spiritual  joy  the  saints  have  in  their 
communion  together  under  the  Gospel 
and  spiritual  sacrifices  they  offer  up  to 
God  by  Christ"— ffreenAW. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTW  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIBL 


OSAF.  nn. 


An  Imposing  Spectacle  op  Worship  in  the  Temple.    (Chap,  xlrl) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1. 
"  The  gate  of  the  inner  court  opened." 

The  inner  east  gate  of  the  Temple, 
otherwise  shut,  sliall  be  opened  on  the 
Sabbath  and  new  moon.  Tliis  rule 
does  not  interfere  with  chap.  xliv.  1. 
There  the  outer  gate  is  expressly  named. 
This  also  here  remains  shut,  as  indeed 
chap,  xlvii.  2  presupposes  that  it  is 
shut  once  for  all ;  otherwise  it  would 
have  been  opened  for  the  princeu* — 
HengstefJberg. 

Yer.  2.  <'The  prince  shall  stand  lyy 
the  post  of  the  gate  and  the  priests 
prepare  his  bumt-oifering."  The  King 
of  the  future  is  the  Messiah;  the 
princedom  shines  in  His  light,  in  the 
brightness  of  the  glory  that  entered 
through  the  east  gate,  which  in  view 
thereof  is  shut  for  ever  toward  the 
outside.  A  clear  distinction  is  drawn 
between  prince  and  priest,  to  avoid  in- 
terference with  each  other's  functions. 

Yer.  3.  "The  people  worship  ftt 
the  door  of  this  gate.''  The  people 
may  not  enter  the  inner  gate;  they 
worship  at  the  opened  door,  through 
which  they  catch  a  glimpse  of  the 
altar  of  burnt-offering,  which  the  prince 
sees  better  from  a  nearer  point  The 
upper  pavement  on  either  side  of  the 
eastern  gate  provided  room  for  such 
worshippers. 

Yers.  4,  5.  ''  The  burnt-offering  and 
the  meat-offering."  These  Sabbath 
offerings  are  larger  than  those  of  the 
Mosaic  law,  to  imply  that  the  worship 
of  God  is  to  be  conducted  by  the 
prince  and  people  in  a  more  muni- 
ficent spirit  of  self-sacrificing  liberality 
than  formerly.  Moses  prescribed  for 
the  burnt-offering  two  lambs,  and  for 
the  meat-offering  two  tenth  deals  of 
flour  mingled  with  oil.  "  As  he  shall 
be  able  to  give  " — literally,  ihe  gift  of 
his  hand.  As  he  shall  be  willing  to 
give,  the  amount  being  left  to  the  will 
of  the  giver.  The  same  meaning  in  the 
slightly  varied  expression  of  verse  7. 


Yer.  6.  "^The  new  moon."  No 
mention  is  made  here  of  the  blowing  of 
trumpets,  which  was  an  important  part 
of  the  New-Moon  Festival  (Num.  x.  10). 

Yer.  10.  '<  The  prince  in  the  midst 
of  them."  Not  isolated  as  at  otlier 
times,  but  joining  the  throng  of  wor- 
shippers at  their  head,  after  the  ex- 
ample of  David  (Ps.  xliu  4)  :  the 
highest  in  rank  animating  the  devo- 
tions of  the  rest  by  his  presence  and 
example. 

Yer.  12.  '*  The  prince  shall  prepare 
a  Toluntaxy  bumt-offering."  Not  only 
is  he  to  perform  ofilcial  acts  of  worship 
on  holy  days  and  feasts,  but  in  volun- 
tary offerings  daily  he  is  to  show  his  in- 
dividual zeal,  surpassing  all  his  people 
in  liberality,  and  so  setting  them  a 
princely  example. 

Yer.  13.  '<  Thou  shalt  prepare  f% 
every  morning.''  The  evening  sacrifice 
is  omitted,  because  the  seer  is  not  enu- 
merating the  sacrifices  of  the  law,  but 
selecting  a  few  of  them  with  a  parti- 
cular object  in  view. 

Yer.  16.  '<If  the  prince  give  a  gift 
unto  his  sons."  The  prince  was  to  be 
provided  with  possessions  of  his  own 
to  prevent  him  having  recourse  to  ex- 
actions from  his  subjects,  and  lest  in 
the  course  of  time  he  might  be  tempted 
to  such  exactions,  enactments  are  added 
to  prevent  the  alienation  of  the  prince's 
land.  The  mention  of  the  prince's  sons 
is  another  argument  against  Messiah 
being  meant  by  the  prince. 

Yer.  20.  ''  The  place  where  the 
priests  shall  boil  the  trespass  offer- 
ing." The  pasclial  lamb  was  to  be 
eaten  roasted.  The  flesh  of  the  other 
sacrifices  was  to  be  sodden  or  boiled 
(Lev.  vi.  28 ;  1  Sam.  ii.  13  ;  2  Chron. 
xxiv.  14),  The  meat-offering  (flour 
and  honey)  was  baked  (Lev.  ii.  4). 

Yer.  82.  ''There  were  courts  Joined.'* 
473 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THAP.  XLVi.  llOMIinTlC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIBI, 

Smaller  courts  joined  or  attached  to  between  them,  as  the  enactments  of 
the  walls  of  the  courts,  at  the  ooraers  vers.  16-18  were  to  secure  their  ro- 
of the  latter.  spective  rights  to  prince  and  people. 

All  this  implies  that  no  longer  are  the 

Yer.  24.    "  The  places  where  the  common  and  unclean  to  be  confounded 

ministers  boil  the   sacrifice   of  the  with  the  sacred  and  divine,  but  that  in 

people."    The  careful  provision  made  even  the  least  things,  as  eating  and 

to  keep  the  offerings  of  priests  and  drinking  the  glory  of  Ood  is  to  be  the 

people  separate  was  to  prevent  oolUsion  aim  (1  Cor.  x.  Sl> 


E0MILETIC8. 

Ths  Tbub  WoBsmp  of  JehoyiHi 

(Vers.  1-15.) 

L  VniteB  all  dasses  in  its  sacred  exercises  (vera  l-SY    Prince,  priests,  and 

people  become  one  in  the  act  of  worship ;  as  they  are  all  alike  dependent  on  God, 
so  they  all  bow  down  before  Him  and  adore  and  praise  His  goodness.  Bank, 
wealth,  display,  sink  for  the  time  being  into  insignificance;  it  is  simply  a 
congregation  of  human  souls,  with  common  wants  and  weaknesses,  craving  help 
and  blessing  from  a  common  Father.  The  monarch  is  never  so  ffreat  as  when 
he  bends  in  lowly  homage  at  the  feet  of  God.  It  is  a  Sublime  sight  to  see  king 
and  peasant  kneeling  together  in  prayer  and  adoration.  The  sincere  worship 
of  God  is  a  great  power  in  unifying  the  human  race ;  inequalities  are  forgotten, 
asperities  toned  down,  national  peculiarities  are  more  kindly  interpreted,  and  a 
universal  solvent  is  discovered  that  melts  and  blends  the  hearts  of  men  into  a 
spiritual  brotlierhood.  The  grand  bond  of  union  in  the  future  will  be  evidenced 
in  the  unceasing  worship  of  «fehovah. 

XL  Demands  generosity  in  giving  proportionate  to  ability  (vers.  4-12).    The 

offerings  mentioned  here  are  on  a  scale  of  liberality  exceeding  anything  known 
under  the  Mosaic  regimen.  The  prince  set  an  example  in  generous  giving, 
which  the  people  cheerfully  imitated.  Our  gifts  to  God's  cause  should  not  be 
more  nor  less  than  our  circumstances  justify.  It  is  a  ^eat  help  in  worship, 
and  an  important  feature  of  it,  to  come  to  God's  house  with  a  gift  in  our  hand. 
The  more  heartily  we  enter  into  the  spirit  of  worship  the  more  clearly  shall  we 
understand  and  practise  the  science  of  proportionate  giving.  A  missionary  was 
staying  with  a  wealthy  Christian  philanthropist,  whose  house  was  riclily  orna- 
mented with  paintings  and  sculpture,  and  was  eulogising  an  exquisite  marble 
statue  of  Silence — the  figure  of  a  boy  with  his  finger  to  his  lipa.  They  had 
known  each  other  from  boyhood,  and  were  free  and  confidential  in  conversation. 
^  Do  you  admire  that  statue  f "  asked  the  friend  of  the  missionary.  '*  I  never 
saw  anything  in  my  life  equal  to  it  for  grace,'*  replied  he.  '*  What  do  you 
think  I  gave  for  it t **  "I  cannot  imagine."  " I  gave  ninety  guineas.**  "  And 
what  did  you  give  at  the  collection  to-night  t  **  asked  the  missionary.     *'  Oh,  I 

give  five  pounds."     **Five  pounds  1"  said  the  missionary.    '*  Shame  on  you  I 
ere  you  give  ninety  guineas  for  a  marble  statue  of  Silence  and  five  pounds 
towards  sounding  the  Gospel  all  over  the  earth.     That  is  badly  laid  out  money.** 

III.  Is  to  be  constantly  rendered  (vers.  13-15).    The  burnt-offering  was 
presented  daily — "every  morning" — and  the  "meat-offering  continually  by  a 
perpetual  ordinance  unto  the  Lord."     The  dawn  of  every  day  should  be  wel- 
comed with  praver  and  praise.     The  day  is  well  bogun  when  it  is  b^gun  with 
474 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETJC  COMMENTARY:  SZBKISL. 


GRAF.  XLin. 


Gh)d;  and  the  religious  character  of  the  day  will  be  decided  by  the  way  in 
which  we  spend  its  first  hour.  It  is  said  that  tlie  spider  mends  its  broken 
web  every  morning,  and  always  begins  in  the  middle.  So  we  before  entering 
on  our  daily  calling  should  be  careful  to  repair  the  broken  webs  of  our  lives, 
beginning  each  morning  with  the  heart.  There  is  a  flower  called  the  Gummy 
Cystus,  which  blooms  every  morning,  unfolding  a  large,  beautiful,  snow-white 
flower.  By  its  example  this  flower  invites  the  soul  every  mornine  to  unfold 
the  blossom  of  a  holy  and  fervent  devotion.  Work  is  worship,  and  the  life  of 
each  day  should  be  one  glad  psalm  (Ps.  Iv.  17). 

LBSSON& — 1.  TempU'Work  is  worship.    2.  Worship  promotes  the  feOowship  ef 
hearts.    8.  The  soul  reaches  its  highest  good  in  the  toorMp  of  OotL 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Yen.  1-0.  SablMitli  FrivUeges— 1. 
Best  from  anxious  toil  (ver.  1).  2. 
An  open  Sanctuary  (ver.  1).  9.  An 
opportunity  for  all  classes  to  worship 
Ood  (vers.  2, 8).  4.  Should  be  char- 
acterised by  generous  offerings  (vers. 
4,6). 

Yers.  1,  2.  Boyalty  and  Worship. 

"1.  Princes  must  not  enter  into  the 
inner  courts  and  may  not  change  any- 
thing in  the  worship  of  Qod.  2.  They 
are  to  countenance  and  maintain  the 
worship  of  Qod.  8.  They  must  wor- 
ship the  Lord  publicly  on  Sabbath- 
days  and  on  special  occasions  as  well 
as  other  people.  4.  They  must  not  im- 
pede the  worship  of  G^od." — OreenhiU. 

Ver.  1.  "Work  does  not  hinder 
holiness,  but  furthers  it — 1.  By  pre- 
venting temptation.  2.  By  nourishing 
experience  of  God's  bounty  and  pro- 
vidence. 3.  By  filling  the  heart  with 
objects  of  heavenly  thought.  4.  By 
stirring  up  to  prayer  and  praise  for 
each  day's  merciea" — Trapp. 

—  "  There  is  a  time  for  prayer  and 
a  time  for  work.  On  work-days  we 
are  not  to  rest  as  on  the  Sabbath. 
He  who  does  not  work  ought  not  to 
eat,  whatever  his  pretences  are.  The 
door  to  the  Father,  the  source  of  all 
grace,  opens  itself  to  us  when  the 
gracious  light  of  the  love  of  Ood 
again  shines  forth,  as  it  often  does 
after  great  darkness.'' — Lange. 

Ver.  2.  '^The  chief  magistrate  was 


always  obliged  to  attend  the  pnblie 
worship  of  God,  as  well  as  the  priest, 
to  show  that  the  civil  and  ecclesias- 
tical States  were  both  under  the  same 
government  of  the  Lord,  and  that  no 
one  was  capable  of  being  prince  or 
priest  who  did  not  acknowledge  God 
in  all  his  way&  Ungodly  priests  and 
profligate  magistrates  are  a  curse  to 
any  land." — A.  Clarke. 

—  '*The  gate  shall  not  be  shut 
until  the  evening.  The  gate  is  open 
till  the  evening;  be  ready  therefore. 
When  the  Bridegroom  has  once  gone 
in,  the  gate  is  shut  and  fools  excluded 
(Matt  xrv.y—Trapp. 

Yen  8.  In  the  old  ooyenant  it  it 
said  '* before  the  Lord;"  in  the  new 
covenant  "  in  the  Lord." 

Vers.  4-15.  "  The  offerings  here  pre- 
scribed  are  generally  in  excess  of  those 
enjoined  by  the  law,  to  note  the  greater 
devotion  and  magnificence  under  the 
new  state  of  things.  Still,  as  of  old, 
there  was  a  certain  liberty  left  to  give 
in  such  proportion  as  the  will  might 
prompt  or  the  ability  permit,  and  the 
seer  contemplates  in  his  vision  of  better 
times  a  willing  king  and  a  people 
ready  to  give  of  their  substance  to 
the  utmost  of  their  meskus.**^  Speakei's 
Commentary. 

Ver.  4.  "The  Lord's  day  is  a  day 
in  which  especially  liberal  gifts  to  the 
Lord's  cause  are  the  appropriate  accom- 
paniments of  the  worship  of  the  Sanc- 

476 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OUP.  XLTL 


HOMILSTIV  COMMENTARY:  EIEKIRL. 


toary,  attesting  that  we  do  not  desire 
to  offer  to  oar  best  Benefactor  a  service 
which  costs  us  nothing  (2  Sam.  xxiv. 
24).  If  the  Israelite  was  not  to  appear 
before  the  Lord  at  the  Passover  empty 
^Ez.  xziil  15),  much  less  ought  the 
Christian,  who  enjoys  such  vastly 
superior  privileges,  to  offer  grudging 
and  stinted  gifts.'' — FauMseL 

Yers.  8-10.  Beligions  Decorum — 1. 

Should  be  rigidly  observed  by  king 
and  people.  2.  Regulates  the  manner 
of  entering  and  leaving  the  Sanctuary. 
3.  An  aid  in  the  public  worship  of 
Ood 

Ver,  8.  "  The  influence  of  love  shall 
extend  into  the  whole  world  from  the 
south  to  the  north,  so  that  they  from 
the  north  and  from  the  south  shall  go 
to  meet  one  another,  in  order  to  receive 
and  embrace  one  another  as  brethren. 
— ^No  one  should  go  out  of  the  church 
as  he  came  into  it ;  he  should  always 
take  home  with  him  something  for 
his  edification  (Eccles.  iv.  17;  Acts 
xvL  14)." — Lange, 

Vers.  9-15.  "A  beautiful  picture  of 
a  religious  people ;  the  highest  in  rank 
freely  mingling  with  the  mass  of  wor- 
shippers, and  inspiriting  their  devo- 
tions by  the  elevating  influence  of  his 
presence  and  example.  But  to  show 
that  his  worship  was  not  merely  to  be 
of  a  public  and  official  nature,  that  it 
should  spring  from  a  heart  truly  alive  to 
Divine  things,  the  prophet  passes  from 
those  holiday  services  to  the  voluntary 
offerings,  which  the  prince  was  also  to 
present  to  the  Lord.  The  proper  head 
of  a  religious  people,  he  was  to  surpass 
them  all  in  the  multitude  and  variety 
of  his  acts  of  homage  and  adoration." 
— FaMxjum, 

Ver.  9.  "1.  The  Lord  expects  not 
only  prince  and  priests  to  worship 
Him  in  a  public  way,  but  the  people 
alsa  2.  The  way  of  God's  servants 
is  a  straight  and  right-forth  way.  3. 
The  shortness  of  man's  life  is  here 


represented :  he  enters  the  world,  goef 
on  a  little  way,  and  then  goes  oat  of  it 
again." — QrunhxU. 

—  "  1.  Teaches  us  not  to  turn  our 
backs  upon  the  holy  ordinances.  3. 
To  make  straight  paths  for  our  feet^ 
and  be  making  daily  progress  towards 
perfection.  8.  That  our  memories  are 
frail,  and  here  we  shall  meet  with 
many  things  that  will  withdraw  us 
from  thinking  upon  Qod.  4.  That 
our  life  is  but  short — a  passage  from 
one  gate  to  another.  One  being  asked, 
'Wlat  is  lifet'  made  an  answer 
answerless,  for  he  presently  went  his 
way." — Trapp. 

Ver.  10.  The  Divine  Leader— 1.  Is 

ever  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  2. 
Guides  to  the  best  spheres  of  religious 
and  secular  work.  3.  Superintends 
and  overrules  all  the  changes  of  human 
life.  4.  Guarantees  all  needed  help 
in  the  Church  and  in  the  world. 

— ''  Prince  and  peasant  stand  on 
the  same  level  in  worshipping  before 
God,  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons ; 
yet  those  in  exalted  positions,  as 
princes  and  nobles,  exercise  a  power- 
ful influence  over  men,  and  may  accord- 
ingly be  the  instruments  of  great  good 
when  they  set  a  godly  example  before 
those  beneath  them." — FamseL 

Vers.  13-15.  Morning  Prayer.  1.  A 
duty  we  owe  to  God.  2.  Decides  the 
character  of  the  day's  experience.  8. 
Essential  to  religious  growth.  4 
Should  be  offered  in  an  earnest  and 
thankful  spirit. 

Yer.  15.  *' Grace  makes  the  heart 
free,  and  so  also  willing.  As  Good's 
grace  is  new  every  morning,  so  also 
ought  our  devotion  to  Him  to  be  re- 
newed every  morning.  Our  whole  life 
should  be  a  sacrifice  from  morning  to 
night,  and  next  morning  again.  Since 
Christ's  appearance  the  night  has  dis- 
appeared and  the  day  has  come ;  there 
are  now  only  morning  sacrifioes**— 


476 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MOMIIETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIeL  CflAP.iXVI. 


SOMILETIOS. 

JUBTICE  AND  OeNBROSIIT. 

(Vers.  16-18.) 

L  That  piroperty  rights  are  founded  in  universal  Justice.  **  The  earth  is  the 
Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof/'  and  it  is  He  who  gives  power  to  get  wealth. 
Property  acquired  by  industry,  merit,  and  by  just  regard  to  the  rights  of 
otliers  is  secured  by  recognised  law.  Tet  the  law  knows  nothing  of  absolute 
ownership:  man  has  but  a  life-interest  in  his  possessions,  for  we  brought 
nothing  into  this  world,  and  we  can  carry  nothing  out.  The  law  which  pro- 
tects property  also  limits  the  exercise  of  the  owner's  power  over  it 

IL  That  ample  poflsesfdons  afford  opportanity  for  acts  of  corresponding 
generosity.  Property  has  its  duties  as  well  as  its  rights.  Great  wealth  means 
great  responsibility;  it  furnishes  increased  facilities  for  doing  good.  Few  men 
give  in  proportion  to  their  means.  Liberality  is  measured  not  by  what  a  man 
gives,  but  by  what  he  has  left.  It  is  degrading  to  spend  one's  life  in  getting 
and  securing  what  we  get;  the  soul  is  shrivelled  into  a  miserly  selfishness. 
Giving  expands  our  human  sympathies  and  widens  a  man's  outlook.  There  is 
a  pleasure  in  accumulating,  but  there  is  a  nobler  pleasure  in  giving.  Gonsalvo, 
the  great  Spanish  captain,  used  to  say,  "Never  stint  your  hand.  There  is  no 
way  of  enjoying  one's  property  like  giving  it  away ; "  and  he  acted  up  to  his 
own  precept. 

IIL  That  it  is  neither  justice  nor  generosity  to  give  away  what  belongs 
to  another  (vers.  16-18).  The  prince  was  amply  provided  for  that  he  might 
be  generous  both  to  his  family  and  his  servants ;  but  he  was  prohibited  from 
indulging  generosity  by  seizing  the  possessions  of  others.  Some  are  generous 
enough  with  what  belongs  to  others.  It  is  mistaken  generosity ;  it  is  fraud 
and  robbery.  Justice  demands  that  a  man  must  be  generous  only  with  what 
is  his  own.  The  prince  gains  power  and  affection,  not  by  violating  but  by 
guarding  the  rights  of  his  subjects.  Property  is  sweetened  and  seasoned  by 
acts  of  judicious  liberality. 

Lessons. — 1.  Property  is  a  sacred  trust,  far  which  we  are  accourUable  to  Ood. 
2.  Property  acgvired  oy  oppression  is  unsafe,  3.  fFe  must  be  just  before  we  can  be 
genenms. 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yers.    16-18.    The    Dnty    of   the  and  settled  order  which  should  pervade 

Wealthy — 1.    To    provide    for   their  the  Kingdom  of  God  when  set  up  in 

own  family  (ver.  16).     2.  To  be  liberal  its  new  and  more  perfect  form.    Every- 

towards  their  dependents  (ver.   17).  thing  should  now  be  ruled  by  the 

3.  To  respect  the  laws  by  which  their  principles  of  eternal  rectitude^  and  no 
possessions  are  governed  (vers.  16, 17).  license  given,   no  occasion   even,  or 

4.  To  avoid  oppression  and  protect  the  pretext  afforded  for  the  usurpations 
rights  of  others  (ver.  18).  of  tyrannical  violence.* — Fairbaim. 

—  "It  is  an  exhibition,  by  an  indi- 
▼idoal  trait,  of  the  pure  righteousness         Yer,  17.  "  As  Alexander  the  Great^ 

477 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


oUAf.  xttt.  BOiltinTtC  COMMENTARY :  BZBKISL. 


who,  going  to  sulxlue  a  great  part  of  jects  to  enrich  their  servants  and  par»- 

the  habitable  world,  gave  away  to  his  sites," — Trofp. 

servants  almost  all  he  had,  and  when  —  ''  How  blessed  shall  that  state 

one  of  his  oflScers  asked  what  he  would  be  wherein  alike  the  temptation  from 

leave  for  himself,  he  answered,  *Hope."*  without  and  the  inclination  from  with- 

— Trapp.  in  to  do  wrong  shall  no  longer  have 

—  "  He  who  is  profuse  in  giving  is  place  I     This  is  the  model  towards 

easily  compelled  to  take  from  others  which  we  ought  to  aspire;  and  in  this 

what  belongs  to  them." — HengsUnberg,  respect  this  picture  of  the  future  Israel 

may  serve  as  the  ideal  according  to 

Yer.  18.  '*  111  accidents  attend  such  which,  in  the  spirit  if  not  in  the  letter, 

princes  as  affecting  to  be  absolute  in  our  State  politioe  should  be  frmmed.'*— 

power,  will  be  too  resolute  in  will  or  FamueL 
dissolute  in  life,  oppressing  their  sub- 

EOMILETIOa. 

Thi  Moral  Sionifioanob  of  Duly  Fo<m 

(Vers.  19-24.) 

L  That  the  snroly  of  dafly  food  is  a  conataat  evidence  of  the  DMne  eare. 

There  is  not  a  single  meal  for  which  we  are  not  indebted  to  the  Divine  thought- 
fulness  and  blessing.  Ood  smiles  upon  the  soil,  and  it  teems  with  plenty  for 
man  and  beaftt.  The  wants  of  the  tiniest  insect,  the  most  solitary  bird,  are 
not  overlooked.  Famine  is  man's  handiwork — the  result  of  sin,  of  indolence, 
or  lack  of  foresight,  and  is  sometimes  a  punishment  for  his  lavish  extravagance 
and  wrong-doing.  Gk>d  is  the  munificent  benefactor  and  food-provider  for  His 
countless  offspring  (Ps.  cxlv.  16). 

II.  That  all  the  possible  needs  of  man  are  satisfied  in  connection  with 
Divine  worship.  The  priests  who  ministered  before  the  Lord  apd  the  people 
who  worship[)ed  were  fed  with  the  sacrifices  they  offered  (vers.  20-25). 
Workers  for  God  are  promised  an  unfailing  supply  of  physical  food  (Ps.  zxxvii. 
8).  Their  work  is  not  to  suffer  by  undue  anxiety  concerning  temporal  things. 
He  who  provides  for  the  higher  needs  of  man  will  not  neglect  the  lower :  the 
greater  includes  the  lesser  (Matt.  vi.  33). 

III.  That  every  meal  should  be  enjoyed  in  a  spirit  of  devont  thankfulness. 

Every  meal  should  be  a  miniature  sacrament.  We  should  remember  that  (Sod 
always  sits  down  at  the  table  with  His  children ;  His  presence  makes  every 
meal  a  joyous  feast.  Eating  and  drinking  cannot  degenerate  into  sensual  excess 
when  we  remember  the  Provider  of  the  feast  is  present.  We  can  make  no 
adequate  return  for  His  goodness,  but  we  can  and  must  be  thankfuL  A  thank- 
ful heart  glorifies  God  (1  Tim.  iv.  4 ;  1  Oor.  z.  31 ;  Phil  iv.  6). 

Lessons. — 1.  The  law  of  supply  cmi  demand  is  Divinely  reaulated.  S.  There  U 
mlackio  those  who  serve  Ood.  3.  Theprayer  is  Divinely  taugM^^^Oimmtkiidag 
mer  daily  tread." 

OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Yer.  19.  '*  In  the  Kingdom  of  God,      the  full  sense  of  the  expression,  ev«rj« 
as  in  the  kingdom  of  nature,  and  in      thing  has  its  own  place.     Only  the 
478 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  EZSKIBL. 


OBAF.  XLVtL 


things  of  men  are  in  disorder  because 
they  are  sinners,  and  sin  is  disorder  in 
every  respect" — Lange, 

Yer.  20.  '*  Ministers  should  indite 
good  matters  in  their  hearts  for  the 
nse  of  the  people,  and  then  their 
tongues  shall  be  as  the  pen  of  a  ready 
writer.  They  shall  not  feed  their 
bearers  with  crude  and  undigested 
stuff,  but  such  as  is  well  boiled  and 
baked  with  the  fire  of  the  Holy  Spirit^ 
kindled  on  the  hearth  of  their  own 
hearts,  that  from  the  heart  they  may 
speak  to  the  heart** — Trapp. 

—  "  To  cook  is  to  bring  to  a  proper 
condition,  so  that  the  fooa  tastes  well 
and  is  agreeable;  so  ought  also  the 
truth  to  be  prepared. — Is  not  homi- 
letics  a  kind  of  sacred  cookery  f* — 
Lamge. 


Ver.  24.  Spiiitiial  Food— 1.  Should 
be  studiously  prepared  by  the  faithful 
minister.  2.  Should  be  partaken  of 
by  tlie  minister  himself.  3.  Should 
be  provided  for  the  worship  of  the 
Sanctuary.  4.  Is  essential  in  nourish- 
ing and  strengthening  the  soul. 

—  "In  God's  Church  there  shall 
always  be*  proyision  both  for  His 
ministers  and  people.  Those  who 
have  but  from  hand  to  mouth  have 
their  bread  hot,  as  it  were,  from 
God's  hand,  which  is  best  of  alL" — 
Trapp, 

—  "  Thus  in  one  part  of  the  house 
was  food  for  the  body,  and  in  another 
food  for  the  soul  In  this  view  heaven 
shall  greatly  exceed  earth,  for  there 
we  shall  not  need  the  bread  that  per> 
isheth.  He  that  eateth  of  the  tree  of 
life  shall  live  for  ever."— iSWcIt/tf. 


Thb  Vision  of  thb  Holy  Waters  Issuing  fboh  thb  Tkhplk 

(Chap,  xlvii) 


EXEGETICAL  NOTES.— Ver.  1. 
**  The  house  eastward."  The  house  is 
the  Temple  itselt ;  the  waters  issued 
from  beneath  the  south-east  comer  and 
flowed  along  the  south  of  the  porch 
which  projected  into  the  inner  court 

Ver.  2.  "There  ran  out  waters  on 
the  right  side."  '*  The  waters  flow  east- 
ward—  towards  the  Kedron,  thence 
towards  the  Jordan,  and  so  along  the 
Ghor  to  the  Dead  Sea.  The  main 
point  in  the  picture  is  the  rapid  aug- 
mentation from  a  petty  stream  into  a 
mighty  river,  not  by  the  influx  of  side- 
streams,  but  by  its  own  self-supply 
from  the  sacred  miraculous  source  in 
the  Temple." — Henderson, 

Ver.  3.  "  To  the  ankles."  This  may 
coincide  with  the  step  gained  in  the 
baptism  of  Cornelius  (Acts  z.)  and 
the  opening  of  the  Church  to  the 
Gentiles. 

Ver.  4.  "^  To  the  knees— loins."  The 
mission  of  St  Paul  and  Barnabas  (Acts 
xiii  1-4)  is  another  marked  epoch  in 


the  Church's  history;  and  the  time 
of  St  Paul's  martyrdom  denotes  an 
increase  in  the  Gentile  Church,  which 
corresponds  with  the  waters  reaching 
to  the  loins. 

Ver.    5.    "Waters   to   swim  In." 

''  When  under  Cons  tan  tine  the  Roman 
Empire  had  become  Christian,  the 
Church  may  be  contemplated  as  the 
full  river,  to  flow  on  throughout  time 
to  the  final  completion  of  Isaiah's  pro- 
phecy, xi.  ^"^Speaker's  Commentary. 

Ver.  7.  •*  Very  many  trees."  Trees 
were  the  natural  consequence  of  abund- 
ance of  water  (Ps.  i.  3 ;  Rev.  xxiL  2). 
The  luxuriant  fertility  of  the  ground 
on  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea  under 
the  fresh  springs  of  Engedi  well  illus- 
trate this. 

Ver.  8.  *'Into  the  sea,  the  waten 
shall  be  healed."  The  Dead  Sea, 
covering  the  guilty  cities,  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah.  In  its  bituminous  waters 
no  vegetable  or  animal  life  is  said  to 
be  found.    But  now  death  is  to  give 

479 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAF.  XLTIt 


BOMILETIC  COMMESTARY:  KZERIEU 


place  to  life  in  Judea  and  throughout 
the  world,  as  symbolised  by  the  heal- 
ing of  these  death-pervaded  waters 
(John  iy.  14 ;  Be  v.  zxii  %  3). 

Ver.  9.  "  WhithArsoerer  the  riven 
shall  come."  Heb.,  *'  the  two  rivers." 
This  new  river  is  to  come  into  the 
Dead  Sea  through  the  same  plain  as 
the  Jordan.  The  Jordan  always  flowed, 
but  now,  when  another  river  comes  in 
and  two  rivers  flow  into  the  sea,  the 
waters  shall  be  healed.  Hengstenberg 
interprets  the  two  rivers  as  meaning 
strong  river. 

Yer.  10.  Trom  Engedi  imto  En- 
eglalm."  Engedi,  now  Ain-Jidy,  west 
of  the  Dead  Sea,  David's  place  of 
refuge.  £n-eglaim,  on  the  confines  of 
Moaby  near  where  the  Jordan  enters 
the  Dead  Sea.  These  limits  comprise 
between  them  the  whole  Dead  Sea 
"  Their  fish  shall  be  according  to  their 
kinda"  ''Jerome  quotes  an  ancient 
theory  that  there  are  153  kinds  of 
fishes,  all  of  which  were  taken  by  the 
apostles  (John  zzi  11),  and  not  one 
remained  uncaptured,  signifying  that 
both  the  noble  and  base-born,  the  rich 
and  the  poor,  and  every  class,  are  being 
drawn  out  of  the  sea  of  the  world  to 
salvation." — Faussei, 

Yer.  11.  ''Not  be  healed;  given 
to  salt."  "Those  districts  in  which 
the  salt-deposits  proper  were  formerly 
found  shall  henceforth  be  waste  places. 
The  thought  is  this — Ouly  those  who 
bar  themselves  against  the  gracious 
stream  of  Divine  love  and  are  unwill- 
ing to  regain  health  are  henceforth 
to  be  given  over  to  the  curse,  continu- 
ing to  exist  as  monuments  thereof." — 
Edvemick  What  is  given  to  salt  is 
entirely  forfeited  to  death. 

Yer.  12.  *' Shall  grow  all  trees  for 
meat" — trees  of  life-giving  and  life- 
restoring  virtue  shall  bloom^  similar  in 
properties  to  and  exceeding  in  number 
the  tree  of  life  in  Eden  (Rev.  ii  7; 
xxii.  2,  14).  "  Whose  leaf  shall  not 
fade  " — expressing  not  only  the  un- 
failing character  of  the  heavenly  medi- 
cine of  the  tree  of  life,  but  also  that 
480 


the  graces  of  the  believer,  which  are  the 
leaves,  and  his  deeds,  which  are  the 
fruits  that  flow  from  those  graces,  are 
immortal  (Ps.  i.  3 ;  Jer.  xvii  8 ;  Mattw 
X.  42 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  58). 

Yer.  IS.  ''This  shall  be  the  border." 

Substantially  the  same  as  Num.  xxxiv.; 
there  the  description  begins  with  the 
south,  here  with  the  north.  "  JoB^h 
shall  have  two  portioui" — according 
to  the  original  promise  of  Jacob  to 
Joseph  (Gen.  xlviiL  5,  22;  Joshua 
xiv.  4.)  Joseph's  sons  were  ffiven  the 
birthright  forfeited  by  Beuben,  the 
first-born  (1  Ohron.  v.  6).  The  special 
mention  of  Joseph's  portions  was  to 
express  that  the  twelve  portions  were 
to  be  exclusive  of  Levi's  land,  which 
was  to  be  provided  out  of  the  oblation. 

Yer.  14.  "  One  as  well  as  another." 

Esekiel  is  speaking  of  tribes,  not  in- 
dividuals. Each  tribe  is  to  have  an 
equal  breadth  of  land  assigned  to  it 

Yer.  15.  "The  way  of  Hethlon  to 
Zedad" — on  the  north  boundary  of 
Canaan.  Names  of  places  in  the 
actual  northern  border  are  given,  not 
to  mark  exact  geographical  position, 
but  to  show  that  the  original  promise 
will  be  fulfilled. 

Yer.  16.  ''Hamath''— at  the  foot 
of  Mount  Hermon,  on  the  Orontes. 
"Berothah" — probably  the  same  as 
Berothai,  a  city  in  Syria  conquered 
by  David  (2  Sam.  viiL  8).  *<Hasar- 
hatticon'' — the  middle  Hazar,  to  distin« 
guish  it  from  Hazar-enan.  *'  Hauraa  ** 
—  Auranitis,  a  tract  in  Syria,  south 
of  Damascus. 

Yer.  la  ''Unto  the  east  sea*— 

the  Dead  Sea. 

Yer.  19.  "Prom  Tamar"— 4t  village 
near  the  southern  end  of  the  Dead 
Sea.  "To  Kadesh**— on  the  borders 
of  the  Wilderness  of  Sin,  where  the 
children  of  Israel  strove  with  Moses. 
"  The  river  to  the  great  sea.**  Lite- 
rally, "riverward  to  the  great  sea,"  By 
the  river  is  meant  a  torrent-stream 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMILSTia  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIEL.  ohap.  xltil 

entering  the  Mediterranean  near  Rhi-  of  the  laud.     Not  only  the  Israelites 

nocolura,  now  El  Arish.     This  is  the  by  descent,  but  those  who  join  them- 

river  of  Egypt  mentioned  in  Num.  selves  to  Israel  by  allegiance  to  the 

xxxiv.  5.  true  God,  shall  have  a  right  of  inherit- 
ance.    The   difference  which  existed 

Yer.   22.   ''And  to  the  strangen  under  the  old  covenant  between  Jew 

that  Bojonm  among  yon.*'    Here  is  and  Gkntile  is  now  at  last  done  away 

quite  a  new  feature  in  the  distribution  (Bom.  x.  12 ;  OaL  iii  28 ;  Col.  iii.  11). 


H0MILETIC8. 

Thb  Biyxb  of  thb  Water  of  LiRi 

(Vera.  1-12.) 

L  Has  ItB  source  in  the  Temple  of  Cbd  (ver.  1,  2).  Not  from  the  Temple 
as  such,  but  from  the  presence  and  activity  of  Him  whose  glory  filled  the 
Temple.  All  the  spiritual  blessings  that  now  eniich  the  world  appear  to  issue 
from  the  Church  of  God,  and  so  they  do;  but  not  from  the  Gnurch  as  an 
organisation,  but  from  Him  who  gives  life,  form,  and  stability  to  the  organisa- 
tion itself.  This  important  fact  is  liable  to  be  overlooked.  Ezekiel  had  gone 
round  the  Temple  repeatedly,  prospecting,  measuring,  admiring,  until  his  soul 
was  filled  with  amazement  at  its  colossal  proportions  and  gorgeous  ritual ;  but 
not  till  it  was  specially  revealed  to  him  did  he  see  the  waters  issuing  from 
under  the  threshold  of  the  house,  and  became  aware  of  their  mysterious  and 
Divine  source.  So  we  are  apt  to  be  so  absorbed  in  contemplating  the  outward 
structure  and  vast  movements  of  the  Church  as  to  lose  sight  for  the  time  of 
the  Divine  power  that  gives  vitality  and  meaning  to  the  whole.  It  is  a  blessed 
moment  for  us  when  we  are  brought  by  the  Spirit  to  '^  the  door  of  the  house '' 
and  shown  the  secret  of  all  this  mighty  energy.  It  is  our  wisdom  frequently 
to  wait  in  meditation  and  prayer  at  the  threshold  of  God's  house,  the  fountain- 
head  of  all  blessing,  until  our  souls  are  penetrated  with  the  thought  that  the 
excellency  of  the  power  in  Temple-work  is  not  of  man,  but  of  God.  Then  we 
can  say  with  David,  "  All  my  springs  are  in  Thee  "  (Ps.  Ixxxvil  7). 

IL  Widens  and  deepens  in  its  progressive  outflow  (vers.  3-5).  Beginning 
as  a  small  rill  of  water  at  the  Temple  threshold,  the  river,  within  a  little  more 
than  a  mile's  space,  rapidly  widens  and  deepens  so  as  to  be  unfordable,  and 
this  not  by  the  aid  of  contributary  streams,  but  from  itself.  Here  we  see  the 
miraculous  character  of  the  river  and  its  evident  ideal  teaching,  as  a  stream 
rising  at  the  top  of  a  mountain,  feeding  itself  and  so  quickly  augmenting, 
is  at  variance  with  all  known  natural  lawa  It  is  a  type  of  the  Biver  of  the 
Water  of  Life,  flowing  in  Gospel  channels,  and  spreading  and  deepening  among 
the  nations  of  the  earth.  What  a  suggestive  study  to  trace  the  course  of  this 
river  in  its  steady  advances  through  the  world  I  In  many  places  the  wilder- 
ness has  been  transformed  into  a  garden  of  Eden.  Our  knowledge  of  Divine 
truth,  like  the  waters  of  the  Sanctuary,  is  shallow  at  flrst,  but  should  grow  in 
depth  and  preciousness  with  the  years.  So  in  our  experience  of  spiritual 
things :  there  should  be  constant  progress  from  grace  to  grace. 

IIL  Imparts  fertility  and  blessing  wherever  it  flows  (vers.  8-12).  This 
mystic  river  produced  extraordinary  eflfects.  Wherever  it  circulated  vegetation 
was  quickened,  trees  remarkable  for  fruitfulness  and  medicinal  properties 
sprang  up  on  its  banks,  and  the  bituminous  waters  of  the  Dead  Sea,  cared  ol 

Sh  481 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ORAP.  XLTXL  UOMILBTIC  COMMENTARY:  BIEEIEL. 


their  deadly  ]>oi8on,  swarmed  with  fish.  Barrenness  gives  place  to  fertility 
and  abundance,  and  the  riyer-course  is  a  scene  of  animation  and  increasing 
activity.  So  the  Gospel — the  River  of  the  Water  of  Life — brings  life,  health, 
beauty,  and  fruitfulness  wherever  it  comes.  Dead  souls  are  quickened  into 
life,  diseased  souls  healed,  feeble  souls  strengthened,  and  the  spiritual  life  of 
believers  is  made  more  intense  and  productive.  Like  the  fabled  goddess  whose 
pathway  was  beautified  with  flowers  which  sprang  up  wherever  she  set  her 
feet,  so  the  course  of  the  Gospel  river  may  be  distinctly  traced  by  the  flowers 
and  fruits  of  grace  that  adorn  and  enrich  its  banks. 

Lessons. — L  Christ  is  the  sowee  and  His  Word  the  ehamisl  of  soulrefreshing 
life.  2.  Wherever  the  Gof?pd  spreads  it  produces  life  and  fruitftdnesL  8.  True 
religion  is  progressive^  andflaurishes  best  by  disseminatini/  itself. 

Ths  Vision  of  thb  Watib& 

(Ver.  9.) 

We  take  the  holy  waters  to  be  the  emblems  of  the  (}ospel — ^that  wondrous 
scheme  of  mercy,  perfected  by  the  atonement  of  Christ,  made  vital  by  the 
everlasting  Spirit  and  adapted  to  the  salvation  of  the  world 

L  The  source  of  the  holy  waters.  While  through  the  Temple  come  to  us 
the  tidings  of  our  peace,  the  blessing  itself  does  not  originate  there,  but  is 
conveyed  to  it  from  a  source  invisible  and  afar.  In  God's  great  provision  for 
the  restoration  of  the  fallen  race  there  are  both  instrumental  and  efficient 
agencies.  He  has  appointed  means,  and  a  Divine  and  perpetual  resident  to 
infuse  those  means  with  life.  They  who  love  the  river  of  the  Temple  are  the 
likeliest,  walking  on  its  banks,  to  find  its  source  issuing  from  the  throne. 
While  we  thus  appreciate  the  uses  of  the  Temple  as  an  instrumentality  of 
blessing,  and  rejoice  in  the  waters  as  they  flow,  we  must  remember  always 
that  they  issue  from  the  foundation  of  the  house  and  have  their  springs  in 
the  everlasting  hills;  in  other  words,  that  Qod  is  the  one  source  of  life. 
Though  the  Saviour  has  ascended  up  on  high.  He  has  shed  forth  His  Spirit. 
That  Spirit  lives  on  earth,  the  perpetuator  of  the  (Gospel  impression,  the 
inspirer  of  all  thought  that  is  holy,  the  great  and  living  agent  in  the  con- 
version  of  mankind.  Men  say  the  truth  is  power,  but  it  is  not^  alone.  It  is 
feeble  as  the  pliant  osier  or  the  bruised  reed  against  the  malignant  enmity  of 
evil  But  let  the  Spirit  animate  it,  and  it  shall  overcome  all  hostility,  and  be 
brave  and  mighty  to  prevail. 

II.  The'  progress  of  the  holy  waters.  Ton  observe  that  in  the  context  the 
progress  of  these  waters  is  said  to  have  been  gradual  and  constant.  The 
prophet  saw  them  first  reaching  to  the  ankles,  then  to  the  knees,  then  to  the 
loins,  and  then  they  became  a  river  too  deep  to  be  forded,  even  a  river  to  swim 
in.  There  was  no  ceasing  in  the  flow,  there  was  no  ebbing  of  the  waters ;  they 
flowed  gradually  and  constantly  in  the  ever-deepening  stream.  And  this  is 
only  a  description  of  the  progress  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  Small  and  feeble  in 
its  beginnings — those  trembling  but  earnest  fishermen,  its  earliest  preachers — 
with  wealth  and  rank  and  patronage  and  power  all  arrayed  against  its  progress 
— with  Caesars  conspiring  to  strangle  it,  and  armies  marched  out  against  its 
fugitive  sons — how  marvellous  was  its  triumph  I  And  though  after  the  esta- 
blishment of  Christianity  there  was  a  seeming  eclipse  of  faith,  and  corruptions 
blemished  the  comeliness  of  tho  bride  of  Qhnst^  tiie  ^adual  pro^press  among 
483 


Digitized  by 


Google 


irOMTLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL,  ohaf.  xtTlt 


the  nations  did  not  cease.  One  after  another  they  received  her  teachings  and 
submitted  to  her  sway.  Insensibly  she  moulded  the  institutions  of  society  and 
stamped  upon  them  her  own  image.  Sanguinary  codes  were  relaxed ;  unholy 
traffic  terminated  ;  pruelty  had  her  arm  paralysed  and  her  sword  blunted ; 
fraud  and  lust  and  drunkenness  became  no  longer  thines  of  glorying,  but  of 
shame ;  there  was  a  gradual  uplifting  in  the  moral  health,  as  if  there  flowed 
around  the  people  the  bracing  air-waves  of  a  purer  atmosphere;  and  men 
wondered  whence  the  healing  came.  The  river  had  done  it  all :  flowing  on, 
now  through  the  darkling  brake,  and  now  over  the  open  plain  ;  now  fertilising 
the  swards  upon  its  banks ;  now  rejoicing  in  the  depth  of  its  own  channel — 
imperceptible  almost  in  the  increasing  volume  of  its  waters  to  those  who  con* 
tinually  beheld  it,  and  yet,  to  those  that  gased  only  at  intervals,  seemed  to  have 
both  widened  and  deepened  every  day.  And  it  is  rolling  on  stilL  Perhaps 
there  never  was  an  age  of  such  quickened  religious  activity  as  the  one  in  which 
we  are  privileged  to  live.  There  are  two  thoughts  suggested  by  this  gradual 
and  constant  progress  of  the  Qospel.  The  fii-st  encourages  our  faith ;  the  second 
reminds  as  of  our  responsibility.  If  we  believe,  with  all  the  firmness  of  a 
settled  conviction,  that  the  Oospel  is  of  €k>d,  we  may  rest  in  the  assurance 
that  it  must  and  will  prevail ;  and  this  hearty  faith  in  its  triumphant  destiny 
will  save  us  from  the  extremes  of  feeling — from  undue  elation  in  seasons  of 
unusual  promise,  and  from  unusual  depression  in  seasons  of  peculiar  languor. 
The  other  thought  addresses  itself  solemnly  to  ourselves.  It  is  quite  impossible 
for  us  to  live  in  times  like  ours,  when  not  only  the  ordinary  religious  privileges 
exist  and  are  enjoyed,  but  when  there  is  so  much  of  special  unction  with  the 
Word,  and  such  large  and  manifest  workings  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  without  entail- 
ing an  added  amount  of  responsibility.  Beware  of  attributing  the  Holy  Spirit's 
work  to  evil  agency.  That  is  marvellously  like  the  sin  that  has  no  forgivenesSi 
Beware  of  setting  yourselves  in  an  attitude  of  resistance  to  good  influences. 
The  waters  wear  the  stones,  but  do  not  change  their  nature.  Beware  of  delay- 
ing  yourselves  into  hardness  of  heart.  The  waters  petrify  sometimes,  and  there 
are  some  moral  petrifactions,  alas  I  which  cannot  be  broken  even  by  the  hammer 
of  the  Word. 

in.  The  efficacy  of  the  holy  waters.  How  complete  and  how  effectual  the 
healing  1  *'  Everything  shall  live  whither  the  river  cometh."  And  this  is  true  of 
the  Oospel.  Not  only  can  it  reach  every  man,  but  each  part  of  every  man.  Life 
for  the  understanding,  that  it  may  no  longer  be  smitten  by  error — life  for  the 
imagination,  that  its  strange  fires  may  be  quenched  and  a  purer  flame  be  kindled 
in  their  stead — life  for  the  memory,  that  it  may  no  longer  be  haunted  by  the 
wraiths  of  ghostly  sins — life  for  the  affections,  that  they  may  revel  in  a  pure 
attachment  which  is  not  idolatry,  ever  increasing  and  yet  ever  satisfied — ^life 
for  the  whole  nature,  that  it  may  not  be  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins — life  for  the 
destiny,  that  it  may  not  even  be  sullied  by  the  shadow  of  death,  but  exult  in  an 
ever-brightening  inheritance  through  an  eternal  day.  It  shall  flow  into  the 
desert^  and  love  to  God  shall  be  implanted  where  was  formerly  enmity,  and  the 
whole  nature  shall  be  turned  about  to  serve  Him.  It  shall  flow  into  the  se€^ 
and  though  the  proud  waves  shall  resist  its  entrance,  it  shall  overcome  their 
frantic  waters  and  heal  them  of  their  plague.  Some  of  you  have  seen,  as  I 
have,  a  very  fine  illustration  of  this,  so  far  as  earthly  things  can  illustrate 
heavenly  in  nature's  bounteous  kingdom.  I  stood  last  summer  at  the  point  of 
confluence,  near  the  fair  city  of  Geneva,  where  two  great  rivers  meet  but  do 
not  mingle.  Here  the  Rhone,  "  the  arrowy  Rhone,"  rapid  and  beautiful,  pours 
on,  its  waters  of  that  heavenly  blue  which  it  is  almost  worth  a  pilgrimage  tr  see ; 
there  the  Arve,  turbid  and  muddy,  partly  from  the  glaciers  from  which  it  is  so 
lar)];ely  fed,  and  partly  from  the  clayey  soil  which  it  upheaves  in  its  impetuous* 

493 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OHAP.  XLTn. 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL, 


path,  brawls  hoarsely  in  its  passionate  course  ^  and  for  a  lone  distance  beyond 
the  point  of  junction  they  roll  side  by  side  with  no  barrier  between  them  bat 
their  own  innate  repulsions,  each  making  now  and  then  an  encroachment  upon 
the  other,  but  beaten  back  again  into  its  own  domain.  Like  mighty  rival  forces 
of  good  and  evil  do  they  seem,  and  for  a  long  time  the  issue  is  doubtful.  But 
far  down  the  long  valley,  if  you  look  again,  you  find  that  the  frantic  Arve  is 
mastered,  and  the  Khone  has  coloured  the  entire  surface  of  the  stream  with  its 
own  emblematic  and  beautiful  blue.  I  thought^  as  I  gazed  upon  it^  that  it 
symbolised  the  long-protracted  conflict  between  truth  aud  error ;  but  in  medi- 
tating upon  the  flowing  of  these  healing  waters,  and  reading  that  they  shall 
flow  into  the  sea  and  heal  it,  the  vision  of  the  scene  rose  up  before  me,  fresh 
and  Tiyid  as  the  facts  of  yesterday.* — W.  Morley  Funahon,  DM. 


OERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 


Vers.  1-12.  "The  eflfect  of  the 
establishment  of  the  mountain  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord  on  the  top  of  moun- 
tains, or  of  Christianity  generally,  is  a 
great  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
signified  oy  these  waters.  As  they 
were  not  to  be  seen  before  the  Lsiio  of 
the  man  with  the  measuring-line,  they 
are  to  accompany  the  preaching  of  the 
Word  by  the  ministers  of  Christ,  and 
the  operations  of  the  Spirit  shall  be- 
come the  more  admirable  and  profound 
as  they  proceed  in  their  spread  over 
all  the  world,  as  is  signified  by  their 
increasing  depth.  By  theiu  shall  the 
evil  influences  of  the  world  be  healed 
and  everlasting  life  conveyed  to  all 
that  will  receive  them.  Still,  some 
shall  harden  even  then  under  its  in- 
fluence, and  become  more  rank  and 
nauseous  in  sin  than  before,  as  is 
signified    by   the   unhealed    bays.** — 


M'Farlan. 

—  "  Issuing  as  this  stream  does  from 
the  threshold  of  the  Temple,  from  the 
very  foot  of  the  throne  of  God,  it  must 
be,  like  all  the  special  manifestations  of 
God  to  His  Ciiurch,  itself  of  a  spiritual 
nature,  and  only  in  its  effects  productive 
of  outward  mat<^rial  good.  It  is  the 
efflux  of  that  infinite  fulness  of  life 
and  blessing  which  is  treasured  up  in 
His  spiritual  Temple,  and  continually 
pours  itself  forth  as  the  operations  of 
His  grace  proceed  among  men.  It  is 
emphatically  a  river  of  life.  Wherever 
it  is  experienced,  the  barren  soil  of 
uatnre  fructifies,  the  dead  live  again, 
the  soul  is  replenished  with  joy  and 
484 


gladness.  Instead  of  spending  itself, 
like  the  streams  of  nature,  as  it  ad- 
vances through  the  moral  deserts  of 
the  world,  it  multiplies  and  grows, 
until  corruption  is  changed  into  in- 
corruption,  mortality  is  swallowed  up 
of  life,  and  the  earth,  which  Qod  had 
cursed  for  man's  sin,  is  transformed 
into  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light." — Fairbaim, 

Vers.  1-5.  |*  Ezekiel's  Temple,  with 
its  ritual,  ministers,  and  congregation, 
symbolises  the  presence  of  Jehovah  in 
the  midst  of  a  loyal  people.  The  waters 
are  the  blessings  which  flow  from  this 
source  to  animate  and  refresh  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth.  The  deepen- 
ing of  the  waters  in  their  course  shows 
the  continual  deepening  of  spiritual  life 
and  multiplication  of  spiritual  blessings 
in  the  growth  of  the  Kingdom  of  God." 
—Specucef'a  Commentary. 

—  "  In  the  Kingdom  of  God  things 
proceed  from  little  to  great :  in  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world  often  from 
great  to  little.  Satan  begins  his  things 
with  lofty  impetuosity,  but  finally  they 
end  in  nothing  and  everything  comes 
to  disgrace." — Hafenreffer. 

Yer.  1,  2.  The  Progress  of  Tmth. 

''  1.  As  it  is  Christ  who  makes  known 
the  things  of  the  Temple,  so  He  makes 
known  some  at  one  time,  some  at 
another.  2.  The  waters  of  the  Gospel, 
the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Spirit,  flow 
from  Zion.  3.  These  spiritual  waters, 
although  they  flow  from  Zion,  Christ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


OHAF.  XLVn. 


18  the  fountain  and  original  of  them. 
4.  Sanctuary  waters  are  not  common 
but  choice  mercies  ;  they  are  right- 
side  mercies,  south-side  blessings," — 
QreenkUl, 

Yer.  1.  The  Gradnalnesfl  of  Divine 
Bevelation — 1.  Accommodated  to  our 
imperfect  faculties.  2.  Suited  to  our 
varying  circumstances.  3.  Educative 
in  its  process.  4.  Enables  us  more 
clearly  to  grasp  the  meaning  and 
grandeur  of  the  truths  unfolded. 

Vers.  3-9.  "  The  Atheistic  Idea.  It 
is  aflSrmed  that  Christianity  is  waning 
because  of  tlie  advancement  of  science. 
The  business  of  the  scientist  is  with 
matter.  There  is  something  back  of 
matter — a  force  beneath  life.  No 
painter,  there  is  no  picture :  no  God, 
there  is  no  nature.  What  doctrine 
has  science  demolished  ?  1.  Has  science 
done  away  with  the  Incarnation  f  The 
scientist  knows  that  the  sum  of  the 
history  of  nature  is  made  up  by  the 
entrances  at  epochs  of  higher  types  of 
being.  Are  not  all  these  appearances 
prophecies  of  the  grand  entrance  of 
the  Higher  Being  ]  2.  Has  science  done 
away  with  the  Atonement  f  The  law 
everywhere  manifest  is  the  depend- 
ence of  one  creature  on  another.  3- 
Has  science  done  away  with  sin  ?  Sin 
is  as  much  a  fact,  a  phenomenon  of 
human  life,  as  the  circulation  of  the 
blood.  4  fFhere  is  Christianity  wan- 
ing? In  Germany  t  Compare  this 
century  with  the  last.  A  short  time 
ago  thousands  of  students  flocked  to  the 
great  universities  to  hear  the  doctrines 
of  Fichte,  Hegel,  Kant,  and  the  Ration- 
alists of  Tubingen.  Now  scarcely  a 
class  of  twenty  can  be  collected  for 
that  purpose.  In  France?  Compare 
this  century  with  the  times  when  a 
deluge  of  blood  followed  the  blas- 
phemies of  Rousseau,  D'Alembert, 
Diderot,  and  Voltaire.  In  England? 
Compare  the  Britain  of  to-day  with 
the  Britain  of  yesterday,  when  Chubb, 
Hume,  and  Bolingbroke  could  sneer 
at  the  story  of  the  Cross — when  the 
clergy  were  immoral.  In  America? 
Compare  it  with  the  time  when  the 


students  in  our  colleges  called  them- 
selves by  the  names  of  leading  French 
atheists.  Where  will  you  find  >uch  a 
college  to-day  ?  5.  JFhat  is  ilie  motive- 
potffer  of  science  f  Compare  the  ages  of 
faith  and  the  ages  of  scepticism  and 
see  the  results.  How  high  has  science 
lifted  the  shadows  that  rest  on  the 
human  heart?  It  is  only  this  blessed 
religion,  this  radiance  from  the  throne 
of  God,  that  can  lighten  the  gloom." — 
Homiletic  Monthly. 

Vers.  3-5.  The  Temple-River  emble- 
matic of  Religion  in  the  different 
stages  of  Human  Life.  1.  Childhood, 
"Tiie  waters  were  to  the  ankles" 
(ver.  3).  Religion  may  be  shallow 
and  yet  genuine.  2.  Youth.  "The 
waters  were  to  the  knees"  (ver.  4). 
Still  exposed  to  much  of  the  world 
and  its  attractions,  yet  standing  in 
the  truth.  3.  Manhood.  "  The  waters 
were  to  the  loins"  (ver.  4).  In  the 
midway  of  life's  struggle,  but  deepen- 
ing in  piety.  4.  Old  age,  "Waters 
to  swim  in,  a  river  that  could  not  be 
passed  over**  (ver.  5).  A  more  pro- 
longed and  profound  study  of  the 
truth  revealing  its  unfathomable  vast- 
ness  and  prompting  the  strongest 
veteran-swimmer  to  exclaim,  "  Oh,  the 
depth  of  the  riches  I  **  (Eom.  xi.  33). 

—  "  Holy  Scripture  and  its  revela- 
tions also  resemble  these  sacred  waters, 
in  that  whosoever  searches  into  them 
will  find  some  parts  intelligible  to  all 
who  sincerely  desire  to  know  them. 
Other  parts  require  a  deeper  investi- 
gation; others  a  deeper  still;  and  others 
are  beyond  our  depth,  and  in  respect 
to  these,  we  can  only  adore  the  infini- 
tude of  God's  unsearchable  wisdom, 
and  humbly  wait  for  His  own  time  of 
revealing  their  now  hidden  meaning. 
The  growth  of  grace  in  the  individual 
soul,  similarly,  is  a  progressive  work, 
beginning  with  but  a  small  stream 
from  the  fountain-head,  but  sure  to  go 
on  increasing  until  it  is  expanded  into 
the  boundless  and  unfathomable  river 
of  heavenly  pleasures  (Ps.  xzxvi.  8).** 
— Fausset. 

—  "  This  vision  may  be  applied — 1. 
To  the  gradual  discoveries  of  the  plan  of 

485 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MOMTLETXO  OOMMtNTART:  EXEKIML 


mhoAon.  (1.)  In  the  patriarobai  ages. 
(2.)  Ill  the  giving  of  the  Law.  (3.)  In 
the  ministry  of  John  the  Baptist.  (4.) 
In  tlie  full  manifestation  of  Christ  by 
the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  To  the  growth  of 
a  believer  in  the  grace  and  knowledge  of 
God.  (1.)  The  seed  of  the  Kingdom. 
(2.)  The  blade  from  that  seed.  (3.) 
The  ear  out  of  that  blade.  (4.)  The 
full  com  in  that  ear.  3.  To  the  dis- 
coveries a  penitmt  believer  receives  of  the 
mercy  of  Ood  in  his  salvation.  (I.)  A 
little  child,  born  of  God,  he  begins  to 
taste  and  feed  on  the  heavenly  food. 
(2.)  He  grows  up  and  increases  in 
stature  and  strength,  and  becomes  a 
young  man.  (3.)  He  becomes  matured 
in  the  Divine  lift*,  and  has  his  spiritnal 
senses  exercised  so  as  to  become  a 
father  in  Christ.  4.  To  the  progress  of 
Christianity,  (1.)  A  few  poor  fisher- 
men. (2.)  Afterwards  many  Jews. 
(3.)  Then  the  Gentiles  of  Asia  Minor 
and  Greece.  (4.)  The  continent  and 
isles  of  Europe,  (6.)  Now  spreading 
through  Africa,  Asia,  and  America, 
at  present  these  waters  are  no  longer 
a  river,  but  an  immense  sea;  and 
the  Gospel-fishers  are  daily  bringing 
multitudes  of  souls  to  God.*' — A, 
Clarke. 

—  The  Spread  of  the  Gospel  **  1. 
Christ  is  the  archiiect  and  measurer 
of  all  things  belon<;ing  to  His  Church. 
2.  The  motion  of  Sanctuary  waters  is 
not  accidental,  but  according  to  Divine 
appointment  3.  The  doctrine  of  the 
Gospel  is  never  rightly  understood 
unless  taught  by  Christ.  4.  The  doc- 
trine of  the  Gospel,  the  conversion  of 
sinners,  and  the  graces  of  the  Spirit 
proceed  gradually.  5.  The  Gospel  has 
depths  and  mysteries  no  human  under- 
standing can  comprehend.  6.  Sanc- 
tuary waters  afford  comfort  to  the 
saints  in  their  deepest  distresses." — 
Oreenhill. 

Ver.  5.  "  There  was  no  such  natural 
course  of  waters  in  the  place,  nor  is  it 
imaginable  that  in  three  miles  or  there- 
abouts the  waters  should  so  rise ;  but 
it  is  emblematical,  hath  a  deep  mys- 
terious meaning,  and  includes  spiritual 
things  and  their  wonderful  growth 
4S6 


from  small  beginnings,  and  these  from 
the  Temple.''— Pool 

—  "  This  marks  the  rich  and  oyer- 
flowing  grace  which  God  designs  to 
shed  down  on  the  earth  in  the  Gospel 
age  and  in  the  glory  of  the  latter  day ; 
and  it  apprises  believers  that  they 
should  not  remain  in  a  loitering  state, 
trampling  the  shallow  watei's  of  grace, 
but  go  on  to  a  deeper  baptism  of  the 
Spirit  till  they  can  swim  in  the  abound* 
ing  streams." — Sutcliffe. 

—  '*  Representing  the  fathomless 
depth  of  the  Scriptures,  which  is  such 
that  we  may  well  do  by  it  as  the 
Romans  did  by  a  lake,  the  depth 
whereof  they  could  not  sound,  and 
dedicated  it  to  Victory:  also  the  abund- 
ance of  spiritual  graces  in  the  Church, 
the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  all 
knowledge,  and  the  over- abounding 
goodness  of  God.  Speaking  of  this 
subject,  Chrysostom  said  :  '  I  am  like  a 
man  digging  in  a  deep  spring ;  I  stand 
here,  and  the  water  rises  upon  me ;  I 
stand  there,  and  still  the  water  rises 
upon  me.  It  is  indeed  a  sea  that  has 
neither  bank  nor  bottom.' " — Trapp. 

Ver.  6.  "  Hast  thou  seen  this  1 "  A 
Suggestive  Question— 1.  As  asked  by 
the  well-informed.  He  knows  more 
than  I  do,  or  why  thd  question  1  2. 
As  addressed  to  the  anxious  inquirer. 
This  may  meet  my  case.  3.  As  ad- 
dressed to  the  thoughtless  and  indifferent 
There  is  a  world  of  knowledge  hitherto 
closed  to  him.  4.  Indicates  there  is 
much  we  miss  for  want  of  a  keener  m- 
sight  into  truth. 

Vers.  7-10.  Fishers  in  Gospel  Waters. 

**  1.  The  waters  of  tiie  Gospel  have 
their  own  course.  2.  That  people 
without  the  Oospel  are  like  the  Dead 
Sea  (ver.  8).  3.  The  waters  of  the 
Sanctuary  have  curing  and  quickening 
virtue  (vers.  8,  9).  4.  The  preachers 
of  the  Gospel  are  fishers  (ver.  10).  5. 
These  Gospel-fishers  catch  fish  of  all 
sorts  (ver.  10):*— GreenhiU. 

Vers.  8,  11.  The  Power  of  tha 
Gospel — 1  Seen  in  its  penetrating  the 
most  unlikely  places,     **The  de^ert-^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


H0M2LST10  COMMBNTART:  BZBKIBL. 


(he  Dead  Sea"  (yer.  8).  2.  Efficacious 
in  giving  life  and  healing  to  all 
who  accept  it.  '*  The  waters  shall  be 
healed"  (ver.  8).  3.  Inefficacious 
where  it  is  resisted  and  rejected. 
''The  miry  places  and  marshes  shall 
be  giyen  to  salt"  (ver.  11). 

Ver.  8.  "(Jod's  Sanctuary  a  well- 
spring  of  life  for  the  Dead  Sea  of  the 
world  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7).  Gtod's  thoughts 
of  peace  over  the  abysses  of  the  world's 
wretchedness.  In  other  cases  a  clear 
and  wholesome  stream  which  flows 
into  a  muddy  and  putrid  lake  be- 
comes corrupt :  it  is  otherwise  with 
the  Gospel,  which  brings  recoyery  and 
health  to  the  earthly-minded  heart. 
It  is  a  power  of  Gk>d,  but  man  will  not 
let  the  power  work." — Lange. 

Ver.  11.  "Those  whom  the  Ghspel 
waters  of  life  do  not  reach,  through 
their  own  indolence  and  carnality, 
shall  be  given  oyer  to  eyerlastinff 
barrenness;  nor  can  any  more  awful 
punishment  be  imagined  than  that 
the  sinner  should  be  given  up  to  the 
unrestricted  and  everlasting  workings 
of  his  own  sin,  bitterness,  and  filthi- 
ness.** — FausseL 

—  The  Hebrew  language  often  ex- 
presses irremediable  barrenness  and 
unprofitableness  by  being  given  up  to 
salt,  salt  being  equivalent  to  barren- 
ness in  that  language.  When  Abime- 
lech  destroyed  Shechem  he  sowed  the 
ground  whereon  it  stood  with  salt,  to 
denote  that  it  should  never  be  culti- 
vated or  inhabited  again  (Judges  iz. 
45). 

—  "Unsound,  rotten  parts,  neither 
sea  nor  yet  sound  ground,  an  emblem 
of  hypocrit<»s.  Low  land,  sopped  with 
the  overflowings  of  unhealthfid  waters, 
neither  fit  to  breed  fish  as  the  sea,  nor 
bear  trees  as  the  land.'' — PooL 

Vers.  9-12.  Spiritual  Inflnence — 1. 
Vitalises  all  it  touches  (ver.  9).  S. 
The  active  principle  of  fertility  and 

Elenty  (vers.  9,  10,  12).  3.  Cannot 
e  resisted  without  disaster  (ver.  11). 
4.  Is  ever  flowing  from  the  Divine 
Templei    **  Because  they  issued  out  of 


the  sanctuary"  (ver.  12).  5.  Is  both 
the  food  and  medicine  of  the  soul 
"  The  fruit  shall  be  for  meat,  and  the 
leaf  for  medicine  "  (ver.  12). 

Ver.  10.  "The  ministers  of  the 
Church  are  compared  to  fishers  be- 
eause  of  the  contempt  with  which 
they  are  regarded  by  the  rich  and. 
powerful  of  this  world;  because  of 
their  labour  by  day  and  night,  in  heat 
and  cold ;  because  of  the  truitlessness 
of  their  labour  at  times — 'We  have 
caught  nothing;'  because  of  the  dan- 
gers they  incur  in  stormy  weather; 
because  of  their  confidence,  which,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  husbandman,  must 
rest  on  Ood;  because  of  the  various 
kinds  of  implements  they  use.  They 
rescue  souls  from  the  abyss." — Starck. 

Vers.  11,  12.  Moral  Barrenness  and 
Fmitfolnefls.  "  1.  Those  places  and 
persons  to  which  the  waters  of  the 
Sanctuary  come,  or  coming  do  not 
heal,  are  designed  to  barrenness  and 
destruction  (ver.  11^.  2.  True  Chris- 
tians are  fruitful  (ver.  12).  3.  The 
cause  of  fruitfulness  is  the  doctrine 
and  Rrace  of  the  Gospel  (ver.  12).  4. 
The  holy  examples  of  true  saints  are 
medicinal  (ver.  12)." — OreenhiU. 

Ver.  12.  Never-ending  Spring.  "The 
text  a  promise  and  picture  of  a  never- 
fading  spring.  Goodness  and  spiiitual 
beauty  are  eternal  1.  The  everlast- 
ing youthfulness  of  a  Christly  soul 
2.  The  everlasting  ftruitfulness  of  a 
Christly  souL  3.  The  explanation  of 
the  glorious  phenomenon  is  in  this — 
'  Because  their  waters  issued  out  of  the 
sanctuary/  A  sacred  place,  a  pure 
sanctuary,  a  holy  fountain  where  the 
soul  may  cleanse  itself  from  the  dust 
and  stains  of  the  world.  Fruit  for  meat 
and  leaves  for  medicine.  A  healthy 
inner  life  ensures  a  fruitful  outer  life* 
A  Christly  soul  is  always  young  and 
hetLutHuV-^Homiktie  Monthly. 

—  "The  blessed  growth  close  by 
the  river  of  life.  Evergreen  leaves, 
yet  not  leaves  merely,  but  also  fruit  I 
Thus  it  is  with  life  from  God's  Sauo- 
tnaiy,"— £aii^ 

48r 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  JMJnL  MOMILETW  COMMBNTAR  Y:  BZEKIBL. 


nOMILETIOa. 

Thb  Inhsbitanok  of  ths  QOODI 

(Vera.  13-23.) 

L  It  Mcnred  by  Diylne  piromise  (ver.  14).  Tiiat  promise  was  declared  and 
ratified  in  the  most  solemn  manner — ''Concerning  the  whicli  I  lifted  up  Mine 
hand."  Though  the  inheritance  is  not  in  possession,  and  all  appearances  are 
against  the  realisation  of  the  promise,  yet  it  is  enough  that  the  promise  is 
made.  Israel  is  kingless  and  portionless,  bereft  of  Temple  and  all  its  im- 
posing ceremonials,  fretting  in  slavery  and  sorrow,  moaning  in  poverty  and 
ruin,  and  with  no  prospect  of  immediate  deliverance,  yet  the  inheritance  is 
sure,  for  Gk)d  hath  promised.  The  Divine  Word  ia  more  valid  than  the  best- 
authenticated  legal  document, 

II.  Is  explicitly  defined  (vers.  15-20).  To  show  that  it  is  no  baseless  hope, 
no  Utopian  dream,  but  a  substantial,  blessed  reality.  Its  boundaries  are  clearly 
described  and  exactly  measured  to  show  that  every  inch  of  its  frontiers  is 
guarded  with  the  presence  and  power  of  Jehovah,  and  to  inspire  an  unwavering 
assurance  of  its  realisation  and  enjoyment.  The  Lord  deals  in  neither  false 
measures  nor  false  promises. 

IIL  Is  enjoyed  by  the  obedient  irrespective  of  nationality  (vera.  21-23). 
The  distinction  between  Jew  and  Gentile  is  abolished.  The  inheritance  is 
made  free  for  all  nations.  Whoever  fears  God  and  works  righteousness  unites 
himself  to  the  true  Israel,  the  perfect  Church  of  the  Messiah,  shall  enjoy  the 
same  privileges  as  the  faithful  and  obedient  descendants  of  Abraham.  Tribes, 
classes,  nations,  are  absorbed  and  lost  in  the  spiritual  unity  of  an  imperishable 
brotherhood.     Christ  is  all  and  in  alL 

Lessons. — 1.  The  Divine  promise  never  fails,  2.  The  faithful  servants  of  Jehovah 
have  a  rich  inheritance  here  and  hereafter.  3  National  strifes  and  jealousies  wUl  be 
mknauyn  m  the  heavenly  Kingdom, 

GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VERSES. 

Vers.  13-23.  ^A  people  settled  in  —  The  Heritage  of  the  Faithftil. 

the  inheritance  of  their  God  is  the  **  1.  Here  we  have  the   great  extent 

proper  result  of  the  re-establishment  of  the  Church  under  Christ.     2.  The 

of  the  covenant  and  the  renewal  of  state  of  Christians  in  the  Church  and 

their  souls  after  its  principles  of  right-  all  their  spiritual  blessings  are  of  free 

eousness.     There  is  no   more  reason  grace.     3.  The  one  and  same  inherit- 

for  understanding  this  portion  accord-  ance   belongs    to   the    believing  Jew 

ing  to   the  letter  than   those  which  and  Gentile.*' — Oreenhill, 
went  before.     The  whole  vision  is  of 

a  piece — a  pictorial  representation  of  Vers.  13,  14.  The  Divine  Faithful- 
the  future  things  of  God's  Kingdom  nesa  —  **1.  Is  not  impaireil  by  the 
under  the  image  of  the  past,  yet  so  lapse  of  time,  or  by  the  fickleness  of 
altered  and  acijusted  as  to  indicate  the  man.  2.  Is  solemnly  declared.  '  Con- 
vast  superiority  of  what  was  to  come  coming  which  I  lifted  up  mine  hand.' 
compared  with  what  hitherto  had  3.  Seen  in  the  kindness  shown  to 
been.'' — Fairbaim.  succeeding  generations.    *  To  give  unto 


488 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  COMMENT  ART:  BZSKIBL. 


OHAP.  TVnSL 


your  fathers :  this  land  shall  fall  unto 
you  for  inheritance.''  4.  Should  elicit  an 
exclusiye  and  unwarering  confidence. 

Ver.  13.  **  Who  can  define  the  boun- 
daries of  the  Church,  especially  in  the 
last  days  %  But  as  here  the  boundaries 
of  Canaan  are  defined,  so  the  boundaries 
of  the  Church  are  faith  and  life  in  the 
Scriptures  of  the  apostles  and  prophets, 
which  accordingly  no  one  is  to  overpass 
(Gal.  vi.  16).  God  gives  to  His  children 
very  difierently ;  from  him  to  whom  a 
double  portion  has  been  given  a  corre- 
sponding return  is  required." — StarcL 

Vers.  22,  2%  The  Impartiality  of 
Ood — 1.  Seen  in  His  equitable  treat- 


ment of  the  faithful  in  all  ages  and 
nations.  2.  Is  continually  promoting 
the  spiritual  unity  of  the  human  race. 
3.  Will  be  terribly  evident  in  Hia 
punishment  of  the  finally  impenitent. 

Ver.  22.  "It  is  not  birth,  but  the 
new  birth,  that  makes  men  children  of 
God.  Here  under  earthly  figures  the 
Jerusalem  that  is  above  with  her  chil- 
dren is  typified,  and  the  calling  of  the 
Gentiles  from  east  and  west  and  the 
utmost  bounds  of  the  earth  is  described. 
Got  I  licre  opens  to  all  the  holy  gates 
of  His  Church,  and  prescribes  to  the 
Church  herself  the  commandment  of 
meekness,  love,  and  brotherly  kind« 
ness." — Langt, 


Thb  Idbal  Allotment  of  the  Holt  LANa    (Ohap.  zlviil) 


EXEGETIOAL  NOTES.  —  The 
order  of  the  original  occupation  of 
the  Holy  Land  by  the  tribes  nuder 
Joshua  is  partly,  but  only  partly, 
followed.  It  is  a  new  order  of  things, 
and  its  ideal  character  is  evinced,  as 
elsewhere,  by  exact  and  equal  mea- 
surements. From  north  to  south 
seven  tribes  succeed  each  other — Dan, 
Asher,  Naphtali,  Manasseh,  Ephraim, 
Reuben,  Judah,  each  occupying  the 
full  breadth  of  the  land  from  east  to 
west.  Then  comes  a  portion  separated 
as  an  ofiTering  to  the  Lord,  into  (1)  a 
northern  portion  for  the  Levites;  (2) 
a  central  portion  for  the  priests  and 
the  Temple ;  (3)  a  southern  portion 
for  the  city  ana  those  who  serve  it. 
These  three  form  a  square  which  does 
not  occupy  the  whole  breadth  of  the 
land,  but  is  flanked  on  either  side, 
east  and  west,  by  portions  assigned  to 
the  prince.  Then  follow,  south  of  the 
city,  five  portions  for  the  five  remaining 
tribes — Benjamin,  Simeon,  Issachar, 
Zebulun,  and  Gad — similar  to  those 
assigned  to  the  seven.  Thus  the 
Levites,  the  Temple,  and  city  are 
guarded  by  Judah  and  Benjamin, 
the  two  tril>es  who  had  through- 
out preserved  their  allegiance  to  the 
true  sovereignty  of  Jehovah,  and  thus 
the   plan  expresses  the   presence  of 


Jehovah  among  His  people,  summed 
up  in  the  name  of  the  city  with  which 
EzekiePs  prophecy  closes,  ''The  Lord 
la  there." — Speaker's  Commentary. 

Ver.  1.  "A  portion  for  Dan."  Lite- 
rally, Van  one.  The  same  is  repeated 
for  each  tribe,  the  usual  mode  in 
Hebrew  of  expressing  distribution  and 
implying  equality  in  the  portions.  Dan, 
as  morally  semi-heathen,  has  the  least 
honourable  place  in  the  extreme  north. 

Ver.  2.  "Aaher."  No  one  of  note 
in  this  tribe  is  mentioned  in  the  Old 
Testament  The  prophetess  Anna 
belonged  to  it  (Luke  il  36). 

Ver.  4.  <'  A  portion  for  Manasseh." 

The  intercourse  and  unity  between  the 
two  and  a  half  tribes  east  of  the  Jordan 
and  the  nine  and  a  half  west  of  it 
had  been  kept  up  by  the  splitting  of 
Manasseh,  causing  the  visits  of  kinsmen 
one  to  the  other  from  both  sides  of  the 
Jordan.  There  shall  be  no  need  for 
this  in  the  new  order  of  things. 

Ver.  5.  ''A  portion  for  Ephraim." 

This  tribe,  with  its  two  dependent 
tribes,  Manasseh  and  Benjamin,  for 
upwards  of  400  years  under  the  judgef 
held  the  pre-eminence. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  ZLTin. 


BOMILBTIO  COMMENTARY:  BZBKIEL, 


doomed  formerly  for  incest  and  in- 
stability not  to  excel  (Gen.  xlix.  4). 
No  diBtinguished  prophet,  priest,  or 
king  came  from  this  tribe.  To  it 
belonged  the  mutinous  Dathan  and 
Abiram.  A  pastoral  and  Bedouin 
character  marked  it  and  Gad  (Judges 
T.  16). 

Ver.  15.  '<The  flre  thousand  that 
are  left**  The  remainder  of  the  great 
square  of  25,000  reeds  from  north  to 
south.  '<▲  profane  place  for  the 
dty*  —  not  strictly  sacred  as  the 
sacerdotal  portions,  but  applied  to 
secular  or  common  uses  :  so  chap» 
xUi.  20. 

Ver.  19.  ''Out  of  all  the  tribes  of 
IsraeL"  Formerly  the  citizens  of 
Jerusalem  were  out  of  the  tribes  of 
Benjamin  and  Judah.  Now  all  the 
tribes  are  to  have  an  equal  part  in  it, 
to  avoid  jealousies  (2  Sam.  xix.  43). 

Ver.  23.  ''BeiOamin  shall  have  a 
portion.**  This  tribe  alone  with  Jiidah 
had  been  throughout  loyal  to  the  house 
of  David,  so  its  prowess  at  the  night 
of  the  national  history  was  celebrated 
as  well  as  in  the  morning. 

Ter.  24.  ^'Slmeonaportion.''  Simeon 


was  omitted  in  the  blessing  of  Mo 
(Deut.  xxxiiL),  perhaps  because  of  the 
Simeonite  prince  who  at  Baalpeor  led 
the  Israelites  in  their  idolatries  with 
Midian  (Nnm.  xxv.  14). 

Yer.  25.  <'  lasachar  a  portion ''—its 
ancient  portion  had  been  on  the  plain 
of  Esdraelon.  Compared  (Gen,  xlix. 
14)  to  ''  a  strong  ass  crouching  between 
two  burdens" — tribute  and  tillage; 
never  meddling  with  wars  except  in 
self-defence. 

Yer.  31.  "*  The  gates  of  the  dtsr-" 

The  twelves  gates  bear  the  names  of 
the  twelve  tribes,  to  imply  that  all  are 
r^arded  as  having  an  interest  in  it. 

Yer.  35.  "The  Lord  is  there."  '<The 
name  of  the  city  sliall  be  no  longer 
Jerusalem — The  wum  of  peace — but 
Adonai-shama — The  Lord  ii  there — ^be- 
cause Jehovah  will  never  again  with- 
draw from  it  as  He  once  withdrew, 
but  will  hold  it  as  His  everlasting 
possession.^ — Jerome.  Not  that  the 
city  will  be  so  called  in  mere  name, 
but  that  the  reality  will  be  best  ex 
pressed  by  this  descriptive  title  (Jer 
ill  17,  xxxiiL  16 ;  Zech.  ii.  10 ;  Rev 
XXL  3,  xxil  3).  A  prophetic  vision 
fulfilled  in  Emmanuel,  Ood  with  tw,  who 
tabernacled  among  men  (John  i  14). 


EOMILETIOS. 

Thk  Earthly  Canaan  a  Ttpb  of  the  Heayimlt. 

(Yers.  1-36.) 

In  this  closing  chapter  we  have  a  condensed  summary  of  the  magnificent 
vision  described  in  the  previous  chapters  with  such  fulness  and  exactitude. 
Reviewing  the  gradual  ilevelopment  of  the  prophecy,  Ezekiel  catches  up  its  chief 
features  and  groups  them  in  a  pictorial  form  calculated  to  arrest  the  attention 
and  keep  alive  the  hope  of  God's  people  through  the  dreary  years  that  followed. 
The  lost  land  is  restored  and  repeopled  ;  from  the  ruins  of  the  old  Jerusalem 
rises  a  city  exceeding  in  vastness  an<l  splendour  the  colossal  buildings  of  anti- 
quity ;  the  Temple  like  a  guardian  angel  occupies  a  lofty,  central  position,  round 
which  the  current  of  city  life  and  worship  is  continually  circling,  and  from  that 
Temple,  like  rays  of  golden  light,  the  glory  of  the  Divine  presence  is  spread 
throughout  the  holy  and  happy  land.  The  prophetic  description  suggests  ih§ 
Matrmif  Canaan  as  a  type  of  the  HeavenUf. 
490 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMSNTABT:  BZBKIBJL  CUP.  ZLTllL 

L  In  the  significsait  position  occupied  by  the  Temple  of  Jehovah.  ''  The 
Sanctuary  in  the  midst"  (vers.  8, 10,  21).  To  the  pious  Jew  the  Temple  was 
the  glory  of  Palestine,  the  all-prominent^  central  object,  towards  which  his  gaze 
was  ever  directed,  and  wherever  he  prayed  bis  face  was  reverently  turned  towards 
the  holy  placa  In  the  midst  of  the  heavenly  Canaan  the  Temple  stands  con- 
Bpicnous.  Worship  is  the  delightful  employment  of  the  glorified,  and  the  very 
essence  of  their  individual  bliss  (Bev.  v.  15). 

n.  In  the  spectacle  it  presents  of  a  united  spiritnal  brotherhood  (ver.  29). 
The  land  was  divided  in  equal  portions  among  the  tribes,  and  a  holy  oblation 
apportioned  for  the  Temple,  priests,  Levites,  prince,  and  people  (vers.  9-22). 
There  was  no  ground,  nor  was  there  any  disposition,  to  indulge  in  the  enyyings 
and  jealousies  that  had  vexed  and  torn  asunder  the  different  tribes. 

**  Antipathies  are  none.    In  the  heart 
No  passion  touches  a  discordant  itring^ 
But  all  is  harmony  and  love." 

The  charm  of  heaven  is  its  inviolable  unity.  Each  heart  is  bound  together  by 
the  cord  of  love,  and  the  uniou  is  cemented  and  strengthened  by  the  worship 
and  service  in  which  all  have  a  common  interest.  The  unifying  power  is  ever 
present  in  the  object  of  their  constant  praise.  There  the  prayer  of  Jesus  has  its 
most  sublime  realisation  (John  xviL  21-23). 

IIL  In  the  honourable  position  assigned  to  those  who  have  been  conspieuous 
for  fidelity.  The  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  who  remained  faithful  to 
Jehovah  when  all  the  rest  were  renegade,  have  a  place  of  honour  in  close 
proximity  to  the  holiest — Judah  on  the  north  and  Benjamin  on  the  south  of 
the  portion  of  land  specially  dedicated  to  the  Lord  ^vers.  7,  23).  The  priests, 
the  sons  of  Zadok,  who  had  kept  the  charge  while  the  Levites  went  astray,  are 
also  generously  remembered  in  the  new  order  of  things  (ver.  11).  Man  loses 
nothing  by  maJdng  a  resolute  stand  for  truth  and  righteousness.  He  may  sink 
in  the  estimation  of  the  temporising  and  may  suffer  for  his  principles  ;  but  it  is 
more  disastrous  to  sink  in  his  own  estimation,  and  still  more  in  the  estimation 
of  God  :  that  would  be  to  entail  suffering  from  which  there  is  no  relief.  The 
faithful  champion  for  the  truth  shall  have  victory  in  this  life  and  distinguished 
reward  in  the  next  (Rev.  iii,  12 ;  vii.  14-17). 

lY.  In  being  presided  over  by  the  manifested  glory  of  the  Divine  Presence. 

"The  Lord  is  there"  (ver.  35).  To  the  true  Israelite  the  Temple  of  tiie  earthly 
Oanaan  was  a  synonym  for  the  Divine  presence :  there  He  dwelt,  there  He 
revealed  His  glory  from  between  the  cherubim,  and  thence  He  declared  His 
law  and  governed  His  people.  The  light,  the  glory,  the  joy  of  heaven  is  the 
presence  of  the  Divine  King  robed  in  peerless  majesty  ana  ever  displaying  the 
endless  manifoldness  of  His  matchless  character.  Its  beauty,  its  splendour,  its 
order,  its  purity,  its  ecstasy,  are  all  summed  up  in  the  exulting  fact — "  The  Lord 
itihere/'' 

Lessons. — 1.  We  learn  that  things  earthly  are  the  patterns  of  theheavenly.  2.  In 
aur  darkest  experiences  we  are  cheered  with  the  brightest  visions  of  the  future.  3.  The 
tupreme  gkry  of  hea/ven  is  a  sight  of  the  unveiled  presence  of  Jehovah, 


GERM  NOTES  ON  THE  VEESE8. 

Vers.  1*7.  "The  places  of  more  or     regulated  by  the  degree  of  faithfulness 
»S8  honour  assigned  to  each  tribe  are     to  the  Lord  and  His  ordinances  by 

491 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


OBAP.  XLTXn. 


HOMILSTJC  COMMBNTART:  SZBKIEL, 


which  the  tribes  severallj  were  char- 
acterised. Thus  Judah  and  Benjamin, 
the  tribes  which  adhered  longest  to 
the  ordinances  of  the  Temple  and  to 
the  house  of  David  when  the  rest 
apostatised,  shall  hold  the  most  hon- 
ourable positions.  Dan,  on  the  con- 
trary, is  to  have  the  least  honourable 
place  at  the  extreme  north,  as  having 
oeen  so  early  as  the  times  of  the  Judges 
in  a  great  degreee  demoralised  and 
heathenised.  So  in  respect  to  the 
degrees  of  glory  which  await  all  the 
saints  in  the  coming  Kingdom  of  God, 
the  measure  of  honour  will  be  regulated 
by  the  measure  of  faithfulness.  Herein 
believers  have  the  strongest  incentive 
not  merely  to  work,  but  to  abound 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  xv. 

Vers.  8,  10,  21.  "The  Sanctuary 
in  the  midst."  The  Oentrality  of  the 
Oliiirch  of  God — 1.  A  special  mark  of 
the  Divine  honour  and  affection.  2. 
Indicates  its  supreme  importance  to  the 
universe.  3.  The  choicest  blessings 
emanate  from  and  converge  towards 
it.  4.  It  is  the  seat  of  Divine  authority 
and  power. 

Ver.  8.  **  Thy  heart  is  in  thy  midst ; 
take  heed  to  whom  it  belong :  is  it  a 
temj)le  of  God  in  which  His  Spirit 
dwells,  or  is  it  a  habitation  of  unclean 
spirits  ?  God  has  an  eternal  right  to 
the  centre  of  man.  God  is  the  centre 
of  the  spirit-world,  and  in  Him  every- 
thing lives  and  moves.'' — Lange. 

Vers.  10-14.  God's  care  for  His 
Servants.  1.  They  shall  have  ample 
provision  for  all  their  needs  (ver.  10). 
2.  He  will  specially  reward  those  who 
have  been  faithful  to  Him  in  times  of 
trial  (vers.  11,  J  2).  3.  Their  posses- 
sions shall  be  permanent  and  secure 
(ver.  14). 

Ver.  11.  **To  err  with  the  erring 
excuses  no  one  ;  the  way  is  broad,  not 
for  us  to  walk  on  it,  but  to  call  atten- 
tion to  the  narrow  path  of  life." — Siarek 

Yer.  13.  '<The  priests  had  their  lot 
492 


near  the  Sanctuary,  and  the  Levites 
had  theirs  in  the  centre  of  the  tribes, 
that  they  might  be  ready  for  the  ser- 
vice of  God  and  for  the  instruction  of 
the  people.  Hence  the  Lord,  having 
made  the  priests  His  first  care,  expects 
that  they  should  make  the  souls  of  the 
people  their  sole  concern." — SiUcliffe, 

Vers.  15-20,  30-36.  A  Happy 
City — 1.  Occupying  a  spacious  area. 
2.  Commanding  vast  temporal  re- 
sources. 3.  Enjoying  unexceptionable 
religious  privileges.  4.  Inhabited  by 
a  devout  and  contented  people.  G. 
Providing  ample  facilities  for  ingress 
and  egress.  6.  A  model  of  order,  good 
government,  unity,  and  peace. 

Vers.  15-20.  "  The  city  was  ample 
and  glorious,  being  about  nine  miles 
from  gate  to  gate  and  thirty-six  miles 
in  circumference.  The  unbelief  of  the 
Jews  in  our  Lord's  time  was  fostered 
by  a  literal  interpretation  of  the  pro- 
phecies which,  under  splendid  figures 
taken  from  earthly  scenes,  shadowed 
forth  that  superior  and  spiritual  empire 
which  He  came  to  establish,  and  their 
carnal  hopes  and  prospects  of  temporal 
dominion  and  glory  led  to  the  rejection 
of  the  true  Messiah.  Nor  is  it  much 
less  delusive  to  expect  a  literal  fulfil- 
ment of  the  predictions  we  have  been 
contemplating,  which  would  in  effect 
be  going  back  to  that  shadowy  dis- 
pensation which  the  Grospel  is  intended 
to  supersede,  instead  of  advancing  to 
that  brighter  and  more  spiritual  glory 
to  be  revealed  in  the  latter  day,  and 
would,  instead  of  converting  Jews  to 
Christianity,  bring  back  the  Christian 
Church  to  a  state  of  Judaism." — jSiti^ 
cHffe. 

Ver.  18.  "Behold  here  the  great 
goodness  of  God,  who  thinks  of  even 
the  labourers  in  the  city  and  cares  for 
them.  But  every  Christian  ought  to 
to  be  an  upright  labourer,  as  every 
stone,  wherever  it  is  placed,  belongs 
to  the  building  and  contributes  to  its 
erection." — Lange, 

Ver.  19.  Holy  Oitiieiui.    *'l.  The 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BOMJLETIC  COMMENTARY:  EZEKIEL. 


CHAP.  XLYin. 


citizens  are  holy  men^  not  common, 
profane  men;  Israelites, not  Gibeonites. 
2.  They  are  men  chosen  not  ont  of 
one,  but  out  of  every  tribe.  3.  They 
are  to  be  serviceable — to  improve  their 
talents  for  the  good  of  the  city." — 
Greenhill 

Ver.  20.  "  All  our  dealings  must  be 
square,  or  else  we  are  not  of  the  holy 
portion,  of  the  New  Jerusalem." — 
Trapp. 

Vers.  23-34.  "As  in  the  great 
family  of  man  not  one  face  answers 
precisely  to  another,  but  each  is  dis- 
tinguished by  some  peculiarity,  so  it  is 
amongst  the  children  of  God :  there- 
fore, though  the  sons  of  Israel  were  so 
many,  they  had  all  their  distinguishing 
names,  to  which  doubtless  the  searcher 
of  their  hearts  and  the  orderer  of  their 
lives  saw  something  corresponding  in 
their  chj*racter  and  history.  Here  also 
we  see  that,  whatever  our  place  may  be, 
it  is  ordered  for  us  by  God,  as  the  lots 
of  the  tribes  in  the  earth ;  that^  how- 
ever we  may  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,  the  peculiarity  of  our  char- 
acter shall  be  regarded  there,  seeing 
the  names  of  its  gates  are  not  one  but 
many ;  that,  whatever  the  history  of 
our  preparation  for  it  be,  suitable 
character  of  glory  is  provided  for  us 
there,  since  its  gates  open  upon  every 
quarter  of  the  earth." — M^Farlan. 

Ver.  23.  "  Let  every  man  be  content 
with  the  portion  of  temporal  goods 
which  he  possesses,  for  the  Lord  has 
apportioned  it  (Matt.  xx.  14)." — Lange. 

Vers.  30-35.  The  City  of  Ctod— 1. 
Is  well  and  strongly  founded.  2.  Is 
comely  and  beautiful.  3.  Has  access 
to  it  trom  all  parts.  4.  Its  happiness 
from  the  Lord's  inhabiting  it 

—  "  The  names  of  the  twelve  tribes 
are  to  be  severally  connected  with  the 
twelve  gates  of  the  city,  for  all  alike 
shall  have  an  interest  in  it  in  their 
respective  places  and  situations.  So 
the  very  humblest  believer  has  his  due 
place  appointed  to  him  in  the  heavenly 
eitv.     That  shall  be  a  blessed  change 


from  the  present  scene  of  disorder  and 
confusion  to  a  world  wherein  all  be- 
neath God,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest,  know  and  keep  their  place  in 
the  most  perfect  harmony,  love,  and 
blessedness." — Faussei. 

Ver.  85.  "The  glory  and  joy  of 
heaven  shall  not  be  so  much  the  ab- 
sence of  all  present  woes  and  the  pre- 
sence of  all  the  other  good  things 
which  God  shall  bestow,  as  it  shall 
consist  in  this :  the  Lord  Himself  shall 
be  there  as  the  everlasting  portion,  joy, 
and  light  of  His  people." — Fausset. 

—  "  That  such  scenes  should  have 
been  described  with  such  assured  confi- 
dence and  at  a  time  so  deeply  over- 
spread with  gloom,  was  indeed  an 
ennobling  triumph  of  faith  over  sight. 
It  gave  a  most  illustrious  proof  of  the 
height  in  spiritual  discernment  and 
far-seeing  insight  into  the  purposes  of 
Heaven,  which  is  sometimes  imparted 
in  the  hour  of  greatest  need,  especially 
to  the  more  select  instruments  of  the 
Spirit's  working.  Here  the  heart  of 
faith  is  taught  never  to  despair,  even 
in  the  darkest  seasons.  And  when  it 
is  seen  how  much  of  the  scheme  de- 
lineated in  the  prophetic  vision  has 
already  been  accomplished,  should  not 
believers  feel  encouraged  to  look  and 
strive  for  its  complete  realisation  f" — 
Fairbaim. 

—  "Here  endeth  this  remarkable 
vision,  which,  though  greatly  mystified 
by  many  of  the  attempts  to  explain  it, 
stands  forth  to  view  on  the  sacred 
page  as  a  noble  specimen  of  Divine 
Wisdom,  admirably  calculated  to  in- 
spire the  captive  exiles  in  Babylonia 
with  the  cheering  hope  of  their  re- 
settlement in  their  own  land  and  the 
restoration  of  their  beloved  metropolis 
and  Temple.  In  contemplating  it,  the 
truly  spiritually-minded  Christian,  with 
hb  thoughts  raised  above  all  earthly 
localities,  will  not  perplex  himself 
with  subtle  and  trifling  inquiries,  but 
grasp  the  grand  ideas  which  the  vision 
suggests,  and  anticipate  for  himself  in 
a  future  world  a  realisation  of  what 
was  only  dimly  shadowed  forth  by  that 
which  is  here  desoiibAd  " — HMd&rson, 

493 


Digitized  by 


Google 


€BAP.  ZLTm.  BOMILETW  COMMENTA  BY:  BZSKIBL. 


HOMILETICa. 

Jkhoyah-Shammah  :  thb  Citt  of  ths  Dnrmx  Pusinob. 

(Ver.  85.) 

1  An  abode  of  impregnable  safety.  **  The  Lord  is  there.**  He  wXL  be 
always  there,  never  to  desert  it  as  He  did  the  earthly  Temple  because  of  the 
sins  of  His  people.  It  is  sustained  and  defended  at  every  point  by  His  in- 
vincible power.  The  enemy  assails  in  vain ;  no  weapon  can  pierce  the  invul- 
nerable defence.  Evil  cannot  invade  its  holy  precincta  Its  inhabitants  are  for 
ever  freed  from  the  struggles  and  warfare  with  sin  with  which  their  earthly 
life  has  been  harassed.  The  Divine  Ruler  governs  with  irresistible  and  loving 
authority,  and  the  order  and  peace  of  the  city  remain  for  ever  unbroken. 

IL  An  abode  of  unfading  beanty  and  splendour.  "  The  Lord  is  there.**  The 
city  shines  with  the  reflected  glory  of  His  matchless  perfections,  and  every  part 
of  the  edifice  is  moulded  into  indescribable  beauty  and  tipped  with  splendour. 
Perfection  is  the  highest  beauty.  The  Lord  beautifies  everything  He  touches. 
There  is  not  a  flower  that  blooms,  a  bird  that  flies,  or  a  star  that  glitters  but 
is  adorned  in  every  part  of  its  wondrous  structure  with  the  reflected  beauty 
of  the  Divine  Artist.  What,  then,  must  be  the  inimitable  beauty  of  the  soul 
which,  created  in  the  Divine  image,  redeemed  and  transfigured  by  Divine  love, 
is  now  admitted  a  citizen  of  the  heavenly  commonwealth,  to  bask  for  ever  in 
the  glory  of  the  Divine  presence  1 

IIL  An  abode  of  endlesdy  satisftTing  Joy.  **  The  Lord  is  there.**  In  His 
presence  is  fulness  of  joy  (Ps.  zvi.  11).  The  withdrawal  of  that  presence  is 
the  soul's  acutest  misery,  and  is  a  catastrophe  to  be  constantly  deprecated 
(Ps.  li.  11).  The  joy  of  earth  is  mingled  with  disappointment  and  distress; 
but  in  the  city  of  the  Divine  presence  no  sorrow  wrings  the  heart  with 
anguish  or  brims  the  eyes  with  tears.  The  soul  is  satisfied  for  ever  with  the 
raptures  of  the  ever-blessed  God. 

^Let  earth  repent,  and  hell  despair, 
Thia  City  has  a  sore  defence : 
Her  name  is  called  *  The  Lord  is  there,' 
And  who  has  power  to  drive  Him  thenoe  t" — Oompm 

Bbflboted  Bats  from  the  Bbst  Literary  Lights  on  the  Sionifioamgi 

OF  Ezekiel's  Temple. 

''  The  whole  wondrous  vision  is  only  the  picture  of  a  condition  of  surpassing 
glory,  expressed  in  imagery  peculiar  to  the  prophet  No  one  thinks  of  taking 
the  almost  parallel  visions  of  St.  John  in  the  Apocalypse  as  literal  descriptions. 
We  do  not  expect  to  see  the  holy  city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  actually  coming 
down  from  Ood,  out  of  heaven,  nor  that  it  will  be  literally  four-square,  with 
walls  and  gates  like  an  ancient  town,  nor  that  the  walls  will  be  over  200 
feet  high,  or  the  city  itself  1500  miles  square,  or  that  its  buildings  and  spires 
will  rise  1500  miles  into  the  air ;  and  yet  it  must  be  done,  if  the  description  is 
to  be  understood  otherwise  than  figuratively.  To  Ezekiel  and  St.  John  alike, 
the  only  aim  was  to  convey  the  highest  conception  of  magnificence  as  each 
imagined  it  most  vividly  presented.  Living  in  the  age  of  Bome  and  great 
provincial  cities,  St  John  thinks  of  a  New  Jemsalem  such  as  he  describes. 
494 


Digitized  by 


Google 


SOMILETIC  COMMENTABY:  EZEKIEL.  chap.  XLVin. 


Imbued  with  a  stronglj  Jewish  and  priestlj  bias,  Esekiel  sees  a  glorious 
Temple  rise  before  him,  and  all  the  details  of  a  re-establishment  of  the 
Theocracy  in  Palestine,  with  transcendent  splendour.  To  the  mind  of  St» 
John,  the  Temple  had  ceased  to  be  a  central  religious  thought;  in  that  of 
Ezekiel,  the  priest,  it  was  supreme.  In  both,  the  inspired  writer  is  left  free  to 
express  the  surpassing  glory  of  the  Messianic  age  in  the  only  way  possible  to 
his  modes  of  thought  and  the  ideas  of  his  age." — CMkUs  Hows  with  the  BibU. 

*'It  was  probably  a  Jubilee  year  when  this  vision  was  seen.  The  Temple 
and  city  were  in  ruins,  but  God  was  pleased  in  this  way  to  revive  the  hopes 
of  His  people. 

'*  Grotius  and  others  have  conceived  that  Ezekiel  was  simply  guided  to  leave 
behind  patterns  on  the  basis  of  which  the  Temple  should  in  after-days  be 
rebuilt  and  its  services  restored.  But  an  examination  of  the  vision  will  show 
the  insufficiency  of  this  explanation.  Not  only  was  this  plan  never  carried 
out,  but  it  was,  as  Ezekiel  must  have  known,  incapable  of  execution.  The 
physical  features  of  the  land  would  not  admit  of  the  separation  of  precincts  a 
mile  square,  surrounded  by  a  territory  sixteen  miles  by  forty-eight.  The  river, 
though  connected  with  the  stream  brought  by  conduit-pipes  into  the  actuid 
Temple,  soon  passes  into  a  condition  wholly  ideal,  and  the  equal  apportionment 
of  the  land  to  each  of  the  twelve  tribes  is  compatible  neither  with  history  nor 
geography.  That  the  Temple  and  its  services  were  symbolical  of  the  Sacrifice 
and  of  the  Priesthood  of  Christ  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  sufficiently  proves. 
The  assemblage  of  the  Christian  Church  around  Christ  as  the  central  object  of 
worship  was  that  of  which  the  assemblage  of  the  people  around  the  Temple 
was  the  type  and  representative ;  and  it  is  more  simple  to  understand  the  vision 
as  portraying  immediately  the  Church  of  Christ,  than  to  refer  to  such  a  partial 
fulfilment  as  would  give  to  the  details  an  unreality  discouraging  to  such  as 
were  looking  to  an  actual  rebuilding.  But  as  the  Jews  already  knew  some- 
thing of  the  typical  character  of  the  Temple  services,  this  vision  was  intended 
to  teach  them  more,  and  the  very  impossibility  of  realising  its  form  was  to 
draw  them  to  the  substance,  and  to  give  them  prospects  looking  beyond  any 
material  reconstruction,  just  as  Haggai  consoled  them  for  their  disappointment 
at  the  erection  of  the  second  Temple  by  promises  of  spiritual  glory. 

'*  Others  have  looked  upon  the  vision  as  purely  allegorical,  and  disregarding 
its  symbolical  character,  have  interpreted  it  according  to  mere  fancy.  But 
many  of  the  details  had  an  actual  existence  in  the  original  Temple,  and  some 
were  exactly  repeated,  as  though  they  were  essential  and  not  accidental 

*'If  we  are  surprised  at  the  minuteness  of  the  details,  we  must  remember 
that  it  is  of  the  essence  of  a  vision  that  the  seer  has  beibre  him  every  line,  as 
in  a  carefully  drawn  picture.  In  verbal  illustration  much  is  left  uudescribed, 
and  the  figures  employed  are  often  not  carried  out ;  but  in  a  vision  the  seer  at 
least  has  all  before  bin,  and  it  is  the  manner  of  Ezekiel  to  describe  all  he 
sees,  and  so  to  put  his  reader  in  the  same  position  as  himself.  This  may 
account  for  the  insertion  of  details  unimportant  in  themselves ;  but  the  num- 
bers and  figures  employed  are  not  without  their  meaning.  Bahr  has,  in  an 
elaborate  treatise,  shown  that  among  the  Eastern  nations  numbers  and  figures 
have  ever  had  a  highly  symbolical  character,  and  has  applied  such  symbolism 
to  the  details  of  the  Tabernacle  and  of  the  Temple.  Without  entering  into 
particulars,  we  may  remark  that  the  symbolical  numbers  of  the  Temple  of 
Solomon  were  repeated  in  the  vision  of  Ezekiel,  whicli  reproduces  with  scrupu- 
lous accuracy  the  leading  dimensions  of  the  most  holy  part  of  the  edifice,  and, 
even  where  there  are  variations,  employs  constantly  the  same  fundamental 
numbers  and  figures.  Among  the  Hebrews  the  perfect  figure  was  the  square 
or  the  eube,  and  harmony  was  thought  to  be  attained  by  exact  equality,  oir 

496 


Digitized  by 


Google 


OBAP.  ZLTHL  HOMJLBTIC  OOMMBNTAMY:  BZBKIEL. 


bj  the  repetition  of  like  dimensions.  Thus  in  the  ideal  Temple,  as  in  the 
real,  we  find  the  fundamental  measure  of  100  cubits  square,  which  is  main- 
tained in  the  Temple-court  and  in  the  court  of  sacrifice. 

'*  The  vision  is  intended  to  depict  the  perpetual  worship  of  the  God  of  heaTen 
in  the  Kingdom  of  Christ.  To  the  mind  of  an  Israelite  the  proper  figure  to 
represent  this  would  be  the  Temple  and  its  services,  with  people,  priest^  and 
prince  each  doing  their  fitting  part- 

''  In  other  parts  of  this  book  Ezekiel  points  forward  to  the  spiritual  teaching 
of  the  Gospel;  here  to  a  people  mourning  over  a  ruined  Temple,  scattered 
priesthood,  and  a  captive  king,  the  seer  sets  forth  in  visions  that  which  the 
last  of  the  prophets  foretold  in  words  (Mai.  i.  11).  This  will  also  account  for 
the  absence  of  all  mention  of  the  high  priest  and  his  office.  In  the  old  dis« 
pensation  the  chief  function  of  the  high  priest  was  the  performance  of  the  great 
act  which  typified  the  atonement  wrought  by  the  sacrifice  and  death  of  Christ 
for  the  sins  of  the  worM.  This  atone  i tent  was  effected  once  for  all  upon  the 
Cross,  and  in  the  new  dispensation  Christ  appears  in  the  midst  of  His  people 
as  their  Prince  and  Head,  leading  and  presenting  their  prayers  and  praises 
day  by  day  to  His  Father  in  heaven. 

*'  It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  vision  represents  the  coming  dispensation  as  a 
kingdom,  and  in  this  respect  has  especial  reference  to  the  rule  of  Messiah, 
foretold  under  the  name  of  David.  We  find  that  Solomon  took  a  special  part 
in  the  Temple-services  as  king,  and  here  there  are  new  and  remarkable  pro- 
visions for  the  prince ;  and  thus  is  brought  forth,  as  a  leading  feature  in  the 
vision,  the  figure  of  a  king  reigning  in  righteousness,  the  representative  of 
Jehovah  upon  eartL'^ — SpeaJcer's  CammefUartf, 

*'  The  description  of  the  Temple  does  not  correspond  with  the  plan  of  the 
Tabernacle,  or  that  of  the  first  Temple.  These  were  real  buildings,  and  were 
erected  according  to  the  patterns  shown  by  God  Himself  to  Moses  and  to 
David ;  but  this  is  an  ideal  communicated,  not  to  a  leader  or  king  in  order 
to  be  actually  carried  out,  but  to  a  seer,  who  wrote  down  his  vision  for  the 
consolation  of  the  captives  of  Babylon.  It  cannot  even  have  been  meant  that 
this  ideal  structure  should  have  been  built  by  the  Jews  after  the  return  from 
captivity,  or  at  any  subsequent  period.  The  dimensions  of  the  Temple,  as 
given  in  the  vision,  are  greater  than  the  entire  ancient  city  of  Jerusalem. 
The  dimensions  assigned  to  the  city  are  as  great  as  the  whole  of  Palestine 
between  the  Jordan  and  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  and  could  not  be  placed  on 
a  square  centring  at  Mount  Zion  without  covering  part  of  that  sea.  Plainly 
the  Temple  is  ideal,  and  so  is  the  city.  The  vision  was  given  to  keep  before 
the  minds  of  the  exiles  the  duty  of  rebuilding  Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  on 
their  restoration  to  their  own  land.  The  stupendous  scale  of  the  vision  was, 
we  presume,  intended  to  project  the  thoughts  of  devout  readers  into  far-distant 
times — ^not  the  times  of  the  present  Church  of  God,  but  those  of  the  future 
glory  and  blessing  on  the  earth,  centring  at  Zion  and  Jerusalem,  when  the 
Lord  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth,  and  the  Holy  City  shall  be  named 
Jehovah-Shammah,  'The  Lord  is  there.''' — Donald  Fraser,  D.D. 

"  That  there  be  things  hard  to  be  understood  in  the  Sacred  Scriptures  these 
nine  last  chapters,  as  well  as  the  beginning  of  Ezekiel,  do  abundantly  testify  ; 
and  such  difficult  things  are  in  these  last  that  they  have  made  many  men  of  the 
greatest  parts  to  tremble  at  the  thought  of  interpreting  them.  The  Babbina 
say  that  the  first  of  Ezekiel  and  these  last  chapters  are  inexplicable  secrets, 
and  understood  by  none,  and  therefore  forbid  their  disciples  to  read  them; 
adding,  when  Elias  sliall  come  he  will  explain  all  things.  Jerome,  that  sreat 
light  in  his  time,  professes  his  trepidation  hereat,  that  he  did  knock  at  a  doted 
496 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMBNTART:  BZBKISL  ohaf.  jlvul 


door.  Gregory  the  Greats  when  he  went  about  this  work,  said,  '  We  pursue  a 
midnieht  journey.'  Maldonate  aflSrms  that  this  last  prophecy  of  Ezekiel  is  so 
difficult  and  dark  that  it  appears  scarcely  possible  to  be  understood.  (Ecolam- 
padius  tells  us  that  in  chapter  xlil  there  is  the  grand  difficulty  which  ancient 
expositors  understood  not ;  and  he  brings  in  Rabbi  Solomon,  who  wrote  upon 
the  whole  Talmud,  saying  that  he  thinks  there  is  not  anything  extant  which 
aids  the  understanding  of  it ;  and  professes  that  neither  by  his  own  study,  aid 
of  ministers,  nor  by  his  own  reading,  he  attained  any  help  in  understanding  the 
meaning  of  this  building,  but  only  what  he  had  from  heaven  :  and  of  himself  he 
saith,  chap,  xlv.,  '  In  this  passage,  above  all  others,  I  feel  the  weakness  of  my 
own  understanding,  yet  silently  I  adore  its  mysteries.  It  is  good  to  tremble 
at  the  Word  of  God,  both  what  we  understand  and  what  we  understand  not ;  for 
all  is  of  equal  authority,  and  to  him  that  trembles  thereat  the  Lord  looketh, 
and  will  let  in  light.  The  vision  is  dark,  but  Ood  dwells  in  darkness ;  the 
Temple  and  city  are  dark,  but  Jehovah-Shammah,  *  The  Lord  is  there,*  whom 
we  most  humbly  desire  to  let  out  some  beams  of  light,  whereby  we  may  come 
to  understand  something  of  the  incredible  sweetness  of  these  dark  and  deep 
things. 

"  This  vision,  therefore,  points  out  the  introduction  of  a  better  hope,  viz.,  the 
Church  of  Christ  uuder  the  Gk>speL  A.  Lapide  tells  us  that  many  Babbins  and 
Jews  refer  this  Temple  and  city  to  the  Messiah,  expecting  that  He  should  hnild 
them  ;  and  because  this  third  Temple  and  new  city  are  not  yet  built  they  think 
the  Messiah  is  not  yet  come.  That  which  the  vision  doth  chiefly  hold  out  unto 
us  is,  the  building  of  the  Christian  Temple,  with  the  worship  thereof,  under 
Jewish  expressions  which  began  to  be  accomplished  in  the  apostles'  days.  And 
that  the  spiritual  Temple,  consisting  of  believing  Jews  and  Gentiles,  is  chiefly 
intended  we  may  see  from  that  correspondency  between  Ezekiel  and  John  in 
his  Grospel  and  Revelation." — GreenhiU. 

**  The  import  of  the  vision  in  the  main  is  this :  that  God  wonld  in  due  time 
accomplish  the  restoration  of  His  exiled  people  to  the  land  of  their  fathers, 
effect  the  reconstruction  of  their  ruined  Temple  and  reorganisation  of  its 
religious  services,  and  bless  them  with  manifest  tokens  of  His  favour.  At  the 
time  it  was  granted,  the  Hebrews  were  in  a  state  of  the  lowest  depression  in 
Babylon. 

**  Fourteen  years  had  elapsed  since  the  destruction  of  their  sacred  edifice, 
and  nothing  could  have  been  better  calculated  to  revive  their  drooping  hopes, 
reinvigorate  their  confidence  in  their  Covenant-God,  and  encourage  them  to 
return  to  Palestine  when  the  hour  of  their  liberation  should  arrive,  than  the 
brilliant  prospect  of  the  restoration  of  their  civil  and  religious  privileges,  which 
the  prophet  here  holds  out  to  their  view. 

"  Let  now  any  reader  of  ordinary  intelligence  turn  up  the  description  of  the 
vision,  and  let  him  be  asked  what  is  the  impression  which  it  naturally  makes 
upon  him,  and  which  he  finds  it  impossible  to  dismiss  from  his  mind,  and  he 
will  candidly  own  that  it  is  that  of  a  literal  Temple.  With  respect  to  the 
waters,  chap,  xlvii.,  it  is  altogether  diflerent.  Here  there  was  nothing  left  for 
the  Jews  to  do  in  bringing  about  the  realisation  of  the  vision.  Having  left  the 
Temple,  the  seat  of  the  Divine  residence,  and  the  source  whence  blessings  were 
to  flow  to  the  restored  Hebrew  nation,  the  prophet  is  carried  in  vision  south- 
wards into  the  regions  of  the  Dead  Sea,  which  had  been  noted  for  everything 
that  was  forbidden  and  noxious  in  its  aspect — the  very  embodiment  of  barrenness 
and  desolation.  These  were  now  to  be  converted  into  fertility  and  beauty.  As 
in  the  previous  condition  they  were  strikingly  symbolical  of  the  spiritually 
unproductive  and  abhorrent  character  of  idolatrous  Israel,  so  they  were  now  to 
serve  as  images  of  the  renewed  state  of  things  when  God  should  bring  back  His 

Si  m 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CBAP.  XLTm.  HOMJLISTIO  COMMENTARY:  EZBKIKL. 


people,  andy  according  to  His  promises^  bless  them  bj  conferring  upon  them 
abundantly  the  rich  tokens  of  His  regard.  'Bj  the  copious  effusions  of  the 
influences  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  He  would  restore  His  Church  to  spiritual  life,  and 
lender  ^er  instrumental  in  diffusing  blessings  to  the  world  around. 

"The  only  apparently  plausible  objection  that  can  be  taken  to  the  literal 
interpretation  of  the  Temple  is  founded  on  the  dimensions  assigned  to  it. 
It  remains,  however,  to  be  settled  whether  leeds  be  the  measure  intended, 
and  whether  the  language  be  not  susceptible  of  another  constmcticm.  Nor  is 
there  any  inconsistency  in  interpreting  one  part  of  the  vision  literally  and  the 
other  symbolically.  The  cases  are  perfectly  different.  In  the  one  a  literal 
Temple  was  required  to  meet  the  circumstances  of  the  exiled  Hebrews ;  in  the 
other,  though  outwardly  restored,  the  Temple  and  Temple-worship  would  still 
hare  left  them  in  a  state  of  spiritual  destitution,  if  ihey  had  not  received  the 
blessing  from  on  high.  The  rich  and  abundant  communication  of  this  blessing 
we  conceive  to  be  l^autifully  set  forth  under  the  image  of  a  river  issuing  forth 
from  the  Divine  presence  in  the  new  Temple,  and,  increasing  as  it  flows  in 
the  direction  of  the  Dead  Sea,  spreading  life  and  fertility  wherever  it  comes,* 
—E.  Henderson,  D.D. 

**lt  any  one  will  take  up  the  full  circuit  of  the  wall  that  encompassed  the 
holy  ground,  according  to  our  English  measure  it  will  amount  to  half  a  mile 
and  about  one  hundred  and  sixty-six  yards.  And  whosoever,  likewise,  will 
measure  the  square  of  Ezekiel  (chap,  xlii  20),  he  will  find  it  six  times  as  large 
as  this  (chap.  xL  5),  the  whole  amounting  to  three  miles  and  a  half  and  about 
one  hundred  and  forty  yards — a  compass  incomparably  larger  than  Mount 
Moriah  divers  times  over;  and  by  this  very  thing  is  shown  that  that  is 
spiritually  and  mystically  to  be  understood. 

"*  The  description  of  the  Temple  and  city  that  he  hath  given  in  the  end  of  his 
book,  as  it  was  a  prediction  of  some  good  to  come,  so  was  that  prediction  true^ 
thus  far  according  to  the  very  letter — namely,  that  there  should  be  a  Temple 
and  a  city  newly  btiilt ;  and  so  it  was  a  promise  and  a  comfort  to  the  people  then 
in  captivity  of  their  restoring  again  to  their  own  land,  and  their  enjoying 
Jerusalem  and  the  Temple  again  as  they  had  done  in  former  time  before  their 
removing  and  captivating  out  of  their  own  country.  But  as  for  a  literal 
respondency  of  that  city  and  Temple  to  all  the  particulars  of  his  description, 
it  IS  so  far  from  it  that  his  temple  is  delineated  larger  than  all  the  earthly 
Jerusalem,  larger  than  all  the  land  of  Canaan.  And,  thereby,  the  scope  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  that  ichnography  (ground-plot^  is  clearly  held  out  to  be, 
to  signify  the  great  enlarging  of  the  spiritual  Jerusalem  and  Temple,  the  Church 
under  the  Gospel,  and  the  spiritual  beauty  and  glory  of  it^  as  well  as  to  certify 
captived  Israel  of  hopes  of  an  earthly  city  and  Temple  to  be  rebuilt]  whioh 
eame  to  pass  upon  their  return  under  Cyrus.'' — lAghtfooU 

''The  general  scope  of  the  vision  may  be  twofold.  1.  To  assure  the  captives 
that  they  should  not  only  return  to  their  own  land  and  be  settled  there,  which 
had  been  often  promised  in  the  foregoing  chapters,  but  that  they  should  have, 
and  therefore  ought  to  be  encouraged  to  build,  another  Temple,  which  God 
would  own,  and  where  He  would  meet  and  bless  them ;  that  the  ordinances  of 
their  worship  should  be  revived,  and  the  sacred  priesthood  should  there  attend  ; 
and  though  they  should  not  have  a  king  to  live  in  such  splendour  as  formerly, 
yet  they  should  have  a  prince  or  ruler  that  should  countenance  the  Word  of 
Ck)d  among  them,  and  should  himself  be  an  example  of  a  diligent  attendance 
upon  it ;  and  that  prince,  priests,  and  people  should  have  a  very  comfortable 
settlement  in  their  own  land.  2.  To  direct  them  to  look  further  than  all  this, 
and  to  expect  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  who  had  before  been  prophesied  of 
498 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILBTIO  OOMMENTART:  SZBKIBL.  osaf.  xltiil 

under  the  name  of  David  (the  man  that  projected  the  building  of  the  first 
Temple),  and  who  shoald  set  up  a  spiritual  Temple,  even  the  Gospel  Church, 
the  glory  of  which  should  far  exceed  that  of  Solomon's  Temple,  and  which 
should  continue  to  the  end  of  time.  And  the  Gospel  Temple,  erected  by 
Christ  and  His  apostles,  was  so  closely  connected  with  the  second  material 
Temple,  and  was  erected  so  carefully  just  at  the  time  when  that  Temple  fell 
into  decay,  being  designed  to  receive  its  glories  when  it  resigned  tliein,  that  it 
was  propel  enough  that  they  should  both  be  referred  to  in  one  and  the  same 
vision ;  which  vision,  under  the  type  and  figure  of  a  Temple  and  altar,  priests 
and  sacrifices,  foreshowed  the  spiritual  worship  that  should  be  performed  in 
Gospel  times,  and  that  worship  perfected  at  last  in  the  kingdom  of  glory,  in 
which,  doubtless,  these  visions  will  have  their  full  accomplishment ;  if  not^  as 
some  think,  in  a  glorious  and  happy  state  of  the  Gospel  Church  to  take  place 
on  earth  in  latter  days.** — Benson. 

''It  is  a  great  thought  which  presents  itself  unadorned  to  our  view  in  the 
prophetico-symbolic  Temple:  God  henceforth  dwells  in  perfect  peace,  revealing 
Himself  in  the  unbounded  fulness  of  His  glory,  making  Himself  known  in  the 
living  Word  of  progressive,  savine,  and  sanctifying  redemption.  Everything  is 
plac^  upon  the  ample  circuit  of  the  Temple,  whose  extended  court  receives 
all  people,  and  through  whose  high  and  open  gates  the  King  of  Glory  is  to  enter 
in  (Ps.  xxiv.  7-9),  and  then  upon  the  order  and  harmony  of  the  Divine 
habitations,  the  well-proportioned  building  (chap.  xlii.  10)  ;  and  the  revela- 
tions of  the  holiest  are  stored  up  in  the  pure  deep  water  of  His  Word,  which 
in  life-giving  streams  issues  from  the  Temple.  The  stone  tables  of  the  Law  are 
consumed,  and  the  fresh  and  free  fountdn  of  eternal  truth  streams  forth  from 
the  Temple  of  the  Spirit,  quickening  and  vivifying  in  land  and  sea,  awakening 
by  its  creative  and  fructifying  power  a  new  and  mighty  race  on  earth.  And 
thus  hast  thou,  much-misjudged  yet  lofty  seer,  in  the  unconscious  depth  of  thy 
mysteriously  flowing  language,  set  up  upon  the  great  undistinguishing,  well- 
proportioned,  and  beautifully  compacted  building  a  type  of  the  simple  yet  lofty 
Temple  of  Christy  from  which  flows  the  spiritual  fountain  of  life." — UnireiL 

'*  The  ideal  Temple  exhibits,  not  the  precise  literal  outline,  but  the  essential 
character  of  the  worship  of  Messiah  as  it  shall  be  when  He  shall  exercise  sway 
in  Jerusalem  among  His  own  people,  the  Jews,  and  thence  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  A  Temple  with  sacrifices  now  would  be  a  denial  of  the  all-sufficiency  of 
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  He  who  sacrificed  before,  confessed  the  Messiah ;  He 
who  should  sacrifice  now  would  solemnly  deny  Him.  These  difficulties,  how- 
ever, may  be  all  seeming,  not  reaL  Faith  accepu  God's  Word  as  it  is,  waits  for 
the  event,  sure  that  it  will  clear  up  all  such  difficulties.  Perhaps,  as  some  think, 
the  beau-ideal  of  a  saored  commonwealth  is  given  according  to  the  then-existing 
pattern  of  Temple-services,  which  would  be  the  imagery  most  familiar  to  the 
prophet.  The  minute  particularising  of  details  is  in  accordance  with  Ezekiel's 
style,  even  in  describing  purely  ideal  scenes.  The  old  Temple  embodied,  in 
visible  forms  and  rites,  spiritual  truths  affecting  the  people,  even  when  absent 
from  it  So  this  ideal  Temple  is  made,  in  the  absence  of  the  outward  Temple, 
to  serve  by  description  the  same  purpose  of  symbolical  instruction  as  the  old 
literal  Temple  did  by  forms  and  acts.  As  in  the  beginning  God  promised  to  be 
a  Sanctuary  to  the  captives  at  the  Chebar,  so  now  at  the  close  is  promised  a 
complete  restoration  and  realisation  of  the  theocratic  worship  and  polity  undet 
Messiah,  in  its  noblest  ideal  (Jer.  xxxL  38-40).  Israel's  province  mav  here- 
after be  to  show  the  essential  identity,  even  in  the  minute  details  of  the  Temple- 
sacnnces,  between  the  Law  and  Gospel  (Bom.  x.  4,  8).  The  ideal  of  the 
theocratic  Temple  will  then  first  be  realised.'* — FanuseL 

49» 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XLvui.  HOMILBTW  00MMENTAR7:  BZBKIEL, 


'^  As  to  the  Messianic  character  of  the  snbstance  of  this  whole  rision  Jewish 
and  CUriKtian  commentators  are  generally  agreed ;  and  the  opinion  which, 
according  to  Jerome,  many  of  the  «iew8  entertained,  and  which  has  been  sup- 
ported by  the  rationahstic  expositors  after  the  example  of  Orotius^ — namely,  that 
Ezekiel  describes  the  Temple  of  Solomon  destroyed  by  Nebuchadnezzar  as  a 
model  lor  the  rebuilding  of  it  after  the  return  of  the  Jews  from  the  captivity — 
has  not  found  much  favour,  inasmuch  as,  apart  from  all  other  objections  to  which 
it  is  exposed,  it  is  upset  by  the  fact  that  not  only  are  its  supporterf  unable  to 
make  anything  of  the  description  of  the  spring  which  issues  from  the  threshold 
of  the  Temple,  but  they  are  also  unable  to  explain  the  separation  of  the  Temple 
from  the  city  of  Jerusalem ;  as  it  would  never  have  occurred  to  any  Jewish 
patriot^  apart  from  Divine  revelation,  much  less  to  a  priest  like  Ezekiel,  who 
claims  such  important  prerogatives  for  the  prince  of  the  family  of  David  in 
relation  to  the  Temple,  to  remove  the  house  of  Jehovah  from  Mount  Zion,  the 
seat  of  the  royal  house  of  David,  and  out  of  the  bounds  and  territory  of  the 
city  of  Jerusalem.  But  even  if  we  lay  aside  this  view,  and  the  one  related  to 
it,  vis.,  that  the  whole  vision  contains  nothing  more  than  ideal  hopes  and 
desires  of  better  things  belonging  to  that  age,  with  regard  to  the  future  restora- 
tion of  the  destroyed  Temple  and  kingdom,  the  commentators,  who  acknowledge 
the  Divine  origin  of  prophecy  and  the  Messianic  character  of  the  vision,  differ 
very  widely  from  one  another  with  reference  to  the  question  how  the  vision  is 
to  be  interpreted  ;  some  declaring  themselves  quite  as  decidedly  in  favour  of 
the  literal  explanation  as  others  in  favour  of  the  figurative  or  symbolico-typical 
Tiew,  which  they  regard  as  the  only  correct  and  Scriptural  ona** — KeiL 

"According  to  some  we  have  here  *a  model,  according  to  which,  on  the 
return  of  the  people,  the  Temple  should  have  been  rebuilt,' — a  building  specifica- 
tion by  Divine  authority.  But  this  opinion  forgets  that  we  have  here  to  do  not 
with  an  architect  but  with  a  prophet — with  one  whose  department  is  not  the 
hands  but  the  hearts,  which  he  has  to  awaken  to  faith  and  hope.  It  cannot 
produce  a  single  analogy  from  the  prophetic  region :  nowhere  have  the  prophets 
intruded  into  the  department  of  legislation,  for  which  under  the  old  covenant 
other  organs  were  provided.  Especially  all  the  other  prophecies  of  Ezekiel  of 
the  time  after  the  destruction  bear  not  a  legislative  but  a  hortatory  character. 
In  particular,  the  adjoining  prophecy  concerning  GrOg  and  Magog  leads  us  to 
expect  that  here  also  much  will  belong  to  mere  pictorial  description,  which  is 
excluded  if  we  ascribe  a  legislative  import  to  the  section.  To  this  is  added  the 
obvious  impossibility  of  erecting  a  building  according  to  the  specifications  given. 
These  suffice  only  to  give  play  to  the  imagination.  We  have  in  particular 
almost  nothing  of  materials,  to  which  so  much  space  is  devoted  in  the  descrip- 
tion of  Solomon's  Temple.  As  a  rule,  the  specifications  are  confined  to  the 
mere  measures  and  distances ;  whence  those  who,  like  Yillalpandus,  have  under- 
taken to  give  literal  plans  of  Ezekiel's  Temple  have  been  obliged  to  draw  much 
from  their  own  fancy.  Lastly,  in  the  building  of  the  second  Temple,  it  is  mani- 
fest that  no  reference  is  made  to  Ezekiel's  Temple.  As  the  reason  of  this  cannot 
be  sought  in  any  doubt  of  the  Divine  mission  of  Ezekiel,  whose  prophecies  were 
admitted  into  the  canon,  it  can  only  be  found  in  this,  that  men  saw  in  this 
prophecy  something  else  than  a  building  specification.  The  restoration  of  the 
city  and  the  Temple  rests  on  the  ground  of  the  firm  conviction  of  the  living 
power  and  indestructibility  of  the  Kingdom  of  God,  the  symbol  of  which  was 
the  Temple,  according  to  a  view  pervading  the  whole  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment. And  as  the  prophecy  reaches  beyond  its  first  fulfilment,  it  guarantees- 
that  within  the  Kingdom  of  Gk>d  life  shall  arise  out  of  every  death — that  the 
old  covenant  cannot  go  down  without  rising  again  gloriously  in  the  new.**-* 
HengsUnberg. 
500 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  EZEKTEL.  chap,  xlthl 

"  What  is  this  Temple  1  The  first  obvious  suggestion  is,  that  Ezekiel  was 
looking  forward  to  the  times  of  Ezra ;  that  this  Temple  is  an  anticipation  of  that 
of  which  Zerubbabel  brought  forth  the  headstone.  But  the  building  which 
rises  before  the  eyes  of  the  seer  covers  an  area  which  the  second  Temple  never 
can  have  occupied*  In  Ezekiel's  vision  there  is  a  distinct  allusion  to  that 
appearance  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  which  belonged,  the  Jews  say,  exclusively 
to  the  elder  building.  Christian  writers  have  availed  themselves  of  these 
circumstances  to  decide  peremptorily  that  the  vision  is  of  a  spiritual,  not  an 
earthly  Temple.  The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  such  an  opinion  are  very  great. 
Accurate  admeasurements  in  feet  and  cubits  seem  as  if  they  must  relate  to  a 
visible,  not  to  an  invisible  fabric^  There  are  still  two  possible  opinions.  One 
is  popular  among  many  of  our  countrymen*  It  is,  that  a  Temple  exactly 
answering  to  Ezekiel's  description  will  appear  hereafter  in  Jerusalem.  The 
other,  that  Ezekiel  carried  with  him  into  Ghaldea  the  habits,  the  prejudices,  and 
formality  of  the  priestly  order  to  which  he  belonged.  Therefore,  though  he 
had  high  moral  j)urposes  and  divine  instincts,  he  could  not  but  regard  the 
reappearance  of  a  Temple  like  that  which  Nebuzaradan  had  destroyed,  only 
more  magnificent,  as  the  consummation  of  an  Israelite's  dreams  and  hopes. 

"  But  where  did  the  prophet  get  these  measures  ]  To  what  did  they  corre- 
spond t  There  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubt,  I  conceive,  that  the  general  form 
and  construction  of  the  building,  the  different  parts  of  which  it  was  to  consist, 
the  cherubim  and  palm-trees  which  were  to  adorn  it,  were  suggested  to  him  by 
that  which  he  had  actually  seen.  If  he  taught  that  the  future  was  to  be  unlike 
the  past,  that  there  was  no  common  root  out  of  which  they  both  grew,  he  would 
be  faithless  to  his  vocation,  he  would  be  forgetting  the  permanent  and  eternal 
Being.  Solomon's  Temple  had  been  EzekiePs  primer  or  first  lesson-book.  I  have 
anticipated  what  I  have  to  say  to  those  who  maintain  that  Ezekiel  is  giving  us  the 
pattern  of  a  Temple  made  of  living  stones,  not  of  stones  hewn  out  of  an  earthly 
quarry.  By  a  spiritual  Temple  they  do  not,  I  trust,  mean  an  unsubstantial 
Temple,  one  built  of  clouds  and  mists,  one  erected  by  the  eye  which  sees  it. 
They  believe,  doubtless,  the  spiritual  temple  to  be  a  spiritual  society,  possessing 
a  real  unity  inhabited  by  the  Divine  Presence  resting  on  the  Divine  Name. 
Well,  I  do  not  doubt  that  Ezekiel  saw  more  or  less  clearly  the  pattern  in 
earthly  forms.  But  we  must  remember,  first,  not  to  confound  the  pattern  with 
the  earthly  forms  which  set  it  forth ;  secondly,  we  must  assure  ourselves  that 
whatever  is  spiritual  and  substantial  will  seek  to  find  some  expression  for  itself, 
to  make  the  things  of  earth  into  mirrors  which  may  reflect  at  least  a  portion  of 
its  glory.  In  chap.  xlvL  8  we  have  announced  a  great  moral  and  political  law 
which  was  a  necessary  and  natural  corollary  from  the  doctrine  that  the  Temple 
was  to  be  the  building  which  denoted  the  restoration  of  the  national  society. 
This  is  a  law  which  those  who  merely  talk  of  a  spiritual  Temple  without  be- 
lieving that  that  Temple  is  to  make  its  influence  felt  in  this  world  would  never 
dream  of  promulgating.  This  is  a  law  which  it  was  most  strictly  in  the  function 
of  a  Jewish  prophet  to  assert,  not  as  proceeding  from  him,  not  even  as  proceed- 
ing from  Moses,  but  as  coming  from  the  mouth  of  the  Lord." — F.  D,  Maurice, 

"The  views  entertained  upon  the  vision  generally  may  be  ranged  under  four 
classes.  L  The  hisioricO'liieraly  which  takes  all  as  a  prosaic  description  of  what 
had  existed  in  the  times  immediately  before  the  captivity,  in  connection  with 
Solomon's  Temple.  II.  The  historico-ideal.  According  to  it  the  pattern  exhibited 
to  Ezekiel  differed  materially  from  anything  that  previously  existed,  and  pre- 
sented for  the  first  time  what  should  have  been  after  the  return  from  the 
captivity,  though  from  the  remissness  and  corruption  of  the  people  it  never 
was  properly  realised.  IIL  The  Jewish  carnal  view.  It  is  the  opinion  of  some 
Jewish  writers  that  the  description  of  Ezekiel  was  actually  followed  by  the 

5C1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


CHAP.  XLTin,  HOMILETIO  COMMENTARY:  BZEKIBL. 

children  of  the  captivity  as  far  as  their  circumstancet  would  allow,  and  that 
Uerod,  when  he  renovated  and  enlarged  it,  copied  after  the  same  pattern.  Bat 
as  this  was  necessarily  done  in  an  imperfect  manner,  it  waits  to  be  properly 
accomplished  by  the  Messiah,  who,  when  He  appears,  shall  canse  the  Temple 
to  be  reared  precisely  as  here  described.  IV.  The  ChrisUan'gpirUual  or  typical 
vie^,  according  to  which  the  whole  representation  was  not  intended  to  find 
either  in  Jewish  or  Christian  times  an  express  and  formal  realisation,  but  was 
a  grand  complicated  symbol  of  the  good  which  God  had  in  resenre  for  His 
Church,  especially  under  the  coming  dispensation  of  the  Gospel  There  are 
several  considerations  to  be  kept  in  view  in  the  interpretation  of  the  risioii. 
1.  That  the  description  purports  to  be  a  vision — a  scheme  of  things  exhibited 
to  the  mental  eye  of  the  prophet  in  the  visions  of  God.  This  alone  marks  it  to 
be  of  an  ideal  character.  2.  That  this  is  confirmed  by  the  substance  of  it^  as 
there  is  much  that  seems  obviously  designed  to  foroe  on  us  the  conviction  of 
its  ideal  character.  There  are  thines  in  the  description  which,  taken  literally, 
are  in  the  highest  degree  improbable,  and  even  involve  natural  impossibilities. 
3.  That  some  may  be  disposed  to  imagine  that,  as  they  expect  certain  physical 
changes  to  be  eff^ected  upon  the  land  before  the  prophecy  can  be  earned  into 
fulfilment,  these  may  be  adjusted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  admit  of  the  prophet's 
measurements  being  literally  applied.  It  is  impossible,  however,  to  admit  such 
a  supposition.  4  That  the  vision,  as  it  must,  if  understood  literally,  imply 
the  ultimate  restoration  of  the  ceremonials  of  Judaism,  so  it  inevitably  places 
the  prophet  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament 
5.  That,  holding  the  description  to  be  conclusively  of  an  ideal  character,  we 
affirm  that  the  idealism  is  precisely  of  the  same  kind  as  that  which  appeared  in 
some  of  the  earlier  visions — visions  that  must  necessarily  have  already  passed 
into  fulfilment^  and  which  therefore  may  justly  be  regarded  as  furnishing  a  key 
to  the  right  understanding  of  the  one  before  us.  6.  That,  looking  to  the  manifold 
and  minute  particulars  given  in  the  description,  some  may  be  disposed  to  think 
it  highlv  improbable  that  anything  short  of  an  exact  and  literal  fulfilment 
should  have  been  intended.  7.  That  it  may  be  asked  whether  the  feeUne 
against  a  spiritual  understanding  of  the  vision  and  a  demand  for  outward 
scenes  and  objects  literally  corresponding  to  it  does  not  spring  to  a  large 
extent  from  false  notions  regarding  the  ancient  Temple  and  its  ministrations 
and  ordinances  of  worship,  as  if  these  possessed  an  independent  value  apart 
from  the  spiritual  truths  they  symbolically  expressed  t  On  the  contnury,  the 
Temple,  with  all  that  belonged  to  it,  was  an  embodied  representation  of  Divine 
realities.  8.  That  in  the  interpretation  of  the  vision  we  must  keep  carefully 
in  mind  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  given,  and  look  at  it,  not  as  from  a 
New  but  as  from  an  Old  Testament  point  of  view.  We  must  throw  ourselvea 
back  as  far  as  possible  into  the  position  of- the  prophet  himself.  He  speaks 
chiefly  of  Gospel  times,  but  as  one  still  dwelling  under  the  veil  and  uttering 
the  l^guage  of  legal  times.** — Patrick  Fairbaim,  l).D. 


608 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


INDEL 


AonviTT,  God  In  btimaii,  116 

AdaptedneM  of  Qod's  meMages,  30 

Adoltary,  fpiritoAL  280 

AdTenities  of  the  Gharch,  the.  411 

Afflicted,  Qod  the  lanctoajry  of  the,  129 

A|;ent  of  Divine  Teogeftnce,  the,  328 

Altar  »  repreMnfcation  of  Ohriit,  the«  442 

— —  ma  emblem  of  tme  wonhip,  the,  467 

—  the  DiTinely  authorised,  468 

Apoetusy,  Israel's,  166 ;  the  punisliment  of,  170 

Appeal  of  religion  to  the  feeUngs,  the,  127 

Architect  of  the  Divine  Temple,  the,  429 

Arty  the  noblest  province  of,  4^ 

Aspects  of  Gtod's  government  over  men,  68 

— —  under  which  Qod  communicates  with 
men,  184 

Atheistio  idea,  the,  486 

Attainments,  high  spiritual,  430 

Audacity  of  evil,  the,  410 

Bad  news,  862 

Bad  shepherd,  a,  869 

Balances,  Just,  471 

Banquet,  a  strange^  421 

Barrenness  and  fruitf ulnesi,  moraL  487 

Beauty,  841 

Believer,  the  security  of  the,  891 

Beet  efforts  of  man,  the,  469 

Blasphemy,  284 

Blessing,  the  Church  a  souroe  of,  866       « 

Blessing  of  food  and  clothing,  the,  447 

Boldnessp  spiritual,  866 

Bones,  vision  of  the  dry,  400 

Brain,  ft  wicked,  412 

Building,  the  Church  of  God  a,  480 

Burial  of  the  slain,  the,  420 

Call  to  repentance,  an  earnest.  208 

Canaan,  the  earthly,  a  tvpe  of  the  lieavenly,  490 

Care  over  His  people,  GkkI's,  861 

Catalogue  of  Jerusalem's  sins,  the,  267 

Chambers  of  imagery,  94 

of  the  Temple,  the,  488 

Christ,  a  Tree  prepared  by  God,  189 

Christian  Churoh,  Temple  a  symbol  of  the, 
488 

Christians,  the  real  security  of,  167 

Church  a  source  of  blessing,  the,  866 :  the  Ad- 
versities of  the,  411;  of  God  a  nuilding, 
the,  480;  the  entrance  to  the,  436;  the 
Metsianic,  449;  the  law  of  God's,  467;  of 
God,  the  centrality  of  the,  492 

Citisens.  holy,  492 

(%ty,  a  happy,  492 ;  of  God.  the,  498 ;  of  the 
bivine  Presence,  the,  494 

Commission,  requisites  for  ezecuUng  the,  24 

Commonwealth,  an  ideal,  471 

Conclusions  as  to  sin,  66 

Conditions  of  spiritual  knowledgOi  02 

Confederacies,  unholy,  826 

Consideration,  201 

Conscious  sin,  391 

Conversion,  360 ;  Israel's,  248 

Converted,  man,  889 

Corruption  of  true  worship.  9S 

of  the  nation,  the,  274  . 

Creation's  materials  instructing  men,  60 

Credibility  of  prophecy,  the,  w 

Critics,  the  preacher^s,  864 

Dabknbsb,  to 

Dead,  the  grim  welcome  of  the,  841 

Death,  383 ;  in  the  presence  of,  398 ;  a  vision  of 
sudden,  123 ;  of  Esekiel's  wife,  Jerusalem's 
destruction  typified  by,  800 

Decorum,  religious,  476 

Defeat  of  the  enemiea  of  God's  people^  416 


Defeated,  the  moan  of  the,  828 

Defiler,  the,  883 

Deliverance,  the  mark  of,  106 

Delusiveness  of  idolatry,  326 

DepArting  God,  a,  131 

Designation  of  the  prophet,  general  oondltlont 

of  the,  7 ;  preliminary  steps  to  the,  9 
Desolations  of  the  sword,  the,  338 
Difficulties  and  their  conquest,  337 
Dignity  of  the  civil  ruler,  the,  461 
Divine  communications  to  man,  426 

dispensations,  the  mixed  character  of,  240 

faithfulness,  the,  488 

impartiality,  the.  387 

generosity,  the,  4*2 

-^  government,  the  unswerving  equity  of,  347 

Justice,  the,  368 

judgment  on  unfaithful  ministers,  860 

Leader,  the,  476 

«<—  manifestations,  462 
—  mercy,  the,  465 

the  pitifulness  of  the,  349 

message,  the  human  side  of  the,  882 

protection,  the,  418 

-^  revelations,  466 

Buler,  the,  466 

solicitude,  868 

sympathy  with  nature,  the,  877 

Temple,  the  grandeur  of  the,  449 

things,  progress  in,  432 

tlie  vision  of,  466 

vengeance,  the  agent  of,  828 

the  terribleness  of  the,  836 

Word,  the,  392 

the  infallible  certitude  of  the,  419 


Divinely  authorised  altar,  the,  458 

inspired  seer,  a,  426 

Duty  accepted  for  reasons.  26 ;  neglect  of,  847 ; 

ministerial,  466  ;  of  the  wealthy*  ti>«>  477 
EOTFT  humbled,  319 
Elders  before  Ezekiel,  the,  218 
Election,  Israel's,  224 
Emotional  worship.  97 
Empire,  the  river  the  natural  louroe  of,  382 
End  of  man's  existence,  the,  166 
Enemies  of  Qod,  the,  367 

of  the  truth,  fierce  onslaught  of  the,  408 

God's  proceedings  against  Mis,  413 

of  God's  people,  signal  defeat  of  the,  416 

God's  dealings  with  His,  418 

Entrance  to  the  Church,  the,  436 

Equity  of  the  Divine  government,  the,  847 

religion  the  basis  of  true,  469 

of  God's  government,  the,  208 

Error  preached,  143 

Estimates,  false,  350 

Evidences  of  Divine  judgment,  421 

Evil,  the  audacity  of,  410;  the  power  of,  412; 

increase  of,  83 
Bsekiel's  Temple,  reflected  ra^s  from  the  best 

literary  lights  on  the  significance  of,  494 
Faob  of  God,  the  hidden  and  the  open,  422 
Faithful  warning,  846 ;  the  heritage  of  the,  488 
Faithfulness,  the  Divine,  488 

in  stewardship,  110 

Fallen  greatness,  332 

False  estimates,  860 

Family   blessing,    minliterial    maintenanee  a 

souroe  of,  467 
Fite  of  the  proud,  the,  420 
Fear,  reasons  for,  888 

Features  of  Divine  disciplinary  government,  108 
Feelings,  appeal  of  relijpon  to  the,  127 
Feet  and  wings,  118 

603 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TNPFX. 


Fertility  of  nature,  the,  378 

Fidelity  in  God'i  lenrice,  4t'>6 

Filial  iMue  of  DiTino  puuisliiuent,  the,  421 

Final  judi;ments  uiK>n  JeruHaleui,  297 

Fiihers  in  Qoepel  waters,  486 

Food,  spiritual,  479 

the  moral  tigniflouice  of  daily,  478 

aod  clothing,  the  bleulng  of,  447 

Freedom  fccm  (utore  erila,  muleading  hopes  of, 

140 
Fulfilled  prophetjr,  419 
Funeral  cnant  o/er  the  graves  of  fallen  nations, 

339 
Qenerositt,  the  Divine,  44S 

justice  and,  477 

Genuine  repentanoe,  860 

Glories  of  lieaveQ,  the,  468 

Glory  of  MoMiah's  Kingdom,  the,  188 

God  a  hedge  about  His  people,  276 

a  departing;  181 

and  Nature,  876 

glorified  in  redemption,  888 

revealed  in  Judgment,  326 

the  enemies  of,  367 

the  presence  of,  871 

the  name  of,  886 

—  the  hidden  and  the  open  face  of,  428 

—  the  visions  of,  429 
the  law  of,  480 

the  heritage  of  the  good,  467 

the  impartiality  of,  489 

the  city  of,  493 

the  judiciary  administraiion  of,  66 

in  human  activity,  116 

the  sanctuary  of  the  afflicted.  129 

hiding  Himself  from  Israel,  238 

slow  to  punish,  411 

God's  action  against  iniquities,  46 ;  affecting  Hit 
servants,  48 

call  to  service  a  trust,  86 

care  over  His  people,  861 

—  for  His  servants,  492 

comfort  in  punishment  achieved,  67 

dealings  with  His  enemies,  418 

-^  disclosure  of  sin,  90 

goodness  a  motive  for  ffis  activity,  422 

government  over  men,  some  aspects  of,  68 

judgments  on  Israel  justified,  173 

-^  knowledge  of  the  tactics  of  the  wicked,  412 

messages,  the  adapted  ness  of,  30 

— ^  motive  in  salvation,  888 
name,  226 

—  people,  the  sufferings  of,  411 

— -  proceeiiings  against  His  enemies,  413 

purpose  of  mercy  towards  Israel,  177 

punitive  justice,  884 

sword  of  vengeance  against  Jerusalem,  250 

treatment  of  rebels,  466 

ways  made  known,  87 

Good,  the  inheritance  of  the,  488 

Shepherd,  the,  364 ;  king,  a,  471 

Gospel,  the  spread  of  the,  486;  the  power  of 

the,  486  ;  waters,  fishers  iii,  486 
Government  of  God,  the,  19 

the  unswerving  equity  of  the  Divine,  347 

features  of  Divine  disciplinary,  103 

the  equity  of  God's,  208 

Gradation,  the  law  of,  447 

Gradualness  of  Divine  revelation,  the,  485 

Graves  of  fallen  nations,  a  funeral  chant  over 

the,  339 
Graves  of  our  kindred,  the,  841 
Greatness,  the  perils  of,  882 
Greatness,  fallen.  332 
Grim  welcome  of  the  dead,  the,  841 
Guardian,  a  national,  846 
Happt  citv,  a,  492 
Hatred,  370 

604 


Heari-ienewal,  888 

of  stone  and  heart  of  flesh,  the,  889 

Heathen  nations,  the  prophecies  against,  SM 
Heaven,  the  gluiies  or,  463 
Heritage  of  the  good,  God  the,  467 

of  the  faithful,  the,  488 

High  spiritual  attainments,  480 

Highest  truths,  the,  440 

Holiness  the  law  of  the  new  Temple,  454 

Holy  place,  the  most,  440;  priesthood,  a,  468, 

oitixens,  492 
Hope  for  a  mined  nation,  878 
Horrors  of  war,  the,  324 
Human  body,  the  tacredness  of  the,  421 
life,  the  Temple-river  emblematic  of  n» 

ligion  in  the  different  stages  of^  486 
Human  perplexity,  899 

side  of  the  Divine  messafe,  the,  882 

Humility,  464 

Hypocritical  inquirers  after  Qod,  145 

IDBA,  the  atheistic,  486 

Idolatry  in  the  heart,  146 ;  vengeance  on,  8M; 

the  delusiveness  of,  825 
Imagery,  chambers  of,  94 
Impeachment  of  unfaithful  mlers,  857 
Impartiality,  the  Divine,  887 ;  of  Qod.  the,  489 
Individual  responsibility,  846 
Individuality  of  the  soul,  the,  194 
Infallible  certitude  of  the  Divine  Word,  the,  419 
Infatuation  of  the  wicked,  the,  419 

—  of  unbelief,  860 
Influence,  spiritual,  487 
Inheritance  of  the  wicked,  the,  802 

of  the  good,  the,  488 

Iniquities,  God*s  action  against,  46 

—'  affecting  His  people,  God's  action  against,  48 
Inquirers  after  Gk>d,  hypocritical,  145 

of  false  prophets,  the,  148 

Israel,  God's  purpose  of  mercy  towards,  177 
Israer  s  apostasy,  166 
->—  conversion ,  248 
-^  election,  224 

fallen  royalty,  lamentation  over,  212 

JsHOYAR,  the  opposition  of,  828 
the  revelation  of  the  glory  of,  461 

—  the  true  worship  of,  474 

Jehovah  •  Shammah :  the   city  of  the  Divine 

Presence,  494 
Jerusalem,  the  punishment  of,  287 
Jerusalem's  destruction,  the  prophecy  of,  247 

typified  by  the  death  of  Exekiel's  wife,  800 

fall  and  rising,  260 

—  sins,  the  catalogue  of,  267 
Joining  the  sticks,  408 
Judah,  the  sin  of,  284 

and  Samaria,  sins  and  punishment  of,  291 

Judgment,  Gk>d  revealed  in,  825 
evidence  of  Divine,  421 

—  the  last  warning  of,  294 

Tyro  threatened  with,  806 

Judgments  of  God  upon  nations,  the,  152 

upon  Israel  justified,  God's,  178 

Judiciary  administration  of  God,  the,  06 
Just  balances,  471 

Justice  and  generosity,  477 

the  Divine,  863 

God's  punitive,  884 

Justified,  man,  389 

Etndrbd,  the  graves  of  our,  841 

Eling,  a  good,  471 

of  Tyre,  the,  818 

Kingdom  of  God,  the  unity  of  the,  401 

of  Judah,  lamentation  for  the,  215 

Kingly  office,  the,  463 

Knowledge,  conditions  of  spiritual,  62 

Lament,  a  pathetic,  324 

Lamentation  over  Israel's  fallen  royalty,  21S 

for  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  215 


uigitized  by 


Google 


INDSX. 


lAnd  question)  the,  470 

LMi  warning  of  jn4iffment^  the,  294 

LftwofOo<Ltbe,  490 

of  maation,  the,  447 

of  God's  Church,  the,  467 

—  of  the  onrighteoos  and  righteous  son,  the, 
200 

Laws  for  lodging  moral  conduct,  89 
Leader,  the  Divine,  476 
Lies,  refuges  ofjJL22 
Life,  the  new,  890 

national,  401 

the  river  of  the  Water  of,  481 

—  weak  points  in  human,  77 

nnestimated  influences  on  human,  113 

Lessons  of  suffering,  the, '827 

from  the  Valley  of  Vision,  898 

Hah  converted,  889 

—  and  Nature,  870 

—  Divine  commnnioatloiis  to,  428 
^istified,  889 

of  war,  the,  419 

■        sinning^  884 

the  best  efforts  of;  459 

Han's  destiny,  how  brought  about,  75 

—  existence,  the  end  of,  155 
Hanifestations,  Divine,  462 

Hen,  some  aspects  under  which  Ood  communi- 
cates with,  134 
Hen's  evasion  of  the  Divine  interference,  187 
Heroy.  the  pitifulness  of  the  Divine,  849 

the  Divine,  466 

Hessage,  an  urgent,  399 

Hessiah's  Kingdom,  the  glory  of,  188 

Hessianic  Cliurch,  the,  449 

Hinisters,  the  Divine  judgment  on  unfaithful,  860 

Hinisterial  calling,  the,  347 

duties  and  privileges,  448 

duty,  4G6 

— -—  maintenance  a  source  of  family  blessing,  467 

Hialeading  hopes  of  freedom,  140 

Hixed  character  of  Divine  dispensations,  the,  240 

Hoan  of  tho  defeated,  the,  828 

Honarch  humbled,  a  proud.  326 

Horal  barrenness  and  fruitfulnesa,  487 

—  conduct,  laws  for  judging,  89 

corruption  in  the  Church,  169 

reform,  391 

signi6oance  of  dailv  food,  478 

Horality,  religion  and,  98 

Homing  prayer,  476 

Houming  for  other  men's  sins,  105 

Kami  of  Ood,  the,  385 

Nation,  the  corruption  of  the,  274 

—  the  overthrow  of  a  grea^  822 

—  hope  for  a  ruined,  876 

—  the  resuscitation  of  an  effete,  895 
National  unity,  828,404 

-»-  greatness  no  guarantee  of  permanence,  880 
— ^  guardian,  a,  346 

—  ruin,  sin  the  cause  of,  380 
life,  401 

Nations,  the  interdependence  of,  882 

a  funeral  chant  over  the  graves  of  fallen,  339 

—  the  judgment  of  God  upon,  152 
Nature,  God  and,  376 

-^  man  and,  376 

—  the  Divine  sympathy  with,  377 

—  the  fertility  of,  378 

—  the  productiveness  o^  890 
Neglect  of  duty,  347 
Never-ending  spring,  487 
New  life,  the,  890 

News,  bad,  352 
Noah,  Daniel  and  Job,  158 
OmoB,  the  prieslly,  435;  the  kingly,  468 
Ofllces  of  civil  and  spiritual  watchmen  oom- 
pared  and  contrasted,  344 


Onslaught  of  the  enemiea  of  the  truth,  408 

Opposition  of  Jehovah,  the,  828 

Oppression,  199 

Order,  the  perfect,  117 

Ordinances  of  the  Temple,  the,  457 

Overthrow  of  a  great  nation,  the,  822 

Pabablib,  teaching  by,  183 

People  of  God,  the  uni^  of  the,  404 

Perfect  order,  the,  117 

Perils  of  greatness,  the,  832 

Permanence,  national  greatness  no  guarantea 

of.  330 
Perplezitv,  human,  899 
Picture  of  righteousness,  a,  197 
Pitifulness  of  the  Divine  mercy,  the,  849 
Place  of  sacrifice,  a,  484 

—  the  most  holy,  440 
Population,  an  increadng,  892 
Postulates-for  an  effective  watchman,  88 
Power  of  evil,  the.  412 

of  the  Gospel,  the,  486 

of  the  Word  of  God,  the,  64 

Prayer,  the  nature,  necessity,  and  powtrol,  882 

morning,  476 

Prayers,  unsatisfied,  108 
Preacher,  the  suoeesaful,  899 
Preachers  critics,  the,  854 
Preaching,  the  secret  of  successful,  886 
Presence,  retumingfrom  the,  131 

of  God,  the,  371 

with  His  people,  the.  405 

the  withdrawal  of  the  Lord's,  80 

Priesthood,  a  holy,  468 
Priestly  ofBce,  the,  485 
Productiveness  of  nature,  the,  390 
Progress  in  Divine  things,  432 

of  truth,  the,  484 

Promise  of  the  Spirit,  the,  422 

Promised  blessing,  244 

Prophecy  of  JeruMJem's  destruction,  247 

the  credibility  of,  418 

fulfilled,  419 

Prophecies  against  heathen  nations,  804 
Prophets,  the  inquirers  of  false.  148 
Prosperi^,  spiritual,  886 
Protection,  the  Divine,  413,  432 
Proud,  the  fate  of  the.  420 

monarch  humbled,  a,  326 

Punish,  God  slow  to,  411 

Punishment,  the  final  issue  of  the  Divine,  411 

—  achieved,  God's  comfort  in,  67 
of  apostasy,  the  170 

of  Jerusalem,  the,  287 

QUKSTION,  a  suggestive,  4M 

KEA80N8  for  fear,  888 

Bebels,  God's  treatment  of,  465 

Bedemption,  God  glorified  in,  388 

Reflected  ra^  from  the  best  literary  lights  oo 

the  significance  of  Eaekiers  Temple,  494 
Reform,  moral,  391 
Refuges  of  lies  broken  up,  122 
Religion,  spurious,  466 

the  basil  of  true  equity,  469 

and  morality,  98 

Religious  decorum,  476 

—  sensibility,  the  sources  of,  14 

movements,  women  in,  142 

Repentance,  genuine^860 

not  eflScaoious,  204 

— —  an  earnest  call  to,  208 
Requisites  for  executing  the  oommlsiloo,  91 
Responsibility,  individual,  346 
Restraints  in  serving  the  liord,  41 
Resurrection,  spiritual,  898 
Resuscitation  of  an  effete  nation,  the,  396 
Returning  from  the  Presenoe,  181 
Revelation,  the  gradualness  of  th*>  Divine,  485 
of  the  glory  of  Jehovah,  the,  451 

uiyiiizeu  uy  x^j  v>' v>' V  LV^ 


II^DETL 


B«t«lAiioiu,  DiTine,  466 
RcTiUng  God't  peopU,  M3 
B«TiTal,  the  seoret  of  tnM,  S98 
Bightoonmeu,  &  piotnre  tk^  IVl 
Biver  of  the  Water  of  Life,  the,  481 
Birer  the  natural  souroe  of  empire,  the,  8SS 
Royalty  and  worihip,  476 
Baler,  the  Dirine,  456 

the  dignitT  of  the  dviL  461 

Bolert,  impeaohinent  of  anfaithf  ul,  367 

Sabbath  pririlegee,  476 

Baered  terrible  sword-iong,  the,  253 

SacredneM  of  the  haman  body,  the,  421 

Baerifice,  a  phioe  of,  434 

BalTation  U  of  the  Lord,  162 

Ood't  motive  io,  388 

Samaria,  the  tin  of,  291,  282 

Secret  of  laooeMful  preaching,  the,  886 

Seoarity  of  the  beUerer,  the,  891 

of  OhriitianB,  the  real,  167 

Seer,  a  DiTinely  inipired,  426 
Sendbility,  the  loaroee  of  religious  14 
SendtlTeneu  to  spiritual  eril,  49 
Senrants,  Qod*e  oare  for  Hia,  499 
Service,  fideUty  in  Qod'i,  466 
Barring  the  Lord,  reetraintt  in,  41 
Shepherd,  a  bad,  869 

the  good,  864 

the  qualiftcationi  of  the  tme^  860 

Sin,  nnrepented,  848 

—  the  diaaatroni  effecte  of.  889 
-»-  the  oaoie  of  national  nun,  880 
— —  oonadouf,  891 

— —  tome  oonolnaione  at  to^  66 
— —  trouble  on  tronUe  for  71 

—  Qod*e  difolorare  of,  90 

-»-  of  the  first  generation  of  Israel,  229 

—  of  the  second  generation  of  Israel.  888 
of  Jadah,the,284 

Sinning,  man,  884 

Sins,  monming  for  other  men*!,  106 

Slain,  the  hmal  of  the,  420 

Slander,  877 

Smelting-fumaee,  a  threefold,  271 

Social  instinct,  the,  446 

Solicitude^  the  Divine,  868 

Soul,  the  individnsUty  of  the,  194 

Sour  crapes,  192 

Speech  ox  the  wicked,  the,  371 

Spirit,  the  promise  or  the,  422 

Spiritnal  boldness,  865;  prosperiW,  886;  re 

snrrection,  398 ;  food,  479 ;  inflaence,  487 ; 

OTil,  sensitiveness  to,  49;  adultery,  280 
Spoils  of  a  great  victory,  the,  420 
Spread  of  the  Gospel,  the,  486 
Spring,  never-ending,  487 
Spurious  religion,  455 
Step  higher,  a,  484 
Stewardship,  faithfulness  hi,  HO 
Sticks,  Joining  the,  408 
Still  upward,  441 
Strange  banquet,  a,  421 
Successful  preacher,  the,  800 
Suffering.  372 
— —  the  lessons  of,  827 
Sufferings  of  God's  people,  the,  411 
Suggestive  auestion,  a,  486 
Summary  of  the  sins  and  punishment  of  Judah 

and  Samaria,  291 
Sword,  the  desolations  of  the,  888 
Tbaohino  by  parables,  188 
Temple,  the  architect  of  the  Divine,  420 

—  the  chambers  of  the,  483 

<— >  •  symbol  of  the  Christian  Ohurch,  the,  488 

506 


Temple,  a  wmqieutattoi  of  Ohiist  and  Hie 

Ohvrah,  the,  440 
— —  the  grandeur  of  the  Divine,  449 
— ^  holiness  the  law  of  the  new,  454 

the  new,  466 

tbe  ordinances  of  the,  467 

Temple-river  emblematic   of  religion  in  tha 

different  stages  of  human  life,  the,  486 
Temple-workers,  441 

Time  of  God*s  communication  to  be  noted,  186 
Trials,  254 

Triumph  of  the  wicked,  the,  871 
Trouble  on  trouble  for  sin,  71 
True  shepherd,  the  qualifications  of  the,  860 
Truth,  the  onslaught  of  the  enemies  of  the,  408 

the  progress  of,  484 

Truths,  the  highest,  440 

TjTt  threatened  with  judgment,  806 

the  king  of,  818 

^re's  greatness  and  downfall,  808 
UVBiLixr,  the  infatuatioiiof,  360 
Unestimated  influeooes  on  human  life,  118 
Unholy  oonfederaeies,  826 
Unity,  national,  828,  404 

of  the  Kingdom  of  God»  the.  401 

of  the  people  of  God,  the,  404 

Unsatisfied  prayers.  106 

Unrepented  sin,  848 

Unrighteous  and  righteous  mb.  the  law  of,  900 

Upward,  still,  441 

Urgent  messajp^.  an,  809 

Vain  worship,  89 

Valley  of  Vision,  leesons  from  the,  898 

Vengeance  on  idolatry,  824 

the  agent  of  Divine,  828 

the  terribleness  of  the  Divine,  336 

against  Jerusalem,  Clod's  sword  of,  200 

Victory,  the  spoils  of  a  great,  420 
Vision  of  tbe  dry  bones,  400 

of  Divine  things,  the,  466 

of  the  waters,  the,  4Sa 

— —  of  sudden  death,  a.  128 

Visions  of  God,  the,  429 

Wab,  the  horrors  of ,  824 ;  the  man  of;  419 

Warning,  faithful,  846 

of  judgment,  the  last,  294 

Watchman,  postulates  for  an  effective,  88 

Watchmen,  the  civil  and  spiritual,  844 

Waters,  the  vision  of  the,  482 

Weak  points  in  human  life,  77 

Wealth  unserviceable,  83 

Wealthy,  the  duty  of  the,  477 

Where  much  is  given,  much  requited,  66 

Wicked  brain,  a,  412 

— ^  the  inheritance  of  the,  862 

— ^  tbe  triumph  of  theJSfl 

-»-  the  speech  of  the,  871 

God's  knowledge  of  the  taotlM  of  the.  41S 

-»-  the  infatuation  of  the,  419 

Wilful  worship.  98 

Wings,  feet  and,  118 

Withdrawal  of  the  Lord's  Presence,  th^  80 

Women  in  religious  movements,  148 

Word,  the  Divme,  892 

of  God,  the  power  of  the,  64 

Workers  for  God :  thefar  privUegea  and  distiii»> 

tion,445 

Temple,  441 


Worship,  vain,  89 ;  eormntfcmof  true,  92;  < 
tional,  97 ;  public  ana  private^  Am ;  royalty 
and,  475;  tne  altar  an  emblem  ^trne^  467; 
of  Jehovah,  the  tme,  ^4 

Wrong-doing,  877 

Zmoin^  the  prophecy  agalnal^  815 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


