
052056




The original of tiiis bool< is in
tine Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 9241 01 1 04481



THE

PULPIT COMMENTARY,

EDITED BY THE

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D,

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER;
AND BY THE

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY THE



VEN. ARCHDEACON F. W. PAEEAE, D.D., P-E-S.— EIGHT EEV. H. COTTEErtL, B.D.,
F.E.S.E.— YEET EEV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOOH, D.D.— KEV. CANON Q.
BAWLINSON, M.A.-BE7. A. FLITUMEB, UA., D.D.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New Yoek and Tobonto.



THE



PULPIT COMMENTARY.



EDITED BY THE



VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,



DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ;



AND BY THE



REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.



ST. LUKE.



(Exjjosition :
Bs VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER.

j|omiletics :
By rev. J. MARSHALL LANG, D.D., ,„„



THE BARONY PARISH, GLASGOW.



A\ V



l^omilies bg Dariotis <^ntl)ors: '■'

REV. W. CLARKSON, B.A. REV. R. M. EDGAR, M.A.

VOL. I. p J

FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New Yoek akd Toronto.



THE

GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. lUEE.



INTRODUCTION.



L St. Lukk's Gospel RKcnvED as an AnrHOBiTATivx WBimta a
FiBST Aas or Ohbistiakity.

Ih the last quarter of the second century — ^that is to say, in less than •
hundred years after the death of St. John — ^the canon of the New Testa-
ment, as we have it now, was generally ^ accepted in all the Ohurohea of
the East and West.

How widespread was the religion of Jesns Christ before the oloae of
the second century we have abundant testimony. Justin Martyr,* for
instance, before the middle of the century, wrote how " there existed not
a people, whether Greek or barbarian, whether they dwelt in tents or
wandered about in covered waggons, among whom prayers were not offered
up in the name of a crucified Jesus, to the Father and Creator of all
things." TertuUian, a few years later, living in quite another part of
the Homan wurld, told the heathens that his brethren were to be found
filling the camp, the assemblies, the palace, the senate." '

Before the year 200 the well-known and voluminous writings of Irensaus
in Gaul, Clement in Alexandria, and Tertullian in Carthage, the capital of
wealthy Proconsular Africa, testify to the wide and general acceptance of
the books composing the New Testament canon. These writings clearly
tell us what was the judgment of the Catholic Churoh at that early period
' The books which at that early date had only received • partial acceptance were th*
Epistle to the Hebrews, the two shorter Epistles of St. John, the Second Epiatle of St
Peter, the Epistles of St. James and St. Jude, and the Apocolypie.

• Justin Martyr, ' DiaL cum Trypho,' 117.

• Tertullian, 'ApoL,' 87.

LUKX. I



INTRODUCTION TO



in the matter of the saored Christian bnnks. They were the holy treasure-
house whither men resorted for authoritative statement on doctrine and on
practice. Here men sousfht for and found their Master's words, and the
teaching of his chosen followers. In the weekly services of the Chu];ch,
as early as the middle of the century, we learn from Justin Martyr, the
memoirs of the apostles (by which term he designated the Gospels) were
read on the same footing as the writings of the prophets of th« Old
Testament.

Among these books, which in the last years of the second century were
among Christians so universally received as authoritative and honoured as
Holy Scripture, was the Gospel according to St. Luke.

We will now see how far it is possible to trace the existence of the Third
Gospel from the close of the second century upwards towards the source.

There is no question that it was generally known and received in the
last quarter of the second century : teas it referred to at a sacred writing
before this date f

From A.D. 120 to 176. Irenseus, Bishop of Lyons, in Gaul, succeeded
Pothinus in the episcopate about a.d. 177. He tells us how, in his youth,
he had been acquainted with Polycarp in Smyrna, who had known St.
John. The date of his birth was about a.d. 130. In the writings we
possess of Irensaus we find no reference by name to any book of the New
Testament ; but we meet with such striking coincidences of language and
thought with many of those books, that it is perfectly certain he was
intimately acquainted with them. St. Luke's Gospel was one of these.

The Canon of Mwratori was discovered in the Ambrosian Library at Milan
in a manuscript of great antiquity, containing some of the works of
Chrysostom. It is but a fragment, yet it gives us, with fair completeness,
the judgment of the "Western Church on the canon of the New Testament
about the year of our Lord 170. The date is clearly ascertained by internal
evidence. Among the other sacred books it writes thus of the Third
Gospel : " The Gospel of St. Luke stands third in order, having been
written by St. Luke the physician, the companion of St. Paul, who, not
being himself an eye-witness, based his narrative on such information as he
oould obtain, beginning from the birth of John."

Jtuiin Martyr, of whose writings we possess several important pieces,*
was bom at the close of the first century, and died about a.d. 165. His
works that are preserved may be dated roughly a.d. 130 to 150-160.
They contain a mass of references to the Gospel narratives, embracing the
ohief facts of our Lord's life, and many details of his teaching — never, save
in one or two very unimportant details, travelling out of the track of the
story ot the four evangelists, his many references being free from legendary
admixture. These circumstances connected with our Lord's life were

• Of the writings which bear now the name of Justin Martyr, two 'Apologies' and the
'Dialogue with Trypho' are genuine beyond a doubt (of. Weatoott oa the Canon, ' The Age
•f tha Oreek Apologiita,' cb. iL).



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDTNG TO ST. LUKE. m

fieri veil for the moBt part, he tells us, from certain written records which,
he said, rested on apostolic authority, and were used and read in the puhlio
aMsemblies of Christians. He never quotes these records by name, bnt
refers to them simply as " memoirs of the apostles " (dn-ojuvi/^oveu/iara roir
dToo-ToX(i)v) ; two of these, he says, were written by apostles, two by their
followers.

His references are for the most part connected with the teaching rather
than with the works of Jesus. He weaves into the tapestry of his story the
narratives especially of SS. Matthew and Luke, quoting often the very words
of the evangelists. In his ' Apology ' Westcott reckons nearly fifty allusions
to the gospel history. In the ' Dialogue * about seventy facts peculiar to
St. Luke's narrative are introduced by Justin ; for instance, the account of
the sweat which dropped as blood from the Bedeemer in Gethsemane, and
the Master's prayer for the passing of " this cup." These " memoirs "
which Justin uses so freely, and which he is careful to state were read
in the weekly services of the Christians, were, in the estimation of the
Church of his time (which was roughly the middle years of the second
century), evidently ranked with the Holy Scriptures of the Old Testament;
and these memoirs of the apostles, it is perfectly certain, were the Grospels
we know severally as the Gospels of SS. Matthew, Luke, and Mark.

As Justin wrote before and after the year of our Lord 150, we have
traced St. Luke's Gospel as an authoritative sacred document a considerable
way upwards towards the source.

The testimony of the early heretical schools is very useful to us here,
and puts us a further step backwards. About a.d. 140 Marcion, the son of
a Bishop of Sinope, claimed to reproduce in its original simplicity the
Gospel of St. Paul. He took for his purpose the Oospel of St. Luke (which
evidently, when Marcion taught, was a universally acknowledged book ol
Holy Scripture) and ten Epistks of St. Paul. The text of the Gospel and
Epistles Marcion altered to suit his own peculiar views.'

Valentinus, the author of the famous heresy which bears his name, camo
to E<ime, Irenaeiis tells us, in the episcopate of Hyginus, and taught there
from about a.d. 139 to 160. In the fragments of his writings which are
preserved, he cites, among other i>iew Testament bouks, the Gospel of SU
Luke as Scripture."

Eeraeleon, the familiar friend of the heresiarch just alluded to, himself
the great Valentinian commentator, has left commentaries on St. Luke and
St. John, and fragments of these are still in existence. Clement of Alex-
andria refers to this commentary on St. Luke, which must have been put out
before the middle of the second century.'

Gerdo, an heretical teacher who lived still nearer the beginning of the

< Cf. Westcott on the Canon, ' The Bariy Heratios,' ok. ir. ; TntvUiaB, • Adv. Mmo.,' t. ;
Epiph. Hier.,' zlii.

' Of. WeBtcott on the Canon, oh. iv. ; Teitullian, ' De PrsBrcr. Hser.'

» Cf. Wegtoott ou the Canon, cb iv: Olem. Alex., 'StromaX' iv. 9, J 73.



INTRODUCTION TO



second century, according to Theodoret, used the Gospels, especially that oj
St. Luke, in his system of theology.'

Basilidet was one of the earliest Gnostics, who tanght at Alexandria about
A.D. 120. He thus lived on the verge of the apostolic times. His testimony
to the acknowledged books in the canon of the New Testament Sciiptures
is clear and valuable. We have now but a few pages of his writings still
remaining with us, but in these few are certain references to several of St.
Paul's Epistles to the Gospel of St. Matthew, St, John, and St. Luke.*

Tatian, a pupil of Justin Martyr, according to the testimony of Bpi-
phanins, Theodoret, and Eusebius, shortly after the middle of the century,
composed what may be called the first harmony of the four Gospels — the
' Diatessardn.' Although Tatian appears to have on some subjects adopted
■trange and heretical opinions, in general form his harmony or 'Diai.08-
Bardn ' was so orthodox and helpful that it enjoyed a wide ecclesiastical
popularity.'

It will materially add to the strength of our argument that the Gt>spel
of St. Luke was generally received by the Churches as authoritative,
because divinely inspired, throughout the second century, if it can be
shown that the Gospel was publicly acknowledged at the same early date
by national Churches as well as by individual scholars and teachers.

Two versions belong to this first period of the Church's history — ^the
Peschito-Syriao and the Old Latin (used in North or Proconsular Africa).

The first, the Peschito-Syriao, represents the vernacular dialect of
Palestine and the adjacent Syriac in the age of our Lord. Competent
scholars consider * that the formation of this most ancient version is to be
fiztid within the first half of the first century. It contains the Glospel of
Sc. Luke and all the books of the received canob of the New Testament
save 2 and 3 John, 2 Peter, St. Jude, and the Apocalypse, and may be
ngarded as the first monument of Catholic Christianity.'

The second version, the Old Latin, was made in the great and wealthy
province of Proconsular Africa, of which Carthage was the chief city, at a
very early period.

TertuUian, writing in the latter part of the second century, desoribes
the widespread influence of Christianity in his time. His own important
province, no doubt, was before his eyes, when he wrote how " Christians
were filling the palace, the senate, the forum, and the camp, leaving their
temples only to the heathen." « To persecute the Christians in North Africa
at the dose of the second century would be to decimate Carthage.' Ter-
tuUian, in his voluminous writings, shows that he recognized a current
Latin version (the Old Latin). For the Nortli African Churoli to have

' Of. Oodet, ' St. Lnk6,' Introd., 6 ; Pseudo-Tertullian, ' De Praiscr. Hasr.,' 51. (Wostcott

iibti the independect anthorlty of this quotation).

' St Hrppolyti, 'BefnUtio Omn. Hwr.,' bk. vU., { SO, 25, 26, eto.

' EoMMns, • Hiat. Eecl.,' iv. 29 ; Weitoott on the Canon, cb. iv.

' Weetcott oil ihe Cttuou, oli. iii., " The Early Vi^roious."

' Professor WestcotU • ■ Apol.,' ii. 37. ' 'Ad S«pk»*«&



THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. LUKE.



attained the proportions described by TertuUian at the close of the second
century, we must presuppose that Christianity was at a very early period
planted in that province, and that its growth was exceedingly rapid. This
would necessarily indicate an early date in the second century for the
formation of that version iu the dialect used in the province, and which
TertuUian found evidently in common use.

St. Luke and most of the other books of the canon are found in this
Old Latin version quoted by TertuUian ; the only omitted writings were
the Epistle of St. James and the Second Epistle of St. Peter. The Epistle
to the Hebrews did not originally exist in this most ancient version ; it
was added subsequently, bnt before Tertullian's days, i.e. before a.d. 200.

Professor Westcott, after an elaborate discussion, concludes positively that
the Old Latin version must have been made before a.d. 170. How much more
ancient it really is cannot yet be discovered. This great scholar conjecture!
that it was, however, coeval with the introduction of Christianity into
Africa, and that it was the result of the spontaneous efforts of the African
Christians.

The absence of the few canonical books above mentioned in these most
ancient versions indirectly are an evidence of their great antiquity. It was
not that the first translators had examined the proofs of their authenticity
and found them wanting, and in consequence had excluded them ; but the
truth, no doubt, was that these particular books had never reached the coun-
tries in question at the early date when the versions were made.

The omitted Epistles were, from their brevity, as in the case of the
Epistle of St. Jude, 2 and 3 John, 2 Peter, or from the contents being
move especially addressed to Jewish Christians rather than to the great
Gentile world, as in the case of the Epistle to the Hebrews and the Epistle
of St. James, less likely to be rapidly circulated. The Apocalypse, from
its mystic nature, would naturally be less read, and consequently it would
require a longer period to become generally known and accepted.

As might have been expected, the &ospeh of St. Luke and St. Matthew
have left more ample traces in the scattered fragments of early Christian
literature which have come down to us than any other of the writings
included in the New Testament canon.

We now come to the early /ears of the second century and the closing
years of the first century — ^roughly speaking, the twenty or twenty-five
years which followed the death of St. John. Here, as might be expected
from the comparatively few remains of Christian writings of this very early
period which we possess, the evidences of the existence and recognition of
St. Luke and the other books of the New Testament are more rare. Yet
even in the scanty fragments still remaining to us of this very early period,
we find traces of the inspired writings of the followers of Jesus of
Nazareth.

In that curious religious romance entitled the 'Testaments of the
Twelye Patriarchs,' a writing which Bishop Lightfoot speaks of as " coming



INTRODUCTION TO



near the apoetolio age," and which the best modem scholars generally
conceive to have been put out some time between a.d, 100 and a.d. 120, it
i« evident that much of the New Testament canon was known to the
writer, who weaves into the tapestry of his work many of the New Testa-
ment thoughts and expressions, and occasionally quotes whole passages
more or less accurately. Especially the Gospels of St. Matthew and St.
Luke are made use of. What is very noticeable in this ancient and curious
treatise, written evidently by a Jewish Christian to his own people, is the
influence which the hSdka written by or under the influence of St. Paul
evidently exercised upon the author.

From St. Luke's Gospel twenty-two rare (Greek) words are used by the
writer of the ' Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs,' of which rare words
nineteen are found in no contemporary writer. From the Acts, which may
be looked upon as a second part of St. Luke's Gospel, twenty-four rare
words are taken, of which twenty are alone found in this book of the New
Testament The anonymous author of the ' Testaments ' borrowed from
the vocabulary of most of the New Testament books, though from none
80 largely as from those written by or under the influence of St. Paul.

This most ancient and singular treatise has received in the last few
years considerable attention at the hands of scholars. Some consider it
honeycombed by interpolations of a later date, but as yet this theory of
later interpolation is supported mainly by ingenious conjecture.

Very lately the scholarly Archbishop Bryennios, Metropolitan of Nico-
media, discovered and published the known but long-lost 'Teaching of
the Apostles ' (AiSa;^^ r&v SuSfKa 'Airoa-ToXiov). This most amcient treatise
probably belongs to the last decade of the first century, possibly to an
earlier date. It is largely based on sayings of Jesus Christ reported in the
Gospels, especially in that of St. Matthew; but St. Luke's Gospel was dis-
tinctly known and used by the writer. One clear reference to the Acts
occurs in oh. iv. of the 'Teaching.' The words rather than the acts
anil miracles of the Lord are dwelt upon. No Gospel is quoted by name.

We have now traced the Third Gospel back to days when probably St
John was still living, certainly to a time when men who had listened to
John and Peter, to Paul and Luke, were still living and teaching. The
testimony of one of the most famous of these pupils or disciples of the
apostles will close our long chain of evidence.

Clement of Borne was the disciple of St. Paul ; the oldest traditions, too,
couple his name with St. Peter. At a very early period, undoubtedly, in the
lifetime of St. John he presided over the Church of the Christians at Eome.
It is certain that in the Church of the first century he exercised a powerful
and lasting influence. Various ancient writings have been preserved bearing
his honoured name. Of these only the first Greek epistle can be confidently
pronounced authentic ; it has been variously dated, a.d. 68, 70, 95. Which-
ever of these dates be accepted, its testimony wiU be the witness of the
belief in the years immediately succeeding the martyrdom of Paul, whec



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. vii

certainly manj of the pupils and disciples of the twelve still lived and
worked among men. We will confine ourselves to this first Greek epiatia
of unquestioned authenticity.

Clement ' was evidently a diligent student of the wrtings of Paul, Peter,
and John. He occasionally uses words found only in St. Paul ; still more
frequently those common to SS. Paul and Peter; while the influence of
their inspired writings is plainly visible throughout this first epistle. In
two passages the Gospels are evidently expressly quoted. The first (cap,
xiii.) begins thus : " Remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, which he
spoke to teach goodness and long-suffering." Then follows a passage in
which the writer seems to unite St. Matthew's and St. Luke's accounts of the
sermon on the mount ; but where, in the opinion of Volkmar, the text of St.
Luke predominates (see Luke vi. 31, 36 — 38). The second is in the forty-
sixth chapter, and contains the spirit and indeed the very words of the
Lord as reported in Matt. xxvi. 24 ; xviii. 6 ; Mark ix. 42 ; Luke xvii. 2.

Archbishop Thomson bums up generally the evidence for the early
reception of the Gospels among the Christian Churches of the first days as
inspired authoritative writings, as follows: "In the last quarter of the
second century the four Gospels were established and recognized, and held
a place that was refused to all other memoirs of the Lord. At the end of
the second quarter they were quoted largely, though not very exactly, but
the authors' names were not made prominent ; they were ' memoirs,' they
were ' the Gospels,' and the like. At the opening of the second century
the words of the Lord were quoted with unmistakable resemblance to
passages of our Gospels, which, however, are quoted loosely without any
reference to names of authors, and with a throwing together of passages
from all three (synoptical) Gospels" (Introduction to Gospel of St. Luke,
by the Archbishop of York, in the ' Speaker's Commentary ').

In the last decade, then, of the first century we find that the three first
Gospels had been written, and were used as the authoritative basis of
Christian teaching. Now, what is the probable story of the composition of
these Divine memoirs?

To answer this question, let us go back to Pentecost (a.d. 33), and the
months and first years succeeding that memorable day.

With startling rapidity the few hundreds who before the Ascension,
with more or less earnestness, believed in Jesus of Nazareth, and accepted
him as Messiah, became, after the first Pentecost, thousands, and these num-
bers kept growing in Palestine and the adjacent countries, with an ever-
widening tendency. It was necessary at' once to teach these " thousands"
something beyond the great fact that the Son of God had died for them.
The apostles of the Son of God felt at once that they must tell these
•' thousands " what was the life which the Son of God would have those
who believed in him live. To do this they repeated to the listening crowds
their Master's teaching: they rehearsed again and again the memoriibl?
' W. Westoott on the Canm, ' Age of th« ApostwUo Fatheii ' ck. L



rili INTRODUCTION TO

diBcourses which they had listened to by the lake, in the synagogues of
Gapemanm, in the temple courts ; some spoken to them alone in comparar
tive solitude, some addressed to curious and even hostile crowds in the
days of the public ministry.

At first, for many months, possibly for years, there was little, or even
nothing, written. The apostles and their first disciples were Jews, we must
remember — men trained more or less in the rabbinical schools, whose great
rule was, commit nothing to writing. The training, we must be careful to
remember, in the Jewish schools of Palestine in the time of our Lord was
almost exclusively oral.

Now, the great teachers of the firtt days had all, perhaps, with rare
exceptions, been with Christ. Out of their abundant memories of their loved
Master's sayings, aided, we may reverently assume, by the Holy Ghost,
they reproduced, alter taking mutual counsel, just those words, sayings,
discourses, which they considered would best paint the picture of the life.
He wished " his own " to live. The acts which were done, the miracles
which he worked, the incidents which happened, were gradually added
in their proper places to complete the picture of " the life to be led," which
they painted. Special doctrinal teaching at first was very simple — a few
great truths, apparently, and no more, were taught.

Together the first great teachers " remained in Jerusalem, in dose com-
munion, long enough to shape a common narrative, and to fix it with
requisite consistency. The place of instruction was the synagogue and
market-place, not the student's chamber."' Provision for the student's
chamber was made later by one of them, still acting under the Holy Spirit's
influence, when John the beloved put forth his Gospel, which dealt rather
with doctrine than with life. But in the first days — possibly for many
years — the gospel preached by the great teachers was the gospel much as
we find it in Mark, or Luke, or Matthew.

An original oral gospel, generally arranged by the apostles in the days
immediately succeeding the first Pentecost, with one great general outline
repeated over and over again, was, doubtless, the foundation of the three
synoptical Gospels. This accounts for the identity of so many of the details
and also for the similarity in the language. It is highly probable that, in
the first years, this oral gospel existed in Aramaic, as well as in Greek] to
suit the various classes of hearers to whom it was presented.

St. Mark's, on the whole, was probably the first form in which the oral
gospel was committed to writing. It is the shortest and the simplest
recension of the preaching of the first days reduced to a consecutive history.
•' The Gospel of St. Mark, conspicuous for its vivid simplicity, seems to be
the most direct representation of the first evangelic tradition, the common
foundation on which the others were reared. In essence, if not in com-
position, it is the oldest, and the absence of the history of the infancy
brings its contents within the limits laid down by St. Peter for the extent
' Profeeior Westioott, ' Introduction to Qoipeli,' oh. iii.



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKK ix

of the apostolio testimony." * After the writing of St. Mark, it is probable
tbat a oonsiderable period elapsed before St. Mattbew and St. Luke were
composed. These two longer and more detailed memoirs of the Lord's
earthly life represent " the two great types of recension to which it may
be supposed that the simple narrative was subjected. St. Luke presents
the Hellenic, and St. Matthew (Greek) the later Hebraic form of the
tradition." '

The three first Gospels, in their present form, were, we believe, put out
somewhere between the years a.d. 55 and a.d. 70, the year of the fall of
Jerusalem. Some would, however, place the date of St. Luke shortly after
than before the great catastrophe to the city and temple.

Ancient tradition and modem criticism, however, generally accept this
date — A.D. 65 to a.d. 70. The hypothesis which places the publication of
any one of the three after the fall of Jerusalem would only give a very few
years later as the date.

Of any writings or memoirs upon which the Gospels were founded we
have only vague and uncertain traces.

Papias, who lived very near the time of the apostles, and whom Irenseua
calls " a hearer of John and a companion of Polycarp " — Papias, in a work
termed AoytW KvpiaKuiv 'E^^yrjo-K, " An Exposition of the Oiacles of the
Lord," of which a few fragments are preserved by Iren8Bus and others,
writes as follows : " Matthew wrote the oracles in Hebrew, and every one
interpreted them as he was able." • The word in the original for " the
oracles " is rot Xoyta. It is now impossible to be certain what exactly to
Xoyia includes. Westcott paraphrases to Xoyto by " the gospel " — " the sum
of the words and works of the Lord." Schleiermacher and others explain
ra Xayia •■ " discourses " only. It is likely enough that this was not the
same as the Gospel of St. Matthew as we now possess it, but simply a
body of the Lord's discourses * committed to writing by St. Matthew at a
very early period in the Hebrew or Aramaic dialect.

The one other reference to writings on the subject of the Lord's life put
out anterior to the synoptical Gospels, is that statement of St. Luke himself
in the prologue to his Gospel : " Forasmuch as many have taken in hand
to draw up a narrative concerning those matters which have been fulfilled
[or, 'fully established'] among us" (oh. i. 1). Here St. Luke, mthout
ditajpproeal, simply mentions others who had already written portions
of the gospel story. The statement of the evangelist is studiedly brief,
and seems to assume that, in his judgment, none of the " many " who had
taken the " story " in hand had been completely successful. He by no
means condemns these as inaccurate, and does not imply that he wiU not
make use of them ; indeed, by his words, " it seemed good to me also," he

• Acta i. 21. 22. ' Wostoott, ' Introduction to Oospelt,' oh. lil.

• Bouth, ' Keliq. Sao.,' I. t1. p. 14 ; Busebius, • Hiit. Bool.,' iii. 39.

' It u noticeable tbat the bascii of the * Teaching of the Apostlea,' noently brought M
light, ue the Lord's duamriusi und worda rather than hia aeU.



umoBVcn&si to



ranges himself on the same platform with these earlier students and wntan
of the Divine story. The truth probably was that these writings to which
1m refers were incomplete portions rather than a whole.

To enm up, when St. Luke undertook his great work there was probably
•arrent, in the Charehos in which he lived and worked, a general oral
authoritative gospel, which had grown up in the apostolic circle in very
early days, in the months and years which followed the first Pentecost, mnch
in the way we have sketched out above. In different Churches, we may
with all reverenee assume, existed separate and distinct memoirs and
faithful oral traditions — memoirs and traditions written and preserved by
men and women, eye-witnesses of the scenes and hearers of the words so
preserved ; such a memoir, for instance, as that evidently Aramaic frag-
ment which treats of the birth and infancy and childhood of the Redeemer
woven into the tapestry of the first two chapters of St. Luke. It is of such
pieces as these that St. Luke, no doubt, was thinking when he wrote the first
verse of his Gospol.

Of the three synoptical Gospels, the first and third are clearly compila-
tions, arranged with a definite aim, constructed out of materials before the
writer. The second, as we have already adlrmed, is the simplest, as it is
the shortest. It probably represents, if not the very first, at least a very
early presentment of the story of the gospel of Jesus Christ. With the
first and second we are not just now concerned.

The third, the Gospel of St. Luke, is the most carefully composed of the
three divinely inspired stories of the Bedeemer. It is the reply to question-
ings which would naturally present themselves to a thoughtful, onltnred
man who had heard, and after hearing had been impressed with the
strange beauty and the intense reality of, the story of the cross. There
were, to suoh a man, many things, apart from the simple narrative which
formed the groundwork of the preaching of the first days, which called for
explanation. Who was this strange, marvellous Being, whose love for men
— a love passing understanding — had led him to die for men who only i«pai4
his love with the bitterest hate 7

* The very God I think, Abib ; dost thou think?
80 the AU-ipeat were the All-loTini; too;
80 thiough the thunder eomei a hninui Toioe^
Baying, • O heurt I made, • heart beate here I
Faoe my hand* faihioned, le* it in myielf t
Thon hast no power, nor mayvst oonoeiTe of mine t
Bat love I gaTe thee, with myMlf te lor* ;
And thoa mnit lore me, who have died for thee I*
The madman saith, Ht «a{d so ; it i« itrange ! "

(B. Browning, ' An Eputle of Kanbiih, the Aiak VhjnUhm.*)

Whamee came hef Bou and when and in vikat gvUe did he fiivt appeu
ig men ? When did he spend the first thirty years of his life? What
his tarthly hornet Who was that honoured and mighty fererauier,



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. LUKE.



thtU John, whom Herod had foully murdered ? What was the meaning of
the exclusion of Israel, the choeeu people, from his Church ?

All these questionings would naturally occur to a cultured listener, who
longed to embrace the promises of Jesus, about a.d. 60-70, when the
Church was growing into a great and widespread company, and the
" story " was being repeated at second and third hand in many a city far
away from the Holy Land.

" No one could understand better than St. Paul the need of an exhaus-
tiye reply to such questionings, the need of an authoritative history,
wheve an account of the rise and progress of the gospel of Jesus Christ was
related with accurate and careful detail. And if Paul, among the helpers
who surrounded him, had an evangelist distinguished for his gifts and
culture — and we know from 2 Cor. viii. 18, 19 that there was really one of
this desoription — how oould he help casting his eyes upon him, and encour-
aging him to undertake so excellent a work 7 Such is the task which Luke
has disohaiged " (Godet).

We have said this Third Gospel was most carefully composed, with the view
of satisfying the requirements of a thoughtful, cultured man, such as
was probably that " most excellent Theophilus " to whom the Gospel was
addressad.

First, it contained, with its sequel the Acts, not a few historical notices,
such as the census of Quirinius, under the decree of Augustus (oh. ii. 1 — 3) ;
the contemporary Boman and Jewish rulers in the fifteenth year of Tiberius
Caesar (ch. iii. 1, 2) ; Pilate's and Herod's jurisdictions (ch. xxiii. 1, 12) ;
with allusions by name to public persons, such as Cornelius, centurion of
tke Italian band (Acts x. 1) ; Herod (Acts xii. 1, etc. ; xiii. 1) ; Sergius Paulus
(Acts xiii. 7); the Emperor Claudius's decree (Acts xviii. 2); Gallic the
deputy of Achaia (Acts xviii. 12 — 16); Claudius Lysias, Felix the Boman
governor (Acts xxiii. 26) ; Porcius Festus (Acts xxiv. 27) ; King Agrippa
and Bernice (Acts xxv.) ; the appeal to Cassar (Acts xxvi. 32).

Secondly, it embodied in its narrative that beautiful and interesting
account of the nativity and the events which preceded it and immediately
succeeded it, with a few notices of the boyhood of the Lord. These details,
as we have suggested in the Exposition, were evidently procured from
information communicated to St. Luke (or St. Paul) by eye-witnesses,
many of the details probably by the virgin-mother herself. These two first
chapters would answer many a question which would naturally suggest
itself to reverent inquirers who had listened to the simple gospel message
as first delivered, and had enrolled themselves among the followers ol

Jmus Christ.

Thirdly, the picture of the gradual development of the Church of Jesus
Christ is drawn with extraordinary skill and care by St. Luke — its develop-
ment from Bethlehem and Nazareth to Jerusalem and Eome. On the mom i ug
of the nativity, in the opening chapters of St. Luke, the Church is confined
to Joaeph, Mary, and the holy Babe. To these, just the few shepherds ol



INTBODUCTION TO



Bethlehem are added. The close of the Acts shows ns the fonndation of
the Church at Borne; but Borne was but a branch, an offshoot, of the great
Churches of Antiooh and Jerusalem. St. Luke traces the various stages
in this development — from Bethlehem to Nazareth, from Nazareth to
Capernaum, from Capernaum to the Galilsean and Per»an villages, then to
Jerusalem. The Acts takes up the wondrous story, and shows how the
Church, advanced from Jerusalem to the Syrian Antioch, from Antiooh to
the cities of Asia Minor, from great Asian centres like Ephesus across the
seas to the old world-renowned cities of Greece, and then from G-reece to
Italy, and the story closes with the beginning of the Church at Borne.

Nor does St. Luke alone depict with his great skill the geographical
development of the Church of Jesus Christ. He describes, too, how the
m>rk of the Divine Master and his chosen instruments developed. First,
we have the story of the birth and growth of the pioneer, John the
Baptist; then the birth and childhood of Jesus himself. He paints the
beginning of his organized Church, when he summons the twelve out of
the number of believers who gathered round him soon after he began his
public ministry among men.

The wants of the growing organization soon called for more workers.
In the Third Gospel the solemn summons of the seventy is related. For
a moment the advancing work seems arrested by a fatal blow, and the
death of the Master on the cross puts, as it seems, a final stop to the new
Church and its work ; but the Besurrection, which St. Luke describee as
quickly following, gives a new and irresistible impulse to the Church and
the Church's work among men. The same men are at work, and the same
Master is guiding their labours. But the homeless Master ia no longer
guiding them as they walked together among the fields of Galilee and the
streets of Jerusalem, but from his glory-throne in heaven ; and the men,
the same men, are quite changed : it is as though they had drunk of the
waters of another and stronger life.

Luke describes in the Acts, the sequel to his Gospel, the rapid progress
and the swift though orderly development of the now great and numerous
Church. Deacons are chosen to sRsist the apostles ; then we read of prophets
and teachers and elders, of the foundation-stories of a- great and powerful
organization.

n. SoHK or TBI SpEioiAi. Featubks of St. Luke's QiysPEU

We have dwelt upon the position of St. Luke's Gospel as a great Chris-
tian writing in the earliest days of Christianity, its teaching being con-
sidered as absolutely authoritative, as containing the mind, even the very
words, of the Divine Founder. We have shown how it was received before
four score years had been counted from the Ascension Day, not only by all
the Churches, but by the principal heretical sects which sprang up so soon
in the Christian story ; and our data for this general very early acceptance



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. xili

of the Third Gospel were drawn, not merely from the scanty &agmenta
which remain to us of individual scholars and teachers, but from versiona
which were the puhlio work of whole Churches. Its author and his
peculiar school of thought wUl be presently discussed. We will now
proceed to a more detailed consideration of some of the couteuta of the
Crospel named after St. Luke.

Of the three synoptical Gospels, St. Luke, though not the longest, is the
fullest, that is, it contains the most details of the Saviour's life on earth.
And some of these details peculiar to Si. Luke are of very high importance
in their practical teaching, as also in their bearing on the blessed life.

Among the more striking of these are — the raising of the son of the widow
of Nain ; the episode of the woman who was a sinner kneeling at the feet
of Jesus when he was at the banquet given in the house of Simon the
Pharisee; the tears which the Master wept over Jerusalem; the famous
parables of the good Samaritan, with its broad, universal teaching; the
parable showing how and why Jesus loved the lost — the lost drachma, the
lost sheep, and the lost son ; the parables of Lazarus and Dives, of the unjust
■teward, the unjust judge, the Pharisee and the publican, etc. ; the prayer
on the cross for those who were doing him to death ; the promise to the
dying thief hanging on the cross by his side ; the walk to Emmaus, and
the conversation during the walk after the Resurrection.

We must not omit here to mention two considerable sections of this
Gospel which contain many peculiar details touching the life or the teaching
of Jesus, which alone are told by St. Luke. (1) The first two chapters
treating of the infancy and boyhood of the Saviour. (2) The account of
that prolonged journey, or perhaps four distinct journeys, toward Jerusalem
related in oh. ix. 61— xix. 27. Some of the events related in this impor-
tant section, and some of the words spoken by Jesus on these joumeyings,
are repeated in one or other of the evangelists, notably in St. John ; but
jaudh in this great section is peculiar to St. Luke.

m. Thk Especial Teachino of St. Lukx.

St. Luke's Gospel has been charged by some critics with teaching certain
doctrines alien to the teaching of primitive Christianity, in some respect*
differing from the teaching in St. Matthew or in St. John.

These critics complain that St. Luke, different to the older apostles,
teaches in the Third Gospel " a universalism "—a breaking-down of all
legal privileges and class distinctions, a free admission of all sinners alike
to the mercy of God upon their repentance, a universality in Christ's
promises, which jars upon some minds peculiarly constituted and specially
trained, in the nineteenth century equally with the first.

There is no doubt that this Divine picture of the Lord's life and teaoh-
ing that we call St. Luke's was mainly the work of that great servant
of Jesus Christ whom men call Paul, only we maintain that there is no real



INTEODUCTION TO



difference between the fundamental doctrines taught in this Gospel and
those laid down in the first, the second, and the fourth. "We believe
simply that in St. Luke— and the Epistles of St. Paul repeat the teaching
— the universality of Christ's promiseB are more distinctly marked; the
invitations to the careless, to the wanderer, to the forsaken of man — " lea
reprouvfis " of this world — are more marked, more definite, more urgent.
The doctrines of the four Gospels are the same, only in St. Luke this
special feature of the Blessed One's teaching is more accentuated.

See how St. Lnke alone, in his short rSmme of the Baptist's preaching,
dwells upon that peculiar feature of Isaiah upon which that great fore-
runner evidently laid great stress, "All flesh shall see the salvation of
God." Luke ignores all privilege of race, or caste, or training, by tracing
back the ancestry of the Eedeemer to Adam. Abraham is ignored here.
In several cases faith alone wins forgiveness. The story of the good
Samaritan reads a sharp, stem lesson, and suggests a grave warning to
the self-styled orthodox of every age, from the first century to the nine-
teenth. The reasons why Jesus loved the " seeming lost " of the world are
strangely but beautifully shown in the parables of the lost coin, the
lost sheep, and the lost son. The parable of the marriage supper accentu-
ates the same teaching. The ingratitude of the nine Jewish lepers, painted
in the strongest colours, sharply contrasts with the gratitude of the despised
alien Samaritan ; and the Lord's blessing in the latter case anticipates a
possible tremendous reversal of human judgments at the last great day.

In these and such-like teachings in the Third Gospel, although there is
a danger of their being pressed by expositors too far, many grave and
anxious thoughts, however, are suggested, and warn us against hasty
and imperfect estimates of others, on whom, perhaps, in our short-sighted
judgment we look down.

This Gospel certainly dwells with peculiar emphasis on the infinite love
and compassion of Jesus, which induced him, in his endless pity, to seek,
yes, and to save, souls among all sorts and conditions of men.

It is especially the Gospel of hope and love, of pity and of faith. Very
beautifully are these thoughts exemplified by the sayings of Jesus on the
cross, reported by St. Luke. It is the Gospel of hope. The Divine Victim
prayed for his murderers. There was hope still, even for them. Of whom
ishall ue, then, despair? It is the Gospel of love. He so loved the men
doing him to death that he could, in his great agony, pray for them. It is
the Gospel of pity. He was so sorry for the poor ignorant but repentant
thief dying by his side that he could promise him paradise. It is the
Gospel of faith. With his last breath he oould commend his departing
spirit to his Father and ours.

"This is the Gospel from which shines most brightly the light of
redemption, forgiveness, restoration, for all the human race ; the two earlier
Gospels are illuminated by the same light, for it is the light of the Spirit
of Christ ; but if differences are to be noticed at all, this is one of the mo^it



rSE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKE.



dietinoily marked. . . . Many of the Lord's parables and words reported
only by St. Luke lead the mind of his readers to understand the infinite
loye and pity of Jesus which led him to seek and save in every region and
class. Before this lovo all questions of class break down. The door of
redemption is opened wide; the Pharisee fails of forgiveness, and the
penitent publican secures it. The priest and Levite pass on the other side,
but the good Samaritan tends the wounded man. Simon the Pharisee,
the host of Jesus, learns a new lesson from our Lord when the sinful
woman is allowed to draw near and to wash the feet of Jesus. All this
points to a breaking-down of all legal privileges and distinctions of class,
Wid to the admission of all sinners alike to the mercy of the Lord upon
their repentance. Ood hath put down the mighty from their seat, <md hath
exalted them of low degree " (Archbishop Thomson),

Some critics, too, have found fault with what they term Luke's heresy
in regard to his bold assertion of the rights of the poor against the rich,
alleging that, in St. Luke's presentment of the teaching of Jesus Christ,
oidy the poor a» stich appear to be saved, the rich, on the other hand,
seem condemned at such.

There was, we know, a tendency in the early days of Christianity to
exaggerate the so-called blessings of poverty, and to depreciate the so-
called curse of wealth or comparative wealth. We see it in the mistaken
attempt in the primitive Church of Jerusalem, where, at all events, the
greater number of members parted with their possessions and attempted to
live a life of Christian communism. The disastrous result is told in the
New Testament story, where the deep poverty of the Church of Jerusalem,
the consequence of their mistaken interpretation of their Master's words,
is frequently and pointedly alluded to. Later a distinct sect arose, the
Ebionites, when this teaching concerning the evil of riches was pressed
home in an exaggerated form.

But it is a strange mistake to see in St. Luke's Gospel any encourage-
ment to this curious misunderstanding of the Lord's words and parables.
Onr Master saw and pointed out that there was a special compensation for
poTerty. Less tempted, less wedded to this life, the faithful poor man
stood often fairer for the kingdom of God than his seemingly more fortu-
nate, wealthier brother. But we see very clearly from St. Luke's teaching
that it is never poverty which saves, or wealth which condemns. It was
the Samaritan's righteous use of his substance which won the Lord's smile
of approval.

IV. The Adthoe of the Third Gospel.

The earliest traditions of the Church, and the writings which we possess
of her teachers — of men who lived in the century following the death of
St. John — the " remains," too, of the great heretical teachers who taught
for the most part in the first half of the second century, all bear witmyj!



xvl INTIIODUOTION TO



that the author of the Third Gospel was identical with the writer of the
Acts, and that this person was the St. Luke well known in the days of the
beginnings of Christianity as the companion and friend of St. Paul. Most
of these early references in some form or other connect St. Luke's work
with St. Paul.

Among the more interesting and important of these, Irenseua, writing in
Southern Gaul circa a.d. 180, says, "Luke, the companion of Paul, put
down in a book the gospel preached by him (Paul) " ('Adv. Haeres.,' iii. 1) ;
and again, " That Luke was inseparable from Paul, his fellow-woi ker in
the gospel, is shown by himself. . . . Thus the apostles, simply and without
envying any one, handed down to all these things which they themselves
had learned from the Lord ; thus, therefore, Luke also . . . has handed
down to us the things which he had learned from them, as he witnesses
when he says, 'Even as they delivered them to us which from the beginning
were eye-witnesses and ministers of the Word ' " (• Adv. Hseres.,' iii. 14).

Tertullian, who lived and wrote in Proconsular Africa in the last years of
the second century, tells us how " Luke's digest was usually ascribed to
Paul " (' Adv. Marcion,' iv. 5 ; see too • Adv. Marcion,' iv. 2).

Eusebius, the Church historian, writing a little more than a century
later, and who spent much of his life in collecting and editing the records
of the first beginnings of Christianity, relates that "Luke, who was a
native of Antioch, and by profession a physician, for the most part a com-
panion of Paul, and who was not slightly acquainted with the rest of the
apostles, has left us two books divinely inspired. . . . One of these is the
Gospel. . . . And it is said that Paul was accustomed to mention the Gospel
according to him, whenever in his Epistles speaking, as it were, of some
Gospel of his own, he says according to my gospel " (' Hist. Ecol.,' vi. 25 ; see
also St. Jerome, ' De Vir. lUustr.,' o. 7). And this apparently generally
received tradition, which at all events very closely connects the Third
Gospel with St. Paul, receives additional confirmation when the teaching
and occasionally the very expressions of St. Luke's G^ospel are compared
with the teaching of the Epistles of St. Paul. The very important section
of St. Luke's Gospel which describes the institution of the Lord's Supper,
closely even in verbal coincidences, resembles St. Paul's account of the same
blessed sacrament (comp. too 1 Cor. xv. 3 with oh. xxiv. 26, 27).

Then in the teaching. It is univeisally agreed that there is a general
affinity between St. Paul and St. Luke. It is in the Third Gospel that
especially those doctrines which are commonly termed Pauline are pressed
with peculiar force. Both Paul and Luke, in their teaching, bring into
special prominence the promise of redemption made to the whole human
race, without distinction of nation or family, ignoring in the gracious oflFer
all privilege whatsoever. "All flesh shall see the salvation of God."
Many of the parables told only by St. Luke, notably that of the good
Samaritan; in the parable-stories of the lost sheep, the lost coin, the loht
■ou, illustrating the love of Jesus shown in seeking the lost — read ae



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. rvii

examples of the teaching pressed home in the Pauline Epistles, homely,
vivid illustrations taken from the everyday life of Syria and Palestine.
The appearances of the risen Jesns after the Besurreotion almost exactly
correspond with those related by St. Paul (1 Cor. xv.).

That a close connection existed between Paul and Luke we know from
several allusions to Luke in the Epistles of Paul : " Luke, the beloved
physician, and Demas, greet you" (Col. iv. 14); " There salute thee, Epaphras,
my fellow-prisoner in Christ Jesus. . . . Lucas, my fellow - labourer "
(Philem. 24) ; " Only Luke is with me" (2 Tim. iv. 11).

Some expositors have thought that this friendship of Paul and Luke only
began at Bome, a city in which Luke was residing as a physician, and that
he met the great apostle during his first imprisonment there, and was con-
verted to Christianity during Paul's captivity, in which we know that many
persons had access to him. This supposition would not be contradicted by
the three special notices of Luke in the Pauline Epistles, two of them — that
to the Colossians and the letter to Philemon — having been written from
Bome during that imprisonment, and the third notice, in the Second Epistle
to Timothy, occurring in a letter written some years later, when the apostle
was confined a second time in Bome.

But the intimacy between Paul and Luke, we confidently believe, began
much earlier. A very general and absolutely uncontradicted tradition,
which dates from the early days of Christianity, ascribes the authorship of
the Acts to St. Luke. Now, in this very writing, in three passages, two of
considerable length, the author of the Acts passes abruptly from the third
person to the first person plural. Thus the narrative changes from " and
as Aey went through the cities," etc. (Acts xvi. 4), to " loosing from Troas,
«M oame with a straight course to Samothraoia," etc. (Acts xvi. 11), as
thongh the writer — ^universally, as we have seen, acknowledged to be St.
Luke — ^had joined the little band of missionaries who accompanied St. Paul
at Troaa (Acta xvi. 10). If this be, as is most probable, the case, then he
must — having at some previotu (unknown) date become acquainted with
St. Paul — as early certainly as A.D. 53, have joined himself to St. Paul's
company when the apostle was at Troas. With Paul, still following the Acts
narrative, St. Luke journeyed as far as PhilippL Then, in Acts xvii. 1,
when the apostle leaves Philippi, the third person is again used in the
narrative, as though St. Luke was left behind at Philippi. After some six
or seven years, again at Philippi, where we lost sight of him, in the course
of what is termed the third missionary journey, the use of the first person
plural — *' These going before tarried for u* at Troas, and we sailed away
from Philippi" — indicates that the writer, St. Luke, had again joined St.
Paul (Acts XX. 6). "With the apostle he passed through Miletus, Tyre, and
Ctesarea to Jerusalem (Acts xx. 5 ; xxi. 18). During the two years or more
of St. Paul's imprisonment at Csesarea (whither he was sent from Jerusalem
after his arrival at that city with St. Luke), St. Lr.ke was probably with
or near him, for when the apostle was sent under guard as a prisoner of

LUKE. '



tvi« INTRODUCTION TO



state from Csssarea to Rome, St. Lnte attain evidently was witli him ; foi
throughout the voyage which ended in the memorable shipwreck and the
subsequent stay at Melita, and on the voyage from Melita in the ship of
Alexandria, we find the forms " we " and " us " used : " Then when toe came
to Bome ; " " when the brethren heard of ««." During that long period of
imprisonment at Csesarea, it is highly pi'obable that St. Luke, acting under
the immediate direction of his master Paul, made that personal investi-
gation, searched out eye-witnesses of the events of the life of love, conversed
with survivors — less than thirty years had elapsed from the Resurrection
morning, it must be remembered, when Paul lay in his Csesarean prison —
procured memoranda in the possession of the holy women and others, and
with the help and guidance of his great master, aided by the Holy Spirit
(a.d. 60-62), we even think compiled much of what is known now as "the
Gospel according to St. Luke." During the Roman imprisonment, which
immediately followed a.d. 63-64, the work, and not improbably its sequel
the Acts, was finally revised and put out.

We thus possess traces of an intimate friendship between the older and
the younger man for a period of some twelve years — a.d. 53 to ti4; for how
long previous to A.D. 63 and the meeting at Troas (Acts xvi. 10) the
friendship had existed we have no data even for conjecture.

V. " Luke, the Beloved Physician " (Col. iv. 14).

" And Luke, who was a native of Antioch, and by profession a physician,
for the most part a companion (ra irXeia-ra a-vyytyovuii) of Paul, and who
was not slightly acquainted with the rest of the apostles, has left us
two books divinely inspired, proofs of the art of healing louU, which he
won from them " (Eusebius, ' Hist. Eccl.,' iii. 4).

" Luke, a physician of Antioch, not unskilled in the Hebrew language, as
his works show, was a follower (sectator) of the Apostle Paul, and the
companion of all his wanderings. He wrote a Gospel of which the same
Paul makes mention," etc. (St. Jerome, 'De Vir. Illustr.,* o. 7).

" The Gospel according to Luke was dictated by the Apostle Paul, but
written and put out (editum) by Luke, the blessed apostle and physician "
(Synopsis Pseudo-Athanasii, in Athanasii ' 0pp.').

The above-quoted references from Eusebius, Jerome, and the pseudo-
AthanasiuB, tell us that the words of St. Paul (Col. iv. 14), when he referred
to his friend Luke as " the beloved physician," very generally coloured all
tradition in the early Church respecting the writer of the Third Go^pel.

The pri)fe-.Hion of physician in the early days of the empire was filled
almost excluBively by freedmun or the sous ol frcoihnon (Ubertini). This
calling implied a cousideraLlo amount of sciontific knowledge, and shows
that Luke the physician certainly belonged to the class of educated men.
Dean Fiumptre, of Wells, calls attention to the well-known list of the
meiribors of the household of the Empress Livia, the consort of Augustus
Caisar, oumpilecl from the Columbarium, a sepuluhro which was opened at



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. xu

Borne in 1726. This "list" gives many examples of names with the word
" medicns " attached to them.

It is remarkable that, with the exception of Hippocrates, all the extant
medical writers were Atiatie Oreeka — such as Qalen of Fergamns, in Mysia;
Diosoorides of Anazarba, in Cilicia; Aretseus the Cappadocian. Hippo-
crates, though not an Asiatic Greek, was bom and lived in close proximity
to the coast of Asia, being a native of Cos, an island off the coast of Caria.

In the first century of the Christian era no medical school stood higher,
and few bo high, as that of Tarsus, in Cilicia. There was a great temple
of .aisculapius at MgBd, only a few miles from Tarsus, which was resorted
to by sick persons from all countries, who came to consult the priests or
brotherhood of the Asclepiadsa.

A modern scholar. Dr. Hobart, of Trinity College, Dnblin, has lately
written an exhaustive treatise' of considerable length to show that the
language of St. Luke, both in the Gospel and Acts, is very largely impreg-
nated with technical medical words — words which none but a trained
physician would have thought of using; words, too, employed in the
general story in the course of relation of events not connected with healing
a disease or any medical subject ; the very words, in fact, which were
common in the phraseology of the Greek medical schools, and which a
physician, from his medical training and habits, would be likely to employ.

1. In the general narrative in the Third Gospel and the AcU, there are
a number of words which were either distinctly medical terms or commonly
emploj'ed in medical language, such as lacri;, Oepa-ireid, crxrvSpofii^, etc.

2. There are, again, certain classes of words which were used in medical
language in some special relation.' St. Luke alono uses the special terms
for the distribution of nourishment, blood, nerves, etc., through the body,
such as Siavefieiv, SiaurireCpeiv, avaSiSovai. ; and the terms to denote an inter-
mittent or a failing pulse, such as Siakuireiv, iKkeiireiv, etc.

3. The same combination of words are used by St. Luke as we find
in medical writers, as for instance, rprjfia /SeAdfi/f, SoktvAw vpovn^avuv,
6p6p.poL ai/ioTos, etc.

4. Other words are found, too, in this Gospel used very rarely save by
medical writers in the sense which they bear in St. Luke's writings, as
avaKciOi^eif, to sit up, iK\j/v)^uv, to expose, etc.

6. Several curious indicatiuns of the writer of the Third Gospel and the
Acts being a medical man are discoverable in the words made use of for
marking time, such as icnrepa, ixe(rrjjj./3pia, p.e(rovvKTiov, opOpoi ; the first
two of which are peculiar to him, and the last two almost so, as p.€<tovvktlov
is used but once outside liis writings (Mark xiii. 35), and opOpoi, too, but
once (John viii. 2). These latter were the usual times and the usual terms
to denote them, for the accession or abatement of disease, visiting patients,

I 'The Medical Language of St. Luke,' by the Bev. W. K. Hobart, LL.D., printed in
the Dublin University Press series, 1883.
' Ibid., IntroJ., p. xiiiv.



IX INTBODUCTION TO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.

applying remedies, etc. Dr. Hobart quotes Galen, ' Meth. Med,,' ix. 4, and
other well-known Greek medical writers in support of this.

As we should expect from the phyBician-evangelist, in the accounts of
the miracles of healing medical language is carefully employed.

In many parallel passages St. Luke will be found to use a term strictly
medical, the other evangelists one less precise, the terms chosen by St. Luke
being words all of which were in common use with the Greek physicians.

In such important sections, for instance, as in the account of the agony
in the garden, described by all the three synoptists, St. Luke's relation,
different from the other two, possesses all the characteristics of medical
writing, detailing carefully, in medical language, the prostration of strength,
and the outward and visible effect on his human frame of the inner anguish
of our Lord.*

It is a very probable hypothesis to ascribe the connection of the two
friends, Paul and Luke, in the first instance, to help given to the great
apostle in one of those many and grave illnesses to which, from many
casual references in his writings, we know the apostle was subject.

VI. CONCLUSIOH.

With the exception of (1) the direct but casual notices in the Epistles
of St. Paul, and the indirect allusions to himself in the later chapters of
the Acts above referred to, where in the narrative the third person is
changed for the first ; (2) the universal tradition of the early Church that
Luke, the companion of Paul, was the author of the Third Gospel ; (3)
the internal evidence contained in the Gospel and in the Acts, which
plainly shows that the writer was a physician; — with these exceptions
nothing further definite or trustworthy is known respecting Luke.
EpiphaniuB and others mention that he was one of the seventy disciples ;
Theophylact believes that he was one of the two disciples who met with
the risen Jesus on their walk to Emmaus. These suppositions may be true,
but they are uncertain. The well-known tradition that Luke was also
a painter, and painted portraits of the blessed Virgin and of the chief
apostles, and even of the Lord himself, rests only on the statement of
Nicephorus, of the menology of the Emperor Basil, drawn up in a.d. 980,
and of other late writers, but none of them are of historical authority.*

After St. Paul's martyrdom (a.d. 67-68) our knowledge of St. Luke
is only vague, and rests on uncertain tradition. Epiphanius ('Contr.
Haeres.,' lib. ii. voL ii. 464, edit. Dindorf) tells us that, after the death
of his master, he preached in Dalinatia, Italy, Macedonia, and Gallia.
Gregory Nazianzen mentions that St. Luke was among the martyra
Nicephorus relates the manner of his martyrdom — ^how that, whilst work-
ing for the cause in Greece, he was hanged upon an olive-tree.

' Hobart, ' The Medical Language of St. Luke,' pt ii. aeot Wi. p. 80.

* ArahbiBhop Thomson, 'Introdnotion to St Lnke,' p. zlL



THE



GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB L



The origin of the Gospeli — ^the four liiBtories
wliioh relate in detail the circumstances of
the foundation of Christianity — will ever be
an interesting study. Here we shall never
know the exact truth of the compilation of
these writings, the foundation-stones of all
our hopes and fears; a reverent, scholarly
speculation is all that can be offered to the
student of the Divine memoirs. The specu-
lation, however, probably in this case comes
very near the truth.

After the Ascension and the events of t)ie
first Pentecost, which quickly followed their
Master's return to heaven, the twelve and a
few others who had walked in the company
which followed Jesus daring the years of his
public ministry no doubt often met together
and talked over the teaching and the acts
of their risen and now glorified Master. As
time passed on, a oertain number of these
acts, a certain number of the public and
private discourses in the apostolic company,
became adopted as the usual texts or sub-
jects of the teaching and preaching in
the assemblies large and small gathered
together by the followers of Jeans in Jeru-
salem and the neighbouring towns and
Tillages, subsequently in other parts of the
Holy Land, in Syria, and in more distant
ronntries — in Africa and Italy. We may
assume that the Holy Spirit aided the com-
position of these apostolic summaries by
bringing to the memory of these holy men
tb« more important of the words and acts of

LUKK.



the Lord Jesus, spoken and dona when ia
their midst.

That some such early authoritative sum-
mary existed among the first preachers of
the faith we may positively assume, (1)
from the ggneral harmony of the facta and
teaching of the first three Gospels; (2)
from the almost total absence of any other
traditional sayings and doings of the great
Master besides those contained in the four
Gbspels.

Some twelve traditional sayings besides
those related by the four, and those of no
great importance, are all that we possess;
no record of other miracles of any descrip-
tion have come down to us.

Years passed on. The precious treasure ot
the apostolic records, the simple memories
of his words and acts preserved, and no
doubt arranged in some order, were enough
for the first preachers and teaoheis of the
faith of Jesus of Nazareth.

There were, no doubt, many rongh at-
tempts to write these down on the part of
apostles and their pupils. These are most
probably the writings to which St. Luke
alludes, without disparaging them, in his
preface to his Gospel, in the words, " Foras-
much as many have taken in hand to set
forth in order a declaration of those things
which are most surely believed among us."

But something more acoturate in the way
of written memoirs was necessary for the
Church, as the number of believers mul-
tiplied, and the original friends of the
Master were one by one taken ftoa theii



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. 1. 1—80.



QiidBt the men who had seen the presence

and heard the voice. When the first fervour
of enthusiasm had passed away, or rather
when the Church had so multiplied that,
in the case of the great majority of its
members who had only heard of Jesus, thia
fervour of enthusiasm had never heen ex-
perienced at all, something of • critical
spirit of inquiry sprang up in the various
congregations. Wlio, for instance, was this
Jesus of Nazareth, whom the apostles and
their pupili preached ? Whence came he?
Who was that strauge teacher John, who
baptized him, and, so to speak, introduced
him to Israel? Such natural questions
necessitated the putting forth, on the part of
the leaders of the new faith, documents at
once comprehensive as well as authorita-
tive.

Each of the four Gospels supplied an
evident want of the early Church ; each wag
the answer, on the part of responsible men,
to the natural inquiry of some great section
of believers.

The preface to the Gospel of St. Luke,
with which we are at present concerned,
with great clearness relates how its compiler,
having availed himself of all the written
and oral apostolic tniditions then current in
the Church, had personally, with careful and
continuous research, traced up these various
traditions to their very source, and, having
arranged his many facts, presented the whole
continuous story to a mau of high rank in
the Christian congregations, one Theo-
philus, a noble Greek or Boman, who may
be taken as an example of a large class of
inquiring earnest Christians of the years
70—90 A.D.

Vers. 1 — 4. — An Introdcotion.

Ver. 1. — rorasmnch as many have taken
in hand. The Greek in which St. Lute's
Gospel is written is generally pure and
classical, but the language of the little in-
troduction (vers. 1 — 4) is especially studied
and polished, and contrasts singularly with
the Hebrew character of the story of the
nativity, which immediately follows. St.
Luke here, in this studied introduction,
follows the example of many of the great
classical writers, Latin as well as Greek.
Thncydides, Herodotus, Livy, for instance,
paid special attention to the opening
ientenoes of their histories. The many
early efforts to produce a connected history
of the life and work of the great Master



Christ are not, as some have supposed,
alluded to here with anything like censure,
but are simply referred to as being ineom-
plete, as written without order or arrange-
ment. They most probably formed the
basis of much of St. Luke's own Gospel.
These primitive Gospels quickly disappeared
from sight, as they evidently contained
nothing more than what was embodied la
the fuller and more systematic narratives of
the " four." Of those things which are most
surely believed among us. There was
evidently no questioning in the Church of
the first days about the truth of the story
of the teaching and the mighty works of
Jesus of Nazareth. It was the incomplete-
ness of these first evangelists, rather than
their inaccuracy, which induced St. Luke to
take in band a new Gospel.

Ver. 2. — Hveu as they delivered them
unto US, which tiom the beginning wera
eye-witnesses, and ministers of the Word.
The general accuracy of the recitals con-
tained in those early Gospels is here con-
ceded, as the source of these primitive
writings was the tradition delivered by the
eye-witnesses of the acts of Jesus ; among
these eye-witnesses the apostles would, of
course, "hold tlie foremist place. The whole
statement may be roughly paraphrased thus:
''The narrative of the memorable events
which have been aecomplished in our midst
many have undertaken to compose. These
different narratives are in strict conformity
with the apostles' tradition, which men who
were themselves eye-witnesses of the great
events, and subsequently ministers of the
Word, handed down to us. Now, I have
traced up all tliese traditions anew to their
very sources, and propose rewriting them in
consecutive order, that you, my lord Theo-
philus, may be fully conviueed of the posi-
tive certainty of (liose great truths in which
you have been instructed." Eye-witiieeset,
and ministera of Vie Word; wituesses of the
events of the public ministry of Jesus, from
the baptism to the Ascension. These men,
in great numliers, after Pentecost, became
ministers and preachers of the Word.

Ver. 3. — Having had perfect understand-
ing of aU things from the very first ; more
accurately rendered, having followed up
(or, investigated) itep by step all thing*
from tlieir source. St. Luke, without
depreciating the accounts of the life and
work of Jesus then current in the Church,
here sets out his reasons fur undertaking a
fresh compilation. His Gospel would differ
from tlie early Gospels : (1) By going back
much further than they did. It is doubtful
if those primitive Gospels began earlier than
with the ministry of John and the baptism
of Jesus. St. if at'' s Gospel — which, per-
haps, represents oe of the earliest forms



OH. 1. 1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE;



of the apostles' preaching and teaching,
— does not go further back than those
events. St. Lnke gave Theophllus, among
other early details, a history of the incarna-
tion and the infancy of the Blessed One.
(2) By presenting the -whole story in a
oonseontiTe form. Hitherto, apparently,
" apostolic tradition probably had a more
or less fragmentary character ; the apostles
not relating eyery time the whole of the
facts, bnt only those which best answered
to the circumstances in which they were
preaching. This is expressly said of St.
Peter, on the testimony of Papias, or of the
old presbyter on whom he relied : Tlphs rilj
j^)flas iiTOifiTo rhs StSocrjfaXfas (* He chose
each time the facts appropriate to the needs
of his hearers'). Important omissions would
easily result from this mode of telling; the
great stoiy " (Oodet). Most excellent Tbeo-
philns. The term rendered "most excellent "
((tpetTio-Te) denotes that the friend of Luke for
whom nominally his Gospel was written
was a man of high rank in the Botnan
world of that day. Nothing is known of his
history. He was most likely, fiom Luke's
oonneotion with Antioch, a noble of that
great and wealthy city, and may fairly bo
teken as a representative of that cultured
thoughtful class for whom in a measure
St. Luke especially wrote. The title xpi-
TiffTt, by which the Theophilus is here
addressed, we find several times applied to
high Roman officials, such as Felix and
Festus (Acts xxiii. 26 ; xxiv. 3 ; xxvi. 25).

Ver. 5 — eh. ii. 52. — The CJospbl of the
Infanot. The critical reader of the Gospel
in the original Greek is here startled by the
abrupt change in the style of writing. The
first four verses, which constitute the intro-
duction, are written in pure classical lan-
guage; the sentences are balanced, almost
with a rhythmical accuracy. They are the
words evidently of a highly cultured mind,
well versed in Greek thought. But in the
fifth verse, where the history of the eventful
period really begins, all is changed. The
narrative flows on clearly with a certain
picturesqueness of imagery; the style is
simple, easy, vivid; but at once the reader
is sensible that he has passed out of the
region of Greek and Western thought. The
language is evidently a close translation
from some Hebrew original ; tlie imagery is
eielusively Jewish, and the thoughts belong
to the story of the chosen people. It is
clear that this section of St. Luke's writing,
which ends, however, with oh. ii., is not
derived from apostolic tradition, but is the



result of his own investigation into tlie
origin of the faith of Christ, gathered piol>-
ably from the lips of the virgin mother
herself, or from one of the holy women be-
longing to her kinsfolk who had been with
her from the beginning of the wondrous
events. St. Luke reproduced, as faithfully
as he could in a strange tongue, the revela-
tions — some perhaps written, some no doubt
oral, communicated to him, we reverently
believe, by the blessed mother of Jeans
herself. The story of these two chapters
is what St. Luke evidently alludes to when,
in his short preface (ver. 3), he writes of hia
"perfect understanding in all things from
the very first («v«9w)."

Vers. 5—25. — The vision of Zaehariat in
the temple.

Ver. 5. — There was in the days of Herod,
the King of Judesa. The Herod here alluded
to was tlie one sumamed " the Great." The
event here related took place towards the
end of his reign. His dominions, besides
Judiea, included Samaria, Galilee, and a
large district of Persea. This prince played
a conspicuous part in the politics of his day.
He was no Hebrew by birth, but an Idu-
msBan, and he owed his position entirely to
the favour of Eome, whose vasssd he really
was during his whole reign. The Soman
senate had, on the recommendation of
Antony and Octavius, granted to this prince
the title of "King of Judsea." It was a
strange, sad state of things. The land of
promise was ruled over by an Idumnan
adventurer, a creature of the great Italian
Republic; the holy and beautiful house on
Mount Zion was in the custody of an Edom-
ite usurper ; the high priest of the Mighty
One of Jacob was raised up or deposed eis
the officials of Rome ti )Ought gnod. Truly the
sceptre had departed from Judah. A certain
priest named Zacharias ; usually spelt among
the Hebrews, Zecliariah ; it means " Remem-
bered of Jehovali," and was « favourite
name among the chosen people. Of the oonrse
of Abia. 'E4>77;[»€p(o (course) signified origi-
nally " a daily service." It was subsequently
used for a group of priests who exeroised
their priestly functions in the temple for a
week, and then gave place to another gionp.
From Eleazar and Ithamar, the two snr-
viving sons of the first high priest Aaxaa,
had descended twenty-four families. Among
these King David distributed by lot tne
various tabernacle (subsequently temple)
services, each family group, or conrse, offi-
ciating for eight days — from sabbatii to
sabbath. From the Babylonish exile, of
these twenty-four families only fonr r»-



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. i, 1— 8Q



turned. With the idea of reproducing as
nearly as possible the old state of things,
these four were subdivided into twenty-four,
the twenty-four bearing the original family
names, and this succession of courses con-
tinued in force until the fall of Jerusalem
and the burning of the temple, a.d. 70.
According to JosephuB, Zacharias was
especially distinguished by belonging to
llie first of the twenty-four courses, or
families. Of the daughters of Aaron, and
her name was Elisabeth; identical with
Eluheba, " One whose oath is to God." Both
the husband and wife traced their lineage
back to the first high priest—* coveted dis-
tinction in Israel.

Ver. 6. — And they were both righteous
before God. "One of the oldest terms of
high praise among the Jews (Gen. vi. 9;
vii. 1; xviii. 23—28; Ezek. xviii. 5—9,
etc.). It is used also of Joseph (Matt. i.
19), and is defined in the following words
in the most technical sense of strict legal
observance, which it had acquired since the
days of Maccabees. The true Jashar (up-
right man) was the ideal Jew. Thus Rashi
calls the Book of Genesis 'The book of
the upright, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob ' "
(Farrar).

Ver. 7.^-And they had no child. This, as
is well known, was a heavy calamity in a
Hebrew home. In the childless house there
was no hope of the long looked-for Messiah
being bom in it. It was not unfrequently
looked on as a mark of the Divine dis-
pleasure, possibly as the punishment of
■ODie grave sin.

Ver. 9. — His lot was to bum incense; more
accurately, he obtained by lot the duty of
entering and offering incense. The office of
burning incense gave the priest to whom
this important lot fell the right of entering
the holy place. It was the most coveted of
all the priestly duties. The Talmud says the
priest who obtained the right to perform
this high duty was not permitted to draw
the lot a second time in the same week,
and as the whole number of priests at this
time was very large — some say even as many
as twenty thousand —Farrar conjectures
that it would never happen to the same
priest twice in his lifetime to enter that
sacred spot.

Ver. 10. — And the whole multitude of the
people were praying without at the time of
incense. This would indionte that the day
in question was a sabbath or some high day.
Dean Plumplre suggests that, lost among
that praying oowd, were, " we may well
believe, the aged Simeon (ch. ii. 25) and
Anna the prophetess (oh. ii. 36), and many
others who waited for redemption in
Jerusalem."
Ver. 11. — And there appeared unto him an



angel of the Lord. Critics have especially
found grave fault with thi« "Hebrew" por-
tion of our Gospel, complaining that it need-
lessly introduces the marvellous, and brings
uselessly into everyday life beings from
another sphere. Godet well answers thesa
criticisms by observing " that as Christianity
was an entirely new beginning in history,
the second and final creation of man, it was
natural that an interposition on so grand
a scale should be accompanied by a series
of particular interpositions. It was even
necessary ; for how were the representatives
of the ancient order of things, who had to
co-operate in the new work, to be initiated
into it, and their attachment won to it,
except by this means ? According to Scrip-
ture, we are surrounded by angels (2 Kings
vi. 17 ; Ps. xxxiv. 7), whom God employs to
watch over us ; but in our ordinary condition
we want the sense necessary to perceive
their presence — for that condition a peculiar
receptivity is required. This condition was
given to Zacharias. Origen ('Contra Cel-
sum') writes how, "in a church there are
two aiaemblies — one of angels, the other of
men, . . . angels are present at our prayers,
and they pray with us and for us." Stand-
ing on the right side of the altar of incense.
The angel stood between the altar and the
shew-bread table. On entering the holy
place, the officiating priest would have on
his right the table with the shew-bread, on
his left the great candlestick, and before
him would be the golden altar, which stood
at the end of the holy place, in front of the
veil which separated this chamber and the
dim, silent holy of holies.

Ver. 12. — He was troubled. This was
ever the first effect produced by the eight
of a spirit-visitant.

Ver. 13. — ^Thy prayer is heard. What
was the nature of this prayer? The Greek
word (Se^trii) used here implies that some
special supplication had been offered, and
which the angel tells had been listened to
at the throne of grace. The righteous old
man had not, as some have thought, been
praying for a son, — ^he had long resigned
himself in this private sorrow to the will of
his God ; but we may well suppose that on
that solemn occasion he prayed the un-
selfish patriotic prayer that the long luoKed-
for Messiah would hasten his coming. Hii
name John; the shortened form for Jelto-
ehanan, "the grace of Jehovah." Under
various diminutives, such as Jonah, it waa
a favourite Hebrew name.

Ver. 14. — Many shall rejoice at his birth.
The gladness which his boy's birth was to
bring with it was to be no mere private
family rejoicing. The child of his old age,
who was to be born, would be the oooasiog
of a true national joy.



OH.1.1— 80j THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE.



Ver. 15. — Great in the sight of the Lord.
To the pious old Jewish priest the strange
visitant's words would bear a deep signifi-
cation. Zacharias would quickly catch the
angel's thoughts. His son was not to be the
Messiah of tlie people's hope, but was to be
like one of those great ones loved of God,
of whom the women of Israel sang on their
solemn feast-days — one like Samson, only
purer, or Samuel, or the yet greater Elijah.
Could all this deep joy be true? Shall
drink neither wine. The old curse theu as
now. God's heroes must be free from even
the semblance of temptation. They must
stamp their high lives, from tlie beginning,
by the solemn vow of self-denial and absti-
nence. It is remarkable how many of tlie
great deliverers and teachers of tlie chosen
people were commanded from childhood to
enrol themselves among the abstainers from
all strong drink. Nor strong drink. The
word o-'tKfpa includes all kinds of fermented
drink except that made from the grape ; it
was especially applied to palm wine.

Ver. 16.— And many of the children of
Israel shall he torn to the Lord their Ood.
The state of the people at this period was
indeed unhappy. The dominant Italian
power had introduced into Syria and Pales-
tine the vices and profligate life of Italy
and Greece. The great Syrian city Antioch,
for instance, in vice and sensuality, had gone
far beyond her conqueror, and was perhaps
at that time the most wicked city in the
world. In the court of Herod, patriotism
and true nobility were dead. The priests
and scribes were for the most part deeply
corrupted, and the poor shepheniless com-
mon folk only too readily followed the
example of the rich and great. The boy
who was to be born was to be a great
preacher of righteousness ; his glorious mis-
sion would be to turn many of these poor
wanderers to the Lord their God.

Ver. 17. — In the spirit and power of Slias.
There was a confident hope among the Jews,
dating from the days of the prophecy of
Malachi, some four hundred years before
the vision of Zacharias, that the days of
Messiah would be heralded by an appear-
ance of the Propliet Elijah. 'The selfsame
expectation is still cherished by every pious
Jew. To turn the hearts of the fathers to
the cbildreB, and the disobedient to the
wisdom of the just. The usual explanation
of these words of tbe angel, who uses hnre
the language of Malachi (iv. 5, 6), is that
the result of the preaching of this new
prophet, who ia about to be raised up, will
be to restore harmony to the broken and
disturbed I'amily life of Israel, whereas now
the home life of the chosen race was split
up— the fathers, perhaps, siiliug with the
foreign or Boman faction, as represected by



Herod and his friends; the sons, on the othei
hand, being Zealots attached to the national
party, bitterly hostile to the Herodians.
So also in one house some would belong to
the Pharisee, others to the Sadducee, sect.
These fatal divisions would, in many cases,
be healed by the influence of the coming
one. There is, however, another interpre-
tation far dieper and more satisfactory ; f<jr
nothing in the preaching of the Baptist, as
far as we are "aware, bore specially on the
domestic dissensiuns of the people; It had
a much wider range. The true sense of the
angel's words here should be gathered from
prophetic passages such as Isa. xxix. 22, 23,
" Jacob shall no more be ashamed, neither
shall his face wax pale, when he seeth (<?
inicjn) his children become the work of my
hands ; " Isa. Ixiii. 16, " Doubtless thou art
our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of
us, and Israel acknowledge us not: thuu,
O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer I " — ■
The patriarchs, the fathers of Israel, behold-
iug from their abodes of rest the works and
days of their degenerate children, mourned
over their fall, and, to use earthly language,
"were ashamed" of the conduct of their
unworthy descendants. Thete would be
glad and rejoice over the result of the
preaching of the coming prophet. Godet
well sums up the angel's words : " It will be
John's mission then to reconstitute the
moral unity of the people by restoring the
broken relation between the patriarchs and
their degenerate descendants."

Ver. 18. — Whereby shall I know this?
for I am an old man. There was something
evidently blamable in this hesitation on
the part of Zachurias to receive the angel's
promise. It seems as though the radiant
glory of the messenger, as he stood before
the curtain of the silent sanctuary in his
awful beauty, ought to have convinced the
doubting old man of the truth of the strange
message. The words of the angel, which
follow, seem to imply this. Wliat I do you
doubt my message ? " I am G*briel, who
stand in the presence of the Eternal."
Others in Old Testament story before — for
instance, Abraham (Gen. xv.) and Gideon
(Judg. vi.) — had seen and listened to an
angel, had at first doubted, but had received
in consequence no rebuke, no punishment,
for tlieir want of faith. Zacharias was,
however, condemned, we learn, to a long
period of dumbness.

Ver. 19. — I am Gabriel. The meaning of
the name Gabriel is "Hero cf God," or
" Mighty One of God." In the canonical
books only two of the heavenly ones arc
mentioned by name. Gabriel (here and
Dan. viii. 16 and ix. 21') and Mirhicl,
which signifies " Who is like God " (Juds
9; Rev. xii. 7; and in Dan. x. 13, 21;



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. i. 1— 8a



ziL 1). Of these two blessed spirits whose
names are revealed to us in the Word of
Gkid, their appointed work seema to be in
connection with the human race and its
enemies. Oabriel is the special messenger
of good news. He comes to Daniel, and
tells him of the restoration of Jerusalem ;
to Zacharias, and announces tlie birth ot his
son, and declares what his glorious office
would consist in ; to Mary of Nazareth, and
foreteUs tlie nativity. Michael, on the other
hand, appears as the warrior of God. In
the Book of D.aniel he wars with the enemies
of the people of the Lord ; in Jude and in
the BeTelation of St. John he is the vic-
torious antagonist of Satan the enemy of
the Eternal. The Jews have a striking
saying that Gabriel flies with two wings,
but Michael with only one ; so God is swift
in sending angels of peace andof joy,of which
blessed company the archangel Gibriel is the
representative, while the messengers of his
wrath and punishment, among whom Michael
holds a chief place, come slowly. That stand
in the presence of Ood.

" One of the seven
Who in God's presence, nearest to his throne.
Stand ready at command, and are his eyes
That run through all the heavens, and dovm

to the earth
Bear his swift commands, over moist and dry,
O'er sea and land."

(•Paradise Lost,' iii. 650.)

Milton derived his knowledge of the seven
from the apocryphal Book of Tobit, where
in ch. xii. 15 we read, " I am Raphael, one
of the seven holy angels, which present the
prayers of the saints, and which go in and
out before the glory of the Holy One." In
the very ancient Book of Enoch we read of
the names of the four great arcliangels,
Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and Bapliael.

Ver. 21. — And the people waited for
Zaeharias, and marvelled that he tarried
■0 long in the temple. The Talmud tells us
that even the high priest did not tarry long
in the holy of holies on the Day of Atone-
ment. The same feeling of holy awe would
induce the ministering priest of the day to
perform his functions with no unnecessary
delay, and to leave as soon as possible the
holy place. The people praying in the
court without were in the habit of wait-
ing until the priest on duty came out of
the tacred inner chamber, after which
they were dismissed with the blessing. The
nnnsnal delay in the appearance of Zacha-
rias puzzled and disturbed the worshippers.

Ver. 22. — When he came out, he oonld
not qpeak onto them ; and they perceived
tiiat he had seen a vision in the temple.
Something in the face of the old man, aa,
«n*ble to apeak, he made signi to the con-



gregation, told the awestruck people that
the long delay and the loss of speech were
owing to no sudden illness which had seized
Zacharias, We know that, in the old days
of the desert wanderings, the children of
Israel could not bear to look on the face of
Mosea when he came down from the mount
after dwelling for a brief space in the light
of the glory of the Eternal. Zacharias had
been face to face with one whose blessed lot
it was to stand for ever in the presence of
God. We may well suppose that there
lingered on the old man's face, as he left the
sanctuary, lomething which told the beholder
of the presence just left.

Ver. 24. — And after those days his wife
Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five
months. Various reasons have been sug-
gested for this retirement. It seems most
probable that, amazed at the angelic an-
nouncement, the saintly woman went into
perfect retirement and isolation for a con-
siderable period, to prove well the words of
the angel, and to consider how she best
could do her part in the training of the
expected child, who was to play so mighty
a part in the history of her people.

Vers. 26 — 38. — The annunciation of the
Virgin Mary. The recital contained in this
little section is peculiar to this Gospel of
St. Luke. It lay outside what may be
termed the apostolic tradition. It neither
helps nor mars the moral or dogmatic teach-
ing of the men trained in the school of
Jesus of Nazareth. It simply answers a
qnestiun that probably few of the converts
of the first quarter of a century which suc-
ceeded the Resurrection morning cared toask.

We do not suppose that the true story of
the birth of Jesus Christ was any secret,
any precious myttery in the Church of the
first days. It was known doubtless to the
leading teachers, known to many of their
hearers, but it was evidently unused as a
popular text for preaching. It probably was
not among those " memoirs " of the apostles
which were read and expounded in the first
forty years in the public synagognes and in
the quiet upper rooms of so many of the
cities of Syria, and in not a few of the towns
of Egypt, Greece, and Italy. Nor is the
reason of this doubtful ; the wondrous story
of the child Jesus' birth would add little to
the simple faith of the first believers in the
Crucified.

Of miracles and worki of wonder they
had heard enough to coavino* them thai,



•11. 1. 1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE.



1



If these were true, Burely never man had
worked like this Man. They had heard, too,
of the crowning sign of the Besurrection.
There were men in those first days, scat-
tered abroad in all lands, who had <een
these things, who knew that the Master had
(lied on the cross, and who had seen him,
touched him, and spoken to him after his
resurrection. The mysterious miracle of
the incarnation was not needed for the
preaching of the first days.

But time went on, and natnrally enough
many of the thoughtful cultured men who
had accepted the doctrine of the cross began
to say — We ought to have the true story of the
beginnings of these marvellous events autho-
ritatively written down. Here and there we
have heard something of the birth and child-
hood, why have we not the details authenti-
cated ? Men like Paul and Luke felt that
such naturalquestioningsshouldhe answered.
And hence it came to pass that, moved by
the Holy Spirit — under, we believe, the
direction of Paul — Luke went to the fountain-
head, to the blessed mother herself, to those
holy women some of whom we believe had
borne her company from the beginning, and
from her lips and their lips wrote down
what she (or they) dictated, partly from
memory, partly perhaps from memoranda
which she and others had kept of that
strange sweet time; and so these two chap-
ters of the Third Gospel, of which the incar-
nation is the central narrative, were written
down much in the original form in which
Luke received it, the Greek simply trans-
lating the original Hebrew story. Around
the words of the Gospel soon gathered a host
of miraculous legends glorifying the blessed
mother of the Lord. These are utterly un-
known to Scripture, and should be quietly
put aside. Strange speculations respecting
her and the manner of the wondrous birth
have been in all times, nay, still are
favourite subjects of dispute among theo-
logians. It is a pity to try and be wise
beyond what is written. The believer will
content himself with just receiving the quiet
story of the holy maid as Mary the mother
gave it to Luke or Paul, feeling assured
that the same power of the Highest by
which the cmclfied Jesus was raised from
the tomb where he had lain for three days,
was able to oversliadow the virgin of Naza-



reth, was able to cause to be bom of hei
that holy thing which was called the Son
of God.

Ver. 26.— And in the sixth month; that is,
after the vision of Zacharias in tlie temple.
Unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth.
These explanatory notes make it clear that
St. Luke was writing for those who were
strangers to Palestine. Such details were
no doubt added by St. Luke to the oral or
written Hebrew narrative upon which this
section is entirely based. Under the Boman
domination the land of promise was divided
into Judsea, Samaria, Persea, and Gralilee.
Galilee was the northern department, and
comprised the old territory of the triiies of
Zebulun, Naphtali, and Asher. From
Josephus we learn that at this period the
northern division was rich and populous, and
covered with flourishing towns. Nazareth,
which still exists as a large village of some
three thousand inhabitants, under the name
of En-Nazirah, is about twenty-four miles
to the east of the Luke of Tiberias. It is
well situate in a valley among tlie hilU
which rise to the north of the Esdraelou
plain. From one of the grassy slopes which
rise behind Nazareth, one of the noblest
views is obtained. The snowy summita of
Lebanon and Hermon close the prospect on
the north ; on the south the broad Esdiaelon
plain, with the mountains of Ephraim ;
Gilead and Tabor lie on the east; on tlie
other side, the green uplands of Carmel are
bathed by the blue waves of the Mediter-
ranean Sea. The meaning of the name
Nazareth haa been the subject of much
learned controversy. The njore usually
adopted derivation, however, refers the won)
to ns3, " a shoot or branch," which conveys,
as Dean Plumptre remarks, something o(
the same meaning as our huret or Itolm in
English topography. Burokhardt, the tra-
veller, believes the name was originally
used on account of the numerous shrulis
which cover the ground in this locality.

Ver. 27. — To a virgin espoused to a man
whose name was Joseph, of the house ol
David; more accurately, lietrothed. Tho
formal ceremony of betrothal took place
among the Jews in most cases a year prior
to the marriage. The question has arisen
whether the words, " of the house of David,"
refer to Joseph or to Mary. Grammatically,
they would seem to belong to Joseph ; but
the fact of the Gospel being here so closely
translated from a Hebrew (Aramaic) original,
prevents us from laying down any strict
linguistic rules which belong to the Greek
language. "Who was Mary the virgin?"
has been often asked. Vers. 32 and 69 would
lose their point altogether unless we regai^d
Luke as being persuaded that the young



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. l 1— Sa



Hebrew giil waa a descendant of David. In
respect to the virgin's family, we read that
she was a cousin or kinswoman of Elisabeth.
This would at least ally her olosely to the
priestly race. Dean Plumptre quotes one
out of the many ancient apocryphal legends
onirent respecting Mary of Nazareth, deem-
ing it worthy of mention as having left its
impress on Christian art. " The name of the
virgin's mother was Anne. Mary surpassed
the maideni of her own agts in wisdom.
There were many who early sought her in
marriage. The suitors agreed to decide
their claims by laying their rods before the
holy place, and seeing which budded. It
was thus that Joseph became betrothed to
hei." The same scholar adds, " The absence
of any mention of her parents in the Gospels
suggests the thought that she was an orphan,
and the whole narrative of the nativity pre-
supposes poverty ! The name Mary is the
same as Miriam or Marah." (On the ques-
tion of the genealogy recorded by St. Luke,
see note on ch. iii. 23.)

Ver. 28. — Hail, thou that art highly fa-
Tonred. The plena gratia of the Vulgate,
said and sung so often in the virgin's famous
hymn, is an inaccurate rendering. Bather,
" gratia cwnulata," as it has been well ren-
dered. "Having been much graced (by God)"
is tlie literal translation of the Greek word.
Blessed art thou among women. These words
must be struck out ; they do not exist in the
older authorities.

Ver. 29. — She was troubled; more accu-
rately, the was greatly trouUed. Different
to Zacharias, who evidently doubted in the
mission of the angel, and who required some
sign before he could believe, Mary simply
wondered at the strangeness of what was
about to happen. Her terror at the sudden
appearance of the angel, who probably ap-
peared to her as a young man clad in garments
of a strange dazzling whiteness, is most
natural.

Ver. 31. — JESTJS; the ordinary Greek form,
the well-known Hebrew Jehoshua, the short-
ened Joshua, " The Salvation of Jehovah."

Ver. 32.— The Son of the Highest. It ia
singular that this title, given by the angel
to the yet unborn child, waa the one given
to the Eeileemer by the evil spirit in the
case of the poor possessed (see Mark v. 7).
la this the title, or one of the titles, by which
our Master is known in that greater world
beyond our knowledge ? The throne of his
father David ; clearly indicating that Mary
herself was of royal lineage, although this
is nowliere definitely stated (see Ps. cxxxii.
11). These words of the angel are as yet
unfulfilled. They clearly speak of a restora-
tion of Israel, still, as far as we can see, very
distant. Nearly nineteen centuries have
passei^ since Gabriel spoke of a restored



throne of David, of a kingdom In Jacob to
which should come no end. The people,
through all the changing fortune of empires,
have been indeed strangely kept distinct
and separate, ready for the mighty change;
but the eventful hour still tarries. It has
been well observed how St. Luke's report of
the angel's words here could never have been
a forgery — as one school of critics asserts —
of the second century. Would any writer in
the second century, after the failure of Jesus
among the Jews was well known, when the
fall of Jerusalem had already taken place,
have made an angel prophesy what is ex-
pressed here ?

Ver. 33. — The Holy Ohost shall come npon
thee, and the power of the Highest shall
OTershadow thee. Again the angel makes
use of the term " Highest" when alluding
to the eternal Father. The expression of
Gabriel, "the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee," reminds us of the opening
words of Genesis, where the writer describes
the davm of life in creation in the words,
"The Spirit of God moved [or, 'brooded']
over the face of the deep." " The Word
was conceived in the womb of a woman, not
after the manner of men, but by the singular,
powerful, invisible, immediate operation of
the Holy Ghost, whereby a virgin was,
beyond the law of nature, enabled to con-
ceive, and that which was conceived in her
was originedly and completely sanctified "
(art. iii.. Bishop Pearson on the Creed).

Ver. 38. — Behold the handmaid of the
Lord ; be it unto me according to thy word.
"(Sod's message," writes Godet, "by the
mouth of the angel was not a command.
The part Mary had to fulfil made no demands
on her. It only remained, therefore, for
Mary to consent to the consequences of the
Divine offer. She gives this consent in a
word at once simple and sublime, which
involved the most extraordinary act of faith
that a woman ever consented to accomplish.
Mary accepts the sacrifice of that which ii
dearer to a young maiden than her very
life, and thereby becomes pre-eminently the
heroine of Israel, the ideal daughter of Zion."
Nor was the immediate trouble and sorrow
which she foresaw would soon compass her
round by any means the whole burden which
submission to the angel's message would
bring upon the shrinking Nazareth maiden
The lot proposed to her would bring probably
in its wake unknown sufferings as well aa
untold blessedness. We may with all re-
verence think Mary already feeling the first
piercings in her heart of that sharp sword
which was one day to wound so deeply the
mother of sorrows ; yet in spite of all this, in
full view of the present woe, which snbmif
sion to the Divine will would forthwith bring
upon her, with an unknown future of sorrow



CH.I.1— 80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. J^UKE.



in the background, Mary snbmitted herself
of her own free will to what she felt was the
will and wish of her God.

Yer. 39. — Uary arose in thoie days, and
went into the hill oonntry with haste.
Between the annnnciation and this journey
of Mary to visit her cousin Elisabeth, we
must interpose the events narrated in St.
Matthew's Gospel, via. the natural suspicion
of her betrothed future husband, Joseph;
his action in the matter ; and then the dream
of Joseph, in which her innocence was vindi-
cated. As we believe that St. Luke's stery
here was derived from Mary's own narrative,
we can understand well that these details,
related by St. Matthew, were scarcely
touched upon, and the mother would hurry
on to the real points of interest in that
eventful past of hers. The hill country here
alluded to is the elevated district of Judah,
Benjamin, and Mount Ephraim, in contra-
distinction to the low maritime plain on
the east — the old Philistia. Into a city of
Juda. There is no such city known as
" Juda." Some have supposed that the text
is corrupt here, and that for " Yuda " we
should read ".Tutta," which, according to
Josh. XV. 55, was a priestly city in the
hill country. There is a rabbinical tradi-
tion in the Talmud which places the resi-
dence of Zacharias at Hebron. It is very
probable that Hebron, the great priestly
city, is here signified.

Ver. 41. — Elisabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost. The Holy Spirit — that Spirit
of prophecy, so often mentioned in the Old
Testament — seizes her, and she salutes her
young kinswoman, Mary, as the mother of
the coming Messiah.

Yer. 42. — And she spake ont with a lend
voice, and said. Blessed art thou among
women (see Judg. v. 24). The words which
clothed the thoughts in these ecstatic ex-
pressions of intense joy and thankfulness on
the part of the two favoured women, Mary
and Elisabeth, are in great measure drawn
from hymn and song contained in tlie Old
Testament Scriptures. The song of Hannah,
the hymn of Deborah, many of the psalms,
the songs of the Canticles, the more glorious
of the prophetic utterances, had been ever
familiar to both these true women of the
people ; and they could find no language so
fitting as the words of these loved national
•ODgs to express the intense joy, the deep
awe and gratitude of their hearts. Think
what must have been the feeling of the two —
the one finding herself the chosen out of
all the thousands of Israel, after so many
centuries of weary waiting, to be the mother
of the Messiah; the other, long after any
reasonable hope of any offspring at all had
faded away, to be tlie mother of Messiah's
chosen friend, his herald, and his pieachtr,



the mighty forerunner of the King of whon
the prophets had written I

Yer. 43. — And whence is tbi* to me, that
the mother of my lord should oome to me 1
But the Holy Ghost (ver. 41) raised Elisa-
beth's though ts y et hi gher. Not only did she
bless the mother of the coming Messiah, but
the Spirit opened her eyes to see who that
coming Messiah really was. Yery vague
indeed was the conception of the coming
Messiah in Israel. The truth was, perhaps,
revealed, and in rapt moments received by
men like Isaiah and Ezekiel; and now
and again men like David ; Daniel wrote
down visions and revelations respecting the
Coming One, the true purport of which
vision they scarcely grasped. Generally the
Messianic idea among the people pictured
a hero greater than Saul, a conqueror more
successful than David, a sovereign more
magnificent than Solomon. They pictured
ever the glorious arm sustaining the coming
Hero-King ; but few, if any, dreamed of the
"glorious arm" belonging to their future
Deliverer. But here the Spirit in a
moment revealed to the happy wife of the
priest Zacharias that the Babe to be born
of her young kinswoman was not only the
promised Messiah, but was the awful Son
of the Highest I Think, reader, what these
simple words we are considering signify I
Why am I so favoured "that the mother
of my Lord should come to me"? "The
contrast leaves no room for doubt," well
argues Dean Plumptre, " that she used the
word ' Lord ' in its highest sense. ' Great ' aa
her own son was to be (ver. 15) in the sight
of the Lord, here was the mother of One
yet greater, even of the Lord himself."

Vers. 46 — 56. — The hymn of Mary, eom-
monly called the Magnifimt.

Ver. 46a. — And Mary said. There is a
great contrast between the behaviour of the
two women when they met in Elisabeth's
house. The elder was full of a new strange
ecstatic joy. " She was filled with the Holy
Ghost" (ver. 42), and spoke her words of
lofty congratulation with "a loud voice"
(ver. 42). Mary, on the otlier hand, was
not conscious evidently, on this occasion, of
any special presence of the Holy Spirit.
Since the hour of the annunciation and her
own meek faithful acceptance of the Lord's
purpose, she had been dwelling, so to speak,
under the immediate influence of the Spirit
of the Lord. Her cousin's Inspiration seems
to have been momentary and trantUory,
while hers, during that strange blessed
season which immediately preceded the
Incarnation, was endurittg. Hence the qniet
introduction to her hymn, " And Mary said."
It is, of course, possible that she had com-
mitted the beautiful thoughts to writing;
'>ut perhaps, in )j;iving them to Luke oi



10



TUB GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [ch. i. 1—80.



Paul, she needed no paichiuent scroll, but
softly repeated to the chronicler of the
Divine story the old Bong in which she had
firet told her deep imaginings to Elisa-
beth, and afterwards often had murmured
the same bright words of joy and faith orer
the holy Babe as he lay in his cradle at
Bethlehem, in Egypt, or in Nazareth. The
" Virgin's Hymn " for nearly fourteen cen-
turies has been used in the public liturgies
of Christendom. We find it first in the
office of Lauds in the Bule of St. Ciesarins
of Aries (a.d. 507)

Vers. 46i — 48.— My soul doth magnify the
Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in Ood
my Saviour. For he hath regarded the low
estate of his handmaiden : for, behold, from
henceforth all generations shall call me
blessed. This is the first of the four divi-
sions of the Mngnificat. In it she speaks of
herself, and her deep feelings of adoration
and of holy joy, and of intense glad surprise.
It is a prayer, but the highest kind of
prayer, for it asks for nothing — ^it simply
breathes adoration and thankfulness. We
may imagine the angels praying thus.
They have all that created beings, however
exalted, can desire in the beatific vision
which they perpetually enjoy ; and yet they
pray continually, but only after this manner.
The joy of lier spirit, nntice, is based on the
fact of the revelation that he, Ood, was, too,
her Saviour ; and, of course, not Iters only :
her great joy was in the thought of the
salvation of the suffering, sinning world
around her. Then she passes into simple
wonderment that she should have been
chosen as the instrument of the boundless
goodness of God. Slie had nothing to re-
commend her only her low estate. Though
royally descended, she only oooupie<l a
position among the humblest Hebrew
maidens, and yet, owing to God's favour,
■he will be deemed blessed by countless
unborn generations.

Vers. 49, 50. — For he that is mighty hath
done to me great things; and holy is his
Name, And his mercy is on them that fear
him from generation to generation. In this
strophe, tlie second division of the hymn of
pralae, she glorifies throe of the principal
Divine attributes— God's power, liis holiness,
and his mercy. His power or might, alluil-
ing to the words of the angel (ver. 35),
"The power of the Highest shall over-
shadow thee." Surely in all the records of
Ihe Lord's works since the world's creation,
his might had been never shown as it was
now about to be manifest in her. His holi-
ness had been displayed to her in the way
in which the mighty acts of ineffable love
had been carried eat. His merey; this
ittribate ef God came home with Intense
power to the heart of the Jewish girl, into



which God's protecting Spirit was shining
with so clear a light. She saw something of
the great redemption mystery which was
then in so strange a way developing itself.

Vers. 51 — 53. — He hath showed strength
with his arm ; he hath scattered the prond in
the imagination of their hearts. He hath
put down the mighty from their seats, and
exalted them of low degree. He hath filled
the htingry with good things; and the rich
he hath sent empty away. From adoration,
Mary's hymn proceeds to celebrate the
mighty results effected by the Divine pity.
As so often in these prophetic strains, the
speaker or writer speaks or writes as thongh
the future had become the past; so Mary
here describes the Messianic reversal of
man's conception of what is great and little,
as though the unborn Babe had already
lived and done his strange mighty work in
the world. The " glorious arm" which, in
old days, had wrought such mighty things
for Israel, she recognized as belonging to
the coming Deliverer (ver. 51). His oliosen
instruments would be those of whom the
world thought little, like herself. The
proud and mighty would be pnt down;
the men of low degree, and poor and hnmble,
would be exalted. The hungry would be
filled ; and they who were rich only in this
world's goods would have no share in the
new kingdom— they would be sent empty
away. How strangely had the virgin of
Nazareth caught the thought, almost the
very words, of the famous sermon her
Divine Son, some thirty years later, preached
on the moTmtain-side near Gennesaret t

Vers. 54, 55. — ^He hath holpen his servant
Israel, in remembrance of his mercy; as he
spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his
seed for ever. Her hymn dies down into a
strain of gratitude for the eternal faith-
fulness to the cause of the chosen people.
Had not Ood in very truth remembered
his ancient promise? From one of their
daughters, still speaking of the future as of
the past, Messiah hai 1 been born — a greater
Deliverer, too, than the most sanguine
Hebrew patriot had ever dreamed of.

Vers. 57 — SO. — John, afterwards called the
Baptist, the son of Zaehariae and Elisabeth,
M bom. The Benediclus.

Ver. 58. — How the Lord had showed great
mercy upon her. No doubt the vision of
Zacliarias in the temple, and his subsequent
dumbness, had excited no little inquiry.
That the reproach of Elisabeth should be
taken awa^, no doubt few really believed.
The birth of her son, however, set a seal
upon the reality of the priest's vision. The
rejoicings of her family were dne to more
than the birth of her boy. The story of the
angel's message, coupled with the unnsnal
birth, set men thinking and asking H'hu.t



OH. 1.1— 80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



11



wonld be the destiny of this child.
Could it be that he waa the promiBed
Meesiah?

Ver. 59. — On the eighth day they came
to oircnmoise the child. This was always,
among the Hebrew people, a solemn day of
rejoicing ; it resembled in some particulars
our baptismal gatherings. Relatives were
invited to be present, as witnesses that the
child had been formally incorporated into
the covenant. It was, too, the time when
the name which the newly born was to bear
through life was given him.

Ver. 60. — Not so; but he shall be called
John. It is clear (from ver. 62) that the old
priest was a£9icted with deafness as well as
with dumbness. At the naming ceremony,
the stricken Zaoharias, who was patiently
awaiting the hour when his God should
restore to him his lost powers, made no
effort to express his will. He had already
in the past months, no doubt, written down
for Elisabeth the name of the boy that was
to be bom. She interrupts the ceremony
with lier wishes. The guests are surprised,
and make signs to the father. He at once
writes on his tablets, " His name is John."
The name had been already given. The
word "John" signifies "the grace of
Jehovah."

Ver. 63. — A writing-table ; better, a writ-
ing-UMet. The tablets in use generally at
the time were usually made of wood, covered
with a thin coating of wax ; on the soft layer
of wax the words were written with an
iron stylus.

Ver. 61. — ^And his month was opened im-
mediately, and bis tongue loosed, and he
spake, and praised God. This, the first
hour of his recovered power, 'was without
doubt the occasion of his giving utterance
to the inspired hymn (the Benedictus) which
is recorded at length ■> few verses further
on (vers. 68—79). It was the outcome, no
doubt, of his silent communing with the
Spirit during the long months of his afiSic-
tion.

Ver. 65. — And fear oame on all that dwelt
round about them: and all these sayings
were noised abroad throughout all the hill
oountiy of Judaea. The inspired utterance
of the old priest, so long dumb, in his beau-
tiful hymn of praise, completed as it were
the strange cycle of strange events which
had happened in the priestly family.

Ver. 66.— And the hand of the lord was
with him. This kind of pause in the his-
tory is one of the peculiarities of St. Luke's
style. We meet with it several times in the
gospel story and in the history of the Acts.
They are vivid pictures in a few words of
what happened to an individual, to a family,
or to a cause, during often a long course of
years. Here the story of the childhood of the



great pioneer of Christ is briefly sketched
out ; in it all, and through it all, there was
one guiding hand— the Lord's. The ex-
pression, "hand of the Lord," was pecu-
liarly a Hebrew thought— one of the vivid
anthropomorphic idioms which, aa has been
aptly remarked, they could use more boldly
than other nations, because they nad clearer
thoughts of God as not made after the
similitude of men (Deut. iv. 12). Mai-
mouides, the great Jewish writer of the
twelfth century, in his ' Yud Haoliazakah,'
says, " And there was under hia feet (Exod.
xxiv. 10) ; written with the finger of Ood
(Exod. xxxi. 18); the hand of the Lord
(Exod. ix. 3) ; ihe eyes of the Lord (Deut.
xi. 12) ; the eart of the Lord (Numb. xi. 18).
All these are used with reference to the in-
tellectual capacity of the sons of men, who
can comprehend only corporeal beings : so
that the Law spoke in the language of the
sons of men, and all these are expressions
merely, just aa, If I whet my glittering
iword (Deut. xxxii. 41) ; for has he, then, a
■word? or does he slay with a sword? Cer-
tainly not : this is only a figure ; and thus
all ai« figures " (' Yad,' oh. i. 8).

Ver. 67. — His father Zacharias was filled
with the Holy Ohost, and prophesied, saying.
The iuspired hymn which follows— thought
out, no doubt, with the Holy Spirit's help in
the course of the long enforced seclusion
which his first want of faith had brought
upon him— holds a prominent place in all
Western liturgies. Like the Magnificat, it is
believed to have been first introduced into
the public worship of the Church about the
middle of the sixth century by St. Csesarius
of Aries. It may be briefly summarized as
a thanksgiving for the arrival of the times
of Messiah.

Vers. 68, 69.— He hath visited and re-
deemed, . , . and hath raised up. The
tenses of the verbs used in these expressions
show that in Zacliarias's mind, when he
uttered the words of his hymn, the Incar-
nation, and the glorious deliverance com-
menced in that stupendous act of mercy,
belonged to the past. He hath visited;
that is, after some four hundred years of
silence and absence, the Holy One of Israel
had again come to his people. About four
centuries had passed since the voice of
Malachi, the last of the prophets, had been
heard. An horn of salvation. A meta-
phor not unknown in classical writings (see
Ovid, 'Art. Am.,' i. 239; Hor., 'Od.,' iiL
xxi. 18), and a much-used figure in Hebrew
literature (see, among other passages, Ezek.
xxix. 21; Lam. ii. 8; Ps. cxxxii. 17; 1
Sam. ii. 10). The reference is not to the
horns of the altar, on which criminals seek-
ing sanctuary used to lay hold ; nor to th«
horns with which warriors used to adorn



11



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. i. 1—80



their helmeti ; but to the horns of a bull — in
which the chief power of this animal residei.
This was a figure especially familiar among
an agricultural folk like the Israelites. " A
rabbinic writer says that there are ten
horns — those of Abraham, Isanc, Jacob,
Josepli, Moses, the horn of the Law, of the
priesthood, of the temple, and of Israel, and
some add of the Messiah. They were all
placed on the heads of the Israelites till
they sinned, and then they were cut off and
given to the Gentiles" (Schottgen, 'Hor.
Hebr.,' quoted by Dr. Farrar). In the house
of his servant David. Clearly Zacharias
looked on Mary, as the angel liad done
(ver. 32), as belonging to the royal house
of David.

Ver. 70. — By the mouth of his holy pro-
phets. Zacharias looked on all that was
then happening as clearly foretold in those
sacred prophetic writings preserved in the
nation with so much care and reverence.
Which have been since the world began.
He considered Messianic prophecy as dating
from the first intimation after the fall in
Eden (Gen. iii. 15). and continuing in an
intermittent but yet unbroken line from
Genesis to Malachi.

Ver. 71. — That we should he saved from
our enemies, and from the hand of all that
hate us. When Zacharias spoke these
words, his mind, no doubt, was on Borne and
its creatures, Herod and his party, whom
Borne had set up. The deliverance of Israel,
in every Hebrew heart, was the first and
great work of the coming Deliverer ; but the
inspired words had a far broader reference
than to Borne, and the enemies of Israelitio
prosperity. The expression includes those
spiritual evil agencies which war their
ceaseless warfare against the soul of man.
It was from Iheae that the coming Deliverer
would free his people. It was only after
the fall of Jerusalem, and the total extinc-
tion of the national existence of the people,
that, to use Dean Plumptre's language,
" what was transitory in the hymn vanished,
and the words gained tlie brighter perma-
nent sense which they have had for cen-
turies in the worship of the Church of
Christ."

Vers. 74, 75. — Might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him,
all the days of our life. What Zacharias
looked on to was a glorious theocracy based
upon national holiness. Israel, freed from
foreign oppression and internal dissensions,
would serve God with a worship at once
nninterrupted and undeflled.

Ver. 76.— And thou, child ; literally, little
rhild. Here the father breaks forth into an
expreiiion of gladness at the thought of the
e;reat part his baby-son was to bear in this
fCieat national deliverance. His son, loo —



oh, joy undreamed of I — is to be ranked
among the glorious company of the prophets
of the Highest.

Ver. 77. — To give knowledge of salvation
unto his people by the remission of their
sins. Zacharias goes on to celebrate tlie
splendid part his son was to play in the
great Messianic drama. He was to be
Messiah's pioneer in order to give men the
true information respecting the Deliverer's
work. Israel was mistaken altogether in
its conception of the salvation which they
really needed GoHet puts it with great
force. " Why," he asks, " was the ministry
of the Messiah preceded by that of another
Divine messenger? Because the very notion
of salvation was falsified in Israel, and had
to be corrected before salvation could be
realized. A carnal and malignant patriotism
had taken possession of the people and their
rulers, and the idea of a political deliverance
had been substituted for that of a moral
salvation. There was need, then, of another
person, divinely authorized, to remind the
people that perdition consisted not in sub-
jection to the Bomans, but in Divine con-
demnation; and that salvation, therefore,
was not temporal emancipation, bat forgive-
ness of sins."

Ver. 78. — Through the tender meroy of our
God. And, goes on Zacharias in his noble
hymn, all this tender care for Israel (but
really for mankind, though perhaps the
speaker of the hymn scarcely guessed it) ia
owing to the deep love of God. Whereby
the Dayspring from on high hath visited us.
The beautiful imagery here is derived &om
the magnificence of an Eastern sunrisa
In his temple service at Jerusalem the
priest must have seen the ruddy dawn rise
grandly over the dark chain of the dis-
tant mountains, and lighting up with a
blaze of golden glory the everlasting hills
as they stood round about Jerusalem. The
thoughtwhich pictured the adventof Messiah
as a sunrise was a favourite one with the
prophets. We see it in such prophecies of
Isaiah and Malachi as, " Arise, shine ; for
thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord
is risen upon thee. For behold . . . Gentiles
shall come to thy light, and kings to the
brightness of tliy rising" (Isa. Ix. 1 — 3).
" Unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun
of Bighteousness arise with healing in his
wings" (Mai. iv. 2).

Ver. 79.— To give light to them that sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death. It
would seem that for a moment the Hebrew
priest saw beyond the narrow horizon of
Israel, and that here, in the close of his
glorious Rong, he caugiit sight of the distant
far-reaching isles of the Gentiles, over which
so deep a darkness brooded for ages.

Ver. 80.— And the child grew, and waxed



OH.1. 1— 80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



13



itrong in spirit. We have here aoother of
St. Luke's Bolemn pansee in his narrative
— one of those little passages in which, in
a few words, he set* before ns a picture
clear and vivid of the events of long years.
"The description," writes Dr. Farrar, "re-
sembles that of the childhood of Samuel
(I Sam. ii. 26) and of our Lord (ol i. ii. 40—52).
\othine, however, is said of 'favour with
men.' In the case of the Baptist, as of others,
' the boy was father to the man ; ' and he
probably showed from the first that rugged
itemnesB which ii wholly unlike the winning
grace of the child Christ. ' The Baptist wat
no lamb of Ood. He vat a wregller with life,
one to whom peace doei not come eanily. &ut
only after a long ttruggle. Hit reitletiTteii
had driven him into the desert, where he had
eontended for yean mth thoughts he could not
master, and from whence he uttered hit ttart-
ling alarms to the nation. He was among the
dogs rather than among the lambs of the
Shepherd ' (' Ecce Homo ')." And wag in
the deserts till the day of his showing unto
Israel " The deserts" here alluded to were
that desolate waste country south of Jericho
and along the ihoreB of the Dead Sea. We
know notiiing of the details of the Ufe of the
boy, the wonderfol oircmnatanoet of whose



birth are related so oircumstantially in this
opening chapter of St. Luke's Goepel. Mary,
whose "memories," we believe, are recounted
almost in her own words, was herself a
witness of some of theciroumstances narrated;
from her friend and consin Elisabeth she
doubtless received the true history of the
rest. But Zacliarias and Elisabeth, we know,
were aged persons when John was born.
They probably lived only a short time after
his birth. Hence his solitary desert life. Of
it we know nothing. In those wild regions
at that time dwelt many grave ascetics and
hermit teachers, like the Pharisee Banus, the
master of Josephns. From some of these
the orphan boy probably received his train-
ing. It is clear, from such passages as
John i. SI — 33 and ch. iii. 2, that some direct
coDimunioation from the Highest pnt an end
to the ascetic desert life and study. Some
theophany, perhaps, like the appearance of
the burning bush which called Moses to his
great post, summoned the pioneer of Christ
to his dangerous and difficult work. But
we possess no account of what took place on
this occasion when God tpohe to his servant
John, the evangelist simply recording the
fact, " The word of God came unto the sod
of Zaoliariaa in the wildemesi " (ch. iii 2).



HOMILETIC&

Ven. 1—4:. — Preface to {he Gotpel. Observe —

L The authob's afoloot. How conspicuous in it are the elements of eandoui,
simplicity, and earnestness ! The first authorities as to the things related were " the
eye-witnesses and ministers of the Word." He is careful to intimate that he is not one
of them ; not an apostle ; not even one of the seventy, as some have supposed he was.
The position which he assumes is simply this : Many had taken in hand to draw up
" a narrative concerning those matters which had been fulfilled among them ; " and he
too felt constrained to place on record all the information which he possessed. And his
claim to be heard is the painstaking which he has brought to the task, the desire to trace
the course of the wonderful history with perfect accuracy. Can we fail to note the absence
of all self-assertion ? Pretentiousness of all kinds is abhorrent to the mind which is
•' of the truth." Especially when it contemplates the " holy glory " of Jesus, it is like
the friend of the bridegroom, who rejoices greatly to hear, not his own, but the
bridegroom's voice.

XL Thb aothob's aim. It is to give the sequence of events " accurately from the
first." He had enjoyed exceptional advantages, on account of which he was able to
relata the things connected with "the beginning" of the life of Christ. And his
purpose is to unfold that life in the completeness and beauty of its development.
Now, is not this the work of the Christian teacher still ? Christianity is Christ. It is
not a mere system of doctrines to be believed and of duties to be done ; the root and
strength of all doctrines and of all duties is the Person of Jesus. And the noblest
function of the " minister of the Word " is to show the eternal life Thich was with thf
Father, and is manifested in the Son, who for us was incarnate.

III. This designation of the one whom the authob addbesseb. " Most excellent
Theophilus." Probably he had in view a man bearing this name — a man of high
station or rank. The superlative employed is the same as that applied in the Book ol
the Acts to the Roman procurator, and once by Paul himself, when he replied, " I am
not mad, most noble Felix." This Theophilus, therefore, may have been distinguithed



14 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. 1. 1—80



hj position. " Not many mighty, not many noble, are called," but some mighty and
noble are ; and he may have been drawn through the teaching of St. Paul, and may
have wished a full account of those things in which he had been catechized. But be
this as it may, note the meaning of the name. " To thee, lover of God, soul,
teachable, humble, desirous to find in Jesus the Way to the Father ; to thee, hungerer
and thirster after righteousness, seeking with pure heart God's gift of the living water ;
to thee, man, woman, who knowest thyself to be the sinner who needs salvation,
and wouldst see the Saviour who receives sinners and eats with them; to thee,
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile, this declaration of the gospel of the grace of
God is sent 1 May he who opened the heart of Lydia open thine heart ; and through
the demonstration of the Spirit, making effectual the exposition of the message, mayest
thou have that witness in thyself which is ' the certainty of those things wherein thou
hast been instructed '! "

Vers. 5 — 23. — Zaeharias and hit vision. Notice some features in the sketch that ii
given of the priest and of that which happened at the altar of incense.

I. It IB A picTUBB OF TEE SOUL WAiTmo FOB QoD. That waiting which is empha-
sized in the Old Testament Scriptures as one of the essentials of piety. How beautifoUy
are the words — " More than they that watch for the morning, my soul waiteth for
the Lord ; " " It is good that a man should both hope and quietly wait for the salvation
of the Lord " — illustrated in the life and attitude of Zacharias and Elisabeth I Year
on year they had waited in their hillside home, asking the blessing of a son.
Apparently the hope had set in heavens that were only brass. But one thing was ever
bright and real — their faith in the living God ; and they walked in all his command-
ments and ordinances blameless. " Our wills are ours to make them thine." It is
eaaier to consent to God's will when the demand is to act, than to consent when the
demand is simply to wait, to direct our prayer to the Eternal, and look up. One of the
lessons which we are slow to learn is, " Walk humbly with thy God."

II. The passage bbfobb us bbveals the Heareb of fbateb. (Ver. 13.) "Thy
prayer is heard." Was this the prayer for the son ? Or was it the priestly prayer, offered
at the altar and through the incense, for the hope and salvation of Israel ? Both, it may
be, are included. For it is noteworthy that in the two scriptural instances of intense
longing for a son — that of Hannah and that of Zacharias — the blessing to the indi-
vidual is associated with blessing to the whole Church of Qod. The prayer of faith
has interconnections with the purpose of God far beyond our power to estimate, and
the doing is " exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or tmnk." " Thy prayer is
heard ; " the answer often looks a great way back. Matthew Henry quaintly says,
" Prayers are filed in heaven, and are not forgotten though the thing prayed for is not
presently giveu us. The time as well as the thing is in the answer; and God's gift
always transcends the measure of the jiromise."

IIL Again, let the poem of the answeb retuened speak to us of the beauty
OP the spiritual woeld. (Ver. 19.) " The angul answering said imto him, I am
Gabriel, that stand in the presence of Gud : and I was sent to speak unto thee, and to
bring thee these good tidings." The same presence as that we meet in the Book of
Daniel. Gabriel is the angel for the greatly beloved, the angel with the glad tidings ;
he who afterwards bore the most wonderful of messages to the Hebrew maiden. Our
ideas are very confused as to the holy angels. There can be no doubt that the tendency
of thought in our day is to narrow the sphere of the supematiu-al. Formerly, it
dominated over thouglit and action; the influence of spirits and occult spiritual forces
was brought in to account for much that is referable to laws and powers in nature.
Nowadays men are occupied in tracing "natural law in the spiritual world." But
who can accept the truth of this first chapter of St. Luke's Gnsiiel and doubt as to the
reality of a spiritual universe encompassing the material? And if there be such
a universe, why should it seem incredible that spiritual presences should, at sundry
times, be declared to men — that Gabriels and Michaels should " at God's bidding speed
and post o'er land and ocean without rest ; " «' ministering spirits, sent forth to minister
for them who siiall be heirs of salvatinn "? The spiritual mind can have no difBculty
Hs to this. It will recognize in the vision of Zacharias a truth for all. Where there ii
aie praying heart there is " the augul on the right side of the altar of incense."



OB. 1. 1—80.] THE GOSPEL AOOORDINQ TO ST. LUKE. 15

IV. Finally, the punishment eecoedbd is one of many wabninos nr SoBiPTimK

AOAINST THK UNBELIEF WHICH WOULD LIMIT THE HoLT OnB OF IbBAEL. " HoW Oao

these things be ? " " Whereby I shall know this ? " are questions ever rising in the
heart. The good priest had waited long. When expectation failed, he bowed his head to
God's will. No doubt, one to another, he and his wife, now " well stricken in years,"
had often recalled the word to Abraham concerning Sarah's laughter, " Is anything
too hard for the Lord? " But when the trial actually comes, the faith falters. Cannot
we understand this ? We limp when we should walk and not be weary. " Thou shdt
be silent . . . because thou believedst not." Is not the constant result of unbelief
spiritual silence ? And the closed heart is followed by the closed Ups— " silent . , .
and not able to speak." " Lord, increase our faith."

Vers. 26 — 38. — The announcement to the Virgin. Gabriel, " the mighty one of God,"
or " the man of God," again sent with glad tidings. The work for the great-hearts, for
the strongest and best, is the work of preaching the gospel of his grace. The Ciod-
seut preacher is he who, like Gabriel, " stands in the presence of QtoA." " He that is
now called a prophet was aforetime called a seer." But the true prophet is always
a seer. " Sent to a virgin . . . and the virgin's name was Mary," It is significant
that so little is said in Holy Scripture as to this one "blessed among women."
Nothing is related as to her birth and parentage, as to her gifts of mind and person ;
it is not even directly asserted that she belonged to the royal stock of David — that is to
be implied only from such a verse as the thirty-second. After the Lord, on the cross,
solenmly gave her to the care of the beloved disciple, there is only one allusion to her
— an allusion in Acts i. There is no reference to her in the Epistles of Paul ; none
in that of James, certainly nearly related to her ; none in those of John, with whom
she had lived. St. Luke, speaking of her in connection with the birth, says only,
" A virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph." " Blessed," cried a woman
one day to Jesus, " is she that bare thee I " He did not deny it ; but that there
might be no distraction of soul, he added, " Yea rather, blessed are they that hear
the Word of God, and keep it." This Mary, or Miriam, is blessed among women.
The word of the Lord's angel we need not hesitate to utter, " Hail, thou that art highly
favoured ! " But what is the real beauty of Mary ? Is it not that she is in the fore-
most rank of those on whom the Lord's "yea rather, blessed" rested — that she is
pre-eminently the hearer and keeper of the Word of God? The few touches of cha-
racter which are presented suggest the picture of a rarely lovely nature. (1) Observe
the manner of the faith which is evoked by Gabriel's message. First, there is the
" casting in the mind." The sight is marvellous ; the salutation is strange. She is
troubled ; but instead of any cdsplay of excitement or of alarm, there is only the
quiet self-possessed casting in the mind. "What could this be? Was it from
above? Was it a voice of God or a snare of the devil?" (2) When the birth is
announced, there is no such reply as that which fell from Zacharias — no word of
scepticism, no demand for a sign. She does not doubt that it shall be ; she only
inquires how it shall be. (3) And, lastly, when the angel's answer is given, concluded
by the assertion, " With God nothing shall be impossible," or " No word shall be void
of power," how complete is the response of the heart 1 DifiSculty, trial, sorrow, for
herself was certain, " Wherefores " and " hows " were no doubt beating against the bars
of their cage ; but there comes forth the submissive and quiescent, "Behold the hand-
maiden of the Lord J be it unto me according to thy Word." The portrait bears the
marka of Divine wisdom- The reticence of Scripture might suggest that the inspiring
Spirit of God, foreseeing the danger which so soon appeared, of an admiration scarcely
separated from and insensibly sliding into grave error, moved the evangelist to abstain
from any magnifying of the Virgin. But the mistaken honour paid to Mary should
not withdraw the mind from what is truly honourable and exemplary in her conduct
She is » type of the believer for all times, in that quietness and confidence which are
the believer^ strength, in that receptiveness of soul which is his life, in that entire
self-yielding to God which is his reasonable service. " Blessed is she that believeth."
What is the angel's message ? Do not attempt to expound the words in vers. 30 — 36.
Be content reverently to receive a mystery so deep and dread. But two things may
be noted ai to ver. 36. (1) The force of the "thtrefore" or "wherefore" at the



16 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. 1. 1—80

beginning of the last clause, bidding us see in tbe statement which precedes the reason
of the assertion which follows. The statement is that the Holy Ghost should encloud
the mother — therefore the holiness of the Lord. Mark, the difference between Christ's
holiness and ours is not in kind ; it is in this, that his generation was that which is
denoted in our regeneration. Of course, in the human nature of Christ we must
recognize an altogether exceptional work of Divine power. But the efficient cause in
his birth is the efficient cause in all spiritual birth. Holiness, we see, is not a mere
attainment, the result of adherence to a moral regimen, of obedience to a moral law ;
it is anew supernatural being — " born of the Spirit." What took place, in a marvellous
way, even before the actual birth of the Son of Mary, takes place in the case of every
one bom from above. He is " born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of
the will of man, but of God." And therefore that which is born, being holy, is the
Son of God. (2) The word, " that holy thing," or " that which is to be bom," that
sacred, separated entity, may suggest a hint as to the Person of Jesus. Body and
■oul are one thing, each having its own properties and qualities which cannot be
transferred to the other, yet the two making one. It is not possible to tell where
body ends and soul begins. Now, in the Son of Mary we have the humanity and
the Divinity, each perfect and complete. Whatever can be said of man can be said
ef him ; what can be said of Qod can also be said of him. Very man and very God.
He is one Person. The one entity bom of the Virgin is the Son of ChxL More than
this let OS not try to say,

" Faith through th« veil of flesh ean sea
The face of thy Divinity,
Uy Laid, my God, my Saviour."

" This is the doing of the Lord, and it is marvellous in our eyei."

Vers. 39—66. — 2%« two expectant motheri. L The BETntEKENT. Elisabeth (ver. 24)
had hidden herself when she knew that the promise of the angel would be fulfilled.
Why she did so we are not told, but the language of ver. 26 suggests a religious motive.
She was filled with gratitude, and she desired, perhaps, a season of holy rest and com-
munion with God. " In silence and solitude," says Thomas k Eempis, " the soul
advantageth herself, and leameth the mysteries of Holy Scripture." The same reason
may partly have influenced Mary. But, besides this, there is no doubt that she wished
to enjoy fellowship with her who alone could share her feeling, and with whom (ver. 36)
her own prospect of motherhood was so intimately associated. Who can speak of tiie
welcome, the salutations, the conferences, of the two cousins ?

" O days of heaven and nights of equal praise.
Serene and peaceful as these heavenly days.
When souls, drawn upward in communion sweet,
Enjoy the stillness of some close retreat.
Discourse, as if released and safe at home.
Of evils past and danger yet to oome,
And spread the sacred treasure of the breast
Upon the lap of covenanted rest I "

IL Th« boho of Mabt. Elisabeth, receiving Mary, gpeaks by the Holy Ohoit
Mary had been told of her cousin's condition, but Elisabeth had received no intimation
of Mary's. The arrival of the latter is the moment of special revelation. Elisabeth
(ver. 42) lifts up her voice with a loud cry. The sound of Mary's voice (ver. 44) had
occasioned the prophetic impulse. She declares the Virgin the mother of her Lord,
and in beautiful humility asks, " Whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord
should come to me ? " And, it may be, feeling the contrast between the faith of the
Virgin and the unbelief of her husband, she pronounces a blessing on her who had
believed. Then, in response from Mary, comes the song which the Christian Church
has incorporated into its liturgies, which it has regarded as the opening of that fountain
of praise, that wonderful hymnology, which has made glad the city of God. With
regard to this hymn — " the Magnificat," as it is usually designated : 1. Compare it
with the song of Hannah CI Sam. ii.). In both there b the same blending of personal



OH. 1. 1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 17



gladness with the emotion and experience of the Cliurch ; the same losing of self in
the sense of an unspeakable loving-kindness ; the same boasting in the Lord as he who
" fiUs the_ hungry with good things, and sends the rich empty away." Mary was
familiar with this song. Her thought would naturally take shape in utterance charged
with its spirit and imagery, even as it represents the purest forms of Hebrew piety,
f et who can fail to see that her utterance is lifted to a higher plane, and is thrilled by a
higher inspiration ?_ 2. The song of Mary marks the transition from Old Testament to
New Testament praise. The Old Testament is present, not only in the language employed
throughout, but also (vers. 54, 55) in the earnest laying hold of the singular providence
of God towards Israel, and the covenant made with Israel's fathers — " with Abraham
and his seed for ever." But the germ of the New Testament is manifest in the special
thanksgiving (vers. 48, 49). God the Saviour has appeared, and his might is to be
declared in the Son because of whose birth all generations shall call her blessed. Thus
the two covenants are united in all true Christian praise. The Old Testament is not
a thing past ; it is completed, and therefore more than ever one possession in Christ.
" AU the promises of God in him are yea."

" Both theirs and ours thou Mi,

Aa we and they are thine ;
Kings, prophets, patriarchs, all have pul

Along the sacred line."

3. Knally, the Bong of Mary illustrates Ps. il. 1 — 8 : whoso waits patiently for the
Lord will, like Mary, know that he inclines to and hears the cry of the soul ; and a
new song will be given to the lips, even praise to our God. The new song of the
redeemed soul has its prototype in that which arose from the hillside dwelling in the
uplands of Judah.

Vers. 69 — 80. — 2%e name-giving, and what foUowed it. There i* a qniet, gentle
beauty in the picture of the home life given in ver. 58. The touches of nature in it
make us feel our kinship with all the a^es. We are told of the flood of congratulations
and kind messages which Bur^ies towards the happy mother; how the cousins of the
priestly families in and around Hebron, and the neighbours scattered over that part of
northern Judasa, hastened to express their gladness to Zacharias and Elisabeth. The
birth of a son of the old age is the talk of the whole country-side. Our attention is
more particularly drawn to the ceremonial connected with the circumcision. Observe —

L The impobtance attached to the name in the Bible. Both in his word to
Zacharias and his annunciation to the Virgin the angel is explicit as to the name. So,
backwards in all the Hebrew records, the name is regarded as full of significance — e.g.
Cain, Abel, Seth, Noah. Changes in character and destiny are marked by changes of
name — e.g. Abram changed into Abraham ; Jacob into Israel ; Oshea into Jehoshus ;
Saul into Paul. The force of the names given to individuals shonld always be noticed
— e.g. Isaac, Ishmael, Jehoshaphat. It is a sign of the deep religious feeling of the
Hebrew nation that, in the name, there is so often a part of the ever-adorable name of
God — e.g. Elijah, Elisha, Jehoshua. The name is the witness for personal responsi-
bility and personal immortality, a reminder that each of us stands fully out, and alone,
before God ; that he deals with us separately. Moreover, as the Roman no less than
the Hebrew understood, there is a capacity of acting on the imagination and, through
the imagination, on the will, in the name. Note, with re°;ard to the name, an interest-
ing conjunction between Christian and Jewish habits. It was the Jewish custom to
aeclare the name on the day of circumcision ; it is a Christian cui torn to declare the
name on the day of baptism. As the Hebrew word was the covenant name — that
by which the child was to be recognized and individualized in midst of the covenant
people — so, theoretically, the name which the parent bestows (not the surname) is that
by which the child is individualized in the blood-bought Church of Christ.

II. The departure r&ou " use and wont " at the aBonMcisioN of Zacharias's
BABE. A practice which had its root in a healthy instinct had come to be an accepted
institution — the naming of the child after one of " the kindred." What should be the
name of the babe ? Surely that of the honoured father. " Not so,' interposes the
mother, who had been instructed by her husband, now dumb and deaf; " he shall be

LUKS. "



18 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. i. 1— 8U



called John." " John ? No relative is called by this name ! What shall the father
decide ? " Then, to the amazement of all, the writing on the slate, " His name is
John." It was the angel name; it was t'he Divine name. Note: God the Father in
heaven has his special name-giving (see Eev. ii. 17). Blessed — oh, how blessed 1 —
to have this name — the name written in the Lamb's book of life, in which there is
recorded " all that goes on in the depths of the heart between the inmost self and God " !
IIL How THE PBIEST BECOMES THE PKOPHBT. The word is no sooner written than
the mouth which for months had been closed is opened, and the long pent-up tides of
feeling burst forth. When God brings back the soul's captivity, the soul's lost capaci-
ties are found. The tongue is loosed which unbelief always ties — tongue and ear as
well. " Mine ears hast thou opened ; then said I, Lo, I come ; " " When I speak with
thee, I will open thy mouth ; " " We believe, and therefore speak." It is a song of
exalted praise, in some of its features resembling Mary's, which flows from the opened
lips. See how, towards the end, borne along by the ever-rising inspirations of the Spirit,
the song swells into a grand missionary hymn. The Dayspring from on high, that shall
visit Israel, will pour a light into the darkness that enwraps the earth, giving light to
all that sit in it and in the shadow of death, and guiding their feet into the way of
peace. Thus the father prophesied that the child should go before the face of the
Lord.

IV. What is said as to the child whose birth and mission have been thus
CELBBBATED. Is not the question discussed in the hill-country (ver. 66) one suggested
by a birth, by looking at the tiny infant? How wonderful a birth is 1 What shall be
the manner, type of mind, life-story, of the child? A being begun I A journey on
and on for ever ; but whither ? O child !

" God fill thee with his heavenly light
To steer thy Christian course aright ;
Make thee a tree of blessed root,
That ever bends with heavenly fruit"

" The child grew, and waxed strong in spirit." Blessed growth ! Hi ah -spirited in the
better sense of the word — the human guided by the Divine 1 The home far from the
world, in the breezy uplands, where he could meditate in the Law of the Lord day
and night, and realize the preparation for the work of the prophet of the Highest!
Here we leave him for a little. For another Child has been born — he who is ealled
" Wonderful, Counsellor."



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 4. — Certainties concerning Christ. There are many things in connection
with the gospel of Christ about which there is difference of view and some measure of
uncertainty. But it is " those things which are most surely believed " that constitute
the rock on which we rest, on which we build our hopes. We cannot live spiritually
on uncertainties ; they may serve the purpose of speculation or discussion, but they do
not bring peace to the soul ; they do not minister to life. We may thank God most
heartily that there are some certainties concerning Jesus Christ, on which we can con-
rtruct our life as it now is, and on which we can rely for that which is to come. There
is no doubt at all respecting^

I. The OIEO0M8TANCES OF CUE Lobd'b oabeer. We have the testimony of " eye-
witnesses," of men who could not have been mistaken, and who gave the very strongest
assurances that they were not deceiving and misleading; we therefore know what were
the scenes through which Jesus passed, what were the particulars of his life. We
know : 1. His character— how pure, how perfect, it was. 2. His thoughts— how pro-
found, how practical, how original, they were. 3. His works — how mighty and how
beneficent they were. 4. His sufferings and sorrows — with what sublime patience they
were endured. 6. His death — under what awful solemnities it was undergone. 6. The
great and supreme fact of his resurrection. Of all these things we are thorouehlr
aaiured. '

IL Thb offbb hx makes of himself as cub Drvnai Bedebmeb. It ii perfectly



OH. 1.1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST, LUKE. 1»



clear tliat Jesu8 Christ regarded himself as One' that was here on the highest mission,
aa One that was very far removed above ordinary manhood. He felt that he stood in
• relation to the human race that was not only unusual, but unique. Otherwise he
could not have spoken of " giving his flesh for the life of the woi Id," of being " the Light
of the world," of " drawing all men unto him ; " he could not have invited all heavy-
laden souls to come to him that they might find rest in him. It is abundantly clear
that Jesus Christ offered himself, and still offers himself: 1. As the Divine Teacher, at
whose feet we may all sit and learn the living truth of God. 2. As the Divine Saviour,
in whom we may all trust for the forgiveness of our sins and our reconciliation to God.
3. As the Divine Friend, to whom we may trust our heart, and in whom we may find a
Refuge. 4. As the Divine Lord, who claims the obedience and service of our lives.

III. ThB 8OFFICIEN0Y OF ChBIST FOB ALL THAT HE UNDERTAKES. Can he, of whom

his critics spoke so slightingly as " the carpenter's Son," do all this? Is he equal to
such offices as these ? There is the experience of eighteen centuries to which this
appeal may be made. And from the first to the last ; from the experience of the little
child and of the man in middle life and of extreme old age ; from that of health and
of sickness ; fi^om that of adversity and of prosperity ; from that of ignorance and of
culture ; from that of human souls of every conceivable variety of constitution and of
human lives of every imaginable variety of condition ; — the answer is one strong, unhesi-
tating, enthusiastic " Yes I " Many things are disputable, but this is certain ; many
things are to be discredited, but these are to be " most surely believed; " and on them
we do well to build our present heritage and our eternal hope. — C.

Vers. 5, 6. — Life in its completeness. A very beautiful picture, though on a very
small canvas, is here painted ; it is a picture of domestic piety. As we think of Zacha-
rias and Elisabeth spending their long life together in the service of Jehovah, attached
to one another and held in honour by all their kindred and friends, we feel that we
have before our eyes a view of human life which has in it all the elements of an excellent
completeness.

I. The domestic bond. Here we have conjugal relationship in its true form ; estab-
lished in mutual respect; justified and beautified by mutual affection; made perjna-
nently happy by common affinities and common aims ; elevated and consecrated by the
presence of another and still nobler bond — that of a strong and immovable attachment
to God. A human life is quite incomplete without such tender ties of God's own bind-
ing, and these ties are immeasurably short of what they were meant to be if they are
not enlarged and ennobled by the sanctities of religion.

II. Human and Divine estimation. These two godly souls enjoyed the favour of
their Divine Father and of their human friends and neighbours : " They were both
righteous before God," and they were " blameless " in the sight of men. God accepted
them, and man approved them. He to whom they were responsible for all they were
and did saw in them, as he sees in all his children, the imperfections which belong
to our erring and struggling humanity ; but he accepted their reverence and their
endeavour to please and to obey him, forgiving their shortcomings. And their kindred
and their friends recognized in them those who were regulating their life by God's holy
will, and they yielded to them their fullest measure of esteem. No human life is
complete without the possession of these two things : (1) the favour of the living God ;
and (2) the esteem of those amongst whom we live. To walk in the shadow ol
conscious estrangement from God, to miss the sweet sunshine of his heavenly favour,—
this is to darken our life with a continual curse, this is to bereave ourselves of oui
purest joy and most desirable heritage. And while some of the very noblest of our
race, following thus in the footsteps of the Master hinis4f, have borne, in calm and
heroic patience, the obl.quy of the ignorant and the malice of the evil-mmded, yet
it is our duty, and it should be our desire and aspiration, so to walk m rectitude and
in kindness that men wiU bless us in their hearts, will esteem us for our integrity, wiU
hold us in their affection. The man who " wears the white flower of a Uamelets hfe
is the man who will be a power for good in the circles in which he moves. _

IIL Sacred sbrticb. It may be questionable whether any distinction is mtendei
between "ordinances" and "commandments;" but there can be no question at all
tliat both together cover religious observances and moral obligations. The Law wh5. h



20 THE GOSPEL ACOOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [ch. i. 1—80.

these two faithful souls obeyed enjoined the one as well as the other. And no human
life is complete which does not include both these elements of piety. L The worship
of Ood, in private prayer, in family devotion, in public exercises, is a serious and
important part of a good man's experience. 2. And certainly not less so is the regvr-
lating of conduct hy Ae revealed will of Qod; the walking, day by day, in uprightness
and integrity, in sobriety and purity, in truth and in love. Beautifully complete,
fashioned in spiritual symmetry, attractive and influential, is that human life which
is spent in the home of hallowed love, which is bright with the favour of God and
man, and which ig crowned with the sovereign excellences of piety and virtue. — C.

Vers. 13 — 17. — Parental ambition. "What would we give to our beloved?" asks
one of our poets. What would we ask for our children if we might have our hearts'
desire? When the young father or mother looks down on the little child, and then
looks on to the future, what is the parental hope concerning him? What is that
which, if it could only be assured, would give "joy and gladness " ? The history of
our race, the chronicles of our own time, even the observation of our own eyes, give
abundant proof that the child may rise to the highest distinction, may wield great
power, may secure large wealth, may enjoy many and varied pleasures, and yet be
a source of sorrow and disappointment. On the other hand, these same authorities
abimdantly prove that, if the parent is only true to his convictions and avails himself
of the resources that are open to him, there is every reason to expect that his child
will be such an one as to yield to him a pride that is not unholy, a joy that nothing
can surpass. Not on the same scale, but after the same manner, every man's child
may become what Gabriel told Zacharias his son should be —

I. One taking hioh bank with God. " Great in the sight of the Lord." By faith
in Jesus Christ our child may become a " ten of God " in a sense not only true but
high (see John L 12). " And if children, then heirs, heirs of God " (Rom. viiL 17).
Obedience will ensure the friendship of God (see John liv. 23 ; xv. 14). Earnestness
will make him a fellow-labourer with God (1 Cor. ii. 9 ; 2 Cor. vi, 1). The acceptance
of all Christian privilege will make him a " king and priest unto Qoi " (Rev. L 6).
Who can compute how much better it is to be thus " great in the sight of the Lord "
than to be honoured and even idolized by men ?

XL Onk in whom God himself dwells. "He shall be filled with the Holy
Ghost" God desires to dwell with and in every one of his human children ; and if
there be purity of heart and prayerful ness of spirit, he will dwell in them continually
(ch. li. 13 ; John xiv. 17 ; 1 Cor. iii. 16 ; vi. 19 ; Rev. iii. 20).

III. One that is master of himself. " He shall drink neither wine," etc By
right example and wise discipline any man's child may be trained to control his own
appetites, to regulate his tastes, to form temj^ierate and pure habits, to wield the
worthiest of all sceptres — mastery of himself.

IV. One in whom the best and noblest lives again. " He shall go in the spirit
and power of Elijah." In John the Baptist there lived a^ain the great Prophet Elijah —
a man of self-denying habit ; of dauntless courage, that feared the face of no man, and
that rebuked kinga without flinching ; of strong and scathing utterance ; of devoted
and heroic life. In any one of our children there may live again that One who " in all
things in which John was great and noble, was greater and nobler than he." In the
little child who is trained in the truth and led into the love of Christ there may dwell
the mind and spirit of the Son of God himself (Rom. viii. 9 ; PhiL iL 5).

V. Onb that lives a life of holy usefolness. What nobler ambition can we
cherish for our children than that, in their sphere, they should do as John did in his
— spend their life in the service of their kind ? Like hira, they may : 1. Make many
a home holier and happier than it would have been, 2. Prepare the way for others to
follow with their higher wisdom and larger influence, 3. Be instrumental in turning
disobedient hearts from the way of folly to the path of wisdom. 4. Earn the bene-
diction of " many " whom they have blessed (ver. 14).

To ensure all this, there must be : 1. Parental example in righteousness and wisdom.
i, Parental training as well as teaching. 3. Parental intercession.— 0.

Vert. 31 — 33. — The greatness of Jetvt Christ. To Mary, as to Elisabeth, it ww fore.



CH. 1. 1— 80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 21

told by the celestial messenger that her Son should be " great." There can be no doubt
tliat, after all that was then said, Mary expected unusually great things of the Child
that should be born of her. But how very far short of the fact her highest hopes h»ve
proved to be! For to whatever exalted point they reached, the Jewish maiden could
not possibly have attached to the angil's words such meaning as we know them to
have contained. The greatness of that promised Child was threefold ; it related to —

L His Divine origin. He was not only to be her offspring, but he should " be
called the Sun of the Most High." And there was to come upon her and overshadow
lier the Hily Ghost, the Power of the Most High. He was to be not only a son of
God, but the Son of God, related to the Eternal Father as no other of the children of
men had ever been or should ever be. He was to be One that would in tlie /idlest
sense partake of the Divine nature, be one in thought and in aim and in action with
the Father (John v. 19, 23; viiL 28; x. 30; liv. 10, 11). He was to be "God
manifest in the flesh."

II. The wobk hk should accomplish. " Thou shalt call his name Jesus;" »nd he
was to be so called lecause he would "save his people from their sins" (Matt. i. 25).
There have been " saviours of society " from whom' this poor wounded world might
well have prayed to be delivered, men who tried to cover their own hideous selfishness
under a fair and striking name. What they have claimed to be, Jesus the Saviour was
and is. He saves from sin. And to do that is to render us the very greatest con-
ceivable service, both in its negative and positive aspects. 1. Negatively considered. To
destroy sin is to take away evil by the root. For sin is not only, in itself, the worst
and most shameful of all evils by which we can be afflicted, but it is the onefruitfid
source of all other evils — poverty, estrangement, strife, weariness and aching of heart,
death. 2. Positively considered. Saving from sin means restoring to God ; it includei
reinstatement in the condition from which sin removed us. Jesus Christ, in the very
act in which he redeems us from the penalty and power of sin, restores us to God — to
his Divine favour, his likeness, his service. Accepting and abiding in the Saviour, we
dwell in the sunshine of God's everlasting friendship; we grow up into his perfect
image ; we spend our days and our powers under his direction. It is not only that
Jesus Christ delivers us from the darkest curse; it is that he raisas us to the loftiest
heritage, by the salvation which he offers to our hearts.

III. The dignity and powbb he should attain. He was to reign upon a throne,
" over the house of Jacob for ever ; " and " of his kingdom there should be no end."
Great and large as Mary's expectations for her promised Child may have very justly
been, they can have been nothing to the fulfilment of the angel's words. For the
kingdom of Christ (as it is or as it shall be) is one that surpasses in every way that
of the greatest Hebrew sovereign. It does so : 1. In its main characteristics. It is
spiritual. The only homage which is acceptable to its King is the homage of the heart,
the only tribute the tribute of affection, the only obedience the obedience of love. It
is heneficent. Every subject in this realm is sacredly bound to seek his brother's well-
being rather than his own. It is righteous. Every citizen, because he is such, is
pledged to depart from all iniquity, to pursue and practise all righteousness. 2. In its
extent. It has " ho end " in its spacial dimensions. No river bounds it ; no mountain,
no sea; it reaches the whole world round. 3. In its duration. He shall reign "for
ever;" his rule will go down to remotest times; it will touch and include the last
generation that shall dwell upon the earth. Let us rejoice in his greatness ; but let us
Bee to it that (1) we have a part in the heritage of those whom he is blessing, and that
(2) we take our share in the furtherance of his mission of mercy. — 0.

Vers. 46 48. — The voice of praise. This " improvisation of a happy faith " i« not

more musical to the ear than it is beautiful to our spiritual discernment. It presents
to us the mother of our Lord in a most pleasing light. We will look at these words ol
devout gratitude as — • j a. « j

L Maet'b besponsb to God's distingmshmg goodness to her. She received from Ood
« kindness that was : 1. Necessarily unique. Only to one of the daughters of men
could be granted the peculiar honour conferred on h«r. We are naturally andjw-operly
affected by mercies which speak of God's distinguishing goodness to us, 2 Fitted to
fill her heart wiA »b«unding Jeg. She was to become a mother, and the mother of On*



22 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. 1. 1— 80.

who should render to his people services of surpassing value; no wonder th«t her
"spirit rejoiced" in such a prospect. 3. Calculated to call fnrth all that was highest
ahd worthiest in her nature. She would have to cherish and to rear, to teach and to
train, that illustrious Sen who should call her " mother." 4. Certain to confer upon
her an honourable immortality. All generations would call her blessed. 5. Bendered
to one who could not have expected it. God had stooped low to bless, even to the low
estate of " his bondniaiden." And, impressed with this wonderful and unanticipated
goodness, she poured forth her gladness in a song of holy gratitude, of lofty prais*.
Such should be —

II. Our appreciation of God's abounding; kindness to ourselves. L The indehted-
neu under which our heavenly Father has laid us. It is, indeed, as different as possible
from that which inspired this sacred lyric. Yet may we most reverently and most
becomingly take the words of Mary into our lips — both the utterance of felt obligation
and the language of praise. For : (1) How low is the condition on which, in our case,
God has mercifully looked I from what depth of error, of folly, of wrong, has he raised
us I — a depth with which the lowly estate of Mary is not to be compared. (2) With
what a great salvation has he delivered us! — a salvation with which even the national
deliverance Mary would be expecting of her Son is of very small account. (3) And
what a lasting good he confers upon us who have received God our Saviour 1 The
blessing of an immortality of undying fame is very precious to these thirsting human
spirits of ours: but is it comparable with that of an actual immortality of conscious,
eternal life with God and with the good in the heavenly kingdom? Distant genera-
tions will not hear our name, but in remotest times we shall be dwelling and serving in
unimaginable joy. 2. The response we should make to our Father. (1) Great gladness
of heart. We should rejuice in God our Saviour ; welcoming liim, trusting and resting
in him, finding our refuge and our strength in his faithfulness and his love. (2)
Honouring him belbre all men. "Magnifying the Lord " with the utterance of the lip,
with the obedience of the life, with active service in his vineyard.— 0.

Vers. 49 — 55. — Ood revealed in Jesus Christ. We see much more in Mary's words
than the thoughts which were present to her mind at the time of utterance; for we
stand well within that kinjidom of God of which she stood on the threshold. To the
holy confidence she entertained in God's goodiiess to all Israel, and especially to herself
up to that hour, there was added a reverent wonder as to this new manifestation of
Divine mercy. So she sang of the power and the holiness, the mercy and the faithful-
neHS, of Jehcivah. Through bitterest experiences (ch. ii. 85) she passed into the light
of truth and the rest of God, and now she sees how much greater occasion she had than
she knew at the moment to sing in such strains of the character of God. We look at
these Divine atiiibutes as expressed in the coming of the Saviour.

I. His Divine power. " He that is mighty hath done . . . great things " (ver. 49) ;
" lie hath showed strenjth with his arm " (ver. 51). God's power is very gloriously
manifested in the formation and furniture of this earthly home, in the creation of
successive gc-nerations of mankind, in the providential government of the world,
including the mastery of all jil'ys'cal forces and the control of all human energies ; but
liy far the most wonderhd exliibition of Divine power is in the redemption of the
world by .Jesus Christ. To exert a transforming power on one intelligent, free, disloyal
sjiiril ; to conquer a rebellious, to win au i stranged, soul ; to raise a fallen nature, and
uplift it to a height of holy excellence; to make that which had lowered itself to the
basest fit for the society of the hnliest in heaven ; to do this not in one individual case
but in the case of "ten thousand times ten thousand;" to introduce a power which
can elevate anl ennoble families, communities, nations; which is changing the cha-
ructer and condition of the intire race; — this is " the power of God," this is the doing
of him " that is mighty."

II. His Divine holiness. " Holy is his Name " (ver. 49) ; " He hath scattered the
proud," etc. (vers. 51, 52). God's holiness is shown in his providential interpositions, in
Ins huniblina the haughty, in his scattering the cruel and the profane, in his raising
the lowly and the pure and the true. Thus he has been revealing his righteousness in
every nation and in every age. But nowhere does his holiness appear as it is seen iu
(1) the mission of his Son, who came to put away sin ; in (2) the life and lanyaag*



OH. 1. 1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 23



of luB Son, who aiustrated all purity and condemned all iniquity; in (3) the death of
hii Son, who by the sacrifice of himself uttered God's thought and feeling about Bin ai
nothing else could speak it, and struck it such a death-blow as nothine else could
■trike it. "

IIL HiB DnmiK mebot. (Ver. 50.) Many are the testimoniei borne by Old
Testament saints to the pity, the patience, the mercy, of the Lord, But in Jesus
Christ— in his spirit, in his example, and more particularly in his redeeming death and
work— is the manifestation of the grace of God. " God commendeth his love toward
us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." In the gospel of Christ the
pity, the patience, the magnanimity, of God rise to their fullest height, reach to their
noblest breadth.

IV. Hi8 DiviNB FAITHFULNESS. (Vers. 53 — 55.) God, who made ub for himself
and for truth and righteousness, who has made our hearts to hunger for the highest
good, does not leave us to pine and perish ; he fills us with the " rich provision " of his
truth and grace in Jesus Christ. " As he spake unto our fathers," so he has done,
granting not only such a One as they hoped for, but One that has been to the whole
race of man a glorious Redeemer, in whom all nations are blessed with a blessing
immeasurably transcending the most sanguine hopes of his ancient people.

1. Let our souls be so filled with the greatness and the goodness of QoA as thus
revealed, that we shall break forth into grateful song, magnifying his Name. 2. Let
us return at once to him, if we yet remain at a distance from him ; for we have no
right to hope, and no reason to expect, that he will ever manifest himself to us in
more attractive features than as we see him in the Son that was bom of the lowlv
Virgin.— C.

Vers. 58, 66, 67. — Joy and awe at a human birth. When John was bom his
mother's heart was filled with great joy, and her neighbours rejoiced with her. And
when the little child, a week old, was introduced into the Jewish commonwealth, a
feeling of awe filled the hearts of those present, and there was much wonderment con-
cerning him. " Fear came on them all," and every one was asking, " What manner of
child shall this be?" No doubt the exceptional character of the circumstances attend-
ing his birth and his circumcision accounted for the joy and also for the fear ; but
apart from all that was unusual, there was reason enough for both sentiments to be felt
and si lown. At any ordinary human birth there is —

I. Occasion for hopefulness and gladness of heart. " The mother remem-
bereth no more her anguish, for joy that a man is born into the world," said our Lord
(John xvi. 21). And why rejoice on this occasion ? Because of: 1. The love which the
little child will cherish. Not, indeed, to be manifested in its very earliest days, but to
be felt and shown before long — the beautiful, clinging, whole-hearted love of childhood;
a love which it is fair to see and most precious to receive. 2. The love which the
little child will call forth — the love which is parental, fraternal ; the love of those who
serve as well as that of kindred and friends, — this, too, is one of the most goodly sights
on which the eye of purity and wisdom rests ; it is one of the sweetest and most whole-
some ingredients in the cup of earthly good. 3. The discipline which the coming of
the child will involve. All parents have an invaluable privilege, from which they
ought to derive the greatest beuefit. They may be so slow to learn, so unimpression-
able, so obdurate, that they are none the wiser or better for their parentage ; and in
that case they will be something or even much the worse. But if the " little child "
does not " lead " us, it is our own fault and folly. The child's dependency on his
parent, trustfulness in his parent, obedience to his parent, — do these not speak eloquently
of our dependence upon, our trustfulness in, our obedience to our heavenly Father'
The love we feel tor our little child, the care we take of him, the profound regret we
ihould feel if he went astray, the sacrifice we are ready to make for his recovery, — does
not all this summon us, with touching and even thrilling voice, to realize the love God
has for us his human children, the care he has taken of us day and night through all
our years, the profound Divine regret with which he has seen us go astray from himself,
the wonderful sacrifice he made for us when he spared not his own Son but delivered
him up for us ail, in order to restore us to himself and reinstate us in our haritagc '
And the labour we are necessitated to bestow, the patience to exercise, and the siii



.i4 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. 1. 1— Sa



denial and sacrifice to show, — these are essential factors in the forming of our character.
We should not choose them, but we may well be most thankful for them. 4. The
excellency to which he may attain; it may be that (1) of physical beauty, or (2) of
Intellectual ability, or (3) of spiritual worth, or (4) of valuable service. Who can
tell what lies latent in that helpless infant ? what sources of power and blessing are
in that little cradle?

II. Occasion for reverent awe. It may well be that " fear " comes on all those
who hold their own children in their arms. For they who are entrusted with a little
cliild receive therewith a most grave responsibility. It is true that nothing can remove
the accountableness of each soul to its Creator for what it has become ; but it is also
true that parents are very seriously responsible for the character and career of their
children. Our children will believe what we teach them, will form the habits in which
we train them, will follow the exatrple we set them, will imbibe the spirit which we
are breathing in their presence. What shall this child be ? That depends on ourselves.
If we are only true and wise and kind, our children will almost certainly become what
we ourselves are — what we long and pray that they may be. Joy and awe are there-
fore the two appropriate sentiments at every human birth. Wlien a child is bom into
the home, there enters that which may be the source of the greatest gladness to the
heart ; there also enters that which should make life a far more serious and solemn
thing. — 0.

"Vers. 74, 75. — The course of the Christian life. These words of Zacharias will very
well indicate the course through which a Christian life passes from its commencement
to its close.

I. It begins in spiritual emancipation. " We being delivered out of the hand of
our enemies." In order to " walk in newness of life," we must be rescued from the
thraldom of sin. And there is a twofold deliverance that we need. One is from the
condemnation of our guHt ; for we cannot rest and rejoice in the love of Gkxi while we
are under a troubled sense of the Divine displeasure, while we feel and know that our
" sin has separated between " ourselves and our heavenly Father. The other is from
the bondage of evil. So long as we are " held in the cords of our sins," we are help-
lessly disobedient ; it is only when we have learnt to hate sin, and, loathing it, to
leave it behind us, that we are free to walk in the path of righteousness. This double
emancipation is wrought for us by the Lord whose way the son of Zacharias was to
prepare. By faith in him, the great Propitiation for our sins (1 John ii. 2), we have
full and free forgiveness, so that all the guilty past may be removed from our sight ;
and in the presence of a crucified Redeemer " the flesh and its affections are crucified,"
we die to our old self and our old iniquities, the tolerance of sin is slain, we hate that
which we loved and embraced before, we are "delivered out of the hand of our
enemies."

II. It proceeds along the path of filtal service. We "serve him without
fear." Here are two elements — obedience and happiness. As soon as we unite our-
selves to our Lord and Saviour, we live to serve. " Islone of us liveth to himself; " " We
thus judge, . . . that we who live should not live unto ourselves, but unto him who died
for us" (2 Cor. v. 14, 15). And this i.s the only true life of man. The animal may live
for itself, though even the higher animals live rather for others than for themselves.
But all whom we should care to emulate live to serve. It is not the st-ntence passed,
it is the heritage conferred upon us, that in Christ Jesus we live to serve God — to serve
him by direct worship and obedience, and also, indirectly, by serving the children of
his love and the creatures of his care. And we serve in love ; and therefore without
fear — without that fear which means bondage; for "perfect love casteth out fear."
It is with no hesitating and reluctant step that we walk in the ways of God ; it is our
joy to do his bidding; we "delight to do his will: yea, his Law is within our heart"
(Ps. xl. 8). " We have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear ; " our spirit i*
the spirit of happy childhood, which runs to fulfil its Father's word.

III. It moves towards perfect excellence of oharaoteb. "In holiness and
righteousness belbre him." Here are three elements of the Christian life. 1. A holy
liatred oftvU; leading us to condemn it in ourselves and in others, and prompting us
to expel and extirpate it to the utmost of our power. 2. The pursuit and practice <^



OH. I, 1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCOtlDlNG TO ST. LUKE. 26

M that is equitable ; endeavouring to do and to promote that which is just in all th«
relations in which we stand to others, or they to one another. 3. Fiety ; doing every
right thing as unto Christ our Lord; living consciously " before him ; " so that all our
rectitude of heart and excellency of behaviour is something more than a habit of life:
it is a sacrifice unto our Saviour.

IV. Ip persbvbbes even to the ekd. "All our days." There is no break in out
course. Our upward and onward path may be undulating, but it is continuous, and is
ever making for the summit. We do not retire, or resign, or abdicate, in this noblest
work, in this sacred office of being " servant of tlie Lord," " king and priest unto God."
Haying loved his own, our Master loved them unto the end (John liiL 1) ; and
loving him whom we have not seen, and rejoicing in him with unspeakable joy, we are
faithful nuto death, and we know that

" To him that overcometh
A crown of life shall be;
He with the King of gloiy
Bhall leigo eternally."

a

Ver. 79. — Christ our Light. To whon and to what extent the Messiah shoiild
" give light " probably Zacharias did not know. He may have limited the blessing, in
his mind, to the people of Israel ; or, inspired and illumined of God, be may have had
a larger and truer outlook. We, at any rate, are unable to confine our thoughts to
Jewry ; we see in the Sun of Righteousness, in the Dayspring from on high, a celestial
luminary " whose going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the
ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof." To ua it is "the Light
which, coming into the world, enlighteneth every one."

L The deobees of dabkness in which the world was shrouded when the Day-
spring rose. It was a dark hour when Jesus Christ was bom. "Darkness covered
the earth." But the shadows were deeper in some lands than in others ; some minds
were more lost and burit-d in the thick darkness than others were. 1. The dim twilight
ttf Judaism — a twilight, not of the morning, but of the evening. For Judaism had
p^sed out of its manhood into its dotage, out of its strength and spirituality into a
dreary and lifeless formalism. It had, indeed, escaped from idolatry,' and it was free
from the worst excesses of the pagan world; but of a pure piety, a spiritual and
acceptable service, it knew but little. Compared, however, with surrounding peoples,
the Jews may be said to have stood in the twilight of truth. 2. The darkness <)f
philosophy. For philosophy was groping in the darkness ; it had felt or was feeling its
way out of the absurdities of polytheism and idolatry ; it touched — but only here and
there — the grand truth of monotheism ; but it was peering in the direction of pantheism
and atheism. " The world by wisdom knew not God." And even where it did reach the
idea of one living God, it could not tell how he was to be worshipped, how his favour
was to be won, what were the relations he desired to sustain to mankind. 3. The
thick darkness of paganism. If the philosophers " sat in darkness," the idolaters of
uncivilized communities were "in the shadow of death." What a death in life is the
existence of those who are buried in the most blighting superstitions and the most
debasing habits ! There indeed " the light is as darkness ; " it moves us to a profound
pity as we think of it. We are not surprised to read in the text of —

II. The compassion of the Father of men in view of it. " The tender mercy of
our God" was called forth by the sad spectacle of a world in deep shadow, a race with-
out the Light of life. At their best, men were far enough from tmth, from righteous-
ness, from the love of God; at their worst, they had utterly gone astray, "stumbling
on the dark mountains " of error and of iniquity. Well might the God of all pity
compassionate such a lost race as this.

III. The visit of the heavenly Datsfbino. " The Dayspring firom on high hath
visited us, to give light." Jesus Christ came to be the " Light of the world ; " and such
he is. He has illumined all the way from the blackness of darkness of sin to the light
and glory of heaven. What precious rays of light has the Divine Teacher shed on (1)
the nature and the disposition of God, our Father ; on (2) the character and the con-
sequences of sin; on (3) the way back to God and righteousness; on (4) the tranicendent



2« THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. 1. 1— SO.

Talue of the human soul ; on (5) the beauty and blessedness of the life of consecration;
on (6) the certainty of future glory to the good and faithful I Let us draw near to him
who is the Light of tlie human world, let us walk in the light of his reviving truth,
" that we may be the children of light," and dwell in immurtal glory. — 0.

Ver. 79. — Christ our Peace. " To guide our feet into the way of peace." And how
far has the mission of the Dayspring succeeded? How far ha$ he guided the feet of
men into the way of peace? Judged by the outward appearance, the answer would be
quite unsatisfactory. To-day, after eighteen centuries of Christianity, there are four
millions of men under arms in Europe only ; and if another great war does not break
out, it is not from humane or Christian considerations that it is suppressed. How do
we explain the fact ? 1. Christianity has had no fair chance of shuwing what it is tn
it to do. It has been so wretchedly misrepresented through whole centuries of time.

2. It hat done much to moderate and mitigate the severities of war ; amongst other
things, it has carried the " red cross " of succour right into the heart of the battle-field.

3. It is impregnating the minds of statesmen with the truth that an unnecessary war
is a heinous crime against God and man. 4. It has been leading the souls of men into
a profounder peace. For there is a spiritual sphere in which there is strife and imrest
worse by far than any physical contests can he. It is there that peace has been most
missed, and that its absence has wrought the saddest eviL This worst restlessness has
resulted from two things —

I. FbOM UAN BEEKINO his BATISFACTIOlir WHEBE HE OAmrOT FIND IT. 1. What •

vain thing is it to seek satisfaction in a life of pleasure, in living to be amused, in
hunting happiness over the field of enjoyment I 2. What an uns itisfying thing is life
lived on any lower plane, whatever it may be I Alas for those millions to whom it Is a
dreary and monotonous round of toil I And to those who move in the higher social
circles, is it so ver}' much better ? When the veil is lifted, as it is occasionally by
some honest memoirs or frank autobiography, how often do we find it full of dis-
appointment, of disillusion, of wretched rivalry, of hunger and heart-ache I There is no
peace or rest there that is worthy of the name. Where, then, shall rest be found?
We shall gain it from him and find it in him who " knew what was tn mom," and who
alone knew wtiat would satisfy the hunger of his soul ; it was he who came to guide
our feet into the way of peace. We shall find it in hia/rtewdsAip, in his tervice, in his
caiue. When we have come to ourselves, and have returned unto the Lord our God j
when we have lost sight of ourselves, and have entered his holy and happy service ;
' then have we left disquietude and unrest behind us, then have we entered into a true,
deep, and enduring peace.

II. From our sense of sin against God. There is no peace for man without
leconciliation to God. He has left the home of his Father, has become estranged from
him, has come under his righteous condemnation, and he can find no peace until he
has been forgiven and restored. Apathy, indifference, the unconcern of a stolid
ignorance, there may be ; but that is not peace. Peace is a well-grounded atsurance
that all ii well with ua. This we can only obtain by knowing the truth concerning
ourselves, and by taking the path which leads ui home to God. It is just this we
liave in Jesus Christ. He (1) makes plain to the understanding and makes grievous
to the soul our own great unwoi thiness and guilt ; and then he (2) offers himself to ug
as our all-sufficient Saviour. Then " being justified by faith [in him] we have peace
witli Gud through our Lord Jesus Christ." And abiding in him, we continue in the
path of peace — a path which leads on to holy joy and up to heavenly glory. — C.



Ver. 80.— The service of solitude. "And was in the deserts till the day of bis
showing unto Israel." John the Baptist had a long period of retirement before he
began the active work of life ; and we may be sure tliat the time spent in the wilderness
waa not lost. The communion ho had there with God, and his prolonged reflection on
the worth and purpose of human life, must have had much to do with the character he
formed and the work he afterwards accomplished. Then good seed was sown which
ore muck fruit in later years. We should do well to " be in the desert " more than
ve are— to seek the solitary place where we are alone with God and with ourselves more
. an we do. "The world is too much with us." We cannot hear the stiller and



cm. 1. 1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 27

deeper voices that speak to us, for its perpetual sound is in our ear — ^the hum of its
activity, the rattle of its pleasures, the wail of its distress. Solitude would render an
essential service if we would but ensure it and employ it.

I. The services solitude would eekdbr ub. 1. It would bring God near to us.
When man is quite removed from us, and his voice is completely hushed ; when we are
alone, whether it be in the folds of the hill, or in the depth of the valley, or in our
own chamber ; — we have a sense of God's nearness to us which we have not amid the
crowd. And what an inestimable advantage it would be to us to let the conscious-
ness of God's own presence often fill our soul, and then to hold sustained communion
with him! 2. It would place our past in full view before our souL It is not well to
be very often looking back on that which has gone. There is deep wisdom in " forgetting
those things which are behind," both past follies and past successes. Yet is it well some-
times to review the way we have been taking — to consider how much there is that
should humble us, and how much that should teach us our weakness and cast us on
the mercy and the help of Gud. 3. It would confront us with the future. It would
make us ask whither we are going, what there remains for us to do before we die, how
well we are prepared for death and the great day of account. 4. It would lead us to
estimate our present spiritual condition — how good a use we have made of our privi-
leges, whether we have been progressing or receding in our course, whether we are
what our Divine Lord would have us be, how we stand in the sight of perfect truth
and purity.

IL The occasions when it is most appropriate. 1. Between the night and the
morning; when the soul has to address itself to new duties, new diflSculties, newoppor-
timities. 2. Between the evening and the night ; before a man commits himself to
the "great Guardian of his sleeping liours," his hours of utter helplessness and uncon-
sciousness. 3. Before leaving the shelter of the home; when the young heart goes
forth into deeper waters — who shall say how deep? — of temptation and trial; when
»11, and far more than all, its resources will be required for the stem struggle before it.
4. In the crises of our career ; when in the innermost chamber of the soul it is deter-
mined whether the heart and life shall be yielded to the holy Saviour and righiful
Sovereign, or shall lie withheld from him. 5. At the time of religious avowal ; wheu
a human being takes upon himself the vows of God, and makes open declaration of
attachment to the Lord his Redeemer. 6. Before special services which demand the
full strength of the soul to meet them bravely and to render them worthily; At such
times as these does it most become us to shut our doors upon ourselves and be long
alone with God. — C.

Vers. 1 — i. — The absolute certainty of the Ghrittian religion. lu this prologue by
Luke we have an insight into the conditions and purposes of his publication. In aa
»ge without the art of printing, it was useful to obtain the patronage of the wealthy,
and thus secure the production of such a number of " copies " as would save the volume
from oblivion. Hence in the classic world dedications to rich men were the rule with
authors rather than the exception. Luke's Gospel, which is the " classic " Gospel in
the series, is thus written lor Theophilus, presumably a rich convert, with whom the
writer has had most intimate relations. It is to the same patron he dedicates the
second volume of the life of Christ, which is commonly, though inaccurately, called
" The Acts of the Apostles," but which is really a second volume of the acts of the
Lord, accomplished in and through his apostles. The Gospel, as Luke tells us in the
prologue to the Acts, was an account of all that Jesus legan to do and teach (Acts i. 1).
Our Lord's earthly life was thus, in Luke's view, only a first stage in an everlasting
history. But while Luke, like other authors in the classical world, may have bad the
interests of his book in view in dedicating it to Theophilus, he had at the same time a
nobler purpose, even to confirm Theophilus in the Christian faith. He proposes con-
sequently to display the basis on which this convert has been building, and how
absolutely certain the Christian faith is. It is well to revise the foundations. We
ought to " walk about Zion, and go round about her ; " we ought to " tell the towers
thereof, and mark well her bulwarks, and consider her palaces ; that we may tell it to
the generation following " (Ps. xlviii. 12, 13). What' then, does Luke present to
Theophilus as an account of the Christian faith ?



28 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. i. 1—80

L The Christian faith is kot a speculative system. Man, left to himMlf,
evolves out of his consciousnesB a system more or less complete, and calls upon his
fellows to accept of it as their religious faith. But such an evolution of religion has
proved a failure. Into the interesting study of comparative religion we cannot here
enter at any length, but two tendencies in specnlatioa may be noticed in passing. The
first is the outward, or idealistic tendency, which may be found developed in the Indian
religions ; the second is the inward, or eetf-reliant tendtncy, which may be seen carried
to its issues in Hellenism and the specidations of the West. Thus the tendency of
the Oriental mind was and is to contemplate Nattire aud to reverence her underlying
forces ; while the tendency of the Occidental mind was to contemplate man or human
nature, and to find in his individuality, his freedom, and his power the true unit and
substance of thought. The Oriental mind consequently lost itself in speculations on
the absolute, which became to the dreamers of the East an abstraction without per-
sonality, intelligence, or limitatiou, just as he has become of late to certain of our
dreamers in the West ; and the climax of being is in the Nirvana, the utter extinction
of human personality through absorption into the tmiversal Spirit. The Western, or
(Grecian mind, on the other hand, held to man and human nature, cultivated a bound-
less self-reliance, and a supreme confidence in human nature and its powers. His gods
and goddesses were but deified men and women ; Olympus only a Greece enjoying l^ger
latitude and more abundant sunlight ; and reason and self the ultimate objects of trust.
The issue, as we might expect, was " intense worldliness of spirit, that dread of death,
that doubt of immortality, that decay of the religious sentiment, which finally covered
classical life with such deep gloom and despair." ' The two tendencies, Oriental and
Occidental — the one making man nothing, the other making man all in all — had, before
Christ's time, ample opportunity to prove their insufficiency. They had in Buddhism
and in Flatonism checks, but they were unequal to the needful reformation. It remained
for a better faith to furnish man with certainty. Hence we remark —

II. The Chbistian faith is founded on the bistort op a Person. The gospel,
as Luke here indicates, consists in the history of a Person whose advent is essential
to the salvation of the world. Hence the substance of the Christian faith is historical,
not nwculative. Whatever certainty attaches to historical evidence as superior to
speculation attaches, therefore, to the Christian faith. And here we have to notice :
1. That the history rest* on the testimony of eye-witnesset. This is asserted by Luke
In Ter. 2. Facts consequently appealing to the senses of the apostles constitute the
foundation of the faith. And if it be insinuated that they were " interested witnesses,"
we reply with Luke : 2. That the witnesses gained nothing in the worldly sense by their
testimony. As ministers of the Word, they were persecuted, in many cases killed ; in all
cases life was much less comfortable in consequence of their testimony than if they had
said nothing about the Saviour who died and rose again. 3. Luke si/ted the facts as
carefully as he could. It is significant that he makes no claim to inspiration in his
prologue. And this is the rule with the sacred writers. Some have supposed that
because the writers do not each and all put in a categorical claim to inspiration, it is
superfluous to suppose that they are all inspired.' But we reply that it is far better
fer writers to_ show that they are inspired than to say they are. Inspiration, like all
other good gifts of God, is to be " known by its fruits." This prologue shows that
many tried their hands at writing lives of Jesus ; but there has been a " survival of the
fittest" in this case at all events, to the great advantage of mankind. Instead of
asserting his inspiration, Luke used his best endeavours to sift the material and pro
duce a careful and " elassic" work. Instead of the Spirit of God despising rneans, he
owns them and blesses them.

IIL The history of Christ has a fbrsonai, bearing upok each ohs or vt,
Theophilus had been taught this, just as we require to be taught it. Now, we may see
the application of Christ's life to our individual need by the two tendencies already
referred to. The human mind is idealizing in its character. It can be shown that we
owe even our scientific progress to the idealists, the Pythagoreans in Greece and the
PlatMiists in Alexandria being the only men in the old world who really advanced

' "fbe Secret of Christianity,' by S. S. Hebberd, pp. 54, 55.

' Of. 'Me Stellang des Christliohen Glaubens zur heiligen Schrift," iwei apoloeetbche
V ortrage, Ten Profesior Dr. Hermann Sohultz, in Heidelberg (1878).



OH. 1. 1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. 29

tdence.* Now, Jesus supplies us, in his own perfect and sinless Person, with the " ideal "
we IndiTidually need to satisfy the oraTings and longings of the heart. He is, in fact,
"altogether lovely." So that by his realized Personality we are saved from occupation
with a pure abstraction, called the " absolute," and the self-effacement to which the
Indian dreamers and others are led, as the hope and consequence of their speculation.
The definiteness of the historic Person is thus placed in antagonism to the dreamy
indefiniteness of speculation about the absolute. Again, the human mind is intro-
$pective and self-reliant in its tendencies. Jesus Christ again applies the requisite
week and antagonism to the dangerous tendency. His perfect life showi us by con-
trast how imperfect our lives are ; bis mission as Saviour demonstrates our spiritual
need ; and so we end by taking up self-suspicion in place of self-confidence, and we
delight ourselves in the Lord alone. Thus it may be seen that the life of Jesus,
especially when we remember his Divinity and omnipotence, becomes a pergonal interest
and a reforming power.'
IV. The histobt of Chbistianitt ib the bebult of the Persohal Chbist

IKFLnEKCINO AS THET NEEDED IT THE WILLIKO SONS OF MEN. The Book of the ActS

has to be taken as the development of the Gospel. In it we see the Lord adding to the
Church of such as shall be saved, and accomplishing his sacred purposes through
human instrumentalilies. The people are made willing in the day of his Pentecostal
power (Ps. ex. 3). The great Personality is thus tteeu to be moulding men. It has
been said truly that Christianity has been a progress through antagonism (cf. Hebberd,
ut nipra). Paganism was a development ; Christianity has been a history of restraint.
It has curbud men's passions, and conducted them through antagonism to their goaL
" The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and thu Spirit against the flesh : and these are
contrary the one to the other : so that ye cannot do the things that ye would " (Gal.
T. 17). This policy of restraint or antagonism may be traced through Church his-
troy. Only an outline can be here sugt;ested. Mohammedanism was a providential
restraint upon the growing superstitions of the early centuries. Catholicism again was
a restraint upon the vandalism of the Germanic tribes, and by the establishment of
feudalism it changed nomadic nations into settled and sympathizing patriots. Protes-
tantism followed, to restrain the " spiritual despotism " which accompanied Catholicism,
and secure freedom and the lights of the individual. Even the scieniific spirit, as
can easily be shown, is due to Protestantism, and if it threatens us, as it dues, with
unspiritual developments, Christianity will take a new start and antagonize that spirit
with a wholesome assertion of the spiritual nature and rights of man (cf. Hebberd,
ut supra). A great restraining Saviour is thus seen to be moving among men and
using their freedom to serve his glorious designs. The Christian faith is simple trust
in this historic yet immortal Person, who can consider and consult at once the majestic
cycles of human progiess and the minutest needs of those who trust him. We have
certainty at the foundation of our faith, and a living Lord continually at our side. —
B. M. E.

Vers. 6—25. — The inauguration of the dispensation of grace. From the prologue
about the historic certainty of the Christian faith, we now proceed to the first stage of
the wonderful history in the annui.ciation of the birth of the I'aptist In this we have
Luke mounting higher than either Matthew or Maik. We can understand this since
he was writing foi a (ientile audience, and the speculative turn of Grecian minds would
certainly lead to inquiries as to the origin of the leaders in the dispensation of grace.
Luke satisfies all just demands, and with that exquisite taste which should regulate
thought upon such themes. Let us notice the facts as preseuted to us.

I. The Lord utilized existing obganizations. Just as we believe the New
Testement eldership was based upon the Old Testament office of elder, so here we have
the great reformer taken from the Aaronic priesthood. Once more is honour put upon
the line of Aaron. The parents of the forerunner both belonged to the pnestly teibe.
They are, moreover, godly people, being "both righteous before God, walking m ^1
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless' (ver. 6). By which could

• Cf. Hebberd's ' Secret of Christianity,' pp. 173 -208.

• Cf. Isaac Taylor's ' Lectures on Spiritual Christianity,' pp. 1*— *S.



80 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINft TO ST. LUKE. [oh. l 1— 8(X

not be meant that they were sinlessly perfect, especially since in such a case the ritual
through which they regularly passed would have been strangely unmeaning. They
were a pious, God-fearing pair, walking before the Lord, and striving to be perfect. And
here we ma^ draw attention to the advantage John thus had in pious parents. It is,
we believe, a physical advantage to be the offspring of those who have learned by God's
grace to subdue their passions, and who may otherwise be healthy. Other things
being equal, their physical development must be superior to that of those whose parents
may be addicted to any forms of sinful indulgence.

II. Notice the tbial of their faith. This consisted in their having no child.
With the Jews there was, added to the natural desire of husband and wife for children,
the stimulus arising from the Messianic promises. A Deliverer is expected: why not
in my family 7 Thus Jewish mothers were kept in an expectant attitude, not knowing
but that the Messiah was to be their Son. We see in such psalms as czzvii., cxzviiL,
etc., evidence how the Divine blessing was associated with fruitfulness. Zacharias and
Elisabeth had hitherto t)een denied the blessing of any child, and, though they had
continued to pray about it, they had ceased really to hope. Just like the people who
prayed for the release of Peter, and then would not befieve it was he when he came
knocking at the door (Acts xii. 12 — 16), so the aged priest and his wife seem to have
kept up the foim of prayer for a son long after they had ceased to expect such a gift.
God keeps us waiting till we are hopeless, and then he surprises us with his blessings.

III. Notice next the PBATiua HULTiTcrDE and the officiating priest. Zacharias
belonged to the eighth of the priestly courses, and had consequently to come up twice
a year for eight days' attendance at the temple. Those belonging to the same course
met and cast lots for the privilege of ofSciating at the golden altar. So soon as a priest
secured the privilege once, he retired from the contest, as once during the sojourn at
Jerusalem was deemed ample honour. Zacharias happened to be successful ; the Lord's
will was that he should officiate on a given day. The lot left the destiny of each
absolutely in the hands of the Lord. It is quite a different matter when people make
•Ti appeal to him in games of chance and such like.' Into the sanctuary (vain'') of the
Lord accordingly he went, to bum incense at the morning hour, as seems most probable.
And while he burned the pure perfume within, the multitude of the people prayed
without. It was an acknowledgment that their prayers required something to make
them acceptable. They could not ascend alone. And was this not the idea of the
arrangement? Man's prayers needed to be supplemented by a divinely arranged per-
fume, just as we now expect our prayers to be accepted only through the merits oj
Jesus Christ. Again, must we not suppose that the people were praying for deliveiance
and the advent of tbe Deliverer ? Their prayers and the aged priest's were really one.
There was unison and harmony, even though presented from different standpoints.
Thepeople without and the priest within were acting in "pre-established harmony."

I V . The angel of joy appears in the banctuart. It was upon the path of duty
Zacharias met the angel, just as Jacob had done long before at Mahanaim (Gen. xxxii.
1). Gabriel's visit at first terrified the solitary priest. But as the angel of glad tidings
vcA so, as be has been called, " of evangelization " (of. Godet, in loc), he soon reassures
Zacharias. He tells him that his wife is to bear him a son, and his name is to be called
"John." 1. This itself is significant. The word "John" is derived from n\v and
{Tj, and means "Jehovah giveth grace." It thus signalized the dispensation. The
Baptist was really the morning star of the gospel dispensation. 2. He was to he
Tiuirally great. The gracious name would not belie his character. He would be " great
in the sight of the Lord," who " looketh on the heart." 3. He was to be separated from
the world as a true Nazurite. He was not to drink either wine or strong drink. 4.
He was to be inspired from the womb. The inspiration from wine was needless, when
he was to be borne upwards and constantly exhilarated by the Spirit of God (cf. Eph.
T. 18). 5. He shall be correspondingly successful. " Many of the Jews shall he turn
to the Lord their God." 6. His reformation is to resemble that of Elias. Elijah lived
to turn the nation to the worship of the true OroA ; his work was preparatory, like the
wind, the earthquake, and the fire, before the still small voice. So was it to be with
John. He was by stem and solitary moral grandeur to bring the people to a sense of

' or. Pr. J. M Mason's ' Considsratlons on Lots,' Works, vol iii. pp. 265—317.



OH. 1.1—80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. Si



•in, and thus prepare ttem for the advent of the Saviour. No father ever got a more
magnificent future laid before his son. The angel sketched a destiny which was fitted
to make the old priest glad.

V. UNBELiEr INSISTING ON A FUETHBR SIGN. The appearance of Gabriel, the trans-
parent honesty of his words, the holy place, the whole circumstance of the vision, ought
to have assured Zacharias and rebuked his unbelief. Here, after four hundred years of
silence, a message has come again from God ; and surely it should have been believed.
But no 1 Zacharias asks for a further sign. Has he forgotten Abraham and Sarah ?
Has he forgotten Isa!\o and Rebecca ? Surely the priest, though aged and with an
»ged wife, had every reason to believe the angel-brougl]t promise of his God ? His
unbelief was criminaL He deserves a chastisement. The demand for miracles at the
present day is on the part of some just as unreasonable. Unless some additional sign
is granted, then faith will be withheld. There is a scepticism which deserves chastise-
ment instead of sympathy or encouragement. And Zacharias is struck dumb. He is
doomed to speed dessness for the most of a year. His dumbness was to be a sign of
his unbelief and a pure judgment from God. We may compare his case with that of
the man born blind (John ix. 2, etc.). In this case the deprivation was to be the basis
of Divine mercy ; in the case of Zacharias it was a clear note of Divine displeasure. Yet
with judgment there is mixed mercy. He is promised a release on the day of the birth
of John. For God's " anger endureth but a moment ; in his favour is life : weeping
may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning" (Ps. xxz. 5).

VI. The patient worshippers and the dumb priest. The burning of incense
occupied usually a certain length of time. But Zacharias tarries long beyond this.
The people wait, but marvel as they wait. They wish his benediction. But when he
at length appears, he can only make signs to them, and dismiss them without a word.
And yet a sign is there for them. They see that a vision has been vouchsafed in the
temple. If the priest is silent, it is because God has spoken. Better that man should
be dumb before God, than that Heaven should be silent for ever I Zacharias's judgment
is to the people a merciful sign. The week of temple-work was no sooner over than
he went home to his house in the hill-country of Judiea. His affliction must have been
very painful and humiliating. He would be regarded by his friends as one " smitten
of the Lord." But in due season the mercy and grace of God are realized in the Baptist's "
conception. If Zacharias mourned over his unbelief and its chastisement, Elisabeth
was enabled to rejoice over her good fortune and the removal of her reproach.

We have thus gone over the announcement of a great man's advent. Are not the truly
yeat the gracious gifts of God ? They should be called " John," as indicating whence
the true heroes come, and to whom we should ascribe the blessing of their lives. A
recent writer says that society has progressed mainly through a succession of great men,
and he adds, " Society makes only so much of the great man as goes to the composition
of the average man, leaving an overplus which is not to be put to the credit of society
or previous human acquisition, but which is a gift from nature — from the Unknown.
It makes all of the great man except his special genius, which is afterwards to improve
society."* If in this quotation we substitute for "nature," nature's Ood, we shall
have the true idea. Great men are God's gifts, and though the world may, as in
this case, misuse and murder them, they confer, through confession and martyrdom,
incalculable blessing upon the race. It is only right for us to recognize in God the
Source of great souls, and to use them for his glory. — R. M. R

Vers. 26 — 38. — " The Beginning of the creation of Ood." We now enter upon soother
announcement, more wonderful still than that about John. It is the announcement
•bout the advent of him who is indeed " the Beginning of the creation of God " (Rev.
iii. 14). A deeper interest should gather round it than attaches to the beginning of
the material universe. Both begin in mystery, but happily we see the mystery by the
eye of faith safely lodged in the hand of God. Oenesit gives to us the mysterious
origin of the ordinary creation, and Luke gives to us the mysterious origin of the
extraordinary creation of which Jesus is the real Head.

I. W* SHALL KOTioB THE SCENE OF THIS ANQBL-VI8IT. We saw Gabriel last in tht
temple, holding intercourse beyond the first veil with Zacharias as he offered tlt«
■ Oiftham's 'Cteed of Science,' pp. 66, 67.



3S THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. 1. 1— 8C

incense. He was in "the holy place," on the threshold of" the holy of holies." Bui
now, by way of contrast, he repairs to Nazareth, that city of Galilee so hidden in the
hills that all who for various reasons needed a hiding-place resorted thither. It was
a rendezvous for the worst of people, and became proverbial as the one place out of
which no good thing need be expecied (John i. 46). It was here the angel of mercy
made his way to carry good tidings to one in whose veins was the blood of kings. The
house of David had fallen indeed on evil days when its lineal representative was to be
found in a virgin betrothed to the village carpenter. Meanwhile let us comfort ourselves
with the thought that angel-visits, though reputedly few and far between, are not
confined to temple-courts or palaces of earthly kings. The lowliest of situations and
the lowliest hearts may be honoured by a messenger from heaven.*

IL The message Gabbiel brought. Having sought and found the virgin who was
espoused to Joseph, he first addressed to her a remarkable salutation. He salutes her
as one who is (1) " highly favoured " (ictxapiranevri), that is, the object of special favour
from God ; and (2) as one enjoying God's special presence—" The Lord is with thee."
The other clause, " Blessed art thou among women," seems to be transferred from the
subsequent salutation of Elisabeth (ver. 42 ; and cf. Revised Version). It was a very
gracious assurance Gabriel brought to Mary. She needed all the support it gave her
in her present trying position. The immediate effect upon her mind was /ear. She
is troubled at the unexpected apparition. But it led her to deep thoughtfulness. It
has been well said that praise comes as a surprise to the meek, but as a right, or rather
less than a right, to the proud.* Mary was thrown by her fear into anxious thought
as to what particular good fortune could be hers. Her idea was that she deserved
nothing, and so she could the more thoroughly appreciate whatever came. What A
relish Divine favour would be if we had Mary's meekness ! Gabriel now bids her no
longer to fear, since she has found favour with God, and her good fortune is to consist
in this — that she is to be the mother of an everlasting Monarch. But we must pause
over Gabriel's message. 1. The name of her Son U to he Jesut. That is, he is to
be a Saviour of men from sin (cf. Matt. L 21). The world has had Joshuas in abun-
dance, captains of invasion, but only one Jesus as a Saviour from the curse and power
of sin. 2. He is to be great. And assuredly, if moral influence and genius constitute
the highest greatness, Jesus has no equal among the sons of men. 3. He is to be
called tTie Son of the Highest. God is to be his Father in a special sense. This does not
refer to his " Eternal Sonship," but to his human sonship. Ue is to stand to God in the
relation of son to father, so far as his human nature is concerned. Mary is thus to be
the mother of GJod's Son, 4. He is to succeed to the thnme of his father David. Now,
are we to understand this of a succession to a world-kingdom, and a " personal reign"
over the Jews ? If this be the meaning, then this reign is still to come, for through
the rejection of Messiah this kingship was prevented. And so some interpret this (cf.
Godet, in foe). But our Lord's own words about the unworldliness of his kingdom
seem to set this idea at rest. He came to be King over a spiritual kingdom. Now,
David, we should remember, was a great ecclesiastical reformer. He exercised com-
manding influence in the Church as well as State of his time ; and he realized his vice-
gerency under God. Jesus succeeds David upon the spiritual lines which were the
cfiief lines of David's influence as king. 5. Hit reign and kingdom are to he everlasting.
His is to be no dying dycasty, but an everlasting rule. Emperors and kings have come
and gone, and left their glory behind them ; bat this Son of Mary commands more
Influence every year, and knows no decline. The kingdoms of the world run a longer
or shorter course ; but Christ's kingdom outlasts them all. Such a message was fitted
to overwhelm an ordinary mind. Mary is to be the mother of a new King, and he i»
never to be uncrowned — an everlasting Monarch I Surely an ordinary head would bo
turned by such tidings as these.

III. How Maby takes the mesbaok. She is so meek that her head is not turned.
She is in amazement certainly, but there is calm dignity and purity iu ter reply. 1.
8ht euks how such a hirth is to come about since she is a virgin t This was not the
inquiry of a doubter, but of a believer. She wanted direction. Wat the to go oa with

• Of. GeroVs ' Evangelien-Predigten,' s. 801, etc

* 0£ Arndf B ' Lieben Jesu,' erster band, s. 1$.



OH. Ll— so.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. 33

her proposed marriage with Joseph? or was she to break with him? or was she to do
oothing but wait? Gabriel directs her to wait passively in God's hands, and all he
has promised will come supernaturally about. Just as the Spirit overshadowed the
old chaotic world, and brought the cosmos out of it, so would he overshadow Mary, and
give her a holy Son, Mary was to sit still and see the salvation of God. And here we
must notice that it was a " holy Child " which the world required as a Saviour, otie in
whom the law of sin affecting the rest of the race should be broken, who would be
"holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners." David may say, "In sin did
my mother conceive me ; " but no such language must be heard from the lips of Christ.
This moral break, this exception to the general rule, is brought about by a supernatural
conception and birth. Is there not here a lesson about leaving things sometimes in
God's hands altogether ? It is a great thing sometimes to sit still and do nothing ; to
cultivate passivity. Like the Virgin, let us simply wait. As a further direction,
Gabriel suggests a visit to Elisabeth, that her faith in God's power may be confirmed.
The intercourse with her aged relative will do her a world of good in present circum-
stances. There in the hill-country of Judaea she will find increasing reason for trusting
in God. 2. Mary accepts the situation with all its risks. Her submission is an instance
of the holiest courage. She cannot but become tor a time an object of suspicion to
Joseph, and to many more. Her reputation will be for a time at stake. It is a terrible
ordeal to encounter. But she bows to the Divine will, and asks God to do with her
as he pleases. Faith alone could sustain her in such circumstances. God would
vindicate her character in due season. How much are we willing to risk for our Lord ?
Would we risk reputation, the most precious portion of our heritage, if (Jod clearly
asked us to do so ? This was what Mary was ready to do. In other words, are we
ready to put God before personal reputation? Is he worthy in our eyes even of such
• sacrifice ? ^

IV. Notice that we have herb an intimation how the new oeeation MnsT
BEGIN WITHIN US. The augel-message comes to us, as to Mary, that " Christ " may be
formed in us " the Hope of glory." What we have got to do is just to wait for the
overshadowing as Mary did. It comes to the waiting and expectant souls. Not the
waiting of indifference, but the waiting of expectancy, secures the great blessing,, Let
us cease from our own efforts, let us be still, and we shall indeed see the salvation of
GodI'— B. M. E.

Ver». 39 — 56. — Inspiratiom amid the hills of Judcea. We already have seen the
angel suggesting to Mary the propriety of visiting Elisabeth. We may reasonably
believe tbat she had no mother at this time to whom she could communicate her
mighty secret, and that Elisabeth is the most likely person from whom to get the
sympathy she now required. For the four days' journey from Nazareth to the priest's
city in the south she would need some preparation ; but she made her arrangements
promptly, going " with haste," and reached the home of the dumb priest without delay.
If she had any fear and trembling on the way as to how she would be received, it was
instantly dissipated through timely inspirations. And here let us notice —

I. The inspibation qbantbd to Elisabeth. (Vers. 42 — 45.) And here we may
mark the directness of the inspired address. There was no lengthened introduction, no
conversation about health, or weather, or news, but an immediate mention of the all-
important matter which concerned the Virgin.' 1. Elisabeth asmres Mary of her
signal llessedness in heing selected to be the mother of Messiah. She was to be the
blessed mother cf a blessed Son. How delightful a balm this would be to Mary's
anxious heart ! Instead of suspicion, there is a salutation such as a princess might
thankfully receive. 2. Elisabeth beautifully depreciates herself. It is the way the
Spirit takes with those he indeed inspires. It is not boastfulness, but self-depreciation
he implants within them. Elisabeth feels herself so unworthy, that she wonders the
mother of Messiah deigns to visit her ! A royal visit would not have been to the priest's
wife such an honour. She is Mary's humble servant, because Mary is to be the mother
of her Lord. In fact, had Mary been a queen, she could not have been more lovingly
and reverentially treated. 3. A holy Joy thrills through her from Mary's advent. It

' Cf. Amdt's ' Leben Jeau,' erster band, ■. 24,
* Ibid., ■.36. * Ibid., enter band, i. 29.

urn. i>



a THE GOSrSL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. 1. 1—80

■was the "chief joy " of human hearts asserting his marvellous power. The Holy Qhost
conducts the humble woman to the most entrancing joy. 4. Mary's/aith is recognized
and encowraged. The contrast between Mary's faith and Zacharias's doubt must have
been very marked. The poor priest is stealing about the house dumb, while Mary is
in the enjoyment of all her faculties and powers. Elisabeth would rejoice that Mary,
through unhesitating faith, had escaped such a judgment as her husband was enduring.
The hUssednesi of faith in God cannot be too emphatically asserted. It is the secret of
real happiness just to take him at his word. As the " faithful Promisor " he never
disappoints any who put their faith in his promised aid. Not only do we who believe
enter into rest"(Heb. iv. 3), but we also enter into blessedness (cf. iiaxapla of ver. 45).

II. The inspibatiok of Makt. (Vers. 46 — 55.) We have in the Magnificat of
Mary the noblest of Christian hymns. There are traces of such earlier efforts as
Hannah's prayer ; but this only brings out the continuity of the revelation, and in no
way affects the originality of Mary's inspiration. And here let us notice : 1. How God
if the Source of Mary's joy. It is not in herself she rejoices, but in God as her Saviour,
rhis is the great fact we have all got to realize — that our Saviour, not our state, is the
fountain of joy. And when we consider his power, and his revealed purposes, and the
course of his redeeming love, we must acknowledge that there is in him abundant
reason for our joy. Mary felt in body, soul, and spirit the joy of her Lord. 2. Mary
recognizes in her own selection the condescending love of God. It is not those the world
would select as instruments whom God chooses. The world selects the rich. God
chooses " the poor of this world rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom which he hath
promised to them that love him" (Jaa. ii. 5); so here Mary signalizes her "low
estate" as magnifying her Lord's condescending love. How beautiful a spirit to
cultivate ! Instead of the honour done her unduly exalting her, it only leads her to
adore the Divine condescension in stooping to such as she was. 3. She lelieves in her
tverlasting fame. She knows that the Incarnation will prove such a stupendous fact
that all generations will call her blessed. As the mother of Messiah, she cannot but
have the homage of all coming generations. She ought consequently to be with all of
us " the blessed mother of the Christ of God." 4. She feels Kerself the subject of great
mercy from the Holy One. And is this not the acknowledgment which all God's
people may make? Hath he not done great things for all his people, whereof they are
glad (Ps. cxivi. 1)? 5. She takes the widest views of Oo<Fs dealings with others.
Thus she recognizes : (1) That those whufear God receive his mercy in every generation.
(Ver. 50.) This is the law of mercy — it is given to those who fear God. It was never
meant to encourage men in recklessness or presumption. (2) The proud experience
his dispersive power. (Ver. 51.) This is brought out in history.* The Jewish captivities,
their present dispersion, " the decline and fall of the Roman Empire," and many a
judgment since, have been illustrations of this line of procedure on the part of the
Most Hio;h. (3) The deposition of rulers and the exaltation of the humble. (Ver. 52.)
Mary is here speaking of the usurpers in Palestine, and the exaltation of those they
despised. The law was marvellously illustrated in the case of Mary's Son, whose
exaltation above all dynasties is the greatest fact in civilization (of. Swdoru of ver. 52).

[4) The satisfaction of the needy, and the disappointment of the rich. (Ver. 53.) Here
is another aspect of the law of the Divine dealings. Those who feel their need, and
hunger after satisfaction, receive it from God. Mary experienced this, and so do all
who really hunger after God and righteousness. They have a beatitude always in store
for them (Matt. v. 6). On the other hand, those who are rich, that is, who feel inde-
pendent and will not look to the Lord for help, who have, in short, " received their
consolation," are sent empty away. Disappointment sooner or later becomes their
portion. This was the experience of Pharisee and Sadducee and all the well- to-do and
self-righteous classes in our Lord's time. And undoubtedly the arrangement is just.

(5) The fidelity of God to his covenant with Israel. (Vers. 54, 55.) In the Incarnation
God was sending real help to his peoijle. It was the crowning act of mercy, and the
fulfilment of the promises made to Abraham and his seed. Mary thus began with
God's holiness, and passed in review his poioer, his mercy, and finally \ya faityidnest.
All these are illustrated pre-eminently in the Incarnation.

IIL Thesk inspirations pbesent to us the chabaotbb of thk oosfeu F«
' Ot Llddon'g ' University Sermons.' vol. ii pp. 205—810.



IJH.I.1— 80.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 86

we have before ua two lowly women, deep ia their self-abasement. The self-rightaoui
ipirit has been annihilated within them, and they are thus fitted to be God's instru-
ments. Secondly, we find them maintaining this beautiful spirit after they hare
become the special objects of the Divine favour. Grace does not spoil them, but pro-
vokes within them gratitude. They abound in praise, not in pride. Thirdly, they
enter into hopes for their people and the world, as well as for themselves. It is so with
real Christians. They become of necessity large-hearted. The inspirations received
lead to outbursts of joyfiil anticipation for all the world. The assertion of Luke that
Mary returned home (ver. 56) does not necessarily imply that she did not wait for
John's birth and circumcision. The probabilities are in favour of supposing that she
did so wait, and received the additional consolations which the song of Zacharias was so
fitted to bring. Strengthened by her long visit to Elisabeth, she would be the better
able to go back to Nazareth and brave all suspicion there. God, by a special communi-
cation, made Joseph's suspicion altogether to cease, and Mary was taken by him as wife,
instead of being privately divorced. The Virgin's trust in God smoothing her way was
thus gloriously fulfilled (Matt. L 18 — 25), and she found herself passing onwards upon
a path of peace towards that signal influence and power which she has exercised among
men. — B. M. E.

Yen. 67—80. — The V,rth and development of the Baptist. We now pass from the
inspirations of the holy women to the birth of the Baptist. We have before us what
one has well denominated " a piotis family in their good fortune." > As this preacher
observes, we have here " the mother in her joy, the father with his song of praise, and
the little child and his development." We cannot do better than allow our thoughts
to group themselves round these three persons in this order.

I. CoNTBMFLATB THE MOTHER IK HEB JOT. (Vers. 57 — 63.) A mother with a
firstborn son embodies as much joy as we can well imagine in a world like this. All
pain and anguish over and forgotten in the mighty fruition (of. John ivi. 21). Next
there would be messages sent to friends, "neighbours and cousins," who wonld be
expected to call with congratulations. And they gave their congratulations without
stint — " They rejoiced with her." Next came the circumcision and the naming of the
child, and the idea of the neighbours was that they could not do better than call him
"Zacharias," ».e. "one whom Jehovah lemembers," after his priestly father. But the
joyful mother has a new name to give her son, and, though none of her ancestors have
borne it, he must be called "John," which, as already noticed, signifies "Jehovah
gireth grace." The new name is to herald the nature of the dispensation. The friends
are not satisfied, however, until they consult the dumb fathe.. i'hey accordingly
make signs to him how he would have him called, and he, with most serious delibera-
tion, wrote on the tablet, " His name is John." It was a revelation to the neighbours,
and they took it as such, and " marvelled all." The joyful mother had thus the satis-
faction of seeing her firstborn son introduced to the Jewish Church by the rite of
circumcision, and receiving a name which was itself a promise of great grace from God.
What a joy it should be to parents to have their little children thus early introduced
into the Church of God, and identified with its brightening prospects !

II. Contemplate the father praising God. (Vers. 64, 67 — 79.) The dumb
priest now regains his speech, and no sooner is his mouth opened than he bursts into
praise. Doubtless he praised God for hia judgment on himself and for his mercy in the
gift of the goodly child. He was able then to sing of both (cf. Ps. ci. 1). Moreover,
the Holy Spirit as a Spirit of prophecy filled him, so that his praise took the beautiful
poetic form here given. And this song of Zacharias divides itself into two portions —
first, the establishment of the theocracy under Messiah (vers. 67 — 75); and secondly,
the apostrophe to the little child about his part in the work of reformation (vers. 76—79).
To these let us devote a few thoughts. 1. The estahlishment of the theocracy vmdtr
Mesbiah. As a priest, Zacharias naturally looked at the new movement from an
ecclesiastical and patriotic point of view. Hence he praised God for the deliverance of
his people through raising up a horn for them in the house of his servant David. Thta
hern, tlie symbol of "might," is the Messiah who is to be born of Mary. But wh»»
•aiva'tiou is it to be? In the usual Jewish spirit, he speaks of it as a salvation froa

> Ot Gerok's 'Evangelien-Fredigten,' band L i. 6(H.



36 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. l 1— 8a

enemies and all that hate the people of the Lord. In other words, the inspired priest
Idoks and longs for a national deliverance. And the true patriot can long for nothing
less. The blessing which he praises God for on his own account, he desires for all bis
race. At the same time, it is to be noticed that it is pious parents who are to realize
the mercy — parents " who had hoped for the blessing of their see. I, and had mourned
over the misery of their posterity." • Such were hoping always on the covenant-pro-
mises, and now they were to have them fulfilled. But it is to be further noticed that
the national deliverance expected is a means, not an end. It is only that the theocratic
idea may be carried out by the emancipated people, and God served by them without
fear in holiness and righteousness before him all their days. It is here that the great
difference between worldly aspirations and spiritual ones is to be appreciated. If people
hope for blessing that they may the better serve and please themselves, then they are
simply worldly and selfish; but if they seek blessing to fit them to serve God, they are
entering into the nobility of his kingdom. It is the reign of God within us and around
'US which we should always hope for and try to promote. 2. The priests apostrophe to
his little child. In the father's address to little John we see the spirituality which
underlay his hope. His boy is to be & prophet of the Most High, something superadded
to the priestly privileges which belonged to the family by right of birth. By word of
mouth, therefore, is he to prepare his Lord's way. But his message is to be in the
first instance about " remission of sins." In other words, the reformation hoped for is
to be moral. Beginning in pardon and penitence, it will indeed be the dawn of a better
day to many who have been sitting in darkness and the shadow of death, and the
" guiding light " irito the way of peace. John is thus to be the herald of the dawn.
The Messiah is the " Sun of Bighteousness," whose presence constitutes the day. He
enables us to say, " The Lord is my Light and my Salvation ; whom shall I fear ? " (Ps.
xxviL 1). John is to be the voice in the desert to apprise the wandering and stumbling
" caravan " of the approach of dawn and its guidance into peaceful paths. And, as we
shall see, the moral reformation under John became national, so that before Messiah's
baptism " all the people were baptized " (ch. iii. 21).

IIL Contemplate the uttle child's development, (Vers. 66, 80.) The result
of such prophecies connected with the circumcision of the child was the growth of a
wholesome " fear" throughout all the hill-country of Judaea. The people began to hope
for important changes. And their hopes were so far confirmed by the development of
John. In the first place, " the hand of the Lord," i.e. Divine power and grace, " was
with him." He grew up a spiritually minded boy. All who saw the priest's son
concluded that God was with him in his grace and love. There are children who grow
up with the stamp of heaven upon their whole lives. The Spirit of God is manifestly
moving them along the trne path. In the second place, he had due physical develop-
ment. " He grew." A dedicated boy, a Nazarite from his youth, he grew up robustly
on his plain fare, physically fit for the life of toil which was before him. In the third
place, " he waxed strong in spirit." His whole inward man more than kept pace with
his outward growth. He was not only a good and growing lad, but also heroic in his
mental progress. The inspired boy was getting strength to become one of God's heroes.
In the last place, he betook himself to the deserts until such times as he was manifested
to Israel. It was to be a development amid the solitude of the desert down towards
the Dead Sea which John was to realize. God was his Teacher. Even the poor Essenes,
who lived a life of asceticism in the neighbourhood, must have kept John at a distance,
and so made his loneliness the more intense. And yet it may be safely said that no
one has ever done much for God who has not been much alone with him. It is the
communion of the lowly spirit with the Supreme which fits for high service. A desert,
and not a garden of Eden, may often be the fittest environment for the consecrated soul,
seeing that he is thereby thrown more completely upon God. Like Moses and Elijah^
John has his long season of solitude with God, and then he comes forth radiant for the
work he has to do in Israel. May such a development as John's be realized by many I
-^. M. E.

* Cf. Weiss'* ' Lebeu Jesu,' erster band, i, 2391



OH. II. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



37



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER IL



Vert. 1 — iO.—The Eedeemer'$ hirth.

Yer. 1. — There went out a decree ftom
CdBBBX Angnstus, that all the world should he
taxed; more accurately, that there $hould
he a registration, etc. ; that is, with a Tiew
to the aseessment of a tax. On the historical
note of St. Luke in this passage much dis-
onssion has arisen, not, however, of much
real practical interest to the ordinary devout
reader. We will glance very briefly at the
main criticism of this and the following
Terse. Bespe9ting this general registration
it is allegsd (1) no historian of the time
mentions such a decree of Augustus. (2)
Bupposing Augustus hiul issued such an
edict, Herod, in his kingdom of Judaaa,
would not have been included in it, for
Judeea was not formally annexed to the
Boman province of Syria before the death of
Archelaus, Herod's son; for some years
after this time Herod occupied the position
of a rex socius. In answer to (1), we possess
scarcely any minute records of this particular
time ; and there are besides distinct traces
in contemporary histories of such a general
registration. In answer to (2), in the event
of such an imperial registration being made,
it was most unlikely that Heiod would have
claimeil exemption for his only nominally \
independent states. It iimst be remembered
that Herod was an attached dependent of
the emperor, and in such a matter would
never have opposed the imperial will of his
great patron.

Ver. 2. — (And this taxing was first made
when Cyrenius was governor of Syria.) Hos-
tile criticism makes a still more direct attack
upon the historical statement made by St.
Luke here. Quirinius, it is well known, was
governor (legatus or prseses) of Syria ten
years later, and during his office a census or
registration — with a view to taxation — which
led to a popular disturbance, was made in
his province. These critics say that St.
Luke mentions, as taking place be/ore the
birth of Jesus, an event which really hap-
pened ten years after. Much historical ia-
vestigation has been made with a view to
explain this difficulty. It has been now
satisfactorily liemonstrated that, strangely
euough, this Quirinius — who ten years later
was certainly governor (legatus) of Syria —
at the time of the birth of the Saviour held
high office in Syria, either as prseses (gover-
nor) or quaestor (imperial comnjissioner).
The Greek word rendered by the English
" governor " would have been used for either
»f theae important offices. On the whole
qnestion of these alleged hi.-torical inaccu-



racies of 81 Luke, it may be observed : (1)
Strangely enough,nofle of the early opponents
of Christianity, such as Celsus or Porphyry,
impugn the accuracy of our evangelist here.
Surely, if there had been so marked an error
on the threshold of his Gospel, these distin-
guished adversaries of our faith, living com-
paratively soon after the events in question,
would have been the first to hit so con-
spicuous a blot in the story they hated so
well. And (2) nothing is more improbable
than that St. Luke, a man of education, and
writing, too, evidently for people of thought
and culture, would have ventured on a
defloite historical statement of this kind,
which would, if wrong, have been so easily
exposed, had he not previously thoroughly
satisfied himself as to its complete accuracy.
Generally, the above conclusions are now
adopted, lately, amongst others, by Godet,
Farrar, Flumptre, and Bishop ElUcott (in
his Hulsean Lectures). Godet has an espe-
cially long and exhaustive note on this
subject. The conclusions are mainly drawn
from the researches of such scholars as Zumpt
and Mommsen. Cyrenius ; Latin, Quirinus,
He is mentioned by the historians Tacitus
and Suetonius. He appears to have been
originally of humble birth, and, like so many
of the soldiers of fortune of the empire, rose
through his own merits to his great position.
He was a gallant and true soldier, but withal
self-seeking and harsh. For his Cilician
victories the senate decreed him a triumph.
He received the distinguished honour of a
public fun( ral, a.d. 21 (Tao., 'Ann.,' ii. 30 ;
iii. 22, 48 ; Suet., ' Tib.,' 49).

Ver. 4. — The city of David, which is oaUed
Bethlehem. After all the long ages which
had passed, still the chief title to honour of
the little upland village was that there the
greatly loved king had been bom. Bethlehem
(" house of bread ") was built on the site of
the old Kplirath — ^the Ephrath where Bachel
died. Of the house and lineage of David.
The position in life of Joseph the royally
descended, simply a village carpenter, the
equally humble state of Mary, also one of
the great king's posterity, need excite nn
surprise when the vicissitudes of that royal
house, and of the people over whom they
ruled, are remembered. The old kingdom
of David had been dismembered, conquered,
and devastated. The people had been led
away into a captivity from which few, com-
paratively speaking, ever returned. All that
the house of David had preserved were its
bare family records. Hillel, the famous
scribe, who was once a hired porter, claimed
to belong to the old princely house.

Ver. 5. — With Uary his espoused wife



38



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. i_cH. n. 1— 62



The older authoritie* here omit "wife."
Tranglate, trnth Mary who was betrothed to
him.

Ver. 6. — The days were acoomplished that
she should be delivered. The universal
tradition of the Christian Church places
the nativity in winter. The date " Decem-
ber 25" was generally received by the
Fathers of the Greek and Latin Churches
from the fourtli century downwards.

Ver. 7. — Her flrstbom Son. This expres-
sion has no real bearing on tlie question
reapectiDg the relationship of the so-called
brethren of Jesus to Mary. The writer of
this oommentary, without hesitation, accepts
the general tradition of the Catholic Church
as expressed by the great majority of her
teachers in all ages. This tradition pro-
nounces these brethren to have been (1)
either his half-brethren, sons of Joseph by
a former marriage; or (2) his cousins. In
the passage in Hebrews (i. 6), " when he
bringeth in the First Begotten into the
world," "First Begotten" signifies "Only
Begotten." (On the whole question, see
Bishop Lightfoot's exhaustive essay on the
" Brethren of the Lord " in his ' Commentary
on the Galatians.') There was no room for
them in the inn, " The inn of Bethlehem,
what in modem Eastern travel is known as
a khan or caravanserai, as distinct from a
hostelry (the ' inn ' of ch. x. 34). Such an
inn or khan offered to the traveller simply
the shelter of its walls and roofs. This
khan of Bethlehem had a memorable history
of its own, being named in Jer. xli. 17 as
the 'inn of Chimham,' the place of rendez-
vous from wliich travellers started on their
journey to Egypt. It was so called after
the son of Barzillai, whom David seems to
have treated as an adopted sod (2 Sam. xiz.
37, 38), and was probably built by him in
hii patron's city as a testimony of his
gratitude" (Dean Plumptre). The stable
was not unfrequently a limestone cave, and
there is a very ancient tradition that there
was a cave of this description attached to
the " inn," or caravanserai, of Bethlehem.
Thii " inn " would, no doubt, be a large one,
owing to its being in the neighbourhood of
Jerusalem, and would often be crowded
with the poorer class of pilgrims who went
up to the temple at the seasons of the
greater feasts. Bethlehem la only six miles
from Jerusalem.

Vers. &—20.—The Bethlehem shepherds see
Ihe angeU,

Ver. 8. — ^In the same oonntry; that is, in
the upland pastures immediately in the
neighbourhood of Bethlehem. Shepherds
abiding in the field, keeping watch over
their flook by night. Why were shepherds
chosen m the first on earth to hear the
strange gloiioue news of the birth of the



Saviour of the world ? It seems as though
this very humble order was selected as •
practical illustration of that which in the
future history of Christianity was to be so
often exemplified — "the exaltation of the
humble and meek." Mary would learn
from this, the first visit of adorers to her
Babe, that the words of her song (the
Magnificat) would in very truth be realized.
The subsequent visit of the learned and
wealthy travellers from the East (Matt, ii,
1 — 12) would tell her that the words of the
Isaiah prophecy were all literally, in their
due order, to be fulfilled, some of them even
in the unconscious childhood of her Son
(see Isa. Ix. 3, 6; Ps. Ixxii. 10). Now,
among the Jews at that period shepherds
were held in low estimation among the
people. In the Talmud (treatise ' Sanhe-
drin ') we read they were not to be allowed
in the courts as witnesses. In the treatise
' Avodah-Zarah ' no help must be given to
the heathen or to shepherds. The Mishna
(Talmud) tells us that the sheep intended
for the daily sacrifices in the temple were
fed in the Bethlehem pastures. This semi-
sacred occupation no doubt influenced these
poor toilers, and specially fitted them to be
the recipients of the glad tidings. They
would hear much of the loveii Law in the
solemn ritual of the great temple. They
would know, too, that there was a rumour
widely current in those days that the long-
looked-for Messiah was soon to appear, and
that their own Bethlehem was to witness
his appearing.

Ver. 9. — The angel of the lord oame upon
them ; better, an angel. The Greek word
rendered " came upon them " — a very
favourite word with St. Luke — suggests a
sudden appearance. The glory of the Lord
■hone round about them: and they were
sore afraid. The white shining cloud of
intolerable brightness, known among the
Jews as the Shechinah, the visible token of
the presence of the Eternal, in the bush, in
the pillar of fire and cloud which guided the
desert-wanderings, in the tabernacle and
the temple. It shone round the Bedeemer
on the Mount of Transfiguration. It robed
him when, risen, he appeared to the Phari-
see Saul outside Damascus. The occa-
sional presence of this visible glory was
exceedingly precious to the chosen people.
The terror felt by the shepherds was the
natural awe ever felt by man when brought
into visible communion with the dwellers
in the so-called spirit-world.

Ver. 11. — A Savioni. Another fevourite
word with SS. Paul and Lnke. The terms
" Saviour " and " salvation " oconr in their
writings more than forty times. In the
other New Testament booki we seldom
find either of these expresiiona.



CH. iL 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



39



Ver. 12. — Lying in a manger. Thia waa
to be the sign. On that night there would,
perhapa, be no other cliildren born in the
Bethlehem village; oertaiuly the shepherda
would find no other newly bom infant
cradled in a manger.

Ver. 13. — With the angel a mnltitnde of
the heavenly host. "The troop of angela
iasues forth from the deptha of that invi-
sible world which surrounda ua on every aide"
(Godet). One of the glorious titles by
which the eternal King was known among
the chosen people was "Lord of sabaoth,"
equivalent to " I-ord of hosts." In several
paasagea of the Scriptures is the enormous
multitude of these heavenly btjiugs noticed ;
for instance, Ps. Ixviii. 17, wliere tlie He-
brew is much more expresaive than the
English rendering ; Dan. vii. 10, " Ten
thousand timea ten thousand stood before
him " (see, too, the Targum of Palestine on
Deut. xxxiii., " And with liim ten thousand
timea ten thousand holy angc^la ; " and " The
crown of the Law is his [Moses'], because
he brought it from the heavens above, when
there was revealed to him the glory of the
Lord's Shechinahjwith two thousand myriads
of angels, and forty and two thousand
chariots of fire," etc.).

Ver. 14. — On earth peaoe. At that junc-
ture, strange to say, tlie Boman empire was
at peace with all the world, and, as was ever
the case in these brief rare moments of pro-
found peace, the gates of the temple of
Janus at Home were closed, there bidiig, as
they supposed, no need for the presence of
the god to guide and lead their conquering
armies. Not a few have supposed that the
angel choir in these words hymned this
earthly peace. So Milton in hia 'Ode to
the Nativity' —

" No war or battle'a aound
Waa heard tlie world around;
The idle apear and shield were high uphung :
Tlie hooked chariot stood
Unstained with hostile blood.
The trumpet s])iik<! not to the aimfed throng ;
And kings sat still with awful eye
As if they aurely knew their souvran Lord
was by."
But the angela sang of something more
real and enduring than thia temporary lull.
The gatea of Janus wore only too quickly
thrown open again. Some acventy years
later, within sight of the apot where the
shepherds beheld the multitude of the
heavenly host, the awful conflagration which
accompanied the aaok of the holy city and
temple could have been plainly seen, and
the shrieks and cries of the countless victims
of the closing scenes of one of the most
terrible wars which disfigure the red pages
of history could almost have been heard.



Good will toward men. A bare majmity of
the old authorities read here, " On earth
peace among men of good will ; " in other
words, among men who are the objects of
God's good will and kindness. But the
Greek text, from which our Autliorized
Version was made, has the support of so
many of the older manuscripts and ancient
versions, tliat it is among scholars an open
question whether or not the text followed
in the Authorized Version should not in
this place be adhered to.

Ver. 17. — And when they had seen it,
they made known abroad the saying which
was told them conoeming this Child. Thus
these men, at the bottom of the social scale
in Israel, were chosen as the first preachers
of the new-born King. Gradually the
strange story got noised abroad in the city.
The vision of Zacharias, the story of Mary,
the two strange births, the marvellous ex-
perience of the shepherds. Following upon
all this was Ihe arrival of the Magi, and their
inquiries after a new-bom Messiah, whom
they had been directed by no earthly voices
to seek after in the neighbourhood of Jeru-
aalem. It was then that the jealous fears of
Herod were in good earnest aroused, and
the result was that he gave immediate direo-
tions for the massacre of the innocents in
Bethlehem, of which St. Matthew writes.

Ver. 19. — But Mary kept all these things,
and pondered them in her heart. Such a
note as thia could only have been made by
Mary herself. She knew her Child was in
some mysterious sense the Son of God. A
glorious being not of earth had told her
that her Boy would be the Saviour of Israel.
The visit of the rough shepherda to her in
the crowded caravanserai, and their strange
but quiet and circumstantial story of the
angel a viait to them, waa only another liak
in the wondrous chain of events which was
day by day influencing her yonng pure
life. She could not as yet grasp it all, per-
haps she never did in its mighty gracious
fulness ; but, as at the first, wlien Gabriel
the angel spoke to her, so at each new
phase of her life, she bowed herself in quiet
tru>tful faith, and waited and thought,
writing down, we dare to believe, the record
of all that was passing, and this record, we
think, she showed to Luke or Paul.

Vers. 21 — 40. — Circumcision and preaenta-
Hon of the Child Jeeut.

Ver. 21. — For the cironmcising of the
Child. These ancient rites — oiroumciaion
and purification — enjoined in the Moaaio
Law were intended as perpetual witneases
to the deadly taint of imperfection and sin
inherited by every child of man. In the
cases of Mary and her Child these rites were
not necessary; but the mother devoutly sab*
mitted herself and her Babe to the aueienl



40



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. n. 1— 6a



customB, willingly obedient to that Divine
Law under which ihe was born and hitherto
had lived.

Ver. 22.— When the days of her pnrifloa-
tion according to the Law of Moses were
aooomplished. This period lasted forty days
from the birth. The forty days, according
to the date of the nativity accepted nniver-
sally by the Catholic Church, would bring
the Feast of the Purification to February 2.

Ver. 24. — A pair of turtle-doves, or two
young pigeons. The proper offering was a
lamb for a bnmt offering, and a pigeon or
dove for a sin offering ; but for the poor an
alternative was allowed — instead of the
more costly present of a lamb, a second
pigeon or dove might be brought. The
deep poverty of Mary and Joseph is shown
in this offering. They would never have
put the sanctuary off with the humbler had
the richer gift been in their power.

Vers. 25 — 35. — The epiiode of Simeon and
kit inspired hymn.

Ver. 25. — And, behold, there was a man
in Jemsalem, whose name was Simeon ; and
the same man was just and devont, waiting
for the consolation of Israel : and the Holy
Ghost was upon him. Many expositors have
believed that this Simeon was identical
with Simeon (Shimeon) the son of the famous
Hillel, and the father of Gamaliel. This
Simeon became president of the Sanhedrin
in A.D. 13. Straugely enough, the Mishna,
which preserves a record of the sayings and
works of the great rabbis, passes by this
Simeon. The curious silence of the Mishna
here was. perhaps, owing to the hatred
whioV this famous teacher incurred because
of his belief in Jesus of Nazareth. Such
an identification, although interesting, is,
however, very precarieus, the name Simeon
being so very common among the people.
Waiting for the consolation of Israel. There
was a general feeling among the more
earnest Jews at this time that the advent
of Messiah would not be long delayed.
Joseph of Arimathsea is especially men-
tioned as one who " waited for tlie kingdom
of God " (Mark xv. 43). Dr. Farrar refers
to the common Jewish prayer-formula then
in use : " May I see the consolation of
Israel I " A prayer for the advent of Messiah
was in daily use.

Ver. 26. — That he shonld not see death.
The idea of the aged Simeon comes from a
notice in the apocryphal 'Gospel of the
Nativity,' which speaks of him as a hundred
and thirteen years old. These legendary
" Gospels " are totally devoid of all authority;
here and there possibly a true " memory "
■ot preserved in any of the " four " may
exist, but in general they are extravagant
and improbable. The Arabic 'Gospel of
llio Infancy' here speaks of Simeon seeing



the Babe shining like a pillar of light in
his mother's arms. There is an old and
striking legend which speaks of this devout
Jew being long puzzled and disturbed by
the Messianic prophecy (Isa. vii. 14), "A
virgin shall conceive ; " at length he re-
ceived a supernatural intimation that he
should not see death until he had seen the
fulfilment of the strange prophecy, the
meaning of which he had so long failed
to see.

Ver. 27. — And when the parents brought
in the Child Jesus. This was evidently the
usual expression which the Nazareth family
adopted when they spoke of the Child Jesus
(see, again, in ver. 48 of this chapter ; and
also in ver. 33, where the older authorities
read " his fatlier " instead of " and Joseph ").
The true story, which they both knew so
well, was not for the tough Galilsean
peasant, still less for the hostile Herodian.
The mother knew the truth, Joseph too,
and the bouse of Zacharias the priest, and
probably not a few besides among their
devout friends and kinsfolk. The Nazareth
family, resting quietly in their simple faith,
left the rest to God, who, in his own season,
would reveal the secret of the nativity.

Ver. 29. — Lord, now lettest thou thy
servant depart in peace. The beautiful
little hymn of Simeon was no doubt pre-
served by the Virgin Mary and given to
St. Luke. The Nunc dimittit has been used
constantly in the liturgies of Christian
Churches for fourteen centuries. The thought
which runs through the hymn has been well
put by Godet : " Simeon represents himself
under the image of a sentinel, whom his
master has placed in an elevated position,
and charged to look for the appearance of a
star, and then to announce it to the world.
He sees this long-desired star ; he proclaims
its rising, and asks to be relieved of the
post on the watch-tower he has oooupied so
long. In the same way, at the opening of
.^schylus's 'Agamemnon,' when the sen-
tinel, set to watch for the appearing of the
fire that is to announce the taking of Tioy,
beholds at last the signal so impatiently
expected, he sings at once both the viotoiy
of Greece and his own release."

Vers. 31, 32.— Before the face of all people ;
a Light to lighten the Oentiles ; more
accurately rendered, aU peopUt. Men
like Isaiah, who lived several centuries
before the nativity, with their glorious far-
reaching prophecies, such as Isa. lii. 10,
were far in cidvanoe of the narrow, selfish
Jewish schools of the age of Jesus Christ
It was, perhaps, the hardest lesson the
apostles and first teachers of the faith had
to master — this full, fiiee admission of the
vast Gentile world into the kingdom of theil
God. Simeon, in his song, however, dis-



cH.n.1— 52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



H



tinctly repeats the broad, generous sayings
of the older prophets.

Ver. 33. — ^And Joseph and his mother
narrelled. It was not so much that Simeon
foretold new things respecting the Child
Jesus that they marvelled ; their aurpiise
was rather that a stranger, evidently of
position and learning, should possess so
deep an insight into the lofty destinies of
an imknown Infant, brought by evidently
poor parents into the temple court. Was
their secret then known to others whom they
suspected not?

Ver. 34. — And Simeon blessed them, and
said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this
Child. It is noticeable that, whUe Simeon
blesses Mary and Joseph, he refrains from
blessing the Child, of whom, however, he
pointedly speaks. It was not for one like
Simeon to speak words of blessing over
"the Son of the Highest." The words
which follow are expressly stated to have
been addressed only to Mary. Simeon knew
that she was related — but not Joseph — to
the Babe in his arms ; he saw, too, tiint her
heart, net Joseph's, would be pierced with
the sword of many sorrows for that Child's
sake. Behold, this Cliild is set for the fall
and rising again of many in Israel ; and for
a sign which shall be spoken against. For
nearly three centuries, of course with vary-
ing intensity, the name of Jesus of Nazareth
and his followers was a name of shame,
hateful and despised. Not only among the
Boman idolaters was " the Name " spoken
against with intense bitterness (see the ex-
pressions used by men like Tacitus, Sueto-
nius, and PUny), but also among his own
nation, the Jews, was Jesus known as " the
Deceiver," " that Man," " the Hung." These
were common expressions used in the great
rabbinical schools which flourished in the
early days of Christianity.

Ver. 35. — Tea, a sword shall pierce throngh
thy own soul also. Christian art has well
caught the spirit of her life who was, in
spite of her untold suffering, " blessed
among women," in depicting her so often
and so touohingly as the mother of sorrows
(Mater Dolorota^. The childhood in the
Nazareth home, and the early manhood in
the Nazareth carpentry, were no doubt her
happiest days, though, in those quiet years,
expectation, fears, dread, curiously inter-
woven, must have ever torn that mother's
heart. The days of the public ministry for
Mary mist have been sad, and her heart
full of anxious forebodings, as she watched
the growing jealousies, the hatred, and the
unbelief on the part of the leading men of
her people. Then came the cross. We
know she stood by it all the while. And,
after the cross and the Besurrection, silence.
Verily the words of Simeon were awfully



fulfilled. Bleek, quoted by Godet, makes
an interesting suggestion on the subject of
the sword piercing Mary's heart : " Thou
shalt feel in thine own heart their contra-
diction in regard to thy Son, when thou
thyself shalt be seized with doubt in regard
to his mission."

Vers. SQ—Zi.— Greeting of Anna the pro-



Yet. 36.— There was one Anna, a pro-
phetess. The name of this holy woman is
the same as that of the mother of Samuel.
It is not necessary to assume that this Anna
had the gift of foretelling future events.
Siie was, at all events, a preacher. These
saintly, gifted women, though never nnme-
rous, were not unknown in the story of the
chosen people. We read of the doings — in
some cases the very words are preserved —
of Miriam, Hannah, Deborah, Uuldah, and
others. Of the tribe of Aser. It is trut
that at this period the ten tribes had been
long lost, the " Jews " being made up of
the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin ; but
yet certain families preserved their genea-
logies, tracing their descent to one oi
other of the lost divisions of the people.
Thus Anna belonged to Aslier.

Ver. 37. — Which departed not from the
temple, but served God with fastings and
prayers night and day. Probably, in virtue
of her reputation as a prophetess, some
small chamber in the temple was assigned
to her. This seems to have been the case
with Huldah (2 Chron. xxxiv. 22). It has
also been suggested that she lovingly per-
formed some work in or about the sacred
building. Farrar suggests such as trimming
the lamps (as is the rabbinic notion about
Deborah), derived from the word lapidoth,
splendour. Such sacred functions were re-
garded among all nations as a high honour.
The great city of Ephesus boasted her name
of veuiK6pos, temple-sweeper, as her proudest
title to honour.

Ver. 39. — And when they had performed
all things according to the law of the Lord.
Another note, which tells us of the rigid
obedience which Maiy and Joseph paid to
the Law of Israel, under which they Uved.
Marciou, the famous Gnostic heretic (second
century), who adopted this Gospel of St.
Luke, to the exclusion of the other three.
Its the authoritative Gospel for his sect (the
Marcionites), omitted, however, all these
passages of St. Luke's narrative in which
the old Mosaic Law was spoken of with
reverence. They retnmed into Galilee, to
their own city Nazareth. To complete the
story of our Lord's early life, we must in-
sert from St. Matthew, before this return
to Nazareth, the visit of the Magi, and the
flight to and return from Egypt It ia
probable — even if the Gospel of St. Mattlicw



42



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. ii. 1— 52,



as we have it, was not then written — that
these details, the visit of the Magi and
the flight into Egypt, were facts already
well known to those whom this Gospel was
especially designed to instruct.

Ver. 40. — And the Child grew, and waxed
strong in spirit, filled with wisdom : and
the grace of Ood was upon him. Another
of this evangelist's solemn pauses in his
narrative. In this short statement the story
of twelve quiet years is told. From these
few words St. Luke evidently understands
the humanity of Jesus as a reality. The
statement that " he waxed strong, filled
with wisdom " (the words, " in spirit," do not
occur in the older authorities), tells us that,
in the teaching of SS. Paul and Luke, the
Boy learnt as others learnt, subject to the
ordinary growth and development of human
knowledge ; thus condemning, as it were, by
anticipation, the strange heresy of Apolli-
narius, who taught that the Divine Word
(the Logos) took, in our Lord's humanity,
the place of the human mind or intellHct.
And the grace of God was upon him. The
legendary apocryphnl Gospels are rich in
stories of the Child Jesus' doings during
these many years. But the silence of the
holy four, whose testimony has been re-
ceived now since the last years of the first
century by the whole Church, is our au-
thority for assuming that no work of power
was done, and probably that no word of
teaching was spoken, until the public minis-
try commenced, when the Messiah had
reached his thirtieth year. "Take notice
here," wrote fionaventura, quoted by Farrar,
" that his doing nothing wonderful was
itself a kind of wonder. ... As there was
power in his actions, go is there power in
his silence, in his inactivity, in his retire-
ment."

Vers, il— 52.— The Child Jetut at Jeru-
talem.

Ver. 41. — How his parents went to Jeru-
salem every year at the Peast of the Pass-
over. The Law required the attendance of
all men at the three great Feasts of Pass-
over, Pentecost, and Tabernacles (Dent,
xvi. 16). The dispersion and subsequent
residence of so many Jews in distant lands
had much broken up the regular observance
of these directions. Still, many devout Jews
were constantly present at these feasts. This
Mosaic ordinance was only binding upon
men, but E. Hillel recommended women
always to be present at the Passover. The
constant yearly presence of Joseph the car-
penter and Mary at this feast is another
indication of the rigid obedience of the
holy family of Xazareth to the ritual of the
Law of Moses.

Ver. 42. — ^And when he was twelve years
•Id, they went up to Jarosalem after the



custom of the feast. When a Jewish boy
was three yean old he was given the tas-
selled garment directed by the Law (Numb.
XV. 38—41 ; Deut. xiii. 12). At five he
usually began to learn portions of the Law,
under his mother's dirention ; these were
passages written on scrolls, B':ch as the
sliema or creed of Deut. vi. 4, the Htllel
Psalms (Ps. ciiv., exviii., oxxxvi.). When
the boy was thirteen years old he wore, for
the first time, the phylacteries, which the
Jew always put on at the recital of the
daily prayer. In the well-known and
most ancient 'Maxims of the Fathers*
(' Pirke Avoth '), we read that, at the age
of ten, a boy was to commence the study of
ihe Mishua (the Mishna was a compilation
of traditional interpretations of the Law) ;
at eighteen he was to be instructed in the
Gemara (the Gemara wag a vast collection
of interpretations of the Mishna. The
Mishna and Gemara together make up the
Talmud. The Mishna may roughly be
termed the text, tlie Gemara the com-
mentary, of the Talmud).

Ver. 43. — And when they had fulfilled
the daya, as they returned, the Child Jesus
tarried behind in Jerusalem. The feast
lasted seven dayg. Now, a boy in the East,
twelve years old, is usually far more ad«
vanced than is ever the case in our Korthem
natiens, where development is much slower.
We may well suppose that the Boy was left
much to himself during these days of the
feast. It requires no stress of imagination
to picture him absorbed in the temple and
all that was to be seen and learned there.
It was, doubtless, hia first visit since infancy
to the glorious house. Slowly, suiely, had
he been growing up into the consoiougness
of what he was and whence he came : may
we not in all reverence assume that his
self-recognition first really burst forth from
the depths of his childhood's nnconscioug-
ness in that solemn week spent in the storied
temple courts ? When Joseph and Mary and
their friends, as was usual after the seven
days, commenced their return journey, the
Boy, instead of joining this homeward-bound
company of pilgrims, went as usual to the
temple and the great teachers there, whnlly
absorbed in the new light which was break-
ing in upon him. There they found him.
Strange that they should have for so long
searched in other places. Had they only
called to mind the sacred secret of the
Child, surely they would have gone at once
to the temple ; was it not, after all, his earthly
home, that holy house of hig Father in
Jerusalem 7

Ver. 46.— And it came to pass, that after
three days they found him in th» temple.
According to the common way of reokonlng
among the Hebrews, thii •xpreision, " a^ter



OH. II. 1—52,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



43



three days," probably means "on the third
day." One day was consumed in the usual
short pilgrim-jonmey. Hia absence at first
would excite no attention; on the second,
as they missed him still, they sought him
in the various pilgrim-companies ; and on
the day following they found him in the
temple courts, with the doctors of the Law.
Sitting in the midst of the doctors, both
hearing them, and asking them questions.
In the temple enclosure, says the Talmud,
there were three synagogues — one at the
gate of the court of the Gentiles, another at
the entrance of the court of the Israelites, ■>
third iu the south-east part of the inner
court : it was In these that the rabbis ex-
pounded the Law. Among the famous
doctors, or rabbis, then living and teaching in
Jerusalem, were the famous Hillel, then very
aged, verging, we are told, on bis hundredth
year; his almost equally illustrious rival,
Shammai; Gamaliel, the master of Saul of
Tarsus ; Jonathan, the compiler of the Chal-
dee Paraphrase of the sacred books ; Simeon,
the son and successor of Hillel ; Nicodemus,
who, some years afterwards, came to Jesus
by night, and, when the end was come,
reverently assisted in laying the King's Son
with all honour in his tomb in Joseph of
Arimathffia's garden. We may, with great
probability, assume that amongst those
" doctors " whom the Boy questioned at that
Passover Feast, some if not all of these
well-known men were sitting. The apo-
cryphal Gospels, as usual, profess to give us
details where the true story is reverently
silent. The ' Gospel of Thomas ' (second
century), for instance, tells us that Jesus,
when on the road to Nazareth, returned of
his own accord to Jerusalem, and amazed
the rabbis of the temple by bis solution
of the hardest and most difficult questions
of the Law and the prophets. In an Arabic
Gospel of somewhat later date than that
of Thomas, we find the Boy even teaching
the astronomers the secrets of their own
di£Soult study. Probably Stier's simple
words approach the nearest to the truth
here, when he suggests that his questions
were " the pure questions of innocence and
of truth, which keenly and deeply pene-
trated into the confused errors of the rab-
binical teaching."

Ter. 48. — Son, why hast thon thus dealt
with nsl behold, thy father and I have
sought thee sorrowing. Mary's words have
in them something of reproach. Joseph, it
is noticeable, stands evidently apart; but
the mother, strangely as it would seem at
first, associates him in "thy father and
I have sought thee sorrowing." Had she,
then, forgotten the past? Who but Mary
oould have repeated this sacred memory
of her mistake, and of the Boy's far-



reaching answer ? What forger could have
imagined such a verse ?

Ver. 49. — How is it that ye sought me 1
To the gently veiled reproach of Mary,
Jesus replies, apparently with wcnderment,
with another question. It had come upon
him so quietly and yet with such irresistible
force that the temple of God was his real
earthly home, that he marvelled at his
mother's slowness of comprehension. Why
should she have been surpri.-ed at his still
lingering in the sacred courts? Did she
not know who he was, and whence he came ?
Then he added. Wist ye not that I must be
about my Father's business 'i There was an
expression of Mary's which evidently dis-
tressed the Child Jesus. Godet even thinks
that he discerns a kind of shudder in his
quick reply to Mary's "thy father and I
have sought thee sorrowing." "In my
Father's house, where my Father's work is
being done, there ought I to be busied.
Didn't you know this?" But the twelve
silent uneventful years of life at Nazareth,
the poor home, the village carpentry, the
natural development of the sacred Child,
had gradually obscured for Mary and Joseph
the memories of the infancy. They had not
forgotten them, but time and circumstances
had covered them with a veil. Now they
were very gently remindeil by the Boy's own
quiet words of what had happened twelve
years before. Scholars hesitate whether or
not to adopt the rendering of the old Syriao
Version, " in my Father's house," instead of
the broader and vaguer " about my Father's
business," as the Greek will allow either
translation. It seems to us J^he best to retain
the old rendering we love so well, " about
my Father's business." The whole spirit
of Jesus' after-teaching leads us irresistibly
to this interpretation of the Master's firet
recorded $aying.

Ver. 51. — And he went down with them,
and came to Nazareth. The question of
Mary, and the quiet grave answer of the
Child Jesus, were all that seems to have
taken place. It served, no doubt, to bring
back to Mary's mind what had long passed,
and the memory of which for her was begin-
ning somewhat to fade. This was, no doubt,
one of the uses of the temple scene, but it
had other and deeper purposes to serve. It
was then, perhaps, as we have already reve-
rently surmised, in the gradual development
and growth of the Bedeemer, than conscious-
ness who he really was first dawned upon
" the Child Jesus." And was snbjeot unto
them. This recital of the temple scene,
the meeting with the great rabbis there, the
few words of surprise addressed by the Boy
to Mary and Joseph when they sought him
" sorrowing " — " as if it were possible," to
use Stier's expression, for "him to be in



^4



THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. LTJKE. [pB.ix.1—52.



wrong or in danger" — this recital alone
brealse the deep silence which shrouds the
first thirty years of " the Life." For some
eighteen years after that visit to Jerusalem
Jesus appears to have lived and toiled as a
carpenter at Nazareth, with Joseph and Mary
while they both lived, with Mary and his half-
sisters and brothers when Joseph was dead.
Justin Martyr, living a century and a half
later, speaks of the ploughs and yokes the
Master's own hands liad fashioned during
that long quiet pause in his life. Why, it
is often asked, were not these years spent in
Jerusalem and in the temple neighbourhood,
in the centre of busy life and active Jewish
thought ? Godet suggests an answer which,
if not exhaustive, is at least satisfactory :
" If the spiritual atmosphere of Nazareth
was heavy, it was at least calm ; anil the
labours of the workshop, in the retirement
of this peaceful valley, under the eye of the
Father, was a more favourable sphere for the
development of Jesus than the ritualism of
the temple and the rabbinical discussions of
Jerusalem." Joseph is never again men-
tioned in the gospel story ; the probability
is that he died some time in that period of
eighteen years. But his mother kept all
these sayings in her heart. As twelve years
before, Mary — pondering in her heart — bad
treasured up the rough adoration of the
shepherds and their strange story of what
the angels said to them about her Child
(ver. 19), as doubtless she had done too
when the M.igi laid their costly gifts before
the Babe at Bethlehem, and when Simeon
and Anna in the temple spoke their prophetic
utterances over the Infant ; so now the
mother, in quiet humble faith, stored up



again her Son's sayings in her heart, waiting
with brave and constant patience for the
hour when her Grod should grant her to see
face to fsoe the mysterious things she had
hitherto seen only " in a glass darkly."

Ver. 52. — And Jesns increased in wisdom
and stature, and in favour with God and
man. Another of these little word-paintings
of St. Luke in which the work and progress
of long years is depicted. The purpose of
this brief statement is clear. The evange-
list would teaoli us that, with Jesus, bodily
development proceeded in the same orderly
fashion as it does with other men, while
wisdotn — deepening with the years — passed
into his soul as it passes into the souls of
other men, by the ordinary channels of in-
struction, study, and thought. On the last
words, "in favour with God and man,"
Dean Plumptre very beautifully writes,
" The Boy grew into youth, and the young
Man into manhood, and his purity and
lowliness and unselfisli sympathy drew even
then the hearts of all men. In that highest
instance, as in all lower analogies, men
admired holiness till it became aggressive,
and then it roused them to an antagonism
bitter in proportion' to their previous ad-
miration." The Greek word in this verse
translated " increased " would be more
literally rendered "kept advancing." The
word is used for pioneers hewing down trees
and brushwood which obstruct the path of
an advancing army. The word in the
original, Englished by " stature '' some
scholars translate by " age ; " either render-
ing is permissible, but the word used in the
English Version is better fitted for the con-
text of the passage.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 7. — The birthplace and the birth. Two travellers, coming up ttom Galilee,
approach the city of David. The knowledge they possessed of the event in which the
glories of David's house were to culminate must have invested every feature with a
peculiar sacreduess of interest. Note Dean Stanley's description of Bethlehem, on the
crest of a ridge of black hills terraced with vineyards. As beheld by Joseph and
Mary, what a stream of patriotic memories, mixed with the inspirations which spring
from the sense of ancestry, must have flowed over their suuls 1 There is the scene of
the notable gleaning of the gentle Moabitess who had accompanied Naomi from those
mighty liilis which rear their pinnacles in the distance behind. There, Jesse with his
Keveii stalwart sons had lived. In those fields and gorges the youngest of the seven
had learned to sling his stones and sing his psalms — had been prepared for the future

which lay before him. From that city had come the mightiest of David's warriors

Joab and Abishai and other,s. Lo ! there, too, by the gate is the famous well of Beth-
lehem, of which David had longed to drink, but, faint as he was, would nct^ because
the drawing of its water had been at the cost of life, strength, and blood. Manifold is
the appeal to the heart of the pilgrims, who, lowly as their condition is, are scions of
iBrael's royal house. They are nearing the place of which prophecy had said (Micah
V. 2), "Out of thee shall One come fnrth unto me that is to be Ruler in Israel; whose
goings forth are from of old, from everlasting." They know that the fulfilment is at
' and. Whither shall they go? High time that one should be at rest. Shall they



OH. n. 1— 52.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 45



go to the inn— the khan or caravanserai ? (See Parrar's sketch of that strange sheltei
for man and beast.) But the inn is full. There is no place in it for such as they.
The necessity is urgent. And their refuge — so a tradition mentioned by Justin Martyr
says — is a grotto or cave in the limestone rook on which the village stands, used as a
stable for horses and a pen for cattle. The horses' manger is the cradle for the King of
kings. Born there and thus, the precise date of the birth is not apparently determinable.

Vers. 8 — 20. — The shepherds and the herald angels. Prom limestone cavern, we are
taken by the evangelists to the long grassy slopes which stretch to the east of the Jewish
city. Hidden in some nook of these slopes rest pious shepherds. Shepherds have
always been a meditative class of men, accustomed to the sweet silences of nature,
and, apart from the bustle and stir of cities, invited to quiet communion with their
own hearts. It would seem that these shepherds were men of the spirit of Simeon.
They quickly understand the message borne to them. Calmly and promptly, they
respond at once, as if it were the intimation of that for which they had been waiting.
" Let us go and see." There they lie, " nursed in devout and lonely thought," unaware
of the myriad myriads of the shining that hover over them. It is the moment of a
pause, of a hush through nature. Lo I the angel of the Lord comes on them ; in an
instant a presence, a glory, is around them ; and first into their hearts is poured the
gospel for all the ages. Of this gospel, note : (1) Its stibstance. (Yer. 11.) " Born to you
this day " — God's gift to men, to sinners, especially to those who believe. " A Saviour,
which is Christ " — the Anointed One — ^he of whom the prophets spoke, and whom David,
the shepherd of Israel, prefigured ; the Sent, not by but from God, from the depths of
the Divine Personality ; the Son from the bosom of the Father. " Christ, the Lord "
—the Jehovah, to whom every knee shall bow ; the Buler who shall restore the lost,
and unite the scattered, and fulfil the kingdom which is righteousness and peace and
joy. (2) The character of this goapel. (Ver. 10.) " Good tidings of great joy ; " the
most blessed message ever proclaimed — one of unspeakable blessedness ; a joy to which
no bound can be set, which no geographical limit can measure, which no tiiought of
class, or race, or sect can embitter ; joy to all the world's peoples. (3) The sign of
the gospd. (Ver. 12.) " A Babe wrapped in swaddling-clothes, and lying in a manger."
The'Babe is the sign of the kingdom, is the token of the King. " Except ye become
is little children, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaveu ' (Matt, xviii.
3). And now suddenly as the sign is given, " a blaze of song spreads o'er the expanse
of hMven/' and

••Like ciioles widening ronnd

Upon a clear blue river,
Orb after orb, the wondrous soimd

Is echoed on for ever :
'Glory to God on high, on earth be peao^
And love towards men of love — salvation and release.' "
The announcement of the hirth is made to shepherds. Why were they selected for
this great honour ? Points of fitness may be traced. Was not the first blood of sacrifice
(Abd's) that of a keeper of sheep ? Was not the chosen type and earthly root of the
Christ a shepherd taken from the sheepfolds ? Is not one of the favourite symbols of
the world's Saviour the good shepherd? Is not the Saviour's work that of him who
leaves the ninety and nine and goes after the sheep which is lost ? Of all earthly
things, are not the pastoral life and spirit the nearest correspondents to the life and
spirit of the incarnate Son of God ? And as to the gospel that was preached, is there
not a truth in the qutunt language of an old writer, " It fell not out amiss that shep-
herds they were ; the news fitted them well. It well agreed to tell shepherds of the
yearning of a strange Lamb, such a Lamb as might take away the sin of the world.
Such a Lamb as they might send to the Euler of the world for a present." Any way,
it is not to supercilious Pharisee, not to Sadducee cold and dry as dust, not to Essene
ascetic and separatist, not to Herodian worldly and crafty, not to the mighty or the
noble that the first tidings of the great joy are brought. The first preacher is the
heavenly angel, and the first congregation some lowly, simple men, who are doing
their duty in the place which God has appointed to them. Ilience comes the lesson
to OS. Heaven is always near the dutiful. They who watch faithfully what has been



46 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. n. 1— Sa

given to their charge, not seeking " some great thing to do," not hurried And restlesi
in their work, but caring fur the things, many or few, over which God has placed them,
are close to that gate of the celestial kingdom through which there peau the music,
" Blessed are the pure in heart : for they shall see God." Two points in this portion
of the narriitive may be touched upon. (1) The conduct of the s/iepherds when the
tidings of the birth are borne to them. On the withdrawal of the heavenly vision, they
say (ver. 15), " Let us now go even to Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come
to pass." The flocks are somehow disposed of. This is a matter to be at once attended
to. A word of God, a voice of the Holy Spirit in the heart, a command or duty
pertaining to the heavenly life, claims precedence over all other claims. " Seek first
the kingdom of God." Prompt obedience is the way of blessing. " They came with
haste." Yes ; " the King's business requireth haste." Never delay. St. Paul acted
in the spirit of the shepherds when, Gtod having been pleased to reveal his Son in him,
" immediately he conferred not with flesh and blood" (Gal. 1. 16). (2) The conduct of
Mary. The shepherds eagerly told their wonderful tale. And all the people who
heard, wondered. " But Mary (ver. 19) kept all these sayings and pondered them in her
heart." The wonder of the people soon passed away ; it was but " as the morning
cloud and the early dew." Beligious feeUngs are conserved and deepened through
reflection »nd prayer. Blessed secret — ^the keeping and pondering in the heart 1

Vers. 21 — 88. — The circumcision a/nd presentation in the temple. L Thjc omonH-
oisiON. With regard to the circumcision, observe : 1. The Son of God is not only
"made of a woman," he is "made under the Law." He is entered into all the
requirements and circumstances of the covenant " with Abraham and his saed." The
apostle tells us why — " to redeem them that were under the Law." Christ took the bond
under which Israel was bound, and became Israel's Surety for it. Now it is ended. There
is a new form of righteousness in which the wall of partition between Jew and Gentile
is removed. The apostle adds (Gal. iv. 6), " To redeem them that were under the
Law, that we" — i.e. as many as have been baptized into Christ, Jew or Greek, bond or
free — " might receive the adoption of sons." This adoption is now the standing through
grace. 2. The circumcision has its special place in the making of Jesus hy Ood to vs
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, Redemption. It is an evidence that the Son
of God was sent " in the likeuess of sinful flesh." Circumcision supposed its subject
to be a sinner. It supposed that a condemnation rested on him as such. The Lord
Jesus, God's beloved Son, therefore took the sinner's place, and in the drops of blood
shed on the eighth day after birth served himself, as it were, the heir to the condemna-
tion of sin. Of this condemnation he spoke when he bowed his head on the cross and
said, " It is finished 1 " 3. The circumcision has its special meaning with regard to the
spiritual history of believers. See in this connection Col. ii. 10, " You Christians " —
thus we may paraphrase the sentence — " have, through your union with Christ, the
reality of circumcision. When you gave yourselves to Christ, a work was done in you
which was equal to the sharp and painful renunciation — the putting off — of the body
of flesh, of that mind of the flesh with its affections and lusts which is enmity against
God. It was through the repentance wrought in you that you became partakers of the
remission of sins. When you were buried with Christ in baptism, your old, unbelieving
self was circumciseil to the Lord. You found the new position, the new life, that is
complete in Christ. (For the manifold suggestiveness of the circumcision of the infant
Jesus, rea<i Keble's hymn in his ' Christian Year.')

II. The prksentation. The forty days of purification prescribed by the Law of
Moses having been accomplished, Joseph and Mary bring the Babe to Jerusalem, to
present him to the Lord. As Mary's Firstborn, he must be formally separated. And in
the narrative of this separation we are reminded of the lowly condition of the parents.
Not the lamb and the pigeon, but the two young pigeons allowed in cases of poverty,
constitute the sacrifice, so low had he stooped whose place is the bosom of the Father.
Look at the welcome prepared for Christ as he is borne in Mary's loving arms into his
Father's temple. 1. "Think first of the man by whom the welcome is expressed. He is
called simply "a man in Jerusalem." Not the priests. In connection wiih the infancy
we trace three acts of adoration — that of the shepherds, that of Simeon and Anna, and
that of the heathen Magi. In all t'Lete in uu represeniatiou of the circles of authority (



OH. ii.l--oa.J IHB GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 47

at least, there ig no dwelling on the importance of those through whom the homage
is shown. The tribute of the human heart is sufficient for the Son of man. Of this
man we know nothing more than is told us by St. Luke. His name is Simeon. He
is (ver. 25) " righteous and devout, one of tliose who lookeil for the consolation of
Israel, and the Holy Spirit is upon him." The character — all that is memorable — is
summed up in the title he himself takes (ver. 29), " Tliy servant." For years he
has been looking — a sharer in the expectation which had become earnest and eager
among the pious. But he thinks and prays and hopes in a light that is peculiar to
himself. Somehow — we are not told how — the intimation has been borne into his
•oul (ver, 26) that " he should not see death before he had seen the Lord's Christ." Is
not the picture of this " watcher for the morning " a beautiful one ? Do we not seem
to see him, weary of the word-wranglings, the fightings over pin-points of ceremonial,
which abounded, piercing through the hypocrisies with which the religious world was
hiineycombed ; amid confusions becoming worse confounded, breathing the prayer,
" thou Hope of Israel, come quickly " ? Is not this man an example to us ? Is
not this present time the watch-night to Christ's people ? Are we watching as he
watched — " not asleep in sin, but diligent in the Lord's service, and rejoicing in his
praises"? 2. Regard next the scene in which the welcome is given. The watcher is
in the temple — there in the spirit of David's psalm, " That I may dwell in the courts
of the Lord, beholding the beauty of the Lord, and inquiring in his temple." He is
there led by the Spirit. When " two unnoted worshippers " enter, his eye fixes on the
two ; faster beats the heart, "It is he; that child is he — the Lord's Christ." An inci-
dent that is indelibly photographed in the heart of Christendom is that in which the
venerable seer takes the Babe in his arms, and lifts his eyes to heaven " in prayers that
struggle with his tears." (1) Behold the sign of the Babe realized. To welcome the
true child-nature, as Simeon welcomed Jesus ; to see heaven in the Child, and open
the soul to the impression, becoming child-like, and therefore Christ-like ; — this is to
receive the kingdom of heaven. (2) Note that in spiritual history there is a moment
of discovery — the discerning of the hidden glory in Jesus. This moment is typified
in the conjunction of the watcher and the watched for (ver. 27) — when the parents
brought the Child Jesus, then he received him into his arms. We may not be able
always to distinguish the very time and way ; but there is the morning hour in the
life, the awakenment to the claim of God on the soul, to the fact " I am a sinner, and
I need the Lord's Christ," and the answering fact, " He is the Saviour, and he wants
me." Would that Simeon's joy were realized in all who read, " Mine eyes have seen
thy Salvation " 1 3. Observe the song, the familiar " Nunc dimittis." What sweet-
ness, what beauty in this, the " swan-song " of the Christian Church ag it hag been
called ! (1) How tenderly the heart asks the supreme release ! What more can be
desired ! The servant has seen the Master. And yet it is no prayer of longing initiated
by the heart itself. Had it not been revealed to him that the hour of departure would
follow the vision of the Lord? The human will touches the Divine. " Let me depart
. . . according to thy word." (2) How the song thrills with the sense of a love free and
universal as the light of God (vers. 31, 32) ! So it is when the Lord's Christ is really
seen. The place of Christ is " a place of bioad rivers and streams." Christian love is
necessarily a missionary love. The word which it sows into the innermost desire is,
"Let there be light." Christians may learn this, too, from Simeon — he, the Israelite,
seeks the good of the Gentiles. The salvation in which he rejoices is one " for reve-
lation to the Gentiles." Should not we Gentiles reciiffocate by embracing in our
prayer and effort God's people Israel ? — seeking that the whole thought of the venerable
watcher may be fulfilled — the Lord's Christ, the Light for the Gentiles and the Glory
of Israel. (3) A soul thus filled out of the fulness of God's love is ready to depart.
Death to it is only a departing, the dismissal of the servant from the scen« of earthly
toil, that he may" enter more fully into the joy of the Lord. " Lord, now lettest thou
thy servant depart in peace." The aged servant has still another word. He has hia
blessin" for the parents. 4. Mark the prediction addressed to Mary. (1) The more general
announcement, which seems at variance with the exalted stniin of the song ; but in thi»
variance it harmonizes with the words of prophecy (e.g. Isaiah's forecasts), and intei-
ijrcts the experience of the ages. For "Christ is both a Corner-stone and a Stimabliiig-
Btone, »nd perhaps, in some sense, he is both the one and the otherto us all." (2) Tiu



<8 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LTJKE. [ch. n. 1— 62.

more special announcement. Ah I how often the love which is the Eource of the purest
joy is the occasion of the most poignant sorrow ! Many a mother can understand the
word of the seer to the mother, " A sword shall pierce through thine own soul." Well
when the wound is that only of a holy sorrow ! Thus (3) the prophetic word is attached
to the hiessing, that, through the Lord's Christ, " the thoughts of many hearts should
be revealed." It is true : the attitude of every heart to Christ is the revelation of that
heart in the roots and springs of its thinking. 6. The sketch of Anna the prophetess it
tfie concluding and consummating feature of the day. She, too, is an interesting person,
A widow, after seven years of married life, and now " advanced in many days " (ver.
36), at least four score and four. Devout, almost an inmate of the temple, and recog-
nized as a prophetess. She, too, has her thanksgiving, as she comes in " at that very
hour." But the notable circumstance in regard to her is that she is the first preacher
of Christ in the city of the great King. " She speaks of him to all them that are
looking for redemption." She is the pioneer of the great host of women that publish
the tidings fPa. IxviiL 11, Revised Version). In this host may many who read or hear
be included I

Vers. 39 — 52. — The chUdhood and the waiting-time. Before the age of twelve,
nothing is told. In modem biographies, all kinds of traits, incidents, forecasts of the
man in the child, are mentioned. The Apocryphal Gospels fall in with this custom.
God's thoughts are not our thoughts. The child-life of "the Lord's Christ" is
thoroughly simple, A bright-eyed boy, learning to read the Scriptures at his
mother^B knee, running out and in to shop and cottage, and joining sometimes in
tlie innocent pastimes of the hillside, taking at night his little quilt from the ledge
surrounding the wall of the house, and laying himself down in peace and sleeping, —
such, we may conceive, was the life of the holy Child. Thoughtful, wise, gentle, yet
full of a nameless " grace and truth ; " for (ver. 40) " he grew and waxed strong, filled
with wisdom, and the grace of God was on him." The incident which alone breaks
the silence is connected with his twelfth year, the completion of which was an
important hour in Jewish history — the hour of transference from pupilage to a certain
measure of responsibility. At that age Jesus, " a son of the Law," is taken by Joseph
and Mary to Jerusalem. The journey, the caravans of pilgrims, the incidents of the
way, the three nighti' halting, and then the sight of Jerusalem with its temple shining
in the sun, — we can imagine wliat all this must have been to the exquisitely sensitive
soul of the Child I And the week's stay in the capital — what bursting of thoughts !
what tides of inspiration 1 Let us dwell on the first recorded word of Jesus — his reply
to his mother (ver. 49), when she and Joseph found him among the doctors. Regard
it as the word of sanctified boyhood — as the awakenment to the consciousness of (1)
the supreme relation of the life ; (2) the supreme interest of the life ; (3) the supreme
necessity of the life.

I. The sutbemb belation. " My Father." We may infer, from the fiftieth verse,
that now for the first time this word had passed from his lips. " Thy father and
I," said Mary. Quietly but distinctly comes the intimation of the Fatherhood — an
intimation in which we can trace the disengagement. " Nay, not he whom I have
honoured, and honour, as earthly parent, but he to whom 1 am truly bound — ^he who
is, who only is, my Father." And a great, solemn hour it is when the feeling of a
personal, individual relation to the Eternal dawns on the consciousness. In earliest
years the child-nature is enfolded in others. The first crisis of the life is when it
begins to realize that it cannot merely be led; that it has a place and calUug of its
own ; tliat it must think and will, instead of only reflecting the thought and volition
ol those who have shaped its path. Here there is a parting of the ways — one way being
towards a self-will, which has " torment " in it for the youth as for others, and which,
unless corrected and disciplined by sharp experience, will bear the soul into hurtful
alliances, will prove "a hewing out of broken cisterns which hold no water;" the
other way being that of Divine grace, the acceptance of a higher rule and guidance,
the learning of the great name Duty in the greater, the supporting Name of God, the
response of the heart to a love and righteousness which asks its yes, the witness of
the eternal Spirit with the human that the Boy is the Son of God. Who will not
aaxiously endeavour so to direct the mind, in the period when it is most susceptible of



cH. n. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 49

all right influences, as that the transition from childhood to youth shall be marked by
a new glance upward, a loving and earnest " My Father " I

IL Further, note ths bupbeme intebest of the life. It matters not whether we
read " about my Father's business " or " in my Father's house ; " the idea is the same
— that the irresistible attraction of the Son is the affairs which connect him with the
Father. At twelve years of age the business was " hearing and asking questions."
There is nothing forced or forward in the holy childhood. The " understanding and
answers " are pronoxmced wonderful. But the Boy is only the " son of the Law ; " he
's not yet the Doctor. By-and-by ho will be. Later on, he will be called to drink
the bitter cup — to suffer and die. But everything in its right order. The life will
evolve out of the principle that, in all, the Father's will is to rule, the Father's mind is
to be read, the Father's kingdom is to be promoted. Here, surely, there is a inggestion
as to the idea which should dominate in the education of the young. At home and at
school, all culture, all training, should be associated with a higher reference ; the boy,
the girl, should feel that the life is among the heavenly Father's things. The sense
of responsibility to him for the nature, and the opportunity of improving the nature,
should be laid deep in the character. More than this, the generous instincts of
youth should be supplied with a fitting aliment. Too often they run to seed because
the intelligence was not enlisted in objects which formed a definite interest to the
mind. Let young people be taken to their Father's house ; let Church services re-
cognize their place and part; let them be invited to a share in the hopes and the
activities of Christ's cause. Plant them in the courts of the Lord, " in their Father's
things."

III. Once more, obsebvb the bufbehx keoebsitt of the spibit of the life iv
THE BoT Jesub. " Why hast thou thus dealt with us ? " asks his mother reproach-
fuUy. " How is it that ye sought me ? " is the rejoinder ; " wist ye not that I must be
where and as you find me ? " We note the surprise in the answer. It is the flash-
ing forth of a something, a secret, in the childhood which the mother had not noticed,
10 simple, so obedient, had the Child been. To the Boy, so full of the glories and
solemnities of the Father's house, it seemed strange that they had not recognized whose
he was — that they had not understood the obligation inlaid in the life itself. And
when the constraint of God's love is acknowledged, when the soul awakes to the vision
of the Father and the Father's business, — the spell of Christ's " I must" is in-esistible.
We come on it again and again in the course of the ministry. It was the law of the
spirit of the life. And the same law operates in every one who is of the truth. In
that sweet bondage stands the soul's perfect freedom : " I must work the works of him
that sent me ; " "I must Iw about my Father's business." Then, in perfect natural-
ness, yet with marvellous boldness, conies forth the first self-revelation of the Lord.
Joseph and Mary understood it not. How often is the yoimg heart, aroused and astir
in consequence of a higher call, misunderstood, misjudged I Mary did not comprehend,
but she sympathized ; she loved and prayed. 'Type of the true mother, " whose eyes are
homes of silent prayer." The sense of the higher sonship only enforces the obligations
of the lower. In the higher love all other loves endure. " This is love," says St. John,
" that we walk after his commandments" — after "the first commandment with promise.
Honour thy father and mother." There is nothing lovelier in the human life of Christ
than the renewed acceptance of the restraints of home. " He went down with them,
and came to Nazareth, and was subject unto them "—to them, with the narrow round of
their daily care and concerns ; and he with the great thoughts glowing in his breast,
and the kingdom of his Father opening to his gaze. Mark : 1. WJiat sd/-repression
hdongtd to the time in Nazareth I We see the Son taking the place in the carpenter's
house a few years later than the visit to the temple ; Joseph apparently is removed by
death from the headship of the house. Is it beyond the probabilities of the case that
he performed the part — always a touching one — of the eldest son and brother supporting
the mother to whom he is subject, and guiding the younger members of the family?
Nothing is left undone, and he who thus learned obedience to duty leaves an example
which serves as a beacon-light both to youth and age. 2. Sow this time consecrates
labour and poverty 1 He wrought at the common things ; in them he could see his
Father's things, and do all as part of his Father's business. The truth receives a new
radiance that " work is the girdle of manliness." Faber sings truly —

wncM. ■



60 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [oh. ii. 1—62.

" Labour ia sweet, for thou hast toiled ;
And oare is light, for thon hast caied.
Let not OUT works with self be soiled.
Nor in unsimple ways ensnared."

3. S0U) emphatie U the lesson on the fruitfulness of silence tuggested ly this Ume}
Between twelve years of age and thirty the Son of God was content to wait. The
public life lasted for three years ; he waited for thirty years. A great disproportion,
we might say ; but God's ways are not our ways. All the while he was growing in
wisdom. As his bodily strength was compacted and matured, so was his mental ; for
in all things he was made like to his brethren. He studied his Father's Word and hia
Father's works. Nature disclosed to him her hidden meanings and beauties ; be thought,
he prayed, he lived, by the Father, The results of the long silence were evidenced in
the exquisite parables of later years, in the wisdom which none could resist, in the
authority which separated his doctrine from that of the scribes. The accumulated
capital was great ; when he went forth in the power of the Spirit he only drew the
interest. Are we not, in these days, in too great baste both to be wise and to be rich ?
Do we not speak too soon as well as speak too much ? Carlyle only apprehends the
signiScanee of Nazareth when he reminds us that in silence all great thought and work
are done. We need more than " flashes of silence." Think, think of Jesus silent so
long. Stier exclaims, " Oh what gracious words may have issued from his lips during
those eighteen years which are not recordeii ! But the words which, by the Father's
ordination, he was to testify to the world were sealed up till his hour was come. Then,
one after another, bursts forth each as it were a deeper stream from the long pent-up
fountains of eternal wisdom and truth 1"



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa

Ver. 7. — Christ excluded. Little did the occupants of that inn at Bethlehem Imagine
who it was they were turning away when Joseph and Mary sougljt admission there.
They did not realize, for they did not know, whom they were excluding. Practically
they were declining to receive, not only the Messiah of their country, but the Saviour
of the world. What they did in guiltless ignorance, men too often do in wilful and
culpable rejection. Jesus Christ is sometimes excluded by men —

I. Fbom theib theoeies of the Divine govebnmbnt. They have constructed such
a perfect theory of government out of the operation of physical law, that there is no
room at all for an interposing Saviour. The whole space of their kingdom of truth is
occupied.

IL Feom their estimate op their intelleotual necessities. They believe that,
by applying their knowledge, their reasoning faculty, their intuitive powers, to nature
and to mankind, they can reach all the conclusions there is any necessity to attain.
All that is over and above this is redundant ; there is no room in their sense of need
for a Divine Teacher. Well did the Master say that to enter the kingdom of heaven
we must become as a little child. The self-sufficiency of a complacent maturity thinks
it has nothing to learn ; it bars its doors ; it sends the light of the world elsewhere ;
its little " inn " of knowledge and aspiration is occupied from floor to roof.

III. From theib estimate or man's spiritual wants. Very many are they who are
not unwilling to welcome a Guide, but who have no room for a Saviour; for they have
no sense of sin. They want to know which of the commandments they have broken.
It does not occur to them that they have been owing to their great Creator, to their
heavenly Father, to their Divine Friend, ten thousand talents of reverence, obedience,
eratitude ; and that they have been only offering to him a few poor pence, or that they
have had nothing at all to pay. They are not conscious of a deep and wide gulf
between their indebtedness and their discharge, and they go on their way not knowing
that ** the God in whose hand their breath is, and whose are all their ways, they have
not glorified ; " that they have sinned against the Lord, and need his abounding mercy.
Tbey, therefore, have no room for Christ, the Divine Propitiation, the great Reconciler
•f man to God.



0H.n. 1— 52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 51

IV. Fbom the habit of thbir life. Of all those who exclude Jesus Christ, the
most numerous and perhaps the guiltiest are they who, recognizing his claims and hi<
powers, refuse to welcome him to their hearts. Their lives are so crowded with caret,
with the business of the market or of the household ; or tiiey are so filled up with the
pleasures and the prizes of this world j or they are so occupied with pursuUs which, if
intellectual, are unspiritual, that there is no room for that Divine One who comes to
speak of sin and of mercy and of the life which is spiritual and eternal, who claims to
be trusted and loved and served as the Saviour ot the human soul and the St/vereign of
the human life. So, while admitting his right to enter, they do not open the door.
Alas 1 of what enlightening truth, of what blessed restfiilness of heart, of what nobility
of life, of what eternity of glory, do men bereave themselves by crowding out the Lord
who loves them, by excluding the Redeemer from the home of their hearts! — C.

Vert. 8 — 11. — Wdeome news from heaven. It is surely not without significance
that this most gracious manifestation and announcement was made to these humble
Hebrew shepherds "keeping watch over their flock by night." It suggests two
truths which are of frequent and perpetual illustration. 1. That God chooses for his
iustruments the humble rather than the high. Our human notions would have pointed
to the most illustrious in the land for such a communication as this. But God chose
the lowly shepherd, the man of no account in the estimate of the world. So did he
act in the beginning of the gospel (see 1 Cor. L 26 — ^29). And so has he acted ever
nnce, choosing often for the agents of his power and grace those whom man would have
passed by as unworthy of his choice. 2. That God grants his Divine favour to those
who are conscientiously serving him in their own proper sphere. Not to the idle
dreamer, not to the man who wiU do nothing because he cannot do everything of which
he thinks himself capable, but to him who does his best in the position in which God's
providence has placed him, will God come in gracious manifestation ; and it is ha
whom he will select to render important service in his cause. But the main thoughts
of this passage are these —

I. Welcome tidings fbom the spiritcal world. " They were sore afraid." " Fear
not ... I bring you good tidings." Why have men always been so sore afraid in
the presence of the supernatural ? Why have they feared to receive communications
from heaven ? Something much more than a popular belief (see Judg. xiii. 22) is
required to account for so universal a sentiment. It is surely that sinful men are
profoundly conscious of ill desert, and fear that any message tliat comes from God, the
Holy One, will be a message of condemnation and punishment. What would be the
expectation with which a camp of rebellious subjects, who had taken up arms against
their sovereign, would receive a messenger from the court of the king? Had that
guilty age known that God was about to announce " a new departure" in his govern-
ment of the world, what ample, what overwhelming reason would it have had to
apprehend a message of Divine wrath and retribution I How welcome, then, the words,
"Fear not . . . I bring you jrood tidings"! Of what dejith of Divine patience, of what
boundless breadths of Divine compassion, do these simple words Hssure us!

II. Tidings of surpassing value. Tidings " of great joy." The birth of the Babe
in Bethlehem " that day " — what did it mean? It meant : 1. Deliverance from a deadly
evil. To these shepherds, if they were patriotic children of Abraham, the promise of
a Saviour would mean deUverance from the national degradation into which Israel had
sunk — a spiritual as well as a political demoralization. To them, if they were earnest
religious inquirers, it meant deliverance from the bondage and penalty ot sin. This is
the significance which the word has to us : in that day was bom into the world a
Saviom', a Divine Redeemer, One who should save the souls of men from that which
is the one curse of our humanity— siw. 2. The fulfilment of a great hope. To those
who then learnt that " the Christ " was born, it meant that the long-cherished hope of
their nation was fulfilled, and that whatever the Messiah was to bring about was at
length to be accomplished. A great national expectation has passed, with us, into
a glorious hope for the human race — the hope that under Christ this poor sin-stricksn
world will rise from its ignorance, its superstition, its godlessness, its vice, and its crime,
and walk in nevraess of lile, in the love and the likeness of its heavenly Father.
3. Restoration to our tnie position. That Saviour is " Christ the Lord." We wh«



€2 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. n. 1—62.

hftre sought to rule ourselves and to be the masters of our own lives, and who have
BuflFered bo much in so many ways by this guilty dethronement and usurpation, are now
to find our true rest and joy by submitting ourselves to him who is " the Lord " of all
hearts and lives ; in his service is abiding peace and " great joy."

IIL Tidings or general and op particular application. These glad tidings are
for " all the people," and they were for those startled and wondering shepherds. " To
you is born." As we hear the angel's words, we know that they are for all the wide
world, and, whoever we may he, for us. — 0.

Vers. 13, 14. — The human and the heavenly world. The strange and elevating
experience through which the shepherds of Bethlehem were passing prepared them for
a scene which was fitted to awaken still greater surprise and spiritual excitement.
For suddenly, all of them appearing together, a multitude of the heavenly host began
to make angelic music ; strains of sweetest song filled the air, and the words of that
celestial chant, so exquisitely sweet, so full of comfort and of hope to our human race,
were fixed in the shepherds' mind ; they found a place in the sacred record; they make
melody in our ear to-day. The scene and the snng suggest to ns —

L The interest which the angelic takes in the human world. It is a striking
and significant fact that the advent of Jesus Christ to our world should be preluded
and accompanied by the ministry of angels (ch. i. 11, 26 ; ii. 9). It confirms the truth
elsewhere indicated that the history of mankind is the subject of deep interest to the
holy intelligences of heaven. They inquire with a pure and heavenly curiosity into
the relations of God with man (1 Pet. i. 12). They reverently admire the wisdom of
God in his dealings with his human children (Eph. iii. 10). They rejoice over the
smallest accession to the kingdom of God (ch. xv. 10). They expend their powers in
the accomplishment of God's will concerning us (text, and Heb. i. 14). Our Saviour
it One in whom they also have profound interest, though they need not his redemption,
and their worship of him is a large element in their celestial joy (Eph. i. 10 ; B«v. v.
11—13).

II. The advent of Christ an epoch in the kingdom op God. Well might
a multitude of the heavenly host chant those words of the text, " Glory to God in the
highest;" well might they join in the high praises of the King of heaven. For when
Jesus Christ came as he thus came, in lowliness of perfect humiliation (ver. 7), that
the world into which he thus entered as a helpless babe might he redeemed and
restored (ver. 10), two things were done. 1. The exceeding greatness of the Divine
grace received its most wonderful illustration. Possibly — may we not say probably ? —
even the records of the kingdom of God contained no event illustrative of a more
magnanimous pity and a more sacrificial love than this expression of " good will to
men." 2. The foundation was laid on which a Divine kingdom of truth and righteous-
ness should be reared. On the rock of the Divine incarnation rests the whole grand
edifice of the restoration of the human race to the love and the likeness of God. Then
indeed, when Jesus was born in Bethlehem, the glory of Gtod was most fittingly cele-
brated; for then was the glory of his grace manifested, and then was the glory that
should be rendered him by our humanity assured.

III. The coming op Christ to ock world the incoming of its peace. " Peace on
earth." It has taken long for the work of Jesus Christ to bring about this result, even
as things are to-day. And how much remains to be done I To some eyes it may leem
as if only the elementary lesson had been learned. Bnt if we look long enough and
deep enough we shall see : 1. That the gospel of Jesus Christ has been, and is, offering
to every burdened human heart a peace which is immeasurably profound and inestim-
ably precious. 2. That the teaching and the Spirit of Jesus Christ are perfectly fitted
to inculcate and to inspire peace, and even love, between man and man. 3. That under
his benign government, and just so far as his will is consulted, man is leaving strife and
discord below and behind him, and is moving on an upward path toward the sphere
wkere peace and purity dwell together. — 0.

Ter. 19. — 2'A« wifdom of devout meditation. Mary "kept" all those things which
Ae had heard, treasured them in the secret chamber of her mind, dwelt upon them in
btr h^rt. Much she must have wondered what it could all mean and what woi)ld be



cH. a. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL AOCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. 63

the iaane of it. Doubtless the hope that was in her purified her heart as so sacred
a hope would do (1 John iii. 3), and made her life a life of reverence and prayer. It
was good for her to think much of the purpose God was about to accomplish through
her instrumentality ; she would be the better fitted for that holy motherhood by which she
was to be so highly honoured, and by which ghe was to render so inestimable a serrice
tu her nation aud her race. The fact that she did keep and dwell upon these solemn
and sacred mysteries may remind us of —

I. The things that abe most wobth keefino. These are not moneys that may be
kept in the bank, nor jewels that may be treasured in the cabinet, nor parchments that
may be guarded in the strong box ; they are none other than Divine thoughts which we
can hold in ou/r hearts. And of these there are Divine reudations. They may be of his
holy purpose, such as Mary's heart held ; or they may be of his own character or dis-
position toward us his children, such as we may learn and hold ; or they may be
revelations of our own true selves, of our character and our necesiities and our possi-
bilities ; or they may be of the way by which we can approach and resemble God,
There are also Divine invitations — to return from our estrangement, to draw near to his
throne, to accept his mercy, to walk by his side, to sit down at his table. There are
Divine exhortations to duty, to service, to self-sacrifice. And there are Divine promises,
of provision and protection and inspiration here, of blessedness and enlargement
hereafter.

II. That which constitutes thbib supbemb vALni. 1. They pertain to God
himself, and therefore connect ua with the Highest. 2. They afiect us, ourselves — our
character, our inner life, our essential being. 3. They bring us into harmony with all
things ; for he that is right with God and true to himself is adjusted to all other beings,
and is ready for all other things. 4. They render lis fitted for life anywhere and in
the distant future ; so that death will be a mere incident in our history, not concluding
our career, but only opening the gate into other and brighter spheres.

III. The danqeb wb abe in of losing them. There is a plausible philosophical
theory that a thought once received into the mind cannot ever be wholly lost ; once
there it remains there, though it may be in the far background, unperceived, unem-
ployed. But, as a matter of practical life, we know too well, both from testimony and
experience, that the best and highest thoughts may escape our view ; they may be
only too easily lost sight of and disregarded. Neglect, or an engiossing interest in
lower or in more exciting subjects, will make them invisible, ineffective, useless. It is
a most pitiable thing that in every generation there are multitudes of souls that once
welcomed and cherished the loftiest conceptions and the noblest aspirations, to whom
these thoughts and hopes are now nothing whatsoever ; they are gone from their mind ,
they have not been wisely " kept," but foolishly and culpably lost. Therefore —

IV. The wisdom of a beverent meditation. We do ourselves the truest service
when, by pondering on them, we keep sound and whole within our hearts the great
thoughts of God. The power of continuous meditation is one of the faculties of our
human nature ; but the rush and strain of modern life constitute a powerful temptation
to let this faculty rust, in disuse. But as we love ourselves truly and wisely we shall
resist and overcome the temptation. All souls that would do their sacred duty to
themselves must think well and much on the things they know. If they would truly
and thoroughly understand that of which they speak, if they wish Divine truth to have
its own purifying and transforming power over them, if they aspire to build up a strong
and influential character, if they wish to be " no longer children," but men in Christ
Jesus, they must ponder in their hearts the doctrines they count in their creed, the
language they take into their lips. It is the truth we dwell upon that we live
upon.— -0.

Vers. 25 30. — A satisfied human spirit. There are few more exquisite pictures

eren in Holy Writ than the one which is here drawn for us. Aa aged and venerable
man, who has lived a long life of piety and virtue, and who has been cherishing an ever-
brightening hope that before he dies he should look upon the face of his country's
Saviour, directed by the Spirit of God, recognizes in the infant Jesus that One for
whose coming he has so long been hoping and praying. Taking him up into his arms,
with the light of intense gratitude in his eyes, and the emotion of deepest happmesi



54 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. n. 1— 6a



in hii voiue, he exclaims, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, . . . foi
mine eye* have seen thy Salvation." Life has now no ungranted good for him to
await. The last and dearest wish of his heart has heen fulfilled ; willingly would he now
close his eyes in the sleep uf death ; gladly would he now lie down to rest in the quiet
of the grave.

I. Those who hubt be unsatisfied in spirit. There is a vast multitude of men
who seek for satisfaction in the things which are seen and temporal — in taking pleasure,
in making mouey, in wielding power, in gaining honour, etc. But they do not find
what they seek. It is as true in London as it was in Jerusalem, eighteen centuries
after Christ as ten centuries hefore, that " the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the
ear with hearing." All the rivers of earthly good may run into the great sea of an
immortal spirit, but that sea is not filled. Earthly good is the salt water that only
makes more athirst the soul that drinks it. It is not the very wealthy, nor the very
mighty, nor the very honoured ruan who is ready to say, " I am satisfied ; let me depart
in peace."

II. Those who may be satisfied in spihit. Simeon knew by special communi-
cation Irom God — "it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost" — that he should
reach a certain point in the coming of the kingdom of God, that his heart's deep desire
for " the Consolation of Israel " should be granted him. And waiting for this, and
attaining it, his soul was filled with joy and holy satisfaction. It is right for those
who are taking a very earnest interest in the cause of Christ to long to be allowed to
accomplish a certain work for him. Again and again has the' parent thus striven and
prayed and longed to see the conversion of all his (her) children, or the teacher of his
(her) class; the minister of Christ to see the attainment of some pastoral design; the
missionary to win some tribe from barbarism and idolatry ; the traaslator to render the
Word of God into the native tongue ; the national reformer to pass his measure for
emancipation, or temperance, or virtue, or education, or the protection of the lives and
morals of women or children. Ami this deep desire of the heart has been a con-
straining power, which has nerved the hand and energized the life, which has brought
forth the fruit of sacred zeal and unwearied toil. God has given to these souls the
desire of their hearts, and they have goue to their grave filled with a holy, satisfying
peace. So may it be with us. And yet it may not be so. We may be called upon to
quit the field of active labour before the harvest is gathered in. Others may enter
into our labours. But if it should be so, there is a way in which we may belong to —

III. Those who cannot fail to be satisfied in bpieit. For we may be of those
who realize that it is in God's hand to fix the bounds ol our piesent labour, and to
determine the measure of the work we shall do on earth. We may work on diligently
and devotedly as those who have much to do for God and man, yet clearly recognizing
that God has for us a sphere in the spirit-world, and that he may at any hour remove
us there, though we would fain finish what we have in hand below, if we have the
spirit of Christ in our service, if we go whither we believe he sends us, and work on
in the way which we believe to be according to his will, we may rest in the calm
assurance that the hour of our cessation from holy labour is the hour of God's appoint-
ment, and a peace as calm as that of Simeon may fill our souL as we leave • not-
unfinished work on earth to enter a nobler sphere in heaven. — 0.

Vers. 34, 35. — The touchstone of truth. We do not suppose that Simeon saw the
future course of the Saviour and of his gospel in clear outline ; but, taught of QoA, he
foresaw that that little Child he had been holding in his arms would be One who would
prove a most powerful factor in his country's history; and he saw that relationship to
him would be a source nf the greatest IJessing, or of weightiest trouble, or of most
serious condemnation. Thui guided by this venerable saint, we will regard the gospel
of Christ as —

I. A TonoHBTONE. Our Lord himself was a toochstone by which the men of hii
day were tried. He came not to judge the world, but to save the world, as he said
(John xii. 47 J; and yet it was also true that "for judgment he came into the world,"
as he alio said (John ix. 39). His mission was not to tri/, but to redeem ; yet it was
a necessary incidental consequence of his coming that the character of the men who
came in contact with him would be severely tested. When the Truth itself appeared



OH. IL 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 6«

and moyed amongst men, then it became clear that those who were Ignorantly supposed
to be blind were the souls that were seeing God (" that they who see not might see "),
and equally clear that those who claimed to know cTerything had eyes that were
fastened against the light (" that they who see might be made blind "). As Jesus
lived and wrought and spoke, the hearts of men were revealed — those who were childraa
of wisdom heard his voice (John xviii. 37), while those who loved darkness rather thai
light turned away from the revealing Truth. An4 to-day the gospel is the touchstone
of human character. They who are earnest seekers after God, after wisdom, aftsr
righteousness, gladly sit at the feet of the great Teacher to learn of him ; but they who
live for pleasure, for gain, for the honour that cometh from man only, for this passing
world, pass him by, indifferent or hostile. They who are prepared to come as little
children to learn of the heavenly Father, receive his Word and enter his kingdem
(ch. xviii. 16) ; while they who consider themselves able to solve the great problems
of life and destiny keep their minds closed against the truth.

II. A swoBD OF soBROw. It was not only Mary's heart that was pierced by reason
of her affection for Jesus Christ. Loyalty to him proved to that generation, and has
proved in every age since then, a sword that has wounded and slain. At many times
and in many places it has meant violent persecution — stripes, imprisonment, death.
In every land and in every age it has exposed men to hostility, to reproach, to temporal
loss, to social disadvantage, to a lower station, to a struggling life, to a wounded spirit
(ch. ix. 23; John xvii. 14; 2 Tim. iii. 12). Our Lord invites us to regard this
inevitable accompaniment of spiritual integrity as an honour and a blessing rather than
a stigma and a curse (Matt. v. 10 — 12).

III. A STUMBLING-STONE. That " Child was set for the fall ... of many." The truth
which Jesus spoke, the great work of salvation he wrought out, has proved to many,
not only in Israel, but in every land where it has been made known, a rock of offence
(see ch. xx. 18 ; 1 Cor. L 23).

IV. A 8TBPPIN0-ST0NE. Not Only for the fall, but for the " rising asain," was that
Infant " set." By planting their feet on that safe, strong rock, the humiliated and even
the degraded rise to honour and esteem, the humble to hopefulness, the weak to
strength, the blemished to beauty, the useless to helpfulness, the children of earth to
spheres of blessedness and joy in the heavenly world. — 0.

Vers. 36 — 38. — 2Vie testimony of womanhood. From this interesting episode, without
which the beautiful story of the infant Saviour in the temple would hardly be com-
plete, we learn—

' I. That there is boom in the kingdom of Chbibt fob the sbbviok of womas-
HOOD. It was well that the aged Simeon should bear his testimony to the birth of
the Saviour; it was also well that this aged and honourable prophetess should "like-
wise give thanks." Woman as well as man was to utter reverent joy on this supreme
occasion. Woman, in the person of Anna, might well rejoice ; for in the kingdom of
Christ there is " neither male nor female ; " all distinction of sex is unknown. Woman
is as free to enter that kingdom as man ; she may reach as high a position, by personal
excellency, in it ; she is as welcome to render holy service and fruitful testimony ; is
as certain to reap the reward of fidelity in the kingdom of heaven to which it leadi.
Women were the most faithful attendants on our Lord during his earthly ministry ;
they have been, since then, the most regular worshippers and the most devoted workers
in his Church (see homily on ch. viii. 2, 3).

II. That long loneliness mat well bring us into close communion with
God. Anna had a very long widowhood (ver. 36), and in her loss of human fellowship
■he waited much on God. She " departed not from the temple, but served God . . ,
with prayers night and day." When denied one another's society, what can we do
better than seek fellowship with our heavenly Father, with our Divine Friend f
What indeed, can we do so well? Communion with the Father of our spirits will
bring 'healing to the wounded soul, will be companionship for the lonely hour, wMl
promote sanctity and submissiveness of will, will remind us of those other ehlUnn
ctf his who need our sympathy and succour, and will send us forth blessing mm uest
on the errands of love.

III. That a vision fbom God shouls bxbult in fbaise and tkstimoi[T. Anna



66 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKK [on- n- 1-«2.

" gave thanks unto the Lord, and spake of him [the infant Christ] to all," etc
Inspired of G-od, she recognized tbe long looked-for Messiah, and immediately she
broke into praise, and forthwith began to communicate the joyful fact to (HI whom
she could reach. This is the true order and the right procedure. When God reveals
himself or his truth to us, we must first go to him in gratitude and praise, and must
lose no time in passing on to others what he has entrusted to ua.

IV. That agb has its orFBRiNO to being, as well as youth and prime. It ii
pleasant to think of the aged Anna, some way past four score, bent and feeble with the
weight of years, speaking to " all them that looked," etc., and telling them that he
whom they had waited for so long had come at last. A fair sight it is in the eyes of
man, and surely in his also who estimates our service according to our ability (ch.
xxi. 3), when those whose strength is well-nigh gone and who have earned their rest
by long and faithful labour will not be persuaded to retire from the field, but labu^r
<w until the darkness of death arrests them.

V. That holt expectation will meet with its fulfilment. There were many
looking (" all of them," etc.) for redemption (ver. 38) ; and as they waited for God
and upon him, their hearts' desires were granted. God may delay his answer for a
while, even for a long while, but in due time it will come. The Maker taill find ; the
worker will reap. — C.

Ver. 49. — The dawn of tacred duty ; a termon to the young. " Wist ye not that
I must be about my Father's business ? " There comes a time in our history — usually
in the days of later youth or early manhood — when all things begin to wear a more
serious aspect to us; when "the powers of the world to come" arrest us; when we
ask ourselves very grave questions ; when we have to confront a new future. It is
the dawn of sacred duty in the human soul.

I. As IT PBESENTED ITSELF TO Jesits Chbist. His parents thought that his absence
from their company was due to thoughtlessness or to absent-mindedness ; they supposed
it was to be explained by the fact that their Son was still a boy. On the contrary, the
one thing that accounted for it was that he was beginning to be a man ; that the burden
of manhood's responsibilities was already resting on his shoulders ; that the gravest
solicitudes were already stirring in his soul. And the form which this sacred anxiety
took was a holy and filial concern to be " about his Father's business." It had dawned
«pon his mind that his heavenly Father had sent him into the world to accomplish a
special work, and that the hour had struck when he must address himself to this high
and noble task. Therefore it behoved him to learn all that he could possibly acquire,
to understand the things he had been taught, to receive from parents and teachers
every truth he could discover and preserve. And the deep earnestness of his own
spirit made it a matter of surprise that others, especially his elders and superiors, should
not have perceived the same thing. " Wist ye not," he said wonderingly, " that I
must be about my Father's business ? "

II. As IT APFKABB TO CUB MINDS NOW. There are various ways in which sacred
duty may dawn on the human mind ; the special form which this holy earnestness
will take is affected by peculiarities of mental constitution, of parental training, of
personal experience. It may be a deep sense of: 1. The value of the human soul, with
its possibilities of nobility on the one hand and of degradation on the other. 2. The
nearness and the greatness of the invisible and eternal world. 3. The seriousness of
human life in view of the glorious and true success to which it sometimes attains, and
also of the pitiable failure into which it sometimes sinks. 4. The strength and weight
of filial and fraternal obligations. How much is due to the earthly father, and how
wise it is to be guided by his ripe experience I how serious a thing it is to be setting
an example to those who are younger 1 5. The attractiveness of Jesus Christ — ^his
purity and lovableness, his worthiness of the full affection and devotion of the human
heart. 6. The claims of the heavenly Father, of him from whom we came, in whom
we live, and by whom we are momently sustained ; of him who has loved us with so
patient and so ceaseless an a£fection. Must we not listen when he speaks, respond t*
his call, be found in his service, become the object of his Divine approval ? When
this solemn and sacred hour dawns upon the mind of the young, it is a time (1) for
profound and prolonged consideration; (2) for earnest prayer; (3) for unreserved



oa.li. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 67

congecration; it will then prove to be • time for (4) true and laiting joy (Ps. criii.
1).— 0.

Vers. 61, 62. — Orowth, ow LercPs and our oum. The growth of Jesus Christ and
his subjection to his parents teach ua some things respecting him, and they suggest
some things for our own guidance.

I. Thg growth Ow Jesus Christ. 1. The fulness of his condescension. We find this
in his stooping so far as (1) to make it becoming that he should " be subject to " his
parents, and (2) to make it possible that he should grow. How the Infinite One could
£0 bereare himself of his infinitude as to be able to increase in wisdom, ws cannot
understand. But we cannot understand infinitude at all, and we act wisely when we
do not draw hard-and-fast deductions from it. We stand on far firmer ground when
we take the statement of the historian in its natural sense, and open our mind to the
fact that Jesus Christ, " our Lord and our God," did stoop so far that it was possible
for him to increase in knowledge and in favour with God and with man. We do not
question the reality of his growth in body ; why should we doubt, or receive with any
reserve, the affirmation that he grew also in mind ? 2. The harmoniousness of his
growth. He grew (1) in bodily stature, and, of course, in all bodily strength and
skill ; (2) in mental equipment — ^in technical knowledge, or in the " education " of his
time, in appreciation of nature, in knowledge of mankind, in apprehension of Divine
truth, in general intellectual enlargement ; (3) in spiritual beauty and nobility — " in
favour with God and man." Not that he was at any time faulty or lacking in any
excellency which it behoved him at that time to show, but that, as his faculties
expanded and his opportunities of manifesting character were multiplied, he developed
all that was admirable in the sight of man and of God. There is a far greater
possibility of spiritual beauty and nobility in a young man with matured faculty and
widening relationships than in the very little child, restricted, as he must be, in powers
and in surroundings. So, as Jesus increased in years and grew in wisdom, there was
in him an unfolding of moral and spiritual worth which attracted the eyes of men and
which satisfied the Spirit of the Holy One himself.

II. OuB HUMAN GROWTH. 1. Unlike our Lord, there is no element of condescension
implied in our growth. We did not sto(^ to infancy ; our course had thgn its com-
mencement; and in the youngest child, with all its helplessness, but with all its latent
capacities, there is a great gift from the hand of God. Whatever it means, in its
humiliations and in its practical illimitahleness, it is so much more than we could
claim. 2. As with our Lord, our growth should be harmonious. All the three
elements in our compound nature should undergo simultaneous and proportionate
development. This is at first a parental question, but subsequently it is one that
affects every one capable of growth. (1) Training of the body ; its nurture and culture,
10 that it shall be continually advancing in strength and skill and symmetry. (2) Dis-
cipline of the mind ; its instruction and exercise, so that it will be ever increasing in
knowledge and enlarging in faculty. (3) Culture of the character ; its guidance and
formation, so that there shall be (o) attractiveness in the sight of man, and (6) worthi-
ness in the judgment of God. It is, indeed, true that we may not give pleasure to
men in proportion as we grow in moral and spiritual worth, for, as with our Master,
•nr purity and devotion may be an offence unto them. It is also to be remembered
that we may gain God's distinct approval long before we have reached the point of
irreproachableness; for that which he delights to see in his children is an earnest effort
after, and a constant growth, towards, that which is true and pure and generous.— C.

Yen. 1 20. The Saviour's birth and the angeVs sermon. We now pass from the

person of the forerunner to that of his greater Successor. The priest's son was great,
but the Virgin's Son was greater, John was a great gift to the world, as every true
reformer must be ; but a Saviour is God's supreme Gift to the children of men. Now,
Ui this narrative before us we learn —

I. How THE will, OF EVEN HEATHEN M0NAECH8 IS KADE TO FULFIL THE WILL OF

Ck)D The Divine will, expressed seven centuries before this time by Micah the
prophet (v. 2), was that Jesus should be bom in Bethlehem. But vmtil a short
time before his birth appearances seemed to show that he mxist be bom in NazaretL



58 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE, [oh. n. 1—61

When lo I Augustus, the heathen emperor at Borne, demands a census, and the Jewish
families must enrol themselves at the tribal cities. This simple circumstance, whose
purpose was the levy of men or the levy of money, brought Mary to Bethlehem in
time to become, in the appointed place, the mother of the Lord. It surely shows the
fall command which God has over the wills even of those who are not his worshippers.
He is the Sovereign of all men, whether they like it or know it or not. Cyrus wag hia
shepherd, although he did not know God (Isa. xliv. 28 ; xlv. 4) ; and Augustus orders
a census and "keeps books" in subservience to Divine purposes and fulfilment ot
Divine promises.

IL How LITTLE WELCOME DID THE WOBLD GIVE ITS NEW-BORN SaVIOUB. The birth

in Bethlehem was the most important birth which ever took place in our planet. Had
the world appreciated the advent, it would have heralded it on every shore ; but so
little wisdom was there in the world that the precious Child had, so to speak, to steal
into the world in a stable and among the cattle. It was humiliating to be bom, even
had palace halls received him ; but how humiliating to be born in the common cattle-
pen, because there was no room for Mary in the inn ! And yet, in thus making his
advent, he identified himself not only vrith the poorest, but also made common caute
with the beasts. They, too, have benefited through Christ being born — there is less
cruelty to animals in Christian than in other lands ; and the religion of love he cama
to embody and proclaim will yet do more to ameliorate the condition of the beasts.
Meanwhile let us notice how sad it is if men have no hospitality to show to Jesus,
but still exclude him from their hearts and homes !

III. The fiest gospel sermon was pbeached bt an angel. The importance of
the birth at Bethlehem, if unrecognized by man, is realized by angels. Heavenly
hosts cannot be silent about it. They must begin the telling of the glad tidings. B
we suppose that the shades of night threw their mantle over Mary when the Babe was
bom, then it would seem that interested angels looked for an immediate audience to
hear the wondrous story. Where shall one be found ? The inn is full of sleepers or
revellers ; they are not fit to hear the message of peace and joy. But outside Beth-
lehem in the fields are shepherds — humble men, doubtless, and despised as in all ages.
Still, they are kind to the sheep — " saviours," in some sense, of the dumb animals they
tend and feed — and now in the night watches they are awake and watchful. Here,
then, is the angel's audience. Does it not instruct preachers to be content with very
humble hearers, and it may be sometimes very few hearers ? An audience may be
most important, even though few and despised. But we must next notice the message
of the angel. Coming with dazzling light, perhaps the Shechinah-glory encircling him,
he first scared the poor shepherds. They were " sore afraid." It was needful, there-
fore, that he should first put to flight their fears, and then proclaim the glad tidings
of a Saviour's birth, which gospid is intended for all people. The sign also which h«
gives is that the Babe shall be found in swaddling-clothes and lying in a manger. It
is a message about a Saviour in apparent weakness but in real power. Such is the
gospel. It is a message about a personal Saviour, who, in spite of all appearances, is
" the Mighty God, the Father of Eternity, and the Prince of Peace " (Isa. ix. 6). We
must " preach Christ " unto men if we know what it is to preach the gospel. Again,
we must notice the angelic choir. The angel has arranged for a " service of praise "
along with his preaching. There is the angel's sermon and then the angels' song.
The sermon is short, but its contents are of priceless valae.* The same may be said
of the angels* song. It speaks simply of " glory to God in the highest, and on earth
peace among men in whom he is well please.i " (Revised Version). It must have been
a melodious service — such music as heavenly harmony secures; angelic choristers
doing their best to interest and elevate a few poor shepherds. Another lesson, surely,
to those who would " sing for Jesus." The preaching of the gospel should be backed
up by the singing of the gospel. Praise has its part to play as well as preaching and
prayer. It was at the praise part of the dedication service in Solomon's temple that
ihe glory of the Lord appeared (2 Chron. v. 11 — 14).

rV. The audience put the preaching to an immediate test. The shepherds,
as soon as the angels passed away, went at once to Bethlehem. They were resolved
(> see for themselves. There was a risk in this, for the sheep might be endangered ic
• Of. Arndt's 'Leben Jesu,' ergter theil, s. 58.



OH. n. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKK. 68

their aliience ; but thev resolve to run the risk if they can see the Saviour. " Never
venture, never win." Hence they came with haste to Mary, and gaze with rapture on
her Child. They see and believe. They are ready to accept this " little Child " as the
Saviour of the world. A little Child was leading them I Next we find them becoming
his witnesses. They tell all who will listen to them what the angel said, and what they
consequently had been led to Bethlehem to see. Having found a personal Saviour,
they cannot but proclaim him to others. One who listened to their story and profited
by it was Mary She pondered their sayings in her heart. The shepherds have become
important witnesses for the incarnate Saviour. So should all be who have really seen
him by the eye of faith. But yet again, the shepherds, like the angels, burst into
praise. " They returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had
heard and seen, as it was told them." This is the real end of gospel preaching when it
leads the audience up to praise. Hence this is represented as the chief employment of
the redeemed. Experience is only perfected when God is praised.

V. We bee here a human succeeding an angelic lamsTBT. It does seem
strange that such a gospel should not be preached by angels. That they are anxious to
do so appears from this narrative. We may be sure that they would esteem it highest
honour to proclaim the message of salvation unto man. But after short visits and
short sermons, the angels arn withdrawn, and these poor shepherds spread the glad
tidings, telling in a very humble way what they have seen and heard. It is God's plan,
and must be best. It is those who need and have found a Saviour who are best
adapted to proclaim him to others. A human ministry is more homely and sympa-
thetic and effectual than perhaps any angelic ministry could be. Besides, a human
ministry is less cavilled at and objected to than an angelic would be. We thus learn
at Bethlehem important lessons about preaching to humble audiences, and out of them
manufacturing preachers. The angels were doubtless satisfied as they looked down
upon the shepherds who had listened so eagerly to their story, and saw them becoming
preachers in their turn. To multiply Christ's witnesses is the great work of preachers
whether angelic or human. — E. M. E.

Vers. 21 — 40. — The circumcision and presentation qfJestu. We pass now from the
angel's sermon and the shepherds' faithful verification of it to the next notable events
in the great life which embodies the gospel for mankind. And we have here —

I. The cieoumoision. (Ver. 21.) This was the admission of Jesus when only eight
days old into the Old Testament Church. It was a painful, bloody process, and as such
it was the beginning of that life of suffering upon which God's Son had determined to
enter in the interests of men. There are not the same details about this circumcision
that there were about John's. The outstanding fact was that he received the name
Jesus, indicating that he was to be the Saviour of mankind. Into the Jewish covenant,
consequently, there has entered by this circumcision a Saviour, One destined, like hii
namesake JosHua, to lead the Lord's people out of all bondage into glorious liberty.
This was a practical identification of him with the people of God, before he could, at
least humanly, decide for himself. And there is nothing better for little children than
to be thus early associated with the cause of God.'

II. The presentation in the temple. (Vers. 22 — 24.) The circumcision consti-
tuted Jesus a member of the old covenant, but his presentation in the temple was hii
formal dedication to the service of the Lord. The mother was directed, at the end of
forty days from the child's birth, to appear before the Lord with two offerings^-one for a
sin offering, the other for a burnt offering. In Mary's case, because of her poverty, the
offerings consisted of two doves or two yotmg pigeons. The one sacrifice expressed a
sense of nn, the other a sense of consecration, both beautiful in the mother of our Lord.
The first was entirely out of place if she was " immaculate," as some represent her. In
addition there would be paid for Jesus the redemption price of five shekels, that he
might be excused from temple service, and might dedicate himself to the Lord in another
capacity. When we consider all his Messiahship meant, it was really a payment that he
might have the privilege of serving the Father as the PulfiUerof the ritual, and thus as
theAbolisher of the ritualism of the temple. It would have altogether confused matters

* Of. Amdf I ' Leben Jesn,' erster theil, s. 81 ; also Gerok's ' Evangelien-Fredigten,'
•. 102 ; also Weiss'i ' Leben Jesn,' erster band, i. 217.



60 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. n. 1—52

if he had undertaken any service about the temple as the Lerites and priest* did. In
a word, the Messiah could not well have come, like the Baptist, from the tribe of Levi ;
but it was better he should belong to one which was not bound to the altar. And here
we must notice as a practical point that the claim made on the firstborn by the Lord
as being his peculiar possession, is a claim which we should all recognize as just. We
are not our own, but bought with a price, and so bound to glorify God with our bodies
(1 Cor. vi. 19, 20). This Jesus alone realized in fulness, but we ought to try to realixe
it in increasing measure.

HI. The TESTIMONY OF Simeon. (Vers. 25 — 35.) While Jesus was being presented,
an aged believer called Simeon comes. Spirit-impelled, into the temple. His character
is clearly sketched for us. He was (1) just and devout ; (2) waiting hopefully for the
advent of him who was to be Israel's Consolation ; (3) the subject of special revelation
about seeing Messiah before death. And now he comes into the temple to recognize
intuitively the Messiah in Mary's little Child. The result is his appropriation of the
Child for an instant, that he might fondle him in his breast. Then does he pour forth
his swan-song, the " Nunc Dimittis," which has been such a pathetic word in th*
experience of the Church. This prayer of Simeon suggests such thoughts as these :
1. A peaceful departure is not only possible, hut most desirable. Manifestly Simeon
could go to his last sleep as quietly as to his nightly rest. We may commit not only
the folded hours of the night to God, but also the folded hours of eternity. 2. The
preliminary of such a departuvre is the sight of the Saviour. The Child Jesus was the
Divine Saviour provided for the aged Simeon, and in his tender care we may also rest.
3. The peculiar joy of salvation is that it is intended for all people. Gentile as well as
Jew. After all the talk about selfishness, there is no system which embraces all the
world as Christianity does.* But after thus speaking gratefully to God, Simeon speaks
sympathetically to the wondering Joseph and Mary. He gives them an old man's
benediction. They had a mighty charge and needed great grace to fulfil it. And then
he speaks special words of warning as well as of encouragement to Mary about the
Child. And here we notice : (1) That the fate of multitudes often hangs on the destiny of
an individual. So was it with the Child Jesus. (2) His fate will be one of determinei
opposition even unto death. (3) It will involve Mary in desperate distress ; but (4) b}
the tragedy many hearts shall he revealed. The crucifixion of Jesus is the touchstone
by which our spiritual condition may be best determined. Accordim; as we are
attached to or repelled by a crucified Saviour must be our spiritual or carnal state.'

IV. The testimony of Anna. (Vers. 36 — 38.) Aana was another inspired person
waiting for the advent of Messiah. An aged widow, she seems never to have left the
temple, and to have risen as near the ideal of ceaseless service as one in this life could.
She also gave thanks to God as with eager eye she gazed upon her Kedeemer in the
Person of the holy Child. And to all who, like herself, were lookins; for redemption, she
spoke of Jesus as the Redeemer promised and now given. There i» not the same
melancholy tone about Anna as about Simeon. She speaks about redemption, aad
will wait for it, while Simeon seems inclined to r<:'ach it as speedily as possible by
death (cf. Godet, in he.).

V. "The eably devklopment of Jesus. (Vers. 39, 40.) Its sphere was Nazareth ;
not the place human wisdom would have selected for a holy development. A sinless
Ufe there was the greatest of all miracles. And here we are told of: 1. His develop-
ment in physical strength. " The Child grew." If the Saviour had never been a child,
but always full-growa like our first parent, he would not have commanded so much
sympathy in the world. Little children take delight in the thought of him who was
once like them a little child. 2, His development in spirit and in wisdom. The
reference seems to be to energy of will and to intuitive insight, and the reflective form
of the verbs seems to attribute the progress to his own effort. That is to say, his will
grew in /orc« while his soul grew in insight. As a Boy he lacked no decision of charac-
ter, and his insight was remarkable for one of his years.' 3. He became, consequently,
the Object of Divine grace. This favour of the Father was his by right. He won his

' C£ Saurin's ' Sermons,' tome v. p. 42.

• Of. Tholuok's ' Light from the CrosB,' pp. 9, 84; also his ' Werke,' ». ss. 223, 272.
' Cf. Godet's 'Studes Bibliques,' deuxi^me serie, pp. 102 — 104; also Bobertson's 'Bar
mons,' second series, no. XT.



OH. n. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 61

way to it, and it could not have been justly denied him. The human race was no longer
in the Father's sight utterly depraved. A redeeming feature had appeared in the person
of the holy Child Jesus in Nazareth. God's attitude towards the world was thereby
altered, and justly so. There are persons who give a halo of holy attraction to the
sphere in which they live. Nazareth became redeemed from universal suspicion
because of one little Child who was living there.* It is for us to rejoice in such a
Saviour as we have in Jesus, One who passed through the stages which we individually
•xperienoe, and was sinless in them all. Childhood attains new interest for us, and iti
innocency was once a perfect reality as the little feet of the Lord of life and glory trod
the streets of Nazareth. — B. M. E.

Vers. 41 — 52. — The visit of Jesus to Jerusalem wlien a Boy. We now proceed to the
solitary circumstance in the Child-life of Jesus which is given iu the Gospels. He had
been growing for twelve years in strength and in spirit, and the Lord loved him. The
Child in Nazareth redeemed in God's eyes all the world. It was the one absorbing
interest in the Divine outlook upon our race. And now he is taken by his pious parents
to the Passover Feast in Jerusalem. It is his second visit to the temple ; this time he
comes himself ; the first time, as we have seen, he was presented. The following points
deserve attention in this narrative.

I. The parental oabe exeboisbd oteb Jebub. The pious pair, Joseph and
Mary, went, as we are told, every year to Jerusalem to the Passover. And they had
given the holy Child committed to their charge such advantages as Nazareth afforded.
The home school especially, not to speak of synagogue services, to which he was doubt-
less regularly taken, evidenced their interest in the welfare of the Child. No sooner,
therefore, has he reached the age of twelve, at which time little ones were deemed able
to become " children of the Law," than he is taken up by them to see the Passover at
Jerusalem. Their pious, consistent life was an excellent preparation for the solemnities
of the great feast. Jesus came face to face with the ceremonies after experiencing most
tender home care. And the history before us affords ample evidence of the parental
consideration. If it was not perfect parental care, this is only to allow that neither
Joseph nor Mary was sinless. Indeed, one of the German preachers bases an admirable
discourse on parental duty upon this history, firjdiag in it six separate hints upon it.'
But let us pause a moment over the care with which they must have explained to him
all the ritual. Doubtless he saw more in it than they did, but he must have received
gratefully their help in the circumstances. To them the Passover spoke of a great
deliverance afforded to their fathers ; to him it spoke of a great sacrifice yet to come.
His insight must have been a deeper thing than they could then appreciate. And now
let us pass to the oversight of which the parents were guilty. Their care was great,
but it was not absolutely perfect. In the bustle of preparation for the home-going,
the parents started with the caravan under the impression that he must be in the com-
pany of the boys who were in considerable numbers attached to the procession. They
should have made sure, and not left such a Child to the chances of travelling. We
have no right to impute the separation of Jesus from his parents to any lack of dutiful-
ness on his part, but solely to an oversight on theirs. What were all their bits of bag-
gage and their acquaintances in comparison with the safe custody of " the holy Child " ?
And in consistency with this view, it has been suggested that underneath Mary's
apparent expostulation and reproof there is a latent confession of her lault, which she
and Joseph tried to atone for in their diligent search for the missing Boy.

II. The lonely Boy tubned instinctively to the temple. The seven days of
the Passover Feast had been a rare feast to Jesus. The priests and ritual and all the
varied life which thronged the temple court must have been a revelation to him. He
brought the consciousness of a Jew instructed in the Law to bear upon the temple and
its services. We must look into his mind through the Old Testament. We there find
the idea of God's Fatherhood in relation to his people several times referred to (Deut.
xiv. 1, 2 ; Hos. xi. 1 ; Jer. xxxi. 9, 20 ; Ps. ciii. 13, etc.). To the little thoughtful
Boy, therefore, the temple was regarded as the home of him who was a Father to all

' Of. Manning's ' Sermons,' vol. ii., on ' Holiness in Childhood.'

' Of. Gerok's ' Pilgerbrod,' s. 196 ; see also his ' Aus Emster Zeit,' B. 97, for another view
of the same passage.



62 THE GOSPEL AOCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oH.n. l---

who trusted in him. And this general idea of fatherhood became specialized in hii
deep, reverential musings, and he could not but feel towards God as no Jew had ever
felt before.' Whethfr he had as a Child the further revelation yet made to him of his
peculiar relation to God as the Only Begotten, or reached this in the progress of th«
years, is what we cannot be certain of. At all events, the temple was the Father's
house. To it the lonely Lad turned. He felt drawn to God irresistibly, now that his
earthly guardians had gone away. " When father and mother forsake me," he could
say, " the Lord will take me up." The orphan Child, so to speak, turned to the temple
as to his real home.

in. He became a hoi,t Leabneb these. Not only was the temple the scene of
the sacrifices ; it was also the place of learning for those interested in the Law. Schools
were established within the sacred precincts where the scribes discoursed to such pupils
as chose to sit at their feet. The method seems to have been by dialogue — the question
and answer which once were so prized. Here the Boy believed he would get light
about the will of the great Father who dwelt there, and who had given his people th«
Law. As a faithful Son, he wished to get all possible' light about ius Father's business,
and so he frequented the schools. He was a " model catechumen," as a suggestive
writer on this whole passage calls him.' Although he must have seen through the
shallowness of some of his teachers, and had doubtless deeper insight than any, he was
content to sit at their feet and get all the good from them he could. It was an instance,
■urely, of great diligence in embracing every opportunity of improvement which came
his way. He wanted to learn all he could while he had the chance. And most natu-
rally did his answers and questions astonish the doctors. They had never had such an
apt scholar before. His insight led them along lines they never had travelled hitherta
And as for the Father's business, it at least embraces such elements as these : 1. The
understanding of the terms of access to his presence. The signiScance of the ritual
which was celebrated in the temple, the meaning of sacrifice, of bloodshedding, of
incense, and of approach by the appointed priests into the Divine presence, — all this
belonged to the Father's business. 2. The understanding of the meaning of his com-
mandments. The Law as the expression of the Father's will, and read consequently in
the light of love. 3. How/or the knowledge of the Father was to be extended. The
kingdom of God in its universal range, as distinct from a narrow nationality, — this was
part of the Father's business. Hence the lingering of the holy Learner about the temple
schools. His apt answers would procure him lodging and food during the season of
separation from his parents. Having put God first, all these things were added unto
him (Matt. vi. 33).

IV. His EBCOVERT BT THE ANXIOUS MOTHBB. Joseph and Mary, on discovering at
the enil of the first day's march the absence of the Child, set out for Jerusalem to find
him. They doubtless inquire all the way back, and then they go hither and thither
through the city, and at last think of the temple. There, in the midst of the doctors, he
is found and recovered by Mary. Her words are apparent rebuke, but really confession
upon her part of the oversight. She had never before had any reason for fault-finding ;
it comes all the more surprisingly upon her now. Jesus defends himself on the ground
that he was looking after his Father's business. In other words, he insists on putting
God first, before Mary or Joseph. We get an insight into what godliness is. It means
making God's business supreme. God claims first place, and this is what the Boy
Jesus gave him. The Revised Version translates the words, " Wist ye not that I must
be in my Father's house ? " This would simply refer to their folly in not first seeking
him there. The Authorized Version is as near the Greek, and of wider import, But
Mary and Joseph did not understand hie meaning. These are the first recorded words
of Jesus; and how they harmonize with the last, when on the cross he said, "Father,
into thy hands I commend my spirit " ! *

V. His obedibncb and detelopmest. He has got all the doctors can meanwhile
give to him. It would not have been profitable for him to have remained longer in
their schools, and to have merely witnessed their powers of disputation. He is to have
collision with them soon enough. Besides, he will be safer out of their reach in the

• Of. Weiss's ' Leben Jesu,' erster band, a. 268.

* See Glover's ' Finding of the Saviour in the Temple,' pp. 7^—88.
» Of. Gerok'g ' Aus Emstei Zeit,' i. 104.



OH. lu. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



63



qmlet of the northern hume. And so he recognizes in his mother's call the voice of his
Father in heaven, and in the privacy of Nazareth his Father's business. He has to
vrait as well as work. Hence without a murmur he goes away with them and is sii b-
jaot unto them. But this subjection and reverence did not hinder, but really helped, his
development. " He increased in wisdom and in stature, and in favour with God and
man." As a person under parental authority, he found his reward in wisdom, and
became beloved of all around him as well as of the Lord above. It was a beautiful
example to set us of being subject under God to parents and superiors. His growth in
wisdom was also so considerate. He would take wisdom as others have to get it,
gradually, and pass from the known to the knowledge of the unknown.^ And God's
favour will rest as well as man's favour upon all wbo follow in the footsteps of his
Divine Son in this beautiful subjection.' There is no truth more important at the
present time than thid of realizing our development in due subjection. — H. M. £.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER m.



Vers. 1 — 22. — The Baptism of John.

Yer. 1. — Now in the fifteenth year of the
rsign of Tiberius Caesar. St. Luke's Gospel
is framed after the model of approved his-
tories. He commenced with an elaborate
rhetorical preface, moat carefully worded,
stating, in a few well-chosen sentences, the
reasons which had induced him to under-
take the work. He then (ch. i. 5 — ii. 52}
skilfully wove into the text of his narrative
one or more original documents; these he
translated, preserving, with great art, as
closely as possible, the spirit, and often-
times the very words, of his original autho-
rity. Now, in this chapter he comes to a
period more generally known. Here he has
a vast number of sources for his story,
written and oral; these he shapes into a
regular history, beginning, as was the ordi-
nary custom with works of this description,
with the names of the chief rulers of the
eountries in which the events, which he
proposed to relate, took place. He first
speaks generally of the great Soman Empire
under whose shadow the Holy Laud at that
time cowered. Then he proceeds to describe
more fully the political divisions of Pales-
tine; and, lastly, he writes of the great
Jevrish ecclesiastical governors of the day.
Tiberius was the stepson of the Emperor
Angnstus, whom he succeeded. It was
about this time that this monarch retired to
the island of Caprea, where his life was
disfigured with the grossest crimes. The
government of his ministers, who ruled
absolutely in his name, has become a by-
word for evil and tyrannical government.
The influence of the Boman emperors at
this time in Palestine appears from the
attempts at adulation on the part of the



local rulers, who, among many other locali-
ties, renamed the Lake of Galilee, where
so many of the scenes narrated in onr story
took place, "the Sea of Tiberius." The
city of' Tiberius, on the shores of this inland
sea, was named after the emperor. Pontius
Filate being governor of Judaea. His proper
title was iirirpmros, procurator. In Judaa
this civil functionary was also military com-
mander. This double office gave the pro-
curater of Judaea a higher rank and title ;
his ofScial seperior was the Boman Governor
of Syria. Pilate became procurator in
A.D. 26, and held the appointment for ton
years. Herod being tetrarch of Galilee.
This Herod is usually known as " Antipas "
(properly, AntipaUr). He was a son of
Herod the Great, and reigned for more than
forty years ; he was eventually deposed by
the Boman authorities and banished to
Gaul. Galilee at this period was the most
fiourishing and densely populated portion
of the land of promise. Boughly speaking,
it occupied all the centre of Palestine, the
rich plain of Esdraelon (Jezreel) and the
surrounding districts. His brother Philip
tetrarch of Itnraea and of the region of
Traohonitis. Herod Philip, another of the
great Herod's sons, is well spoken of as a
fair and judicious ruler. Csesarea Philippi
was built by him. His tetrarchate included
the ancient Bashan and the Hauran, and
the country lying round the base of Hermon.
Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene. This
district lay to the east of the mountain
range of Anti-Libanus, the river Barada
flowing through it.

Yer. 2. — ^^nas and Caiaphas being the
high priests. The older authorities read,
" in the high priesthood of Annas and Caia-
phas." The mention of two high priests
arises from the fact of the legitimate high



' Upon the growth in wisdom of onr Lord, see Moorhouse's 'Hulsean Lectures,' jNunn.
* 0& Woolsey's < Religion of ths Present and the Future,' Scribner's edit., pp. 9—23,



64



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. m. 1— 8&



priest, Annai, having been deposed some
fifteen years previously by the action of the
then Roman procurator, Valerius Gratus.
In spite of thisofScial deposition, he still
apparently continued to be regarded as the
legitimate high priest by the great majority
of his countrymen. His great position and
claim to the pontifical office, as we shall
see, was markedly recogni«ed at the time of
the state trial of nnr Lord. Since his depo-
■ition by the Soman government, four high
priests had been promoted in succession to
the ofBce of chief pontiff. It appears that at
this time and for a long eeriea of years, this
great and powerful man, although not daring
publicly to defy the Koman authority by
assuming the insignia of the high priest,
filled the office of Nasi, or president of the
Sanhedrin. The word of God came unto
John the son of Zacharias in the wilder-
ness. In the days of the above-mentioned
rulers — pagan and Jewish, civil and eccle-
siastical — came the summons to the son of
Zacharias in his solitude in the wilderness.
From childhood he had been designated for
some great work, and he knew it; his whole
early life had been a training for it ; and at
last the summons came. We are not told
of its special form ; it was doubtless a theo-
phany, or a vision somewhat similar to that
which revealed to Moses and Isaiah, to
Jeremiah and Ezekiel, their special work,
and the way in which that special work
was to be done.

Yer. 3. — And he oame into all the country
ahont Jordan. The reputation of John pro-
bably preceded the Divine summons. His
family — the son of a well-known priestly
family — the marvellous circumstances at-
tendant on his birth, his ascetic manner of
life from the beginning, — all this had contri-
buted to make him a marked personage ; so,
when he left his solitude, we read in the other
evangelists how multitudes came forth to
hear the strange burning words, the Divine
eloquence of one long looked upon by the
people as set apart for a great work. He
seems to have principally preached and
taught in the Jordan valley — ^no doubt for
the convenience of his candidates for baptism.
But he evidently did not confine his presich-
Ing to one spot or even to one neighbour-
hood. The district here alluded to was
about a hundred and fifty miles in length.
The expectation of Messiah for centuries
had been tlis root of all true life in Israel ;
gradually, as the clouds of evil fortune
gathered thick over the people, the figure
of the coming Messiah assumed a different
aapeot. At first a holier Monaroh than their
loved David, a grander Sovereign and a
mightier than the Solomon of whom they
were so prood, a King whose dominions
-hould be broader br than evon the wide



realm mied over by the son of Jesse and his
greater son, was the ideal dreamed of by the
Hebrew. In the long period of misfortune
which succeeded the golden days of the
monarchy, the people at first longed for a
deliverer, and then — as never a ray of sun-
light pierced the clouds which surrounded
them — an avenger took the place of a deli-
verer. The Messiah of the future must be
One who should restore his people certainly,
but in the restoration must exact a sharp
and severe reckoning &om those who had
so long oppressed his Israel. They had
no conception of their true state, — their
hypocrisy, their formalism, their total igno-
rance of all true spiritual religion. Their
higher and cultured classes were selfish,
grasping, impure, untrue. The mass of the
people were ignorant and degraded, cruel
fanatics, excited and untutored zealots.
From this mistaken notion of Messiah and
his work it was necessary that a prophet,
eminent and gifted like those mighty men
who had wrought great things in times past
among the people, should arise among
them, and with strong, powerful, inspired
words convince them of their fatal error —
one who, in the language of the greatest of
the order, should prepare the way of the
Lord. How imperatively necessary, for
the work of the Eedeemer, this work of the
pioneer was, is seen from the extreme diffi-
culty which Jesus Christ himself found in
persuading even his own little faithful band
to realize anything of the nature of his
work ; in good truth they never, not even tho
noblest spirits among them, really grasped
the secret of their Master's mission till tho
cross and the Passion belonged to history,
and the Crucified had become the Bisen, and
the Bisen the ascended God. The baptism at
repentance. What, first, did John mean by
repentaruie 1 The word translates the Greek
lierivoia, which signifies " change of mind."
In the Gospel of St. Matthew, where John's
work is told in slightly different language,
he is represented as saying, " Bepent ye "
(/itTttraeiTe). There his words might b*
paraphrased, "Turn ye ftora your old
thoughts, from your state of self-content,
self-satisfaction ; mend your ways ; reform."
Here, then, the baptism (what that signi-
fied we shall discuss presently) which he
preached and summoned men to, must be
accompanied with a change of mind ; the
baptized must be no longer content with their
present state or conduct ; they must change
their ways and reform their lives. Let
them, those who were convinced that he wai
indeed a man of God, that his words were
right and true, — let them come to him,
determined to change their conduct in lif
and receive from his hands a baptism,
washing — tt« symbol of the meant of pttf



CH. in. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE.



6S



cation; for John's baptism was nothing
mora Now, baptism, it is clear, was not at
this time practised among the Jews. It was
not, as far as we can trace, even n«ed in the
case of pagan proselytes to Jndaism. This
apparently only became a national custom
tfUr the fall of Jerusalem, a.d. 70, forty
years later. His very title, " the Baptist,"
m some way shows us that he practised an
unusual, if not a novel, ilte in the course of
his preaching and teaching. John's bap-
tism (to use Dr. Morrison's vivid expressions,
Commentary on Matt. iii. 6) was just the
embodiment, in significant optieal sym-
bolism, of the significant audible symbolism
of the Old Testament prophets, when they
cried aloud and said, " Wash you, make
yon clean ; put away the evil of your doings
from before mine eyes" (Isa. 1. 16); "In
that day there shall be a fountain opened to
the house of David, and to the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, for sin and for unclpanness "
(Zech. xiii. 1) ; " Then will I sprinkle clean
water upon you, and ye shall be clean:
from all your filthiness, and from all your
idols, will I cleanse you. A new heart also
will I give you, and a new spirit will L put
within you" (Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26). This
view of John's baptism, viz. that it was a
symbol, and nothing more, was suggested by
Josephus writing for the Jews. "John,"
he says, "enjoined upon the Jews first to
cultivate virtue and to put in practice right-
eousness toward one another, and piety
toward Gnd, and then to come to his bap-
tism, for thus only would the baptism be
acceptable to God " (' Ant.,' xviii. 5. 2).

Ver. i. — As it is written in the book of
the words of Esaias the prophet, saying. The
voice of one crying in the wilderness. The
prophet quoted (Isa. xl. 3) had been writing
in his solitude, or more probably in some
great popular assembly preaching to the
people. There was doubtless at that time
much national trouble threatening Israel ;
the future of the chosen race looked very
dark and gloomy, within and without. We
can hear the man of God speaking with
intense earnestness, and looking on to
brighter times. "Comfort ye, comfort ye
my people, saith your God. Speak ye com-
fortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her,
that her warfare is accomplished, that
her iniquity is pardoned," etc. ; and then
a sudden burst when the prophet, bending
forward and straining his ears to hear some
sound none other caught but he, goes on in
his rapt utterance — I hear a voice, " The
voice of him that orieth in the wUdemess,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord." Prepare
ye the way of the Lord, make hii paths
straight. The image is a simple one, and
in the East one well knows, where the roads
are comparatively few, and where they do

LUEK.



exist are often in a bad state, when a sove-
reign is about to visit any part of his
dominions, or still more if the march of an
army has to be arranged for, the roads
require considerable preparation, Josephus
(' Bell. Jud.,' iii. 6) describes the advance
of the Emperor Vespasian's army, and
specially mentions how the pioneers and the
vanguard had to make the road even and
straight, and, if it were anywhere rough and
hard to be passed over, to plane it. There
was t> Jewish legend that this special
pioneering work in the desert was done by
the pillar of cloud and fire, which brought
low the mountains and filled the valleys
before the Israelitic march. John's special
work was to prepare the way for the advent
of a Messiah very different to the one the
people looked for — to prepare his way by
a spiritual reformation in the heart, the
mind, and the character.

Yer. 5. — Every valley shall be filled, and
every mountain and hill shall be hronght
low ; and the crooked shall be made straight,
and the rough ways shall be made smooth.
Godet and other commentators suggtst,
though they do not press, a particular '
application to each of the details of the
picture. " For instance, the mountains that
must be levelled may be referred to the
pride of the Pharisees; the valleys to be
filled up, to the moral and religious indiffer-
ence of such as the Sadducees : the crooked
places to be made straight, to the frauds
and lying excuses of the publicans; and
lastly, the rough places, to the sinful habits
found in all, even the best. '

Ver. 6. — And all flesh shall see the salva-
tion of God. And when this preparation
is complete, then shall Messiah publicly
appear. And the Baptist faithfully per-
formed his work as pioneer of the Christ.
He awoke men's slumbering consciences ;
his note of alarm aroused through Palestine
multitudes of men and women who after-
wards, no doubt, formed the nucleus at least
of the crowds who thronged round Jesus
as he preached in the cities washed by the
Lake of Galilee, or in the streets and temple
courts of Jerusalem.

Yer. 7. — Then said he to the multitude
that came forth to be baptized of him. The
following grave cutting rebukes, the burn-
ing reminders, must not be read as an ex-
tract from any one particular sermon of the
Baptist, or even as a report of any of his
discourses, but rather as a general sketch of
the line of argument the great prophet
adopted in his teaching. generation of
vipers, who hath warned yon to flee from
the wrath to cornel In St. Matthew's
account of John's work such scathing words
as these were addressed to members of the
Pharisee and Sadducee seoti, who evidently



6S



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch, in. 1— 3&



flocked in great numbers to his baptism.
They were alarmed and disturbed at his
preaching ; they feared that that drear time
of awful suffering, generally known as the
" woes of Messiah," a period which their
great rabbis had told them would precede
Messiah's advent, was at hand ; they would
provide themselves with some talisman
against this time of sore calamity. The
Inspired predictor of these " woes " — men
evidently looked on John as such — ^bade
them come to Ida haptism; this baptism
would be surely a safeguard, an easy bit of
ritual, thought they, and one that readily
approved itself to men trained in the rabbis'
schools of that age, so they came to him in
numbers. But John read their hearts; hence
his stern fiery rebukes. " Let it be borne
in mind that only teachers of transcendent
holiness, and immediately inspired by God
with fervency and insight, may dare to use
•uch language" (Panar).

Yer. 8. — Bring forth therefore troiti
worthy of repentance. In other words,
" Since you profess to have taken flight
from the wrath to come, show at once, by
• your change of life, that your repentance is
worth something, has some meaning in it."
Begin not to say within yourselves, We have
Abraham to our father. These words show
that John had the splendid courage to
strike boldly at the very root of Jewish
pride. Gradually Jewish belief in the
especial favour of God, which they were to
enjoy through all eternity, had grown up
till it resulted in such extra vagnnt expres-
sions as these : " Abraham would sit at the
gates of hell, and would not permit any cir-
cumcised Israelite of decent moral oharacter
to enter it ; " "A single Israelite is worth
more in God's sight than all the nations
of the world ; * " The world was made
for their (Israel's) sake." This incredible
arrogancy grew as their earthly fortunes
became darker and darker. Only an eternity
of bliss, of which they alone were to be
partakers, could make up for the woes they
were made to suffer here, while an eternity
of anguish foi the Gentile world outside
Israel was a necessary vengeance for the
indignities this Gentile world had inflicted
upon the chosen people. Long ago the
great Hebrew prophets had warned the
deluded race that their election would profit
them nothing if they failed in their duties
to their God and their neighbour. Tor I
say unto you, That God is able of these stones
to raise np ohildren unto Ahrahatn ; pointing,
no doubt, to the rough shingle lying on the
river Jordan's banks. John's thought was
the same which Paul afterwards expressed
to the Galatians in his own nervous lan-
guage, " Know ye therefore that they which
ore of iaith, the same are the ohildren of



Abraham;" "And if ye b» Christ's, then
are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according
to the promise " (Gal. iii. 7, 29).

Yer. 9. — And now also the aze it laid
unto the root of the trees : every tree there-
fore which bringeth not forth good fruit is
hewn down, and cast into the fire. This
intensifies the statement respecting the
power of God to raise up, out of the very
river shingle at their feet, children who
should inherit the glorious promises made
to Abraham. Nay, more, the Divine Wood-
man had already laid the axe at the root of
the tree of Israel ; its hours, as the peculiar
people, were indeed numbered. Let these,
who said they were willing to wash and be
clean, be ready and bring forth fruit worthy
of their high calling and the lofty prerogative
of which they boasted. The last of the
prophets, from his lonely watch-tower of
unerring insight into the future, saw the
awful coming doom of the loved city, the
scattering and captivity of the remnant of
the chosen people. Within forty years of
that time would the fatal axe, now lying at
the root of the tree, be lifted. In uttering
this stem prophetic saying, we believe John
was gazing at the storm gathering round
Jerusalem, which in a.d. 70 swept away
city and temple, and destroyed the existence
of Israel as a nation. When he preached
it was about a.d. 30 — 32.

Yer. 10. — And the people asked him, say-
ing, What shall we do then t Dean Plump-
tre's note liere is interesting and suggestive :
" The questioui that follow are peculiar to
St. Luke. They are interesting as showing
that the work of the Baptist was not that of
• mere preacher of repentance. Confession
of sins followed naturally on the part of the
penitents ; that was followed, as naturally,
by guidance for the conscience. St. Luke,
as a physician of the soul, may well have
delighted to place on record this example
of true spiritual therapeutics." The same
train of thought is followed out by Godet
in his remark on the question contained in
this verse : "It is the confessional after
preaching." This little section (vers.
10 — 14), containing an epitome of questions
placed before John by different classes of
hearers touched by his soul-stirring preach-
ing, is peculiar to our evangelist It is clear
that here, in the story of the ministry of the
Baptist, Luke derived his knowledge of the
details from an independent authority not
used either by Matthew or Mark.

Yer. 11. — He that hath two coats, let
him impart to him that hath none; and
he that hath meat, let him do likewise.
This advice is simple and practical. No
difficult counsels of perfection are recom-
mended, no useless penance. The great
confessor simply presses home to his peni-



OH. m. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



67



tenta the dnty of nnselflshnesB, the beauty
of quiet genemBity in the eight of God.
The whole teaching of this eminent man
of God was thoroughly practical. His pre-
deoesaor, Micah, centuries before had given
the luxurious and selfish Israel of his time
the same Divine lesson : " He hath showed
thee, O man, what is good; and what doth
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God?" (Mioah vi. 8).

Ver. i2. — ^Then came also publicans to be
baptized, and said unto him, Master, what
shall we dol This is the first time this
class of men, who on several occasions come
before us in the gospel story, is mentioned.
The English rendering is mout unhappy,
for to many of our people it either suggests
nothing, oi else supplies a wrong chain of
reasoning. The reXwrai, the Latin publi-
etmi (whence our rendering), were men who
collected the Bom'an taxes or imposts. These
imperial taxes, the most painful and ever-
piesent reminder to the Jew of his subject
and dependent position, were in the first
instance leased out to jobbers and specu-
latoTB of the equestrian order; these were
properly the publicani. Beneath them and
in their employ were a numerous staff who
performed for these farmers of the imperial
revenue the various disagreeable duties con-
nected with the collection of the taxes.
Then, as now in the East, bribery, corrup-
tion, oppression, and unfair dealing, were
too common among all ranks of officials.
First, then, the duty itself, the being con-
cerned in the collection of a tribute — for
that is what these taxes really were— for
Gentile Borne, and, secondly, the various
iniquities connected with the gathering of
this tribute, made the tax or tribute col-
lectors of all ranks odious among the Jews
dwelling in Palestine. Many of the posts,
especially the subordinate ones, in this de-
partment of tribute and taxes, were held by
Jews, in all ages singularly gifted in matters
which have to do with finance. The Jew,
however, in the days of John the Baptist,
who could stoop to such an employment,
lucrative tliough it might be, was looked
npon by his stricter fellow-countrymen with
feelings of intense scorn. Yet even these
men are not bidden by this inspired prophet
of the Highest to change their way of life,
but only its manner. "Would you," he
says to these men who belonged to the
hated calling, "indeed wash and be clean
in the eyes of the All-Seeing? then in that
profession of yours, remember, be scrupulous,
be honest"

Ver. 14.— And the aoldiers likewise de-
manded of him, saying. And what shall wo
dot Commentators generally discuss here
^ha these soldiers were. Ttie question is



of little moment whether they were legion-
aries of Borne, or mercenaries in the pay
of one of the tetrarchs or neighbouring
princes. The lesson is clear. As above to
the publicans, so here to the soldiers, John
says, *' Bemain in that profession of arms ;
you may, if you will, serve God in it, for it
is never the work wliich ennobles, but the
troy in which the work is done."

Ver. 15. — All men mused in their hearts
of John, whether he were the Christ, or not.
There was general expectation at that tim«
among the Jews that Messiah's coming was
at hand. This strange feeling that some-
thing momentous was about to happen to
mankind was not confined to the Jews of
Palestine, it strongly influenced the Jews
who were dispersed in foreign countries —
Egypt, Greece, Italy, eto., and through them
it had even reached many of the Gentiles
who were brought into contact with the
chosen people. This idea among the Jews,
that John was probably the looked-for de-
liverer, is only mentioned by St. Luk©^
another proof that the source of his informa-
tion was quite distinct from that used by
Matthew and Mark.

Ver. 16. — I indeed baptize yon with water;
but One mightier than I oometh. To refute
this growing conviction that he was the
Messiah, John tells the people plainly that
Another far greater than he was coming.
He, John, certainly washed (baptized) those
who oame to him, but his washing wat
merely symbolical — it could not purify them ;
his work had been to stir them up to re-
pentance, to arouse them to change their
lives. But the One who was coming, before
whom he (John) was unworthy to stand
and perform the humblest menial ofBce,
that great One should baptize too, but hli
baptism would be a very different thing.
He shall baptize you with the Holy Ohost.
There was, indeed, a difference between
John's baptism and the baptism of the
Messiah who was to come after him. John
could do no more with his words and symbol
baptism than rouse the people to struggle
after repentance and a change of heart and
life, while Messiah would furnish to men
the influence from above, that was really
needed in order to purity of heart and life.
He would procure and pour out the influence
of the Divine Spirit (see Dr. Morrison, on
Mark i. 8). And with Are. Not with pu-
nitive fire, which interpretation would be
quite alien from the context here. Those
expositors who have adopted this meaning
of the fire here have been most likely in-
fluenced by the mention of the unquench-
able fire in the next sentence. The fire
which was to enter into Messiah's baptism
was rather the flame of purification. So wa
read of the coal of fire taken firom off the



68



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. m. 1— 38.



altar and laid on the mouth of Isaiah the
prophet (Isa. vi. 6, 7). " With Are," writes
Bishop Wordsworth, "to purify, illumine,
transform, inflame with holy fervour and
zeal, and carry upward, as Elijah was
carried up to heaven in a chariot of fire."

Ver. 17. — Whose fan is in his hand, and
he will throughly purge his floor, and will
gather the wheat into bis gamer. But not
only, taught John, was Messiah's work to
consist in baptizing those who sought his
face with the mighty baptism of the Holy
Ghost and fire, there was another terrible
aspect of his mission. The useless, the
selfish, the oppressor, and the false-hearti d,
— these were to be separated and then de-
stroyed. When will this separation and
subsequent destruction take place? The
separation will begin in this life. The
effect of the revelation of a Saviour would
be to intensify at once the antagonism be-
tween good and evil. Between the followers
of Christ and the enemies of Christ would
a sharp line of demarcation be speedily
drawn even here; but the real separation
would only take place on the great day
when Messiah should judge the world ;
then would the two classes, the righteous
and the unrighteous, be gathered into two
bands; condemnation, sweeping, irresistible,
would hurry the hapless evil-doers into
destruction, while the righteous would be
welcomed in his own blessed city. The
imagery used is rough, but striking. It was
taken, as is so much of Oriental teaching,
from scenes from the everyday life of the
working world around them. The theatre
is one of those rough Eastern threshing-
floors on the top or side of a hill, so chosen
for the purpose of having the benefit of the
wind. The actor, a peasant employed in
winnowing. " Not far from the site of
ancient Corinth," writes a modern traveller
in Greece, " where the peasants in many of
their customs approach near to Oriental
nations, I passed a heap of grain which
some labourers were employed in winnow-
i»g ; they used, for throwing up the mingled
wheat and chaff, a three-pronged wooden
fork, having a handle three or four feet
long. Like this, no doubt, was the fan, or
winnowing-thoBel, which John the Baptist
represents Christ as bearing " (Dr. Hackett,
quoted by Dr. Morrison, on Matt. iii. 12).
The fan thus described would throw up
against the breeze the mingled wheat and
chaff; the light particles would be wafted
to the side, while the grain would fall and
remain on the threshing floor. With fire
unquenchable. This image in itself is a
terrible one ; still, it must not be used in the
question of eternity of punishment. The
fire is here termed " unquenchable " because,
when once the dry cliaff was set on fire.



nothing the peasants could do would arrest
the swift work of the devouring flame. All
that is here said of the condemned is that
they wiU be destroyed from before the
presence of the great Husbandman with a
swift, certain destruction. If it points to
anything, the imagery here would hint at
the total annihilation of the wicked; for the
flames, unquenchable while any chaff re-
mained to be consumed, would, when the
rubbish was burnt up, die quickly down,
and a little heap of charred ashes would
alone mark the place of its burning. But
it is highly improbable that any deduction
of this kind was intended to be drawn.
The Baptist's lesson is severely simple.

Ver. 18. — ^And many other things in his
exhortation preached he nnto the people.
These words tell us that the above was
merely a " specimen " of John the Baptist's
preaching, trenchant, fearless, practical,
piercing the hearts of all classes and orders
of the people who thronged to hear the
earnest, fiery appeals of the great desert
preacher. In this and in the next two
verses St. Luke once more gives us a little
picture of the events which were spread
over a considerable area of time. It is here
introduced out of its proper place to explain
the abrupt termination of the popular career
of John the Baptist.

Ver. 20. — He shut up John in prison. It
did not enter into St. Luke's plan to write
any detailed account of the circumstances
which led to the death of the Baptist. The
story (related at length by St. Matthew)
was, no doubt, well known in all the Gentile
Churches. He simply mentions the act
which consigned the dauntless preacher to
the dungeons of Herod's palace-fortress,
close to the Dead Seh ; it was termed Maoha,
or Machserus. In closing his little sketch
of the work of his Master's great pioneer,
St. Luke wishes to show that the fearless
Baptist was no respecter of persons. The
despised collector of Boman tribute, the
rough free lance or mercenary, the nameless
legionary of Eome, was attacked for his
evil life and his wanton excesses, with no
greater hardihood than the prince who sat
on the throne of the mighty Herods. True
servant of his brave and patient Master, he
paid the penalty of his splendid courage,
and, " like so many of earth's great ones,
he passed through pain and agony to his
rest."
Vers. 21, 22.— The baptism of Jetm.
Vers. 21, 22. — Now when all the people
were baptized. This is the shortest account
of the first three Gospels of this event.
Two circumstances related are, however,
peculiar to St Luke — the fact that he
ascended "praying" from the water, and
the opening words of this verse, which



tH. ui. 1— 38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE



probably signify that on this day Jesus
waited till the crowds who were in the
habit of coming to John had been baptized.
Jesns also being baptized. There is a curious
addition to the Gospel narratiyes of the bap-
tism of the Lord preserved by Jerome. He
tells ns he extracted it from the Hebrew
Gospel used by the Nazaienes, a copy of
which in his day was preserved at Csesarea.
" Lo, the mother of the Lord and his brethren
laid to him, John the Baptist is baptizing
for the remission of sins; let us go and be
baptized by him. But he answered and said
unto them. In what have I tinned, that I
should go and be baptized by him 1 unless,
indeed, it be in ignorance that I have said
what I have just said." It is, no doubt, a
very ancient traditional saying, and is per-
haps founded on some well-authenticated
oral tradition. If St. Luke knew of it, he
did not consider it of sufBcitjnt importance
to incorporate it in his narrative. In St.
Matthew's account of the " baptism," John
at first resists when asked to perform the
rite on his kinsman Jesns. His knowledge
of Jesus at this time was evidently con-
siderable. He was acquainted, of course,
with all that had already happened in his
"cousin's" life, and probably it had been
revealed to him, or told him by his mother
(ch. i. 43), that in the Nazareth Car-
penter, the Son of Mary, he was to look for
the promised Messiah, with whose life-story
his was so closely bound up. The answers
to the question, What was the reason of
Jesus' baptism ? have been many. In this,
as in many thing^j connected with the
earthly life of our Lord, there Is much that
is mysterious, and we can never hope here
to solve these difSculties with any complete-
ness. The mystic comments of the Fathers,
though not perfectly satisfactory, are, how-
ever, after all the best of the many notes
that have been made on this difficult ques-
tion. Bishop Wordsworth sums thein up
well in his words: "He came to baptize
water, by being baptized in it." Ignatius
(' Ad. Eph.,' 18, beginning of the second
century) writes, "He was baptized that,
by his submission to the rite, he might
purify the water." Jerome, in the same
strain, says, "He did not so much get
cleansing from baptism, as impart cleansing
to it." It would seem that Jesus, in sub-
mitting to the rite himself, did it with the
intention of sanctifying tlie blessed sacra-
ment in the future. And praying. Peculiai
to St. Luke. This evangelist on eight othei-
occasions mentions the praying of Jesus.
The heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost
descended . . . upon him. While he was pray-
ing and gazing up into heaven, the deep blue
vault was rent asunder, and the Sinless One
gazed far into the realms of eternal light ;



and as he gazed he saw descend s rajr of
glory, which, dove-like, brooded above his
head, and then lighted upon him. This
strange bright vision was seen, not only by
him, but by the Baptist (John i. 32, 33).
That the form of a dove absolutely descended
and lighted upon Jesus seems unlikely ; a
radiant glorious Something both Jesus and
the Baptist saw descending. John com-
pares it to a dove — this cloud of glory sailing
through the clear heaven, then, bird-like,
sinking, hovering, or brooding, over the hesid
of the Sinless One, then lighting, as it were,
upon him. In likening the radiant vision
to a dove, probably John had heard of
the rabbinical comment (it is in the Tal-
mud) on Gen. i. 2, that the Spirit of God
moved on the face of the waters lilce a dwe.
Milton has reproduced the thought —

" And with mighty wings outspread
Dove-like safst brooding on the vast abyss."
(' Paradise Lost,' i. 20.)

John, for want of a better simile, reproduced
the image which he had doubtless heard
from his teacher in the Law, when he de-
sired to represent in earthly language the
Divine Thing which in some bodily form
he had seen. In the early Church there
was a legend very commonly current — we
find it in Justin Martyr (' Dialogue with
Trypho,' 88), and also in the Apocryphal
Gospels — that at the baptism of Jesus
a fire was kindled in Jordan. This was
doubtless another, though a more confused
memory of the glory-appearance which
Johu saw falling on the Messiah. And a
voice came from heaven; better rendered,
out of heaven. We read in the Talmud that
" on the death of the last prophets — Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachi — the Holy Spirit
departed from Israel; but they (i,e. Israel)
were availing themselves of the daughter
(echo) of a voice, Bath-Kol, for the recep-
tion of Divine communications" (' Treatise
Yoma,' fol. 9, col. 2). In the Gospels there
is a mention of the heavenly voice being
again heard at the Transfiguration (Matt,
xvii. 5), and during the last week of the
earthly ministry (John xii. 28 — 30). In the
story of Israel tlie Persons of the ever-
blessed Trinity were pleased to manifest
themselves on various occasions to mortal
eye and mortal ear. Very frequently to the
eye, in the visible glory of tlie pUlar of cloud
and fire in the desert journeys; in the
glorious light which shone in the holy of
holies, first in the tabernacle of the wander-
ings, then in the temple ; in the flame as in
tlie burning bush, and in the Tisions of
Isaiah and Ezekiel ; in appearances as in the
meeting with Abraham and with Joshaa. To
Su ear the word of the lord spoke, amongst
I others, to Abraham, Moses, Samuel, and the



TO



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. in. 1— 3a



later prophets. So in this, the transition
period of Messiah, the visible glory of God
and the audible viiice of God were again
■een and heard by mortal man. Jerome
calls attention here to the distinctness of
each of the Persons of the blessed Trinity,
as shown in this baptism of the Messitih.
"The mystery of the Trinity is shown in
the baptism of Christ. The Lord is bap-
tized, the Spirit descends in the likene.-s of
■ dove, the voice of the Father is heard
bearing Vfitness to hia Son, and the dove
settles on the head of Jesus, lest any one
should imagine that the voice was for John
and not for Christ." We may with all
revejrenoe conclude that, after the hearing of
the voice from heaven, " the Messianic self-
consciousness would undoubtedly exptind
with rapidity, both intensively and exten-
sively, into complete maturity. That eelf-
oonsciousness, it must be borne in mind,
would neceesarily, so far as this human side
of bis Being was concerned, be subject, in
its development, to the condition of tiine "
(Ur. Morrison, on Matt. iii. 17).

Ver. 23o. — And Jesus himself began to be
about thirty years of age. This was the
age at which tiie Levitts entered upon tbeir
work ; the age, too, at which it was lawful
tor scribes to teach. Generally speaking,
thirty among the Jews was looked upon as
the time of Ufe when manhood had reached
its full development.

Vers.236 — 38.— The Eakthlt Genealoot
OF Jesus Christ. Although in every Hebrew
family the hope seems to have been cherished
that the promised Messiah would be born
among them, yet generally the prophetio
utterances were understood to point to the
Deliverer springing from the royal house
of David. To demon„brate that this vras
actually true in the case of tho reputed Son
of Mary and Joseph, both the genealogies
contained in the Gospels of Matthew and
Luke were compiled from private and public
records. It is well known that these family
trees were preserved with care in well-nigh
every Jewish family. The sacred books
compiled after the return from Babylon —
1 and 2 Chronicles, Ezra, aod Nehemiali —
with tlieir long tables of descent, show u«
that these family records existed then.
Josephus (second century) thus writes : " I
relate my genealogy as 1 find it recorded in
the public tables" ('Life,' oh. i.). In his
work against Apion (i. 7) he says, " From
all the countrief in which our priests are
■cattered abroad, they send to Jerusalem
[in order that their children may be placed



on the official roll] papers with the namei
of their parents and their ancestors; these
papers are formally witnessed."

It follows that, if such care were taken in
the case of the numerous priestly houges,
equal attention would be paid to their
family reourds by the comparatively few
families who boasted their descent from
King David and the ancient royal house.
E. Hillel, the renowned teacher, who lived
in the days of Jesus Christ, belonged to the
poor among the people, and yet he was able
to prove, Irom existent records, that he was
one of Daviil's descemlants. Some seventy
years later, the grandchildren of Jude, the
reputed brother of tiie Lord, a son of Joseph,
were summoned to Bome, and appeared
before the Emperor Domitian as deecendanli
of the old royal house of David.

Now, no further comment would be ne-
cessary upon this elaborate " table " of St
Luke did there not exist in St. Matthew's
Gospel another family tree, purporting to be
the line of Messiah's ancestors. Between
these two tables there are many important
differences. How are these to be explained ?
On this subject in different times many
works have been written. In the present
Commentary the writer does not propose to
examine the details of the two tables of SS.
Matthew and Luke; the question of tha
existence of the two records will alone be
dealt with. The various smaller points of
discrepancy in the registers of SS. Matthew
and Luke, altliough curious and striking,
are utterly barren of interest to the great
majority of students of the Divine Word.
The reader who may wish to examine these
is referred — among modern scholars' works
on tills subject — to Bishop Harvey's ex-
haustive work on the genealogy of the Lord ;
to Archdeacon Farrar's Excursus in his
'Commentary on St, Luke' in the 'Cam-
bridge Bible for Schools ; ' and to Professor
Godet's Commentary on this Gospel.

We will confine ourselves here to three
points. (1) Why does St. lyuke insert his
table of Messiah's earthly des ent in this
place ? (2) For what reason does he trace
up the long ancestral line to Adam? (S)
What is tho broad outline of the explanation
of St. Luke's divergency from the genea-
logical table of St. Matthew ?

(1) and (2) can be shortly answered.



CH. in. 1— 38.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



71



(1) St. Luke felt that this was the most
snitable place ra his narrative for such a
table. His work was evidently most care-
fully and skiifiilly arranged upon the lines
of formal histovy. Up to this point the
story was mainly concerned with other per-
sonages — with tlie parents of the great fore-
runner John, with Mary the Virgin and
Joseph, with the angels, with the shepherds,
with Simeon and with Anna, and especially
with the work of John the Baptist. But
from henceforth all the minor persons of
the Divine story pass into the background.
There is now one central figure upon whom
the whole interest of the Divine drama
centres — Jesus. This, the moment of his
real introduction on the world's stage, was,
M St. Luke rightly judged it, the time to
give the foimal table of his earthly ancestry.

(2) Different from the Hebrew evange-
list St. Matthew, whose thoughts were cen-
tred on the chosen race, and whose horizon
was bounded by Palestine, or at least by those
cities where his countrymen of the disper-
sion lived and worked, and who only cared
to show that his Messiah had sprung from
the great patriarch, the father of the tribes
of Israel, St. Luke, feeling that the scene
of the work of his Messiah was bounded by
no Jewish horizon, traces up his Lord's
reputed line of earthly ancestors to the first
father of the human race. The Jesus of
Luke was the Saviour, not only of the chil-
dren of Abraham, but of the children of
Adam. The noble Isaiah-prophecy, which
we feel was one of the great mainsprings of
Paul's life and work, was the real reason of
Luke, the disciple of Paul, tracing up Mes-
siah's family line to Adam. " It is a light
thing that tliou shouldest be my servant to
raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore
the preserved of Israel : I will also give thee
for a light to the Gentiles " (Isa. xlix. 6).
Luke alone records the inoideat and the
words of Simeon in the temple.

(3) The genealogy given by St. I-uke
differs from that presented by St. Matthew,
because St. Luke has extrioat«d from family
records the line of Mary, while St. Matthew
has elected to chronicle the family of
Joseph. This solution of the differences
between the two lists was apparently firot
■uggested byAnnius ofViterbo,at the close
of the lifteentn century. Among the many



eminent modem scholars who accept it, 1
would instance Professor Godet and Dean
Plumptre. The arguments in favour of
this view — viz. that the genealogy is Mary'i,
not Joseph's — are the following.

The table begins as follows : " And Jesua
. . . being (as was supposed) the son of
Joseph, which was the son of Heli, which
was the son of Matthat," etc. In the original
Greek all the older authorities, before the
name Joseph, omit the article toS, of the.
This article is found before all the namei
in the long list with this solitary exception.
This absence of the article rod certainly
puts the name of Joseph in a special posi-
tion in the series of names, and leads us to
suppose that the genealogy is not that of
Joseph, but of Heli. (Heli being the father
of Mary, the omission of her name will be
treated later on.) The twenty-third versa
would then read thus: "And Jesus, . . .
(being as was supposed the son of Joseph),"
after which parenthesis the first link in the
chain would be Jesus, the heir and grand-
son, and in that sense the son of Heli.

It is by no means unusual in the Old
Testament to find the grandson termed the
" son " of his grandfather (compare, for in-
stance, 1 Chron. viiL 1 and 3 with Gen.
xlvi. 21 ; Ezra v. 1 and vi. 14 with Zeoh.
i. 1, 7). On the omission of Mary's name,
Godet quotes from the Talmud (' Treatise
Bava Bathra,' 110, a), and urges with great
truth that not only among the Hebrews did
ancient sentiment not accord with the men-
tion of a mother as the genealogical link.
The Talmud treatise most singularly comes
to our help again by mentioning that Mary
the mother of Jesus was called the daughter of
Heli. We have before dwelt upon the fact
that not only general ancient tradition, but
the plain sense of the gospel story, ascribed
to Mary a royal Davidic descent. ' Bava
Bathra' (quoted by Godet), with great force,
asks (though with a different design), what
sensible luan, after declaring at the com-
mencement of the list that the relationship
of JiiSuph and Jesus was destitute of all
reality (as ivo/itCeTo), could take pleasure
in drawing up such » list of ancestors?
This most pertineut question can only be
answered by showing that the list is a liat,
not of Joseph's ancestors, but of Mary'i, wl r
was in very truth the mother of Jesus.



72



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. iii. 1— 38.



In coming to any conclusion respecting
the real history of the drawing up the two
distinct genealogical tables, the one of
Joseph, the other of Mary, it will be ever
well to bear in mind that the early chapters
of the two narratives of SS. Matthew and
Luke, where the events of the birth and in-
fancy of the Lord are told, were most pro-
bably based on memories written and oral,
proceeding from two distinct centres or circles
of believers, eye-witnerjses many of them of
the things they related or of which they
preserved a faithful memory in writing. The
one circle — to use Godet'g words — of which
Joseph was the centre, and which we sup-
pose consisted of Cleopas, his brothers
James and Jude the sons of Joseph, of whom
one was the first bishop of the flock in
Jeruialem, included, too, Simeon a son of
Oleopai, the first successor of James. The



narratives preserved amongst these penoni
might easily reach the ears of the author of
the First Gospel, who doubtless lived in the
midst of this flock. But a cycle of narra-
tives must also have formed itself round
Mary. These doubtless are those which
Luke has preserved.

The genealogy, then, of St. Matthew,
which has Joseph in view, must have pro-
ceeded from his family, That given, on the
other hand, by St. Luke, no doubt issued
frum the circle of which Mary wa* the
centre.

The other differences in the two genea-
logies are minor and of far less interest ; they
are exhaustively discussed in the various
monographs which have been written on
this subject, and to which reiiarenoe haa beea
made abov*.



HOMILBTICS.



Vers. 1 — 18. — The forerunner, and his ministry. Some thirty yean h»Te passed
since the birth of a son of the old age had filled the house of the good priest Zacharias
A-ith the voice of rejoicing. The blameless priest and his blameless wife are dead.
The son who, when an unconscious babe, was called " the prophet of the Highest," has
lived the life of a recluse, receiving his inspirations wholly from the study of the Law
of the Lord, from lonely communings with God and truth in the great temple of nature.
There were many solitaries in that period. There were the Essenes, one of the sects of
the Jewish nation. Eremites, too, dwelt in dens and caves, fleeing far from the world,
witk its strife and tumult. But this man was no mere Essene, no mere Eremite.
There was a vocation before him ; like the Master who was to come after him, he was
being fiUed with the Holy Ghost for the work the striking of whose hour is related in
the passage. A man sterrdy, austerely simple. No phylacteries and fringes about him ;
no soft clothing and signs of luxurious culture. For dress there is only the skin of
a camel thrown around him and held together by a rough leather band. His sole
nourishment is the honey which he gathers in the moorland, and locusts steeped in
water and dried in the sun. He wants nothing which the world can give to him, and
he fears nothing which the world can do to him. He can stand alone, for God is with
him. To him, in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, comes the Word of the Lord.

L Observe, at the outset, the time and thk pkophbtio desiqnatiom o» thb
MINIBTRT. The date bids us back to one of those times of confusion and uncertainty
which mark the passing away of the old and the preparation for a new day or period.
Note the names in ver. 1. Tiberius, a low, dull, sottish despot; Pontius Pilate, indo-
lent, overbearing, greedy; Herod, disgracing his tetrarchate by open licentiousness;
Caiaphas and Annas disputing for the priesthood, and neither of them worthy of respect.
Typical of the world on which from his Judssan retreat the son of Zacharias looked
forth. " The godly man ceased, for the faithful were failing from the children of men."
Then — reminding us of Elijah the Tishbite, who abruptly confronts Ahab in his purple,
protesting, " as the Lord God of Israel liveth before whom I stand" — on a sudden the
popular vision is arrested, the popular imagination is excited, by the figure and preach-
ing of John. The evangelist sees in this preaching the fulfilment of the sublime
prophecy of Isaiah (xl. 3 — 5). Looking at this prophecy, we are struck with the great-
ness of the announcement, and the apparent insignificance of the fulfilment. There is
nothing incongruous in applying to John the description, " a voice crying in the



OH. HI. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKB. 73



ifildemess." But the results declared— the filling of every valley, the bringing low of
every mountain and hill, etc. — seem too vast as a representation of the effect of John's
cry. Beading Isaiah's sentences we imagine a work with inspiring circumstances,
with grand, striking evidences of its accomplishment ; turning to the Gospel pages we
are introduced only to a rough preacher of the desert, uttering sharp sentences, and
aiming at a spiritual repentance for the remission of sins. Yet in this preacher and
in his work the prediction was fulfilled — in Qnd's way. Let no one despise the
poverty of the instrument. " The excellency of the power is of God." The chapter
reminds us of a wonderful blaze of popularity. On the effete religiousness of Judeea
it came as a new sensation to hear that a man, recalling the image of Elijah, was
speaking in sentences which fell like thunderbolts ; and forth from priestly Hebron,
from Pharisee-worshipping .Jerusalem, from city and village, there poured a mighty
throng, all hastening to the desert-sanctuary of John. Again the long-silent Spirit of
God was speaking; the chain of prophecy, which seemed to have ended with Malachi,
had again been formed. They gather trembling and awe-struck around that strange,
uncouth-looking saint; he bids them submit to his baptism; they do so; and sancti-
monious religionist and haughty soldier and corrupt publican demand, " What shall
we do?" It was a great religious revival, raising the question, "Can this be the dawn
of Messiah's day ? Is this indeed the Messiah promised to our fathers ? "

II. Regard the pbbacheb and his message. What is the force of the man?
What is the relation of his word to Christ ? 1. The preacher. (1) There is the force
of earnestness. He has looked through all the appearances and shams of his age, and
has seen how hollow they are. He has been communing with the unseen realities ;
and to him heaven and hell are no distant futures, but are states actually encompassing
men. He is possessed by the word which has come to him, and therefore he is beyond
the region of fear. What are either smiles or frowns to him ? Therefore, too, his is
the eloquence of action. A man in earnest will not trifle among the flowers of rhetoric;
he has no time to hunt for metaphors and tropes. Is not life very short ? He must
get by the most direct road possible to the human cod science. Ah ! that is the power
of the God-sent preacher. When men feel that there is no second-hand repeating, that
there is no mere playing at dialectics, that there is no part-acting, that the utterance
proceeds from conviction, that it is the expression of truth which is swaying the soul,
they cannot but listen; so far they will yield. Earnestness is not noisy rant; but,
calm and quiet as it is, like the kingdom of heaven, it breaks in with violence. It
must work, fight, win. (2) There is the force, too, of plain, dovmright, practical
teaching. To the anxious inquirers he returns answers which prove his tact in dealing
with human nature. See how he hits each class at the point of its special temptation
and besetting sin, and how at once he insists on the application of Isaiah's rule (i. 16):
" Wash you, make you clean ; put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes ;
cease to do evil ; learn to do well." It was a solemn peremptory summons to yield to
the Eternal Eighteousness. There were no honejed phrases. The preacher laid the
axe at the root of the tree ; for it was no time for clippings and loppings here and there.
No mercy was shown for the piety of outside appearances. Privilege I what mattered
that if it was only a bed on which to sleep ? He who conferred the privilege can take
It away ; nay, he is able of these stones to raise up children to Abraham. Was it
wonderful that the crowd listened with hated breath ; that souls cowered beneath the
eagle eye and the searching incisive teach'mg of the mighty prophet of the wilder-
ness ? (3) Add to this the thorough honesty and humility of the teacher. Every person
knows mat the ordinary ambitions of men have no charm for him ; even the extra-
ordinary ambitions — to be a leader of thought, to guide and direct spiritual movement,
to stamp the impression of his own mind on others — have no power over him. Ho
claims to be only the voice. "Art thou the Christ?" so deputations of the Pharisees
ask; to this effect the people muse. "No" is the answer; "there is One behind mo.
I am only the witness, only the herald. Mine is only the poor baptism with water. His
is the baptism with the Holy Ghost and with fire." Thoroughly honest, unselfish, noble^
is this prophet of the desert. 2. Now consider his message as that is stated by St. Luka,
(1) Its great word, " Bepent ! " — the word which in every time, and never more than
in this nineteenth century, is apt to be softened. People applaud discourses about faitb
ind love, and the search for truth, and so lorth ; but proclaim the need of repentance^



74 THE GOSPEL ACOOBDING TO ST. LUKEL [ch. in. 1— 3a

bring persons individually face to face with that need, and one of two things follow —
either the resistance of the heart to condemnation, or the conviction of the soul to
salvation. Have we not far too little of the preaching of " repentance for the remission
of sins"? Mark this : There can be no real sending away of sin from between the soul
and God without a change of mind, caused by the sight of sin as sin, as darkness, as
death. God will never bless a man in hia sins. " Kepent " is the burden of all preaching
on which the Holy Spirit sets his seal. (2) The saerament which accompanies the
word. There is the baptism of repentance. Sinners must take their stand with God
as to their sins, joining him in his condemnation. They must conless their sins. They
are commanded to do this in expressive act — to go down, soiled with dust and weary
with their journey, into the river ; standing there, with eye uplifted to heaven, to say,
" I acknowledge my transgressions ; against thee, thee only, have I sinned. God be
merciful to me a sinner ! " And then, as they sink beneath the water, they seem to
have Bunk in it their old sinful life; they arise, white and clean, pledged to walk
henceforth in newness of life. A type yet to be fulfilled I John distinctly protested,
" This baptism is only an instalment ; the laver of regeneration is not with me." Bnt it
was a symbol rich with meaning ; it was the act which expressed the word that rang
thiough the wilderness, " Repent ! " (3) The hand which pointed forward. This man,
with the true second sight, sees the measure of iniquity all but filled up. He sees the
tokens of rapidly hastening judgment. The nation ig only the carcase of a nation,
and the eagles are swooping down on it. " Flee, flee from the wrath to come." How?
" Repent ! " Whither ? " The kingdom of heaven is at hand." He is there to prepare
them for it, to lead them to it. Note : The preacher knows that a new order, that of
the Coming One, is close on them. But he knows no more. While he is preaching,
that new order is moving towards him in the person of the Cousin on whom hia eyes,
for long years, had never rested — perhaps, indeed, he had never even seen him, " I
knew him not," he could afterwards say. All that he then knew, he knew through
an inner teaching which was no lie, "One mightier than I cometh, and with him
oometh the kingdom of heaven."

Vers. 21, 22. — The taptism of Je»iu, and the descent of HKe Holy Ohost. The narra-
tive of the meeting between Jesus and John is given at greater length, and with more
completeness of detail, by St. Matthew (see homileticB on Matt. iii. 13—17). But the
account of St. Luke suggests some points of interest.

L The identification of Jesus with the feoplb. " When all the people were
baptized, Jesus also having been baptized." In this, as in other things, " he is made
like to his brethren." But, specially observe, he is still, and he is as yet only, " under
the Law." His righteousness has been hitherto that Indicated in the book of the Law.
He has submitted to every requirement. He has completely done whatsoever was
commanded. Sharing this position in common with all the people, he offered himself
for the baptism unto repentance and the hope of the kingdom. This baptism was the
fitting conclusion of a perfect legal righteousness. The man needs to be washed. The
Law cannot make the conscience perfect. That which signified the inadequacy of the
Law, Jesus of Nazareth must appropriate. A righteousness which is in and of the
flesh cannot be the ground of acceptance with God. Jesus condemned sin in the flesh
when, with the forerunner, he went down into the water of baptism.

II. The pra-stbr which solemnized the baptism. St. Luke alone makes mention of
this prayer. With all the people, Jesus was baptized ; but who of ihe people were with
him in this — " baptized and praying"? To him there is no confessiun of personal trans-
gression ; he is yielding himself to his Father in perfectly loving resignation. The
baptism was an act of communion. '• I come to do thy will." " Here am I ; send me."
Not without purpose, surely, is notice taken of the prayer. Connect it with what
follows— in praying, the heavens were opened. Behold the law of spiritual blessing,
" Ask, and ye shall receive " 1 Behold that which makes all ordinances effectual, with-
out which they are forms, not means of grace! Behold the evidence of the power of
prayer ! God is ready still to open his heaven to the obedient, desiring heart. " We
enter heaven by prayer."

III. The desoknt in a bodily shape like a dote. The evangelist inserts "the
bodily form" to signify that it was not a mere imagination, but a real descent assuw.



cH. m. 1—88.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. M

ing this shape. What of the descent of the Holy Ghost ? Observe it (1) as between
Christ himself and the opened heavens, and (2) as a token of the grace and truth
which have come by Christ. 1. What we have before us is not a coming of the Spirit
for personal holiness, for in this sense the Holy Spirit had been with Christ during the
preceding thirty years. It is the coming of the Holy Spirit into a new form of admi-
nistration. The new thing is what St. John expresses. " The Spirit abode upon him."
He dwelt henceforth in the Man Christ Jesus, not as a mere limitlest abundance, but
as an undivided abundance. All ofBces, gifts, graces, were realized in the Lord him-
self. He was Apostle, Prophet, Evangelist, Pastor, and Teacher ; he was all in alL
The fountain was sealed in his own Person ; after the Ascension the seal was broken,
and the power in the gloriSed humanity was divided. Some he gave as apostles, some
as prophets, some as evangelists, some as pastors and teachers. But that which is
signified by the investiture of Jesus coming out of Jordan is that in him, consecrated
the Messiah, is the fulness of grace and blessing ; that his exclusively is the baptism
with the Holy Ghost. " The same is he that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost." 2. And
see the token of this administration. " Like a dove " — recalling the mission of the dove
which Noah put forth from the ark, and which returned to him with the olive leaf in its
mouth. "Like a dove" — suggesting love tender and brooding, noiseless and winning,
the Spirit descends. Is not this the characteristic token of the new covenant ? (See
Keble's thirty-third hymn.) It is the dove-like Spirit that dwells in Jesus. There is
a fire that goes before him. When he began the public ministry, he took a passage
full of gracious words, yet one which concludes with the proclamation of a day of
vengeance of our God. There are " woes" in Jesus' discourses very -scathing and stem.
There is " the wrath of tlie Lamb." But the characteristic action of Christ is that of
the Dove. The Dove is visible even in his Divinity, even in the lambent tongues, the
lightning flashes, the arrows of conviction. He is waiting to be gracious. sinner,
yield thyself to him. For thee are prepared dove-like blessings, influences

"To nurse the soul to heavenly love.
The struggling spark of good within
Just Bmothered in the strife of sin
To quicken to a timely glow.
The pure flame spreading high and low."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1, 2. — Soman worldlivess and Hebrew devotedness. We have these historical
personages brought into view in order to fix the year when John began his ministry.
At the time when they lived tliey would have scorned the idea that their names were
only to be valuable in proportion as they shed light on the life and the work of this
rugged Jewish saint. But so it is. We only care to know about these Bomans
because their figures cross the stage of sacred history, and because they came into
temporary relationship with John and with John's great Master. Their names, how-
ever, being brought into conjunction with his, let us notice the contrast which they

present to us.

I. They were unlike as thbt could be to one anothbb in the circumstances
AND SURROUNDINGS OF THEIR LIFE. These Romau worldlings dwelt in palaces, lived in
luxury, surrounded themselves with everything that could minister to comfort and
enjoyment ; they were gorgeously apparelled, and lived delicately m their kingly courts
(ch vii. 25). John was a man who despised delicacies, and deliberately chose that
which was coarse in garment, unpalatable in food, rude in dwelling. His life was
positively devoid of tliat which was refreshing, comforting, delightful, so far as the
outward and the visible were concerned.

IL Thet were diametrioallt opposed IN CHARACTER. If We exccpt rhilip, who
left • leputation for justice and moderation, and l^ysanias, of wljom nothing or little is
known we may say of the others that they vere men whose character was not only
reprehensible, but even hideous. Of Tiberius Cssar we read that, after he came to the
throne he entirely disappointed the promise of his eariier years, and that he " wallowed
in the 'very kennel of the low and debasing." Of Pilate we know from the evange-



te rafi gospel ACCORDINQ to ST. LUKE. [oh. m. l— 38.

lists' story that he was a man, not indeed without some sense of justice and pity, not
incapable of being moved at the sight of sublime patience and innocence, but yet
sceptical, superstitious, entirely wanting in political principle, ready to sacrifica
righteousness to save his own position. Of Herod Antipas we know from Scripture
that he was cunning, licentious, superstitious. But of John, the Hebrew prophet, we
know that he was utterly fearless and disreganiful of his own interests when duty
called him to speak freely (ver. 19) ; that he was a faithful preacher of Divine truth
(vers. 7 — 14) ; that he was perfectly loyal to that One who was so much greater than
himself (ver. 16) ; that he was capable of a most noble magnanimity (John iii. 29).
He was a godly, upright, heroic soul.

■ III. They have left very diffbhent memories behind them. Of one of these
Eomans (Tiberius) we read that he " deserved the scorn and abhorrence of mankind."
Perhaps this language, only a very little weakened, might be used of two others of
them. But concerning John, after our Lord's own eulogium (ch. vii. 2S), we feel that
we can be in little danger of thinking of him too highly and of honouring him
too much.

IV. They resembled one another only in that they both ran great bisks
OF earthly ill. Devotedness in the person of John exposed itself to severe penal-
ties, to the condemnation of man, to imprisonment and death. But worldliness in the
person of these Eoman dignitaries ran great risks also ; it had to encounter human
fickleness and human wratli. Tiberius is believed to have become insane. Pilate
committed suicide. Herod died in exile. Worldly policy may succeed for a time, may
stand in high pl^es, may drink of very sweet cups, but it runs great risks, and very
often it has to endure great calamities. Alas for it, that, when these come, it is wholly
destitute of the more precious consolations!

V. At death they confronted a very different future. Well might the
least guilty of them shrink from that judgment-seat at which all men must stand 1
how must the worst of them be covered with shame in that awful Presence ! and how
serious must he the penalty that will be attached to such flagitious abuse of position
and opportunity ! On the other hand, how high is the power, how bright and broad
the sphere, how blessed the hope, into which the faithful forerunner has entered I He
has " passed into that country where it matters little whether a man has been clothed
in finest lineu or in coarsest camel's hair, that still country where the struggle-storm
of life is over, and such as John find their rest at last in the home of Q-od, which is
reserved for the true and brave." — 0.

Vers. 3 — 6. — John, before Jesus; repentance before Hilvation. We may view this
subject —

I. Historically. Jesus, as his name indicated, came to be a Saviour ; but he came
to bring a very different salvation from thut which was expected of him. His contem-
poraries were not aware that they themselves were in any need of salvation. They
supposed it was their political condition which needed to undergo a change. They
were full of a fatal self-sufBciency so far as their own character was concerned;
they esteemed themselves the prime favourites of Heaven, and thought that, when the
great Deliverer appeared, it would be entirely on their behalf, in order that they might
be restored to their rightful place and assume the government they believed themselves
so worthy to conduct. If they were to receive, with any cordiality of welcome, a
Saviour who came to save them, to deliver them from guilt, it was necessary that
a voice should be heard speaking in plainest tones breaking through the hard crust of
complacency and delusion, working conviction of guilt within the soul ; it behoved that
he should come " preaching the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins." Thus
did John '' prepare the way " for Jesus — the apostle of repentance for the Saviour of
mankind.

II. Experimentally. That which was the historical order is also the order in our
heart's experience. We repent of sin before we know the Saviour so as to possess his
full salvation. It is indeed true that the words of Jesus Christ, the view of his holy
life, the consideration of his dying love — that this is a power working, and working
mightily, for repentance on the soul ; yet must there be repentance, as an existing
condition of mind, for a true and full appreciiition of the great service Jesus Christ



CH.in.1— 38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 71

offers to render to us. We cannot rejoice in him as in our Divine Saviour, redeeming
us from the penalty and the curse of sin, until we have known and felt our own
unworthiness and wrong-doing. 1. This is the Kriptwral doctrine. Our Lord, before
he left his apostles, instructed them to preach " repentance and remission of sins in
his Name among ail nations " (ch. xxiv. 47). Peter said, " Bepent ... for the remis-
sion of sins " (Acts ii. 38). Paul testified to Jews and Greeks " repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ " (Acts xx. 21). John wrote, as he doubtless
preached, " If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves ... if we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteous-
ness " (I John i. 8, 9). 2. This is the dbvixms spiritual order. For how can we make
our appeal to Christ, how can we put our trust in him as in our Divine Redeemer and
the Propitiation for our sins, until we have recognized in ourselves the sinners that we
are ? For this there is necessary : (1) The idea of sin — ^in many hearts, in many places,
found to be wholly wanting, and having to be planted there. (2) The tense of sin —
absent from a great many more ; absent, it may be, because it is forgotten that our
guiltiness before God is not only nor chiefly found in doing what he has forbidden, but
in withholding what he has desired and required of us, in the non-payment of the
" ten thousand talents " of reverence and gratitude and service we owe him. (3) Shame
for sin, and a strong and deep desire to be cleansed from its evil stain. This true
penitence brings us in eagerness and hope to the feet and to the cross of the Divine
Saviour. — C.

Ver. 7. — The ministry cf fear. We read that " Noah, moved with fear," built the
ark which, in saving him and his family, saved the human race. Fear, dread of
impending danger, has its place in the heart of man, and its work in the service of
mankind. God made his appeal tu it when he dealt with Israel ; there was much of it
in the Law. It was not absent from the ministry of Jesus Christ ; it was he who
spoke to men of the "millstone about the neck," of the undying worm, of the doom less
tolerable than that of Tyre and Sidon. John's teaching seems to have been composed
very largely of this element ; he spoke freely of the " wrath to come." We are bound
to consider —

I. The fdtubb which wb have to fear. We are not to imagine that because
those terrible pictures of physical suffering which arose from mistaking the meaning of
our Lord's figurative words have long ceased to haunt the minds of men, there is there-
fore nothing to apprehend in the future. That would be a reaction fi'om one extreme
to another. If we take the authority of Scripture as decisive, it is certain that the
impenitent have everything to fear. They have to face : 1. Jztdgment and, with judg-
ment, condemnation. " VVe must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ."
" Every one shall give account of himself to Groi." What reason here for keen appre-
hension on the part of ^e impenitent sensualist, oppressor, defrauder, scorner I 2. 1^
penalty which is due to guilt. This may be heavier or lighter, according as the light
in which a man lived was clearer or less clear; but when we think how sin is branded
and smitten now, what shame and suffering follow in its train in this world of probation,
how seriously Divine wrath visits iniquity even in the day of grace, we may well
shrink, with a fear that is not craven but simply wise, from enduring the penalty of
unforgiven sin in the world of retribution (see Kom. ii. 5 — 9). It is not the brave, but
the blind and the infatuated, who are indifferent to " the wrath to come."

II. OuB COMMON iNTBBEST IN THIS SOLEMN THEME. " Who hath wamcd you^ Said
John, addressing himself (as we learn from Matthew) more particidarly to the Pharisees
and Sadducees, " to flee from the wrath to come ? How comes it that you, who are so
perfectly satisfied with yourselves and charge yourselves with no defects, are concerned
about judgment? And how is it that you Sadducees, who profess not to believe in
any future at all, are trembling in view of another world ? " Why did the rigid for-
malist and the sceptic come to listen so attentively to his doctrine of repentance ? The
truth was and is that the supposed sufBciency of Pharisaical proprieties, and the barrier
of sceptical denials, break down in the hour when the faithful and fearless prophet
speaks, when the stern but friendly truth of God finds its way to the human conscience.
Our carefully constructed defences may last for days, or even years, but they will not
last for «Ter; the hour comes when some strong; reality sweeps them away. There if



78 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. [cH. III. 1—38.

not one of ub, into how many different classes or denominations we may be divided,
who does not need to inquire earnestly of God's spokesman what is the way of escape
from the penalty of sin. And we know what is —

IIL The sxjbb way of escape. It is that of penitence, on which John so strongly
insisted ; and of faith in that " Lamb of Gud " whom he pointed out as " taking away
the sins of the world." — C.

Vers. 8 — 14. — The futile in religion, etc. In these verses we have brought Into
view four aspects of religious truth.

I. The futile. The Pharisee, if he were charged with any evil course, consoled
himself with the thought that he was a " son of Abraham ; " to his mind it was every-
thing with God that he was lineally descended from the fatljer of the faithful, and had
been admitted by the rite of circumcision into the " commonwealth of Israel." John,
anticipating the doctrine of Jesus Christ, demolishes this delusion. That, he tells his
audience on the banks of Jordan, is a matter of very small account with Heaven; that
is not the criterion of character; that is not the passport to the kingdom of God. Let
no man think to build on that poor foundation. Not genealogical connection with
the best of men (see John i. 13), not admission by outward rite into any visible com-
munity, decides our state before God. If we appear before him, and have no Iwtter
plea than this to offer, we must prepare for his dismissal. All that is fleshly, all that
is circumstantial, all that is outward and unspirituRl, falls short of the Divine require-
ment. It does not bring us into the kingdom of heaven.

II. The difficult. " God is able of these stones," etc. Nothing could be easier
than for Almighty power to raise up children unto Abraham — to bring into existence
more children of privilege. He had but to " speak, and it would be done ; to command,
and it would come forth." But it was quite another thing to win the disobedient and
the disloyal to filial love and holy service, to bring the hard of heart and the proud of
spirit to penitence and confession of sin, to conduct the feet that had long been walking
in paths of selfishness and guilt into the ways of wisdom and of worth. This is a work
in the accomplishment of which even the Divine Spirit employs many means and
expends great resources and exercises long patience. He teaches, he invites, he pleads,
he warns, he chastens, he waits. And on this great, this most difficult work, this spiritual
victory, on which the eternal Father spends so much of the Divine, we surely may be
well content to put forth all our human, strength.

HI. The severe. " Now also the axe is laid unto the root ... is hewn down, and
cast into the fire." John intimates that a new dispensation is arriving, and with its
coming there will come also a more severe sentence against disobedience and un&uitful-
ness. The shining of the fuller light will necessarily throw far deeper shadows. They
who will not learn of the great Teacher will fall under great condemnation. The use-
less trees in the garden of the Lord will now not only be disbranched, they will be out
down. It is a very solemn thing to live in the full daylight of revealed religion. With
every added ray of privilege and opportunity comes increase of sacred responsibility
and exposure to the Divine severity.

IV. The practical. (Vers. 10—14.) Real repentance will show itself in right
Vehaviour, and every man, according to his vocation, will take his rightfiil part. The
man of means will be pitiful and generous ; the man in ofBce will be just and upright ;
the soldier will be civil ; the servant will be faithful and be satisfied with the receipt
of what is due to him ; the master and the mistress will be fair in their expectation of
service ; the father will be considerate of his children's weakness ; the children will be
regardful of their parents' will. And while the right thing will be done, it will be done
reverently and religiously, not only as unto man, but as " unto Christ the Lord."— 0.

Vers. 15 — 17. — The wisdom, of a true estimate. Those who are far up the •oci'l
heights are usually under a strong temptation to climb to the very summit. We do
not know how strong the temptation may have been to John to assume or to attempt
the part of the Messiah. Popularity is very exciting and ensnaring ; it leads men to
prefer claims and to adopt measures which, on lower gronnd and in calmer mood, they
would not have entertained for a moment. But John's mind never lost its balance
in the tumult of great professional success. Unlike most men, he seems to hav*



OH. m. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. 79

etood prosperity better than adversity (see Matt. xi. 2, 3), He does not appear to
have wavered for a moment in his fidelity to the Lord whose way he came to prepare;
he always retained a true estimate of himself, his work, and his Master. In this
respect he was as wise as he was true, and we cannot do better than emulate his
wisdom.

L A TBtTB ESTIMATE OF 0DB8ELTB8. John knew that in personal worth and
dignity he was not for a moment to be compared with Jesus. That great Prophet whom
he was preceding was " One mightier than himself," One for whom he was not worthy
to discharge the meanest ofBce which the slave renrlers his master. In cherishing this
thought he was both right and wise. There is the truest wisdom in humility. To
mistake ourselves, to think ourselves greater or worthier than we are, is to do ourselves
the greatest injury and wrong. 1. It is to offend God and to draw down some sign
of his serious displeasure (Jas. iv. 6). 2. It is to incxur the disapproval and hostility
of our fellow-men ; for there is nothing that our neighbours more thoroughly dislike on
our part than an exaggerated notion of oiu: own importance. 3. It is in itself an evil
and perilous condition, in which we are open to the worst attacks of our spiritual enemies.
On the other hand, humility is acceptable to God, approved of man, and safe.

II, A TRUE ESTIMATE OF CUB POSITION andof the work we have to do in the world.
John clearly recognized, and very distinctly declared, that his mission in the world
was one altogether and immeasurably inferior to that of Christ ; to those who would
not have been surprised to learn that he claimed to be the Messiah he made it known
that he was doing that which was slight and small in comparison with the work of
Christ. It is indeerl a good and a wise thing for us to aspire to do all that God gives
us the capacity and the opportunity to do. But let us take great care that we do not,
from pride or vain-glory, go beyond that boundary-line. If we do we shall make a
serious and possibly even a calamitous mistake. Many that have done excellent
service and have had great joy in the doing it when they have worked within the range
of their powers, have done grievous mischief and have suffered sad trouble when they
have attempted that which was beyond them. Nothing but injury to others, damage
to the cause of God, and sorrow for ourselves can arise from an over-estimate of the
position we are able to fill.

III. A TBUE ESTIMATE ot ouB LoRD. That Mighty One who was coming should
io the very greatest things. He would : 1. Act with direct Divine energy upon the
souls of men — " baptize with the Holy Ghost." 2. Utter truth which should have •
great testing and cleansing power ; his Tan would " throughly purge his floor " (see
homily on ch. ii. 34). 3. Make a final distinction between the true and the false :
" He will gather the wheat into his garner," etc. No man who cares for his own
spiritual and eternal interests can afford to disregard the words or the work of this
great Prophet that was to come, that has come, that " is now exalted a Prince and a
Saviour," giving redemption and eternal life to all who seek his grace and live in hie
service. — C.

Vers. 21, 22. — OocHt good pleasure in im. There are some preliminary lessons we
do well to learn before we approach the main one ; e.g. : 1. That piety will sometime*
prompt UB to do that which we are under no constraint to do. Jesus was not under
any obligation to be baptized with the baptism of repentance. Moreover, he could not
be said to be enrolling himself as a disciple of John. But he felt that " it became
him " to do what he did (Matt. iii. 15) ; probably his abstention would have been far
more likely to be misunderstood than his compliance : hence his action. If we are
earnestly desirous of doing everything we can in the cause of truth aud righteousness,
we shall not stop at the line of positive commandment or of necessity ; we shall consider
what it hecomes us to do and how we shall best serve the purposes of God's love. 2,
That God will not fail to manifest himself to us in the hour of need. Again and again
he appeared in strengthening grace unto his Son ; on this occasion, when " the heaven
was opened," etc. ; and when " his soul was troubled " (John i. 28) ; and in the garden
(ch. xxii. 43). So did he appear to Paul in the time of his neceseity (Acts xviii. 9 ;
xxiii. 11 ; 2 Tim. iv. 17). So will he appear in all-snstaining power unto ui in the
crises of our life. 3. That in proportion to our true devoutness of spirit may we look
for the manifestations of God's kindness. " Jesus . . . praying, the heaven was opened."



80 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. m. 1—38

The main lesson is that those who are God's true children may be assured of his good
pleasure in them.

I. God's good pleasure in his Son Jesus Cheist. " Thou art my beloved Son ;
in thee I am well pleased." The sentiment of Divine complacency and gladnesi is
Jesus Christ probably had regard to : 1. Our Lord's past earthly life, to the mnooenoy
of his childhood, to the integrity of all his life at home, to the preparation he had been
making in solitary study and devotion for his life-work. 2. To his then spiritual con-
dition, especially to his attitude toward his Divine Father, his submission to his holy
will, his readiness to undertake whatever that holy will should appoint hitn, and,
therefore : 3. To his sacred and sublime purpose, his intention to enter ,on that great
work which should issue in the redemption of mankind. It must have been no slight
access of holy strength* to the Saviour to be so strikingly assured of his Father's love
and good pleasure as he entered on that most arduous and lofty enterprise.

II. God's good pleasure in us. We cannot hope to have for ourselves the meaiure
of Divine complacency which was possible in the Person of our Lord. Yet in our
measure may we hope to have and to enjoy the good pleasure of our heavenly Father,
For us there may be : 1. Full forgiveness of the faulty past. Grieved with all that is
guilty, and resting on the abounding mercy of God in Jesus Christ, we are freely and
frankly forgiven ; so truly and thoroughly forgiven that our past transgressions and
shortcomings are buried from the sight of the Supreme ; they do not come between our
souls and his favour; they are to him as if they were not; they do not make us less
dear to his parental heart. 2. Positive Divine delight in our filial loyalty and love.
As God, searching our hearts with pure and benign regard, sees in us a true filial spirit,
a spirit of grateful love and of cheerful submission and of glad consecration to himself,
he is glad in us with a Divine, parental joy. 3. Divine satisfaction with owr purpose
for the future — our intention to dedicate our life to the service of God and to spend our
powers in the service of our kind. — 0.

Vers. 1 — 20. — 2%e ministry of the Baptist. We left Jesus, when last we studied
Luke's narrative, in Kazareth, subject to his parents and realizing a gracious develop-
ment in subjection. We have now to pass over about eighteen years, «{ which we
know only that during them he had become a carpenter (cf. Mark vi. 3), that we may
contemplate the preparatory movement under John the Baptist. In these verses we
find Luke entering upon the description with the hand of a true artist. He summarizes
for us a whole life in fewer verses a great deal than it had years. And yet they are so
deftly written that, had John Baptist no other memorial, they would secure for him
undying fame. Let us take the facts as they are put before us by Luke, noting such
lessons as they are well fitted to suggest. And —

I. The Baptist appeared when dboat had set m both in Church and Statb.
(Vers. 1, 2.) The Jewish kingdom, which had a unity until the death of Herod the
Great, has now been parcelled into tetrarchies, each governor reigning by grace of the
Boman emperor. The sceptre is assuredly departing from Judah. "The ancient glory
of the Israelitish monarchy only makes the present decline the more impressive. The
kingdom needs resuscitation or to be supplanted by a better kingdom. A national
leader was never more needful than now. The fulness of time has surely come. Again,
decay has seized upon the Jewish Church. The singular number used here (&px<«P^<»0>
while two names are associated with the high priesthood, shows to what a condition
the affairs of the Church had come. Annas is not allowed his lifetime of the ofBce,
according to the Law of Moses, but Caiaphas, his son-in-law happily, has b en appointed
by the civil power in his room. Eeformation is, therefore, sadly needed ; the hour has
struck, and happily the man is here.

II. The Baptist came as the pioneer of the Lord. (Vers. 3 — 6.) Luke here
borrows imagery from the prophecy of Isaiah (xl. 3 — 5), and a careful study of the
passage endorses the application of it to the preparatory work in view of the advent of
Messiah. John, like a pioneer, is to make a smooth path for the Prince of Peace ; but
the valleys to be raised, the mountains to be laid low, the crooked to be made straight,
and the rough ways to be made smooth, are not outward and physical obstacles. It is
not by /orce they are to be overcome, but by a voice, by a cry. They represent conse-
quently the chdratien of men. The valleys represent the depressed and despairing ;



OH. m. 1—38.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 81

the mountains, the exalted and proud ; the crooked, the tortuous in sin ; the rough
ways, the rugged and uncouth in natui-e. All these classes, through John's preaching,
are to he prepared for a sight of God's salvation in the Person of Messiah. How, then,
did John try to prepare his generation for Jesus? By "preaching the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins." Now, this new rite introduced hy John (cf. Godet,
t» loc.) was a tremendous indictment, so to speak, against human nature. It was as
much as to say to every man, "You need to be washed, entirely washed; you are so
defiled, you are sinners against God to such a degree that you must be not only washed
and purified, but also pardoned, betbre you can take your places in the kingdom of
Messiah." It was the proclamation to all his contemporaries that the one reformation
needed in order to better times was self-reformation — reformation beginning at home in
one's own bosom by the grace of God, as the most important preliminary to the reforma-
tion of the world. Repentance has been well defined as a taking of God's side against
ourselves;* and this was the spirit of John's reformation. It was a call to arms, but to
krniB against self, not against one's neighbours. And it is here that every true ret'oimer
must begin. We must reform ourselves first by the grace of God, or we shall be quite
unequal to any large reformation in the world.

III. The Baptist's pbbaohing was excbedqtoly plain aot) fbaotioal. (Vers.
7—9.) Luke here gives a resume of John's discourses. They were not certainly very
conciliatory. They did not mince matters. The vast multitude which came to hear
him was, he knew, largely of the Pharisaic class. They were proud to be children of
Abraham according to the flesh. They fancied this was sufficient to secure their
acceptance with God. But in spite of their good pedigree they were venomous at
heart, would sting a neigkbour like a viper, and do the most unbrotherly things.
Hence, as a faithful messenger from God, John tells his hearers what they are — but " a
generation of vipers." He asks them further who has warned them to flee from " the
wrath to come," that is, the judi^ments of Messiah ? He exhorts them in such circum-
stances to put away their fancied merit as children of Abraham, and to bring forth fruits
worthy of repentance, for in case they did not do so, they would be cut down and cast
into the fire. The " fi-uits " demanded were not, of course, graces of the Spirit, which
they could not of themselves produce ; but acts of reparation, of justice, and such like,
which were fitted to show the better view they were taking of their previous life, and
the amends it demanded at their hands. If sorrow for sin is genuine with us, it will
work a reformation immediately in our conduct; we shall not do the old hard-hearted
things we once were guilty of. Now, John, in thus dealing with the question of human
nature and its depravity, is an example to all our reformers. It is here that reforma-
tion is required,' and the philosophy that fails here has no pretensions to the leadership
of the world. No wonder, therefore, that " pessimism " hangs like a nightmare on the
boasted philosophy of the time, and men by philosophy alone cannot get rid of it.»

IV. The pbaotical advice given to different classes by John. ^ers. 10 — 14.)
The real success of preaching is proved by inquirers. When people begiu to ask what
they must do, the message has begun to tell. Now, different classes became inquirers.
They were from the lower ranks of the people. The Pharisees largely declined baptism,
as ch. vii. 30 shows. And : 1. 2^ aymmon people asked John's advice as to what they
should do. He tells them to be brotherly instead of grasping. He preached " frater-
nity." He that had a second coat, or some meat to spare, would do well to impart to
a needy brother. Co-operation in the battle of life is our first duty. 2. The tax-
gatherers ask what they should do. John tells them to avoid their easily besetting sin
of extortion. In fact, here, as always, the gospel begins by antagonizing man's selfish
impulses. 3. 2%e soldiers also ask his advice. These are believed to have been soldiers
on the march to a war in Arabia Petraea on behalf of Herod Antipas, and to have been
caught at the fords of the Jordan by the wave of religious excitement which was
surging there. The brave Baptist advises them to avoid (1) violence, (^2) perjury, and
(3) grumbling about better wages. He thus sets each class to fight against its easily
besetting sins.

> Cf. Monsell's ' Religion of Redemption,' p. 44.
• Of. Graham's ' Creed of Science,' pp. 227— 29a

» Cf. the admissions in 'Natural Religion,' by the author of* Ecoe Homo; 'also lai
Graham, at supra.

MJKB. •



82 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. m. 1— 3&

V. The Baptist's mission was but a promise op a better baptism. (VerS:
15 — 18.) When John's preaching had proved so successful, the people began to wondei
if he were not Messiah himself; and then it was that he declined leadership and gpoke
of a greater Leader and a far more important baptism. So great was his successor to be,
that John was not worthy to unloose his shoe-latchet ; and he was to have the grand
prerogative of baptizing the people with the Holy Ghost and with fire, or, as it perhaps
had better be, " in the Holy Ghost and fire {iv nvedfiaTi ayirf koI wpC)." The Spirit is an
Agent, not a means, as water is ; and his agency has all the purifying and sublimating
effect of fire, rendering those on whom he descends pure and ardent in the service of
the Lord. This baptism of the Spirit is what characterizes the dispensation of Messiah.*
But Messiah will exercise authority and execute judgment, as well as baptize with fire.
He will separate by his doctrine, which is his fan, the wheat from the chaff; and those
who demonstrate their worthlessness by rejecting the gospel, will be consigned by him
to fire unquenchable. If we will not accept of fire as purification, we shall receive it in
another form as fire of judgment (cf. Godet, in foe). Hence the solemn alternative
which Jesus sets before us in his gospel.

VI. The reward the world oivbs its spiritual heroes. (Vers. 19, 20.) It has
been supposed that John accepted a crafty invitation from Herod Antipas to come to
his court. The last act in the tragedy of his life is when he appears before us as a
courageous " court-preacher." ^ Here the Baptist would not take things ea.sily, as
courtiers do, but denounced the infamy of the monarch. His reward is a dungeon.
The finale is his murder. So has the world rewarded its spiritual heroes. It has
nothing better for the noblest than a castle-dungeon and a headsman's sword. This
shadow is inserted in Luke's history by anticipation. But there is artistic power in so
inserting it. It completes the picture of a great ministry. The forerunner of Messiah
has not a much better fate than Messiah himself. The age of heroes is beginning in
the person of John, the heroes who had heart to die for truth. Their blood is truth's
most precious seed, and the gospel which can command " the noble army of martyrs"
is destined to endure 1 ^ — E. M. E.

Vers. 21 — 38. — The laptism and genealogy of Jesus. From the general features of
the remarkable ministry of the Ba[)tist, summed up as it is for us in the preceding
verses, we now pass to the most notable instance of baptism performed by him. This
was the baptism of Jesus. We are expressly told that it was when the movement
under John had become national, when all the people (ajroKTo rhv \a6v) had submitted
to the rite, with, of course, the Pharisaic exceptions already noticed (ch. vii. 30), that
Jesus appeared at the Jordan to claim the rite too. We learn also from Matthew that
John at first objected, feeling an incongruity in the case. Had he been allowed, he
would have changed places with Jesus, and been the baptized rather than the baptizer.
But Jesus never descended to the administration of water-baptism; he always main-
tained his high prerogative as the Baptizer of men with the Holy Ghost and fire.
Hence, while he insisted on receiving water-bajitism, he left it to others to administer
it (cf. John iv. 2). Let us, then, proceed to the following inquiries : —

L What were Christ's reasons for submittino to this baptism unto repent-
ance? We must reject at once the insinuation of Strauss and others, that it implied
some sense of sin. Jesus never was conscious of sin, as his whole life and his express
testimony show (cf. John viii. 46; see also Ullman's ' Sinlessness of Jesus,' ^jassim)
Why, then, should he come ui der even the suspicion through a baptism unto repent-
ance ? The national character of the movement will help to explain our Lord's act.
The multitudes who submitted to baptism did so in hope of a place in Messiah'g
kingdom.^ But as a "kingdom of God " the impenitent and unpardoned could have no
place in it. A way must be found for the pardon and purification and penitence of
sinners. Christ's identification of himself, therefore, in baptism with tb'i expectant
people was his surrender of himself so far as needful for the accomplishment of this

' On this baptism of the Spirit, die Oeistestaufe, of. Weiss's 'Leben Jesu,' erstei band,
■. 307, etc.

» Of. Bersier's noble sermon on ' TJn Predicateur de Oour,' Sermons, tome ii. p. 3.

• Bobertson's last volume has two sermons on 'The Character and Mission of tbt
Baptist : ' see also Gerok's ' Pilgerbrod,' s. 36.



CH.III.1— 38.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LTJKK 88

great work.^ It was not osly a response to the Father's call to enter upon his peculiar
Messianic work, as Weiss in his ' Leben Jesu ' has very properly suggested, but also a
deliberate assumption of the responsibilities of sinners. Hence it has been supposed
that, as the ordinary candidates for baptism confessed their personal sins (Matt. iii. 6),
so Jesus most probably confessed the sins of the nation and people who were looking
hopefully for his advent. This dedication, moreover, implied self-sacrifice in due
season. The Messiah hereby became voluntarily " the Lamb of God " to take away
the sins of the world, and John seems to have realized this himself (John i. 29), It
was consequently the most sublime dedication which history records. It was not a
mere entrance of the " valley of death," like a soldier in a battle-charge, with a few
moments' agony and then all is over ; but it was a dedication of himself, three yean
and more before he suffered, to a policy wMch could end only in his crucifixion.

II. In what way did tee Father bbspond to this sublime dedication of
THE Son? Wo are told that Jesus was " praying" during the administration of the
rite. As Arndt observes, " Instead of John urging Jesus to bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, as he had done with others, it is here simply said by Luke, ' And Jesus
prayed.' " He prayed with uplifted eye, and for those gifts and graces which his great
work needed. His prayer was for his rights in the emergency of his sacrificial life.
We seek grace from God as a matter of free favour, and for the Saviour's sake. He
sought grace and gift as a matter of Bim[>le justice, seeing he was undertaking to
perform the Father's good pleasure in the salvation of sinners. And now we have to
notice how the Father responded to his appeal. 1. The Father granted him the gift
of the opened heaven. When it is said " the heaven was opened," we are not to under-
stand by it merely that a rent took place among the clouds to allow the Divine Dove to
come fluttering down, but rather that the right of Jesus to access to the heavenly light
and secrets is recognized. As Godet puts it, it was the guarantee of a perfect revelation
of the Father's will in this great work of saving men. Any clouds which sin may have
intei'posed between man and God were in Christ's case cleared away ; and, as a sinless
Representative, he is enabled in unclouded light to realize his duty in the matter of
man's redemptiun. It was a splendid assurance that Jesus, at all events, would not
want light in the midst of duty. And if we follow the Lord fuUy, we too shall have
such opening of the heavens, and such revelation of duty, as will enable us to see the
proper path, and to tread it for the benefit of mankind. 2. The Father granted him
the Holy Spirit in the organic form of a descending dove. This symbol is only used in
Gen. L 2, where the Spirit is represented as " brooding dove-like o'er the vast abyss,"
to use the Miltonic paraphrase ; and here in connection with Christ's baptism. The
soul of Christ, upon which the Holy Spirit on this second occasion descended, was the
scene of a mightier work than the chaotic abyss at first. The new creation is greater
than the old ; and the sinless material upon which the Divine Dove had to brood
guaranteed a more magnificent result than the sensible world affords. The " super-
natural evolution" hereby secured has been mightier and more magnificent than the
evolution in nature.' Now, regarding the significance of the symbol, we are taught
that (1) the Holy Spirit came down in his entirety upon Jesus. Other men receive the
Spirit in measure, and hence as oil,as fire, as water, as wind, — these minor symbols sufficing
to represent our tiny inspirations; but Jesus receives the Spirit as a dove, an organic
whole — ^the Spirit without measure (John iii. 34). We are also taught (2) that the
dove-like graces were imparted in all fulness to Jesus. "As the dove is the symbol of
innocence, of purity, of noble simplicity, of gentleness and meekness, of inoffensiveness
»nd humility, so Jesus stood there in possession of the Holy Ghost, as the complete
embodiment of all these perfections." ' And it is out of his fulness we must all receive,
»nd grace for grace. His is the perfect inspiration, ours is the mediated inspiration, so far
as we can receive the Spirit. Let us look prayerfully for the descent of the Dove, and
he will come to abide even with us I But yet again (3) the Father granted to Jesus th«
assurance of Sonship. From the account in Matthew we should suppose the words
were spoken to John ; from this in Luke we should infer that they were spoken only

' Godet, in he.; also hia 'iltudes Bibliques,' tome 11. p. 101; and his 'Explications w
l^ponse aux qnelques Eemarques de M. Darby,' pp. .S2— 35.

' Cf^ Dr. Newman Smyth's ' Old Faiths in New Light,' American edit, pp. 185 — 28&

* Ot Aiudf s * Leben Jem,' enter theil, ss. 181, 182.



84 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LdKE. [oh. it. 1—44.

and directly to Jesus. Both hearers were doubtless regarded in the paternal communi-
cation. Now, when we consider all that Jesus had undertaken in accepting baptism,
he surely had a right to this assurance, that as a Son he was well-pleasing in all his
consecrated life to the Father. It was upon this he fell back in the lonely crisis of his
history (John xvi. 32). It was the only consolation left to him. And a similar assur-
ance may be looked for by us if we are trying to follow in the footsteps of our Lord.
It will in our case be a matter of free grace, and not of strict right ; but it will in con-
sequence be all the more precious. Most likely we shall have lonely hours when we
shall be deserted by supposed friends, and be put upon our mettle as to our faith in the
ever-present Father ; but at such times the assurance that our conduct has been pleasing
in some measure to the Father, and that he sympathizes with us in our work, will be
the greatest earthly consolation. If, in studying to show ourselves approved unto God,
we are denied every other approval, we can feel the Divine to be all-sufBcient I

III. What are wk to lbabn from the interposed genealogy? Jesus had
jiist been assured of his Sonship, according to St. Luke's history, and now the evange-
list interposes between the baptism and the temptation the genealogy of his human
nature, carrying it upwards, step by step, to God. The course taken is the reverse of
Matthew's. Writing for Jews, Matthew simply starts with Abraham and descends
to Joseph, the reputed father of Christ, and so fulfils all Jewish demands. But Luke,
writing for a wider Greek-speaking audience, begins with Jesus, the all-important
Person, passes to Heli, Mary's father, and then upwards, step by step, past Abraham to
Adam, and from Adam to God. Is it not to make out, in the first place, a wider
relation for Jesus than Jewish prejudice would afford ; to show, in fact, that he is
related by blood to the whole human family, and contemplates in the broadest spirit its
salvation ? In the second place, does the genealogy not clearly imply a direct relation
between human nature and God? Man was made at first in the Divine image. This
fact afEords the basis and the key to the Incarnation. The Divine can unite with the
human, since the human was originally the image of the Divine. This relation to God,
this spark of Divinity within human nature, constitutes even still man's chief glory.
" According to the gospel of the Spirit, Adam is the son of God ; according to the
gospel of the senses, man is the son of an atom. ... If the former prove to be the true
descent of man, then we are capable of religion, and we live in some personal relation-
ship to a Being higher than ourselves, from whom we came." * We accept, with Luke,
as truth the Divine " descent of man," whatever analogies may be made out between
man and the beasts. It is surely evidence of our degradation that this Divine descent
should be called in question, and its demonstrations disregarded. In the third place,
we have to notice that some of Christ's ancestors were not very creditable — the " bar
sinister " enters once or twice, as in the case of Thamar and of Bahab ; yet this only
shows that he owed nothing to his pedigree, but was willing to be related to all kinds
of people that he might become their Saviour.' Let us, then, rejoice in the relation
thus established between the eternal Son of God and the human race ; and may that
Divine image, implanted in the race at first, have its gloriou renewal in our individual
experience 1 — B. M. E.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER IV.

Ven. 1 — 13. — The Temptation.

The consecration of our Lord in his bap-
tism was immediately followed by what is
knowc as his temptation. It is, perhaps, the
most mysterious and least understood of



any of the scenes of the public ministry

related by the evangelists.

It is related at some length by SS. Mat-
thew and Luke, with very slight difference
of detail, the principal one being the ordet
in which the three great temptations oo.
curred. In St. Mark the notice of this



• ' The Religious Feeling,' by Dr. Newman Smyth, p. 9L

* Of. Arndt's ' Leben Jesu,' erster theil, ss. 9, 10.



»H. IV. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDIN& TO ST. LUKE.



85



■trange episode in the life ia very short,
but harmonizes perfectly with the longer
accounts of SS. Matthew and Luke, St.
John omits it altogether ; first, because, with
the earlier written Gospels before him, he
was aware that the Church of liis Master
already possessed ample details of the occur-
rence ; and secondly, the story and lessons
of the temptation did not enter into the plan
which St. John had before him when he
composed his history of his Lord's teaching.

What, now, was the temptation ? Did the
evil one appear to Jesus actually in a bodily
form ? Did his feet really press some eleva-
tion, such as the summit of snowy Hermon,
or the still more inaccessible peak of Ararat ?
and did the far-reaching prospect of sea and
land, mountain and yalley, bathed in the
noonday glory of an Eastern sun, represent
to him the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them? Did he in very truth stand
on the summit of the great temple-roof, and
from that dizzy height gaze ou the crowds
below, crawling like ants across the sacred
court, or toiling along the Jerusalem streets ?

So generally thought the ancients, and so
it would appear, on fii'st thoughts, from St.
Matthew's account, where we read (iv. 3),
" The tempter came to him ; " and the vivid
realistic imagery of St. Mark (i. 12, 13)
would rather help us to the same conclusion.
Some expositors and students of the Word
have imagined — for it comes to little more
— that the devil manifested himself to Jesus
under the guise of an angel of light ; others
have supposed the tempter came to him as
a wayfaring man ; others, as a priest, as one
of the Sanhedrin council.

But on further consideration all this seems
highly improbable. No appearance of the
devil, or of any evil angel, is ever related in
the Bible records. The mountain whence the
view of the world's kingdoms was obtained
after all is fanciful, and any realistic inter-
pretation is thoroughly unsatisfactory and
improbable. The greater of the modern
scholars of different countries — the Germans
Olshausen and Neander, the Dutch Van
Oosterzee, the Frenchman Pressens^ the
Swiss Godet, Farrar and Plumptre in our
own land — reject altogether the idea of a
presence of the tempter visible to the eye
of sense. The whole transaction lay in the
spiritual region of the life of Christ, but on



that account it was not the less real and
true.

Nor is it by any means a solitary expe<
rience, this living, beholding, listening, and
even speaking in the Spirit, narrated by the
evangelist in this place hb a circumstance
in the Lord's life. Centuries before, Ezekiel,
when in his exile by the banks of Ohebar
in,Chaldea, was lifted up and borne by
the Spirit to far-distant Jerusalem, that he
might see the secret sins done in the temple
of the Lord (Ezek. viii. 3). Isaiah again,
in the year that King Uzziah died, saw the
Lord on his throne, surrounded by sera-
phim ; in this vision the prophet tpeaks, and
liean Hhe Lord speak, and a burning coal
from off the altar is laid on his mouth
(Isa. vi. 1—11). To pass over the several
visions of Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and others,
in which the transactions lay altogether in
the spiritual region of their Uves, we would
instance from the New Testament St. Paul's
account of himself caught up into paradise,
'■ whether in the body or out of the body "
he could not tell '(2 Cor. xii. 1 — 4). And
still more to the point, St. John's words
prefacing his Revelation, how he was " in
the Spirit on the Lord's day," when he
heard the voice behind him, and aaw his
glorified Master. On that day and in that
hour he heard and saw what he relates in
his twenty-two chapters of the Bevelation.

In language very slightly different, the
temptation of the blessed Son of God is
related by the evangelists, when they preface
tlie history of the event with the words,
"Jesus being fuU of the Holy Ghost , . .
was led by the Spirit into the wilderness "
(see, too. Matt. iv. 1).

We conclude, then, with some confidence,
that the devil did not appear to Jesus in a
bodily form, but that, in a higher sphere
than tliat of matter, the Bedeemer met and
encountered — with the result we know so
well— that spiritual being of superhuman
hut yet of limited power, who tempts men
to evil, and accuses them before the throne
of God when they have yielded to the temp-
tation. " We believe " — to ose Godet's
words here — " that had he been observed
by any spectator whilst the temptation was
going on, he would have appeared all
tlirough it motionless upon the Mil of the
desert But though the conflict did n-'



66



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [om. it. 1—44



pass out of the Bi-iritual Bpheie, it was none
the less real, and the value of the Tictory
was none the less incalculable and decisive."

Ver. 1. — And Jesna being full of the Holy
Ghost returned from Jordan, and was led
by the Spirit into the wilderness; more
accurately translated, in the Spirit. The
question of the nature of the temptation hiis
been discussed in the above note. The
words, " full of the Holy Ghost," and " was
led by the Spirit," lead us irresistibly to
the conclusion that the Lord, during this
strange solemn time — like Ezekiel, Daniel,
Isaiah, and, later, Paul and John the be-
loved apostle — was especially under the
influence of the Holy Spirit ; that his eyes
were open to see visions and sights not
usually visible to mortal eye ; and that his
ears were unlocked to hear voices not
audible to ordinary mortal ears. Tradition
has fixed upon a hill district bordering on
the road which leads up from Jericho to
Jerusalem, as the scene of the temptation.
The hill itself, from being the supposed
spot where the Lord spent these forty days,
is named Quarantauia. The rocks in this
neighbourhood contain many caves.

Ver. 2.— Being foi:ty days tempted of the
devil. For some reason unknown to us, the
number forty seems to possess some mystic
significance. Moses was forty days alone
with the Dirine Presence on Horeb. Elijah
fasted forty days in the wUdemess before
the vision and the voice came to him.
Forty years was the period, too, of the
wanderings of the chosen people. The exist-
ence of an evil power has been a favourite
subject of discussion in those schools of
thought who more or less question the
authoritative teaching of the canonical
books of the two Testaments. Keim, quoted
by Godet, well and fairly sums up the
present state of opinion of the more mode-
rate and thoughtful schools of free-thought :
" We regard the question of an existence of
an evil power as altogether an open question
for science." Those, however, who recog-
nize the Gospel narratives as the faithful
expression of Jesus Christ's teaching, must
accept the repeated declarations of the
Master that an evil being of superhuman
power does exist, and has a great, though
a limited, influence over the thoughts and
works of men. Whatever men may feel
with regard to the famous clause in the
Lord's Prayer, which the Bevisers of the
Authorized Version render, " deliver us from
the evil one," they must agree at least with
the conclusion of the Bevisers, that, in the
Christian Church, a large majority of the
ancients understood the Master's words in his
^reat prayer as asking deliverance, not from
evil tat the abstraot, aa the English



Authorized Version seems to prefer, but
deliverance from the power of some mighty
evil being. And in those days he did eat
nothing. In this state of ecstasy, when the
body was completely subordinate to the
Spirit, the ordinary bodily wants seem to
have been suspended. There is no difficulty
in accepting this supposition, if the signifi-
cation of the words, " in the Spirit," above
suggested, be adopted. The whole trans-
action belongs to the miraculous. We, who
receive as God's Word these Gospel narra-
tives, find no difficulty in recognizing God's
power to suspend, when he pleases, what
men regard as fixed natural laws We be-
lieve, too, that on certain occasions in the
world's history it has pleased him to put
this power into operation. He afterward
hungered. Although still in the Spirit, in
order to provide a field for the exercise of
the peculiar typical temptation about to be
dwelt upon, some of the bodily functions,
which during the trance or the ecstasy had
been temporarily suspended, were allowed
again to play their usual part in the Ufe, as
in the case of Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Paul,
and John.

Ver. 3. — And the devil said unto him, If
thou be the Son of God, command this stone
that it be made bread. It has been quaintly
said of the tempter " that he had sped so
successfully to his own mind by a tempta-
tiou about a matter of eating with the first
Adam, that he practised the old manner of
his trading with the second." These diaboli-
cal promptings have been spoken of already
in this Commentary as " typical." They
represent, indeed, some of the piincipal
temptations to which different classes of men
and women in all ages are subject ; the hard
task of bread-winning, after all, suggests very
many of the evil thoughts and imaginings
to which men are subject, though, perhaps,
they suspect it not. Weakened and ex-
hausted by long abstinence from food, the
temptation to supply liis wants by this easy
means at ouce was great. Still, had he
consented to the tempter's saggestion, Jesus
was aware that he would have broken the
conditions of that human existence to which,
in his deep love for us fallen beings, he had
voluntarily consented and submitted him-
self. Should he, then, use his miraculous
power for his own advantage? Then, re-
membering his own late experience, the
long fast from all human food, and yet life
enduring through it all; calling to mind
the miraculous supply of manna in the old
desert days, the preservation of Elijah's life
through a similar fast, — Jesus, all faint and
weary, exclaims in reply, "Man shall not
live by bread alone."

Ver. S. — And the devil, taking Urn np
into an high mountain, showed nnto him oU



0H.rr. 1— 44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



81



the Ungdoms of the world in a moment of
time. This temptation was something more
than " offering to One who had lived as a
village carpenter the throne of the world."
It appealed to his ambition certainly, hnt
in Jesus' case it was a high, pure, sinless
ambition. Tliis much he certainly knew
already, that he was destined to rule over
men from pole to pole. It was for him a
righteous longing, this desire to have the
heathen for his inhi. ritauoe, and the utter-
most parts of the earth as his possession.
No false ambition was this in Jeans, this
desire to realize the glorious Messianic
hope. Again, how typical a temptation I All
ranks and orders are often soon tempted
here. A noble end as they think, and in
the beauty of the goal they forget that the
road leading to it is paved with evil and
wrong.

Ver. 7. — If thou therefore wilt worship
me, all shall be thine. Dr. Morrison, on
Matt. iv. 9, has well caught the thought
here. The aich-tempter "as it were said
to Jesus, ' I am indeed the prince and god of
this world. Its kingdoms and their gloiy
are at my disposal. I could at onue open up
thy way to the highest honouis that a uni-
versal conqueror and a universal sovereign
could desire. I could gather at once around
thee a host of devoted Jewish troops ; I could
pave tlieir way for victory after victory,
until at no distant period the whole Koman
empire, and indeed the whole world, should
be subject to thy sway. Only abandon
the wild chimera of putting down sin and
making all men fanatical and holy ; fall in
with my way of things ; let the morals of
the world alone, more especially its morals
in reference to God ; work with me and
under me, and all will go well. But if thou
refuse this oHVr, look out for determined
opposition, for incessant persecution, for the
most miserable poverty, and for every species
of woe.' "

Ver. 8. — Get thee behind me, Satan; for it
is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shalt thou sferve. Jesus
repelled the offer witli stein indignation.
He would receive the splendid inlieritance
which he felt was his at no other hands
than his Father's; he would win nil and
more than the tempter offered him, but it
would be by a slow and painful process— by
self-denial, self-sacrifice, self-surrender ; the
glorious consummation would only be at-
tained at the end of a long vista of cen-
turies. The words, " Get thee behind me,
Satan," do not occur in the older manu-
scripts containing St. Luke's Gospel. These
are evidently a later addition from the
parallel pasbage in St. Matthew.

Ver. 9. — And he brought him to Jerusa-
lem, and set him on a piuuaole of the temple.



In St. Matthew Jerusalem is here called
" the holy city," a name still preserved in
the East, where it is still termed Hl-Khuds,
the holy. Pinnacle ; literally, " wing " of the
temple. " Pinnacle " comes from the Vulgate
translation, pinnacMlmn. The part of the
great building evidently referred to here
was that magnificent southern wing of the
Lord's house constructed by Herod the
Great, which was known as the royal por-
tico. Josephus calls it the most remarlcdble
huilding v/nder the sun (' Ant.,' xv. 11. 5).
One who stood on the roof of this portion of
the temple would look from a dizzy height
into the Valley of the Kidron. Such a spec-
tator, writes Josephus (' Ant.,' ii. 5), " would
be giddy whUe his sight could not reach to
such an immense depth." To this spot,
" whether in the body or out of the body "
we cannot tell, Jesus was taken by the evil
spirit. "Now," said his tempter, "if you
really are what you seem to think, oast thyself
down. You know what is written in the
Divine writing, how the Eternal would give
his angels charge concerning thee, they were
to bear thee up, ' lest at any time thou dash
thy foot against a stone.' If thou art he of
whom all this is written, there will be no
risk. You are sure that you are the Son of
God : try this once, and see. If you trium-
phantly come out of this trial, all men wUl
recognize you, and your reign as Messiah
will commence forthwith." This temptation
was of a more subtle nature than the other
two. It appeals again to all ranks of men,
and warns them of the sore danger of lelf-
ishly courting danger. The angels will ever
watch over us with ~ tender care when, to
accomplish a duty or to perform an act of
self-denying love, we confront peril ; not so
when we presumptuously and for our own
ends rush into danger.

Ver. 12. — And Jesus answering said unto
him, It is said. Thou shalt not tempt the
Lord thy God. It is remarkable that in these
crowning instances of temptation, which no
doubt were originally recounted by the Lord
himself to the inner circle of the disciples,
and from them passed into the regular
course of instruction adopted by the Chris-
tian teachers of the first days, the Kedeemer,
in each of his three answers to the devil,
uses words taken from two chapti rs (the sixth
and eighth) of Deuteronomy. It has been
suggested that the thoughts and expression?
of this book were fresh in tlie mind of the
tempted Christ, as he had probably, specially
during his sojourn in the wilderness, used
for his own study and meditation a book
which told the story of Israel's wanderings
in the desert for forty years. It seems, how-
ever, more likely that the Lord simply Aosa
to fr.ame his answers from a book with which
every Israelite from his earliest years h,«i



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [ch iv. 1—44



been acquainted. The maxims and precepts
of Deuteronomy were used in tlie education
of every Hebrew child. Its devout and
beautiful maxuns were written on the phy-
lacteries or froutlets which so many pious
Jews were in the habit of wearing.

Yer. 13. — And when the devil had ended
all the temptation.

'•Thou Spirit, who ledd'st this glorious ere-
mite
Into the desert, hii victorious field.
Against the spiritual foe, and brought'st

him thence
By proof the undoubted Son of (Jod."

(Milton.)

St. Matthew closes the story of the " victo-
rious field " by telling us how, when every
hellish suggestion had been made and re-
pelled, the wearied and exhausted Jesus was
visited and refreslied by the visible ministry
of angels. The words of the Greek original
translated " all the temptation " would be
more accurately rendered by " every kind of
temptation." The three great temptations,
related by two of the evangelists in detail,
are very varied and comprehensive in cha-
racter, and appeal to most of the human
passions and desires ; but from the wordi
with which St. Luke began his recital, " be-
ing forty days tempted of tlie devil," it is
clear that Jesus was incessantly tempted the
whole time by hellish whispers and sugges-
tions, perhaps of the same kind, though with
varied details, as the three we have recorded
for us. Besides the uses of the temptation
mystery In the devdopment of the humanity
of the blessed Son of God, the great scene
has it? deep lessons for all sorts and condi-
tions of men in all times. Some eminent
expositors would seem to wish to limit the
area of the teaching of the temptation, and
to regard it as mainly an experience pre-
serve! I tor the guidance of the disciples of
the Master. They — so say these scholars —
were, from this scene in the life of the great
Teacher, to learn never to use their miracu-
lous power for their personal advantage (first
temptation) ; never to associate with wicked
men for the attainment of good ends (seiond
temptation); never to perform a miracle in
an ostentatious spirit (thud temptation),
AU this was doubtless contained in the
Lord's story of his awful experience, and the
lesson was never forgotten by the twelve and
their own immediate followers. But the
instruction was not meant to be confined to
the little circle of his own ; it was, like the
whole of the gospel teaching, intended for
all sorts and conditions of men. The com-
mon everyday lesson which every child
may read in this story uf his Master's trial,
is that from the plain appointed path of
duty, which very often too is the path of



suffering, no persuasion however ikilMly
worded, no sophistry however plausible,
most be sufficient to turn him. He departed
from him for a season; more accurately,
till a convenient season. It is evident that
all through tlie two years and a half of
the public ministry, which succeeded the
events just recorded, Jesus was exposed to
the various trials and temptations to which
suffering mortal fiesh is exposed. So Bona-
ventura, in his ' Life of Christ,' says, "Many
other were the occasions on which he en-
dured temptation." Still there is no doubt
but that the "convenient season" here
pointedly alluded to referred to that other
great epoch of temptation just before the
cross, when our Lord prayed in the agony of
the garden at the close of his earthly work.
There the tempter tried if great suffering
was not able to conquer tliat Sinless One.
Vers. 14 — 30. — The Pkeaouino or Jesci

AT NaZABETH, and ITS BeSULT.

Yer. 14. — &nA Jesus retnmed inthe power
of the Spirit into Galilee: and there went
out a fame of him through all the region
round abont. Between the events of the
temptation and the preaching at Nazareth
here related, some considerable time had in-
tervened. St. John, in his Gospel, gives a
somewhat detailed account of this period
which St. Luke omits. Shortly after the
temptation, took place the concluding inci-
dents in the Baptist's career, which St. Luke
summarized in his brief statement (ch. iiL
19, 20), when he tells us of the arrest and
imprisonment of the fearless preacher by
tlie Tetrarch Herod. St John tells how the
Sanhedrin sent some special envoys to the
Baptist, asking him formally who he really
was. After tbis questioning, John in his
Gospel mentions the calling of Andrew,
Simon, Philip, and Nathanael, and then
records the first miracle of Jesus at Cana
in Galilee, and how the Lord visited Caper-
naum. He then proceeds to relate some of
the circumstances which took place at the
Passover at Jerusalem, and how the Lord
drove out the men who profaned his Father's
house. He writes down, too, the particulars
of Nicodemus the Pharisee's visit to Jesui
by night. The Master then proceeded, ai
is here related by St. Luke, " in the power
of the Spirit," who descended on him form-
ally at his baptism, into Galilee, and on his
journey thither tarried at Samaria, resting
on the well there, and talking with the
woman in those memorable words recorded
by St. John at length in his fourth chapter
(vers. 4 — 12). Eapidly the report of what
be had done at Cana, the fame of his mar-
vellous words at Jerusalem, Samaria, and
other places, spread through all the central
districts of the Holy Land.

Yer. IS. — ^And he taught in their lyna-



CH. IV. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACUOEDING TO ST. LUKE.



89



gogaen, lieiiig glorified of all. His miracles,
his words toucliing and eloquent, perhaps
too • dim memory of marvels which had
happened years hefore at his birth, shed
round the new Teacher a halo of glory. It
was only when,in8tead of the Messianic hopes
of oonqueut and power which they cherished,
a life of brave self-denial and quiet gene-
rosity was preached, that the reaction
against him set in. The men of Nazareth,
with their violent antagonism, which we ^re
about to consider, were only, after all, a few
months in adviince of the rest of the nation
in their rejection of the Messiah.

Ver. 16. — ^And he came to Nazareth, where
he had been brought up : and, as Ms custom
was, he went into the synagogue on the
sabbath day. This bad been for years his
practice in the little synagogue of the village
where was his carpenter's shop. Children
at the age of five years were admitted into
the synagogue, and at thirteen attendance
there was part of the legal life of the Jew.
These synagogues were the regular places
for religious gatherings every sabbath day,
and also usually on Mondays and Tuesdays,
besides on other special occasions. ^^ e hear
of them after the return from the Captivity,
and probably they existed long before.
Some think that in Pa. Ixxiv. 8 there is a
reference to them. And stood up for to read.
The holy books were always read standing.
The ruler or elder presided over and directed
the synagogue service. The priest and Le-
vite had no recognized position in the syna-
gogue. Their functions were confined to
the temple and to the duties prescribed in
the Law. It was not unusual for the syna-
gogue officials, if any stranger was present
who was known to be competent, to ask him
to read and to expound a passage in the Law
or Prophets. Our Lord was well known in
Nazareth, and of late had evidently gained
a great reputation as a preacher. It was,
therefore, most natural that he should be
asked to take a prominent part in the sab-
bath services.

Ver. 17. — And there was delivered unto
iiiTti the Book of the Prophet Esaias. In the
sabbath service there were two lessons read.
The first was always taken from the Penta-
teuch (the Law). The five books of Moses
were written on parchment, (usually) be-
tween two rollers, and the day's lesson was
left unrolled for the reader's convenience.
The Prophets were on single rollers, no
special portion being left open. It has been
suggested that the great and famous Mes-
sianic passage read by our Lord was the
lesson for the day. This is quite uncertain ;
indeed, it is more probable that Jesus, when
the roll of Isaiah was handed to him by the
ruler of the synagogue, specially selected
the section containing this passage.



Yer. 18. — The Spirit of the Lord ia npog
me. St. Luke here quotes, with a few nn
important variations, from the LXX. of Isa.
Ixi. 1, 2. /The clause, "to set at liberty
them that are bruised," does not occur in
the present text of Isaiah, The bright,
comforting words of the great prophet the
Lord chose as giving a general summary of
what he designed to carry out in his minis-
try/' It could be no undesigned coincidence
that the opening words of the passage con-
tain a singularly clear mention of the three
Persons of the blessed Trinity — ^the Spirit,
the Father, and the Anointed (Messiah),
Because he hath anointed me to preach the
gospel to the poor, eto. The common inter-
pretation referred this passage to the state
of the people on the return from the Cap-
tivity. Nothing, however, that the people
had yet experienced in any way satisfied
the brilliant picture painted in the great
prophecy. A remnant certainly had re-
turned several centuries back &om their
distant exile, but the large majority of the
chosen people were scattered abroad ; their
own land was crushed under what seemed a
hopeless servitude ; poverty, ignorance, uni-
versal discontent, reigned alike in Jerusalem,
garrisoned with Roman legionaries, and in
the most distant of the poor upland villages
of Galih^e. Only could deliverance come
and a golden age of prosperity return with
the promised Messiah. This was the inter-
pretation which the choicest spirits in Israel
applied to the great Isaiah prophecy read
that sabbath day in the little synagogue of
Nazareth. This was the meaning which
Jesus at once gave to it, only he startled his
hearers by telling them that in him they
saw the promised long-looked-for Deliverer.
We only possess, it is evident, the very
barest abstract of the words of the Teacher
Jesus on this occasion. They must have
been singularly eloquent, winning, and
powerful to have extorted the wonder and
admiration alluded to in thO' twenty-second
verse.

Ver. 20. — And he closed the book, and he
gave it again to the minister, and sat down.
This was the usual position adopted by a
Jewish preacher. The chair of the preacher
was placed near the spot where the lesson
was read. These synagogues were built
with the end pointed towards Jerusalem, in
which direction the Jew ever loved to turn
as he prayed (Dan. vi. 10). The men sat
on one side of the building, the women on
the other. There was always at the end
of the chamber an ark of wood, a memory of
the sacred ark of the covenant which once,
with its golden mercy-seat, hallowed now
and again with the presence of the visible
glory, was the chief treasure of the temple
on Mount Zion. In the " ark " were kept



so



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. iv. 1—44



the Law (the five books of Moses) and the
rolls of the piophets.

Ter. 22. — ^And they said, Is not this
Joseph's SonT Quickly the preacher canght
the mind and feeling of his audience. Sur-
prise and admiration soon gave place to a
spirit of unbelief. Is not this who speaks
to us Buoh words, bright and eloquent with
hope, often with a ring of sure triumph and
certain victory in them — is it not the young .
Carpenter we have known so long in our
village?

Ver. 23. — ^Ye will surely say unto me this
proverb. Physician, heal thyself. " There is
something interesting in our finding this
proverb in the Gospel rf the beloved physi-
cian. May we think of him hs hearing the
proverb casually, tracking out its applica-
tion, and so coming on this history? It was,
probably, so far as is known, a common
Jewish proverb ; but there is no trace of it
in Greek writers, and it was therefore likely
to attract his notice " (Dean Plumptre).
Whatsoever we have heard done in Caper-
naum, do also here in thy country. Now,
up to this time in Jesus' public career no
miracles are recorded as having been done
in CapernLium. After the miracle at Oana
we know that the Lord resiiied for some
time in Capernaum (John ii. 12); the
miracles to which these men of Nazareth
alluded were no doubt worked then. The
memory of these early miracles, as Godet
well observes, would have been effaced by
more remarkable later events, as that at
Cana would have been had not John, who
required it in the plan of his Gospel, rescued
it from oblivion. The Jews of Nazareth,
after the first moment of surprise and ad-
miration at Jesus' words, evidently looked
at him with scorn and unbelief. That poor
Carpenter their glorious expected Messiah 1
As for the marvellous deeds reported to have
been done in Capernaum, they did not be-
lieve in them ; at least why did he not here,
in the neighbourhood of his own home, some-
thing of the same kind? If they could see
with their eyes marvels worked by him,
then perhaps they might accept him as
Messiah.

Ver. 24. — And he said, Verily I say unto
yon, No prophet is accepted in his own coun-
try. But instead of gratifying their curi-
osity and supplying them with tome more
empty arguments why they should not
listen to his words, the Lord quietly quotes
a proverb well known to all people — Farrar
calls it a curious psychological fact — the
ouoting prefaced by the solemn "verily."
The Master was evidently looking far be-
yond the little prejudices of Nazareth.
" His own country " meant far more than
the B«tT»w circuit bounded by the Nazareth

ills Th« Speaker was thinking of all the



chosen people— of the Jews, who as a nslion
he knew too well would not accept him.
But if Israel would have none of him, he
would reign in the hearts of that unnum-
bered multitude who peopled the isles of
the Gentiles.

Vers. 25— 27.— But I teU yon of a truth,
many widows were in Israel in the days of
Elias, when the heaven was shnt np three
years and siz months, when great famine
was throughout all the land ; hut unto none
of them was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a
city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a
widow. And many lepers were in Israel in
the time of Eliseus the prophet ; and none
of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the
Syrian. In support of these assei'tions,
Jesus proceeds to quote two well-known in-
cidents in the story of Israel. They musi
remember God's mercies in past times were
not confined to Israel. There were many
starving widows among the chosen people,
not a few childless, desolate hearths; but
their own great Elijah was sent to none of
tliese, bat to a despised Phoenician woman
in Sarepta, hard by Sidon. Elisba, that
loved man of God, who passed by the homes
of the people continually, performed his
famous miracle of healing on no child of
Israel, though many a leper mourned bis
sad lot among the chosen people ; but the
one on whom Elisha worked his mighty
miracle of mercy was the Syrian leper Niia-
man, the great foe of Israel.

Ver. 28. — And all they in the synagogue,
when they heard these things, were filled
with wrath. The Jews in the synagogue
quickly canght the Master's meaning.
Thoughts such as " Thou our Messiah, who
talkest of Gentile, Syrian, and Zidonian in
the same breath with us the chosen and
elect of God, who hintest at the possibility
of the accursed Gentile sharing in our pro-
mised blessings!" flaslied through their
minds, and as one man the congregation rose,
and, seizing the Preacher, dragged him out
of tlie synagogue, and hurried him through
the little town to one of the rookv precipices
close by.

Ver. 29. — And rose np, and thrust him out
of the city, and led him unto the brow of the
hill whereon their city was built, that they
might oast him down headlong. The place
now shown as the scene of the aot of violence
of the fanatics of Nazareth, known as the
Mount of Precipitation, is some two miles
frnm the town. It must be remembered
that this happened on a sabbath day ; this
would therefore be beyond the limits of a
sabbath day's journey. There is, however,
close to Nazareth a cliff abont forty feet
high.

Ver. 30. — But he passing through th«
midst of them went his way. lUt tmom



oil. IV. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL AOCORrHNQ TO ST. LUKE.



91



Baiily a miracle. There is nothing hinted
here that our Lord rendered himself in-
visible, or that he smote his enemies with a
temporary blindness. He prubably quietly
overawed these angry men with his calm
self-possession, so that they forbore their
cmel pnrpose, and thus he passed through
their midst, and left Nazareth — as far as we
know — for ever. The foregoing is probably
the same visit very briefly alluded to by
St. Matthew (xiii. 54—58) and by St. Mark
(vi. 1 — 6), in both Gospels related in uncbro
nological order. Most likely they were aware
of the incident, but ignorant of the exact
place it held among the early events of the
Master's life. St. Luke, who gives it witli
far greater detail, inserts it evidently in its
right place. Is it not at least probable that
St. Luke derived his accurate knowledge of
this Nazareth incident from Mary, or from
some of her intimate circle, from whom he
procured the information which he embodied
in the earlier chapters of his Gospel? She,
and others of her friends, would be likely
to have preserved some accurate memories
of this painful visit of Jesus to his old home.

Vers. 31 — 44. — At Capernaum.

Ver. 31.— And came down to Capernaum.
Capernaum was the real home of the Master
during the two years and a half of his public
ministry. He chose this flourishing lake-
city partly because his kinsmen and first
disciples lived in it or its immediate neigh-
bourhood, but more especially on account of
its sitnation. It has been teriued the very
centre of the manufacturing district of
Palestine ; it lay on the high-road which led
froni Damascus and the Syrian cities to
Tyre, Sidon, and Jerusalem. "It was, in
fact, on 'the way of the sea' (Isa. ix. 1), the
great caravan-road which led (from tlie East)
to the Mediterranean. It was hence pecu-
liarly fitted to be the centre of a far-reaching
ministry, of which even Gentiles would
hear" (Farrar). The evangelist speaks of
" coming down " to the shore of the lake, in
contrast with Nazareth, which was placed
in the hills. We do not meet with the name
Capernaum in the Old Testament ; it there-
fore appears not to have been a city belong-
ing to remote antiquity. Its name is gene-
rally interpreted as being compounded of
two words, signifying "town of consola-
tion," Din: 133 — a beautiful and significant
derivation. It may, however, originally
have taken its name from the Prophet
Nahum. Josephus, the historian, tells us
the name originally belonged to a fountain.
He dwells also on the mildness of the cli-
mate ; it would therefore seem as though, in
the first place, Capernaum was used as a
health resort, and then its admirable situa-
tion favoured its adoption as a convenient
centre. The extensive ruins of TelSum,



on the lake-shore, are generally believed to
be the remains of the once rich and populous
Capernaum. And taught them on the sab-
bath days.

Ver. 32. — And they were astonished at his
doctrine ; for his word was with power. We
have here again a picture which gives a
general summary of Jesns' life extending
over a considerable period. This is the fifth
of these pictures of St. Luke. It represents
the Master dwelling quietly at Capernaum,
in the midst of his disciples, teaching and
preaching ; on the sabbath days gathering
a considerable concourse drawn from the
people at large, and generally surprising
the listeners with his earnestness, freshness,
and ability, which carried conviction into
many a heart, Gentile as well as Jew.
Although this period of the life of Jesus
was signalized by many miracles, it does
not seem that his ordinary preaching and
teaching needed any such supernatural tes-
timony to ena lie it to win its way. St.
Luke especially tells us it was with power,
and that the crowds heard it amazed and
astonished. St. Matthew gives us (vii. 29)
one reason, which helps us to understand
something of this success which attended
his teaching. It was " not as the scribes."
In the Talmud we have many a fair speci-
men of the sacred instruotion of the "schools"
in the time of our Lord. Frivolous minutiaj.
hair-splitting of texts, weary repetition of
the sayings of tlie men of old, questions con-
nected with the exact keeping ot the sabbath,
with tlie tithing of mint, anise, and cumniii,
a singular lack of all dealing with the
weiglitier matters of the Law — justice, j udg-
ment, truth — were among the characteristics
of the scribes' popular instruction. The
practical heart-searching words of Jesus
were in strong contrast with the curious
but useless themes dwelt on by the official
teachers of the day. It was with the thirty-
first verse of this chapter that the great
Gnostic heretic, Mareion (second century)
began his Gospel, which, in the early days
of Christianity, had a vast circulation.
Mareion, while preferring St. Luke's Gospel,
as emanating from St. Paul, before putting
it out as the authoritative history to be used
by his numerous followers, cut out the earlier
chapters of our Gospel, which bore on the
birth and infancy of the Lord, commencing
here — prefixing, however, a note of time,
thus: "In the fifteenth year of the govern-
ment of Tiberi us, Jesus went down" (Mareion
probably intended it to be understood from
heaven) " into the town of Galilee named
Capernaum."

Ver. 33. — And in the synagogue there was
a man, which had a spirit of an unclean
devil. After the general picture of Jesus'
life and work in Capernaum, St. Luke pro-



92



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. iv. 1—44



ceeds to give a detailed account of the way
in which one sabbath day waa spent, no
doubt intending us to understand it as a
specimen of the ordinary sabbath-day work
of the Master. We meet with here, for the
first time in our Gospel, one of those un-
happy persons desoribtil as either " having
a spiiit of au unclean devil," or as "pos-
sessed with a dBvil" or "devils," or in
similar terms, generally signifying "de-
moniacs," men or womtu — apparently a class
by themselves, directly umler the influence
of some evil spirit. Who, now, were these
unhappy beings with whom Jesus in his
ministry of mercy seems often to have come
in Contact? Many of tliese "demoniacs"
mentioned in the Gospels would nowadays
certainly be classed under the ordinary
category of the " sick." They seem to have
been simply afiSicted with disease of one
kind or other; for instance, the epileptic
child mentioned by St. Luke (ii. 39),
or dumbness again (Matt. ix. 32), blind-
ness (Matt. xii. 22), and insanity, among
other instances, are ascribed to demoniac
agency. Are we, then, simply to regard these
cases, not as exceptional displays of dia-
bolical power, but as instances of sickness
and disease which still exist among us?
and to suppose that our Lord, in speaking
of devils possessing these siuk ones, accom-
modated himself to the popular belief, and
spoke of these afflicted persons in the way
men were able to understand ? for it is in-
disputable that Judaism in the days of Jesus
of Nazareth ascribed to "demons," or
" devils," much of the suffering and woe
with which men are aiBicted under the
common name of disease. The Talmud,
which well represents the Jewish teaching
of that time, has endless allusions to evil
spirits, or devils, who were permitted to
work evil and mischief on the bodies and
even on the souls of men. Josephus, the
contemporary historian, narrates that a lamb
grew at Machserus, the wool of wliich had
the power of expelling devils; and he tells
how he was the eye-witness of the cure of a
man possessed of a devil by means of a ring
containing a root which had similar pro-
perties ; tliis, he says, took place in the
presence of tlie Kmperor Vespasian (' Ant.,'
viii. 2. 5 ; ' Bell. Jud.,' vii. 6. 3). Many be-
lli ved that these demons, or devils, were the
Bijuls of the wiuked who returned to earth
after death, and sought a new home for
tnemselves in the bodies of the livin;^'.
1'his popular belief in demoniacal agency
is mentioned by Justin Martyr (' Apol.,' i ),
and even seems to have lingered in some
parts as late as Clirysostom. But such u
theory — which represents Jesus in his mi-
raculous cures accommodating hiniselt' to
popular belief, and speaking of the sntfnrers



as possessed by devils which really had n«
existence save in imagination — ^is not only
quite foreign to the transparently truthful
character of all the Master's words and
works, but is perfectly incompatible with
the narra lives given us by the evangelists
of the cures in question. In these, in several
instances, the devils are not only spoken to,
but they speak themselves — they answer
questions, they even prefer requests. Jesus,
too, gives his own power to cast out devils
(ch. is. 1), and to tread on all the power of
the enemy (ch. x. 19). He even, in St. Mark
(ix. 29), is represented as distinguishing a
special class of devils over whom a mastery
could be obtained alone through prayer and
fasting. Evidently the Holy Spirit, who
guided the writers of those memoirs of the
apostles we call the Gospels, iniended that
a marked distinction should be impressed
upou the readers of the apostolic memoirs as
existing between ordinary maladies of th«
flesh and those terrible and various scourges
which the pre.^^ence of devils inflicted upon
those hapless beings in whose bodies, for
some mysterious reason, they had been per-
mitted to take up their habitation. The
whole question is fraught witb difficulties.
Dean Flumptre suggests that perhaps we
possess not the data for an absolutely certain
and exhaustive answer. It seems, on the
whole — while not denying the possible pre-
sence of these evil spirits at different times
of the world's history occupying the bodies
and distracting the souls of men — best to
assume that these devils possessed special
and peculiar power over men at that period
when Jesus walked among us. By this
means, as Godet well says, Jesus could be
proclaimed externally and visibly as the
Conqueror of the enemy of men (and of his
legions of evil messengers). That period,
when the Lord taught among us, was a
time when, it is generally conceded, moral
and social evil had reached its highest point
of development. Since that age the power
of these unhappy spirits of evil has been, if
not destroyed, at least restrained by the
influence — greater, perhaps, than men choose
to acknowledge — of the Master's religion
or by the direct command of the Master
himself.

Yer. 34. — Let us alone ; what have we to
do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth T art
thou come to destroy us ? This man, with
his evil spirit, would have been looked on
as UDclean, and would not have been ad-
mitted within the synagogue walls; he had
probably erept in unseen. Something in
the nearness to the holy Teacher we know
compelled the demon to cry aloud. It is
strange, this presence of God causing pain
It is the impossibility of the wounded eye
beaiing light. The cry rendered, " Let oi



OH.IV. 1— 44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE.



»lone," Is scarcely the imperative of tia, but
an interjection, possibly the Greek repro-
duction of the Hebrew nnK^.ahl woet There
was evidently some deeper degree of misery
possible for the unhappy spirit ; hence its
** Alt thou come to destroy us ? " The same
dread appears in the case of the Gadarene
demoniac (oh. Till. 31 ; Matt. viii. 29), where
the spirits dreaded being driven into the
deep, where such spiiits await the judgment,
that abyss, literally, "the bottomless place ; "
any doom seemed to these lost ones prefer-
able to that. I know thee who thou art;
the Holy One of God.

Ver. 35.— And Jesus rebuked him, saying,
Kold thy peaoe. Jesus at once indignantly
refuses this homage. He never allowed
devils to proclaim they knew him. There
is something very awfid in the thought that
to this whole class of created beings he is
ever pitiless. In his dealings with these we
never are allowed to catch sight of one ray
of the Redeemer's tender pitiful love.

Ver. 37. — ^And the fame of him went out ;
more acciuately rendered, and then went
out a rumour coneeming him.

Ver. 88. — And he arose out of the syna-
gogue, and entered into Simon's house. And
Simon's wife's mother was taken with a
great fever ; and they besought bim for her.
This abrupt mention of Peter (Simon) for
the first time, without any explanatory
notice, tells us that when St. Luke wrote his
Gospel Peter was well known and honoured
in all the Churches. The Lord's choice of
one who was already married, the subsequent
favour showed to him, the high position
evidently accorded to him in the Church of
the first days, is a perpetual protest against
the exaggerated asceticism which later was
so earnestly taught in ecclesiastical Chris-
tianity. The epithet "great," applied to
the fever, was a well-known technical term ;
it was used by Galen of fevers. There are
several expressions in this Gospel which
remind us that the author was a trained
physician.

Ver. 40. — Now when the sun was setting,
all they that had any siok with divers diseases
brought them unto him; and he laid his
hands on every one of them, and healed them.
The healing of the "possessed" in the
synagogpie tiiat morning, followed by the



cure of the fever of Simon's wife's mother,
we know Tas rapidly noised abroad, and in
great measure acoounted for the crowds who
brought their sick to him in the evening. It
was evidently in the life of Jesus a notable
occasion, and many a sick tortured one had
occasion to bless the Master's presence then.
It was so memorable an occasion that all the
three evangelists notice it ; their reports are
recorded in almost the same words. No
doubt, in the early days of the preaching of
the faith, this evenitig's work was constantly
alluded to by the first teachers. The note
of time, " when the sun was setting," indi-
cates that the moment in question had been
waited for, for sunset ended the sabbath, and
then those outside Capernaum and in its
outlying suburbs were enabled to bring their
sick and affiicted without infringing the
strict sabbath rules. " The twilight scene,
of Jesus moving about with word and touch
of healing among the sick and suffering,
the raving and tortured crowd (Matt. iv. 24),
is one of the most striking in the Gospels,
and St. Matthew quotes it as a fulfilment of
Isa. liii. 4"(Farrar).

Ver. 41. — Thou art'Christ the Son of Qod.
The older authorities omit "Christ," and
read simply, " Thou art the Son of God."
For they knew that he was Christ; better
rendered, that he mat the Christ, or Messiah.
After the Crucifixion, but not till then,
"Christ" became a proper name. It was
before simply a title, signifying "the
Messiah," "the Anointed One." These
words of the evil spirits do not seem to have
been prompted by any design, as some have
supposed, to excite the people either for or
against the fresh Teacher ; they are simply
a cry of involuntary adoration. They knew
who that poor Carpenter-Babbi was; they
had teen him in his Divine glory !

Ver. 42. — And when it was day, he de-
parted and went into a desert place. For
solitude, meditation, and prayer. The night,
or at least most of it, must have been spent
in these blessed works of mercy. It was
very early in the deep, dark dawn that the
Bedeemer was up again seeking firesh
strength from his Father. St. Mark tells
us when he left the house " it was still very
dark."



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 13. Z5ie temptation in the wilderness. One of the most mysterious but

most suggestive passages in the history of the Christ. Without attempting to indicate
all the points presented for reflection (see homiletics on Matt iv.), observe —

L The tmiptation is neobssabt to the pbepeoting op Jesus ks the Bavioub
OF BDWEBS. Ho is led by the Spirit into fhe wilderness— led for the purpose of being
tried \>j the deviL In the solitudes and simplicities of the \azaretb life, he I:ad not



94 THE GOSPEL AOOOBDING r» 6T. LUKE. [oh. it. 1—44



known, he could not knov, this kind of trial. Now is to come the first distinct
experience of the devil's power. God — ^may we so say ? — carried him away from the
scene of the baptism and the opened heavens and the Divine voice, and presented him
to Satan, the prince of the power of the air : " This is my beloved Son : put forth thine
hand, and touch him." Is this strange ? L It is a very real link of communion
between the Lord and the life beset by sin and evil. " By thy fasting and teniptation,
good Lord, deliver me." 2. See in it a part, and an essential part, in the making of
Jesus to us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctiflcation, and Redemption. Let us not
overlook that " the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the
deviL" Now begins the great pitched battle between the kingdoms of light and of
darkness ; the wilderness-time is the girding of the sword on the thigh of the most
Mighty. Do not think of the temptation as an isolated experience. At the end of all
the temptations the devil departed from him only for a season, or tmtil a season. He
had been conquered, but he was not done with the Conqueror ; he only bided his oppor-
tunity. The whole earthly ministry was a conflict with that hell which had all but
dominated over the world of man. And the conflict was concluded in victory only when
the Head was bowed on the cross. " Through death he destroyed him that had the
power of death, that is, the devlL" Ah 1 truly there is " an infinite more behind " all
that is recorded.

II. Temptation is necessabt to eitmah PBRFBOTiNa. The hour of the leading
into the wilderness is striking. St. Luke amplifies the account given by the earlier
evangelist. The latter connects the event with the baptism and that which accom-
panied it ; the former tells us of what is subjective — of the conscious plenitude of life
and power. Jesus, being full of the Holy Ghost, is led. When the sense of the mighty
force is strong witliin him, when the chords of the heart are vibrating in response to
the voice &om heaven, when the soul feels straitened until it enters on the great
mission given it ; when he is ready, lo I this summons to the wilderness, this forcible
taking of the anointed man, with the anointing fresh and full, to the dreary desert
place over whose surface the wild beasts roam. But is not this a way of God ? Was
not Saul of Tarsus, in the morning of his life in Jesus, sent for three years to Arabia ?
Is not strength gathered, is not character compacted, through contact, direct and per*
sonal, with the forces alike of good and evil ? He who was " made in all things like
to his brethren" must have that in his human history which corresponds to facts and
necessities in ours. And the wilderness, with its struggle, its assaults on faith and
obedience, its glimpse into the outer darkness, its resistance of the devil, is a necessity
in the education of the man as the Son of God.

III. The temptations of Christ eecobded are a mibbob of the temptations
OF his bkethben. Mark the word " recorded." St. Luke tells us that Jesus was led
during forty days, templed of the devil. What the forty days meant remains untold.
Piobably it could not be expressed in language intelligible to us. It was only at the
end that " tiie Divine event becomes human enough to be made to appear." Until then
the lower wants were in a condition of suspense ; the hunger is " the first sign of his
coming back to us." Then the part of the temptation which we can understand begins.
It will be remembered that we are dealing with a narrative of real transactions. It is
not a poem, not a parable. Whether the acts were purely subjective, consisting only
cf sugges ions to the inner spiritual sense, is a doubtful point ; but that there was a
veritable tempting in the manner described, that we are regarding " a chronicle of
events," cannot be doubted. Nor is it a mere likeness of temptation that is set before
us. The gospel story would be nothing to the heart if we conceived of it as a series of
visions which in no distinct way touched the citadel of the Lord's heart, was not to
him what temptation is to us — the contact of the soul with some hour and power of
darkness. If it be asked — How can tliis be if Jesus was without sin ? let it be recol-
lected that sin does nut consist in an impression of what is evil ; it consists in yielding
to the impression, in receiving it. The sacred writers are careful to note that all sug-
gestions come, not from the soul, but to the soul from a lyins spirit outside the per-
sonality. When we speak of sinlessness, we do not mean that enticements to sin
ean never present themselves or be felt as enticements ; we mean that they are never
yielded to or consented to— that there is a wilf so perfectly loyal to the Father that
the wrong and the uuchildliko aro never iu the purpose of Jesua. TSni\» the tkrea



CH. IV. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 95

points or regions of the temptation recorded. The order is slightly different in the
atjcounts of St. Matthew and St. Luke. That which is third in the one is second in
the other, reminding us that too much stress is not to be laid on the mere sequence of
the story. The first trial had reference to the lugent need; it came in the form (if the
subtle insinuation, " Son of God, you are hungry : why not use your power to satisfy the
wants of nature ? Tou have not bread, you cannot buy bn ad : why not bid these ston es
become bread ? " So plausible, that the lie can scarcely be discerned. It is addressed
to the man on the most pressing side of his necessity. And Jesus meets it as man.
" Man'i only life is not that by bread, but that by every word which proceedeth out of
the mouth of God." God's Word had made the stone a stone. He would not say the
stone is a loaf. He must be throughout in harmony with the eternal word and vrill.
Then how subtle is the second attack 1 Adhering to St. Matthew's order, "Thou art
full of confidence in thy God. Thou dost trust him to the uttermost. Put thy faith to
the proo^ The Jews expect that their Messiah will descend from the clouds. Away to
the top of yonder temple. Cast thyself down from thence. Do something striking ;
thou knowest it is written, ' He shall give his angels charge over thee.' " How
plausible the appeal to the Son of God on the side of his faith I And, once more —
repelled by the counter-thrust, the counter-Scripture, " Thou shalt not try to the utter-
most the Lord thy God, claiming a miraculous help for what is bom of human pride
and rashness" — mark the tact and the audacity in the final assault which the enemy
makes. The love of power — that which is at once the strength and the weakness of
every noble mind — shall be the wedge. " Son of God, look down on the kingdoms of
the vrorld and the glory of them. Thou art seeking the sovereignty of man. I can
give it thee. The force is thine ; nse it at my instigation. The dominion of love is one
of toil and pain. Take what I offer. Think what blessings to the world will be at once
%cured. The sole condition is to fall down and worship me. Am I not the real king
of the world ? " It is the very climax of devilry. The temptation can go no further.
" Then saith Jesus, Get thee behind me, Satan." It is the battle of man that is por-
trayed in man's Lord. " For both he that sanctifieth and they that are sanctified are
all of one." Here is the tempter who is tempting us, adapting the form of his solicita-
tions to our tempers, our endowments, our circumstances. Here are the characteriatica
of hit approaches, his doubts, his "ifa" ("if" is a devil-word which more than any
other loosens the holdfasts of faith), his quotationa from Scripture when it suits his pur-
pose to do so, his three great heads of temptation — that which seeks us through bodily
need or fleshly appetite, that which seeks us through even our purer and higher instincts,
that which would draw us into the net by stirring up the pride of life. Ah I there is
no sleeping with this tempter. " Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation."

IV. The viotoet of Cubist is oub encoubagement. Blessed is the assurance
contained in the words, " Get thee behind me, Satan." The devil is behind Jesus, the
Captain of our salvation. What is our position towards our Captain ? Apart from
him? Ah, we may tremble 1 With him, in him? He is between us and Satan,
and we can do all things through him strengthening. " Be of good cheer : I have
overcome,"

Vers. 14 — 30. — The visit (f Christ to Nazareth. The Lord Is in Galilee, dowly
moving from place to place, always in the character of Teacher, and always winning
the applause of those who throng the synagogues. It is the period of unbroken popu-
larity, short but, so long as it lasts, complete. His face is towards his native place,
foreseeing and, as we are reminded, foretelling that the tide will receive its first check
there. The visit is in many ways significant.

I. It bbminds tra of a duty. " He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought
up." He had testified, when leaving Samaria, that a prophet is without honour in his
own country. But he will not turn from it. He makes it the place for the first
unfolding of the blessed Messiah-mission. And, although cast forth from the city, ha
seems again to have visited Nazareth. " He does not give it up for a first sin, though
that sin may have been a grievous one." Is not this a lesson for all ? The place of
the upbringing, however far we may roam from it, has a claim on our special sympathy.
Our own should never be neglected. It is easier sometimes to deal with strangers.
We can speak more frankly and openly to them ; tkey meet us often more frankly and



96 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch.iv. 1— 44.



openly than do our kindred or those directly related to us. What is far-fetched il
frequently more esteemed than what is home-bred. Nevertheless, the duty is to
witness for God to the circle which encloses our tenderest associations. Yes, even to
repeat and repeat our message, and thus deliver our own soul.

II. It bfeaes to us of a good habit. "As his custom was, he went into the
synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up to read." Here was one, remember, who
knew more than the elders. Might be not have said, " Why go to the place of meet-
ing? Can I not worship God, my Father, on mountain-side, or in my dwelling ? The
syni^ogue can give me nothing, no increase to my knowledge or to my devotion ; nay,
my meditation can be more free and sweet when my soul is alone with Heaven." But
this he did not say. It was his rule to be where the two or three met in the name of
God. The sabbath day was God's ordinance ; therefore he kept it holy. Social worship
has its authority, not only in the sanction which is implied in God's promises to those
who assemble together for his praise, but in the instincts of our common nature.
Therefore he kept rank with those who surrounded him, and when the call to the local
lanctuary was sounded, he was always responsive. Surely in this he has left an
example on which may well be based the rule, " Forsake not the assembling of your-
selves together." Keep two things in view : (1) the honouring of God ; (2) our part as
members one of another. And when these things are vivid, there will arise the sense,
not merely of benefit to be received by ourselves, but of duty, both to him who made
and redeemed us, and to those amongst whom we live and move. No light excuse
will then be allowed to interfere with the custom. Each worshipper will feel, "I
have my ministry, my place in the congregation; this place vacant, this ministry not
rendered, there is a want for which I am responsible." It is the absence of a feeling
of responsibility in regard to the services of the sanctuary, it is the presence of a mere
self-pleasing spirit, which explains much of the laxity of attendance which prevails.
Let ChriBtians ponder the way of the Lord, whose custom was to enter the village
sanctuary, and contribute to the instruction of the village folk on the sabbath day.

III. It sets befobb vs a bemarkablb sermon. The first of the two lessons for
the day has been read ; the lesson which remains is from the prophets — it is from
Isaiah. Jesus stands up to read it. It is the passage which forms the sixty-first
chapter of the book. The opening words of this chapter are his text. He rolls up the
parchment, returns it to the attendant, and, as was the manner of the teacher, he sits
down. Every eye is fastened on him as slowly and emphatically he declares, " This
day il this Scripture fulfilled in your ears." And there follows the sermon, the substance
of which Luke records. Concerning the sermon, note : 1. Its thought and style. The
words are " gracious," literally, " words of grace." Divine grace is the theme, and the
language befits the theme. It is not in the fashion of ordinary teachers ; it shines,
and it bums. It is beautiful, winning ; " grace is poured into the lips." Such words
become the pulpit ; no other words become it. 2. Its effect. At first the wonder,
the admiration, of the people is excited. If they had only yielded to the teaching,
how mighty would have been the work of the day ! But, alas 1 the small, petty
feelings of the village prevent the work. The charm of the discotu'se is soon effaced
by the murmurs, " Is not this Joseph's Son ? Capernaum may shout in his
praise, but he is one of ourselves. We know his parentage and early surroundings.
No, no ; Joseph's Son is not the Anointed of Jehovah." And soon tiie countenance
changes from wonder into scorn, and from scorn into rage, as the Teacher, reading their
thoughts, charges home their guilt, and reminds them that the blessing passes from
those who account themselves unworthy of it. Are these Nazarenes sinners above all
others because this is their treatment of the Holy One? Have not we prejudices
and prepossessions sometimes quite as irrational as were theirs? Has not the osdlla-
tion of leeling which we trace in them its counterpart in our own experience? Have
not words sometimes seemed gracious to us until some little pride was touched, some
demand made on faith against which reason or inclination rebelled, and, in our secret
soul, Jesus was cast out ? May we not hear his love protesting, " How often would 1
have gathered you, . . . and ye would not"?

Vers. 81 — 43. — A sabbath day's work. " The despised and rejected " of Nazareth
come* down to Capernaum, henceforth the centre of his labour of love. The evangelist



OLiT. 1— 44.] THE GOSPEL ACOOBDING TO ST. LUKE. 9T

Eets before us one of the sabbath days of this early Galilaaan period, and bids us note
the use made of the sabbath by the Son of man, who was also its Lord, fie takei
US to the synagogue, no doubt crowded by an expectant throng of fishermen, farmers,
masters and workmen of busy Gennesareth. Jesus is the Teacher ; and, as the dis-
course proceeds, we hear the sentence passing from one to another, " What a word I "
or, " What is this word 1 "— »o different from the speech to which they are accustomed,
so strangely fascmating. Has not the exclamation of these simple folk been repeated,
in circles ever widening ? Is it not, more than ever, the voice of the day in which we
lire ? Let us look to the incidents of the Capernaum sabbath for three illustrations of
the abiding power of the Word of the Lord.

I. These is the poweb to inbpibe. We see this generally and specially. Generally,
in the effect produced on the great body of the people. They had not yet been
inflamed against Jesus by the emissaries of the Pharisees ; and his preaching arrested
the attention. It was not wild and startling, like that of John ; it was calm, but
intense. The pedantries of the scribes had no place in it ; it spoke t« the heart ;
it was the word of One in the light and love of God — the Son of God and the Son of
man. " For a season " at least they rejoiced in it. There were responses in the con-
science, deep answering " amens " in the soul. The word was with authority. Specially
in the attitude of those by whom Jesus was accompanied. We are told by Mark that
he is accompanied by Simon and Andrew, James and John. They are the elder sons
of his special family. They have heard the word, " Follow me," and, obeying it, have
left all to be his disciples. Oh, blessed power — the power of that Spirit who, in the
beginning, moved on the face of the waters and said, " Let there be light 1 " the power
to awake the slumbering desire, to interpret the needs and thoughts of the heart, to
■tir up the longing to be better and nobler, to be the citizens of the kingdom of heaven
and the sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty 1 Who of us has felt the life-giving
force of this heavenly spring ? Such a one will join in the cry, " What a word I "

IL There is the foweb to exoboisi. One of the audience on the first of the
Capernaum sabbaths is a miserable demoniac, " a man with the spirit of an uncleaa
demon." Whether, by such an expression, we are to understand only a violent type of
mania, there is no need to discuss. The language of the thirty-third and thirty-fourA
verses seems to imply more than this. " It is utterly impossible," says Dean Alford,
" to understand such a testimony as that of the sick person, still less of the fever er
disease." Be this as it may, the multitude, spell-bound, is receiving the word whi^
ii with power, when suddenly a great scream is heard. "'Ea, (a\ Let us alone; what
have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth ? I know thee who thou art ; tke
Holy One of God." Calmly, firmly, the Preacher rebukes the spirit ; there is a paroxysm,
a convulsion, and the man rises up, the wildness all gone, a right spirit renewed in
him. "What a wordl He commandeth the unclean spirits, and they obey hiss 1"
Let us believe that this word of command and rebuke is still with ui. Unclean splrita,
demons in men, alas I are legion, and sore havoc they' make in human lives and
homes. No demon is ever alone; it is always accompanied by evil powers, by mani-
fold miseries. The only force adequate to the cleansing of the soul thus possessed ia
that of the Holy One of God. Welcoming all remedial legislation, all forms of philaa-
thropic efibrt, with a view to raise the fallen, to cast out the devils which afilict society,
let us rememlier that the innermost seat of the evil can be reached only by the gospel
of the Holy One. With this gospel, let us never despair. " God is the God of tutpe ;
the devil is the spirit of despair."

III. Thebb is the row%;B to heal. The mission of Jesus in Galilee was a great
medical mission. The Preacher and the physician represent the two aspects of his
ministry. Here is a thought which consecrates the art of the physician ; he is a reve-
lation of one side of the abiding power of Christ; it is for him to recognize the Master
and acknowledge the supreme authority of the Word of the Lord. And turning to the
physician and availing themselves of liis skill, the sick and diseased may recall that it
is Jesus Christ who maketh whole. This is the true faith-healing. See how the heal-
ins? power of the words is illustrated. Read vers. 40, 41. What a hospital is before
the eye of the Healer when the sun is setting! And not one of the impotent and
sfBicted is without the touch ; not one baffles the skill. For a more particular illus-
tration, read vers. 3S, 39. It ia "a great fever," and they beseech him for that
LUKK. H



98 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINQ TO ST. LUKE, [oh. it. 1-4A.

precious life. He stands over her and '• rebukes the ferer.'' Another acconnt is still
more touching : " He comes and takes her by the hand, and lifts her up." Is not this
a passage which makes all the Christian world kin ? How many understand what is
meant by the beseeching for one laid low with " the great fever "1 Ah I but some will say,
" It was not with my beloved as with her in the gospel story. I wept and fasted ; I
cried, ' Oh, spare my dear one 1 ' but there was no rebuke of the disease. The one for
whom I entreated was taken, and I was left, sitting alone and keeping silence." Peace,
thou bleeding heart ! He allowed his beloved Lazarus to die ; but in his own time and
way he stood beside the grave and bade Lazarus come forth. He told the sisters that
their faith was feeble ; that the higher laith would not have been clamorous — it would
have felt, " His hand is holding that life ; it is lifting it up ; whosoever lives and believes
in him has been already lifted up, and never dies." So bethink thyself; not according
to thy way, but according to his own, he did come ; he did take by the hand ; he did
whisper, " Rise, my love, my fair one, and come ; where I am thou shalt be also." In
the case of Simon's mother-in-law the answer is visible. Observe, not only is the fever
removed, but strength is infused — " immediately she rose up and ministered unto them."
A beautiful suggestion, that ministry to Christ always follows the sense of healing by
Christ. " What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me ? "



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1, 2 (first part). — Solitude and struggle. We are not to suppose, even though
we read this statement as given by Matthew (iv. 1), that our Lord was led by the
Spirit into the Wilderness for the express purpose of being tempted by the evil one :
to take that view would be to mistake the force of the Hebrew idiom. All that is
intended is that Jesus was constrained (" driven," Mark says) to retire into the soli-
tude of the wilderness where he would have to undergo the temptation which did actually
befall him. He was led, by Divine direction, into retirement, and there, by Divine
permission, into spiritual struggle.

I. The Divine dibeotion. As Moses in Midian, as David around Bethlehem, as
Elijah at Horeb, as John in the wilderness of Judaea, as (afterwards) Saul in Arabia,
•o Jesus prepared for his great work in the depth of " the solitary place." There we
can well believe that he held much communion with God ; that he looked down into
the secret places of his own soul and communed carefully with himself; and that he
pondered long on the great work — the Father's business — which lay before him. We
may be sure that this period of solitude produced very rich fruit in after-days, not only
in the truth which was spoken, but in the life which was lived and the sorrow which was
endured. This period should find its counterpart in our history ; if it does not find it
by our consent, it may do so without any choice of our own. For : 1. Qod commends
such retirement to us. He does so by the way in which he led the greatest and the
wisest of his servants (see above) ; by the faculties of devotion, introspection, and fore-
oast which he has given us ; by the example of our Lord. But : 2. God compels us to
such retirement. He does so by his holy providence, when he lays us aside, when he
takes us away from the busy scenes of toil, from " the strife of tongues," from the
excitements of society, and even from the distractions of the home circle ; when he
shuts the door upon us and draws round the curtain and leaves us alone with himself.
Of that time, if we are wise, we shall make good use. It is a Mme for spiritual renova-
tion ; then we may learn lessons we should never gather even in the sanctuary ; then
we may enter on an upward path which otherwise we should never take, and so
reach a goal we should otherwise never gain. It is a sacred opportunity, inciting to
(1) review; (2) introspection or self-examination; (3) onlook; (4) prayer, including
the solemn and determined rededication of our whole selves and our entire future to Ihe
service of our Saviour.

II. The Divikb permission. By the permission of God the evil one came to our
Lord and tempted him (see following homilies). God allows the tempter to assail us
even as he did his " beloved Son." There are some temptations which are more likely
to bwet us in the period of solitude than at any other time — temptations of the wilder-
ness. Thev are : 1. A morhiil sensitiveness as to (1) our own condition — a d'snositioB



OH. IT. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. W

to look too much to our own feelings, and to dwell too little on the goodness and tha
love of God ; also as to (2) our own reputation, and the estimation in which we an
held among men. 2. Excessive disappointment and consequent di.sheartenment con-
cerning (1) the life we are living hefore God ; (2) the work we are doing for our fellow-
men ; (3) the progress of the kingdom of God. But though we may pass through
these struggles we may come safely out of them. The remedies are these : (1) An
appeal to God for his guidance and inspiration ; (2) a resort to the promises of his
Word; (3) a timely return to the activities of daily work, of puhlic worship, of active
" ' J.— 0.



Ters. 2 — 4. — The temptation of the flesh. There can he no question as to the reality
of the temptation. Without contending for the strictly literal sense of the passage,
we do maintain that the temptation was a very real thing to onr Lord. It <^nnstituted

• serious struggle through which he went, out of which he came forth viuiorious, by
passing through which he was our Exemplar. We cannot afford to lose this aspect of
his life, this view of our Lord himself; but we must beware lest we do; for "if we
shrink from believing that he really felt the force of temptation ... we make that
Divine life a mere mimic representation of griefs that were not real, and surprises that
were feigned, and sorrows that were theatrical. But thus we lose the Saviour." It was

• real conflict that is here depicted ; and the first stage of it was that through which
we have all, in our time, to pass — the stem contest with the temptation of the flesh.

L The severity op the temptation. " He hungered " after long fasting. Hunger,
in its severer forms, is unknown to us. Id a country like this we have no experience
of it. We can only judge of it from the testimony of those who have endured it;
and, thus judging, we are sure that it is a very urgent, imperious, almost irresistible
craving. The extremities and inhumanities to which it has driven men who are not
naturally inhuman tell their own tale with terrible force. Our Master was suffering,
we may well believe, from the most severe pangs of want. There were stones of the
size and colour of such a loaf as he would have given everything (it would be right
to give) to obtain. By an easy exertion of his miraculous power he could turn the
one into the other. Why not do so ? Because to do that would be to take himself
oatof the hands of that heavenly Father to whose care he was committed, and manifest
distrust in his providential goodness. Or because to do so would be to employ his
Divine power first on his own behalf, instead of using it, as on the occasion of its first
•xercise it behoved him to employ it, on behalf of others. Or because to do that
would be to give present and bodily cravings precedence of the great concerns of the
kingdom of God. For some such reason our Lord thought that it would be wrong
or, at any rate, undesirable for him to act on the suggestion, and he forbore. Tempta-
tion of the fleshly kind comes to us in the shape of hunger, or thirst, or sexual passion.
1. These trials of our moderation and self-government are more or less severe accord-
ing to (1) our temperament and (2) our circumstances. 2. They may lead us into
errors and evils which are (1) mistakes to be avoided ; or (2) indiscretions to be con-
demned and regretted, and, oi course, forsaken ; or (3) vices and sins which are shameful
and deadly, which stain the conscience, which ruin the reputation, which lead down
to swift destruction.

n. The way op victoby. When the hour of conflict comes we must giid onnelves
for the fight ; and though the peril may be great because the enemy is strong, yet have
we great resources, and there is no reason why we should not win the battle. We
should call to our help our regard for: 1. The will of God as revealed in his Word;
that " sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God," should be at hand with ns as it
was with our great Leader ; " It is written." 2. The penalty of disobedience — a very
heavy one in its ultimate issues. 3. The example of our Divine Master, calmly putting
aside the false suggestion, preferring to suffer rather than to sin. 4. The consideration
that sin excludes us from other and higher blessings. Better far, in the thought of
Christ, to rest in bodily hunger, committing himself to the faithfulness of the holy
Father. And how much better than any physical enjoyment is the satisfection of
spirit which attends purity and piety I Not the bread of bwlily comfort, but the sense
of OtoA'e abiding favour, the continuance of the friendship of Christ, the chsrishing «f a
Vi,.oi7pn)v hnrie, — that is the good thing to prize and to pursue, — C



!00 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. nr. 1—44

Vers. 6 — 8. — Temptation : outward and inward grandeur. Of course, literal exact-
aess is necessarily excluded here; we must look for, and shall hava no difficulty in
finding, the sense and spirit of the words. We will look at —

I. The appeal that was made to oub Lord, and the corresponding attack that
la made on ourselves. Christ was tempted to seize "power and glory" for himself
by an act of unholy submission. These were the prize which the worldly minded Jews
of his age imagined to be within reach of their Messiah. To one of his humble cir-
cumstances but limitless capacity, and also of rightful and honourable ambition, there
might very easily be presented a most powerful temptation to aim at a great and
glorious supremacy — a throne like that of the Caesar himself, on which imperial power
might be exercised and human glory at its topmost height be enjoyed. And the force
of this temptation would be very greatly intensified by the fact that such a throne as
this would be gained by very different measures from those Jesus had been contem-
plating in his solitude. The collecting of multitudes by appealing to their national
passions, the leading of armies and gaining of victories, the command of great bodies of
men, the excitements of political strife, — all this is full of enjoyment to the ambitious
soul. A vastly different experience this (and to all that was human in the mind of
Jesus Christ immensely more attractive) from that of speaking unappreciated truth,
living a life too noble to be understood, suffering from keen and malignant persecution,
dying in the pangs and shame of martyrdom ! The price to be paid for surrendering
the higher for the lower aim, and the distressing for the delightful means, was "wor-
shipping" Satan; in other words, declining the course which he most disliked, and
adopting the course which he most desired. The attack which is now made on us,
corresponding to this, is the suggestion that we should turn aside from the higher
aspiration (whatever it may be) to the lower ambition. It may come to the Christian
minister ia his study, to the statesman in his cabinet, to the doctor in his consulting-
room, to the author or editor at his table ; it is a suggestion to leave the straight line
of duty, of faithfulness, of service, of truth, of loyalty to conviction, of moral and
spiritual integrity, and take the lower path of popularity, of honour, of temporal
success. To do this is to take a course which we may dignify by some fair name, but
which, in Scripture language, is worshipping the devil.

IL The bpibit in which it was repelled by him, and in which it should be
defeated by us. This was one of holy indignation : " Get thee behind me," etc. Our
Lord indignantly refused to entertain a suggestion so utterly opposed to his spirit of
consecration, so subversive of all his high purposes and lofty hopes. He met it by
the quotation of a word which demanded entire obedience to the will of God and full
dcTotedness to his service. In this spirit of holy indignation let us repel the first advances
of a temptation to leave the higher and the heavenly road of truth and service for the
lower and the earthly one of mere temporal success. To take that lower course would
be to play into the hands of the evil one ; to lose the commendation of our conscience
and to live under the shadow of its rebuke ; to lower ourselves and to degrade our life
in the estimate of all the true and wise on earth and in heaven ; to lose our true and
high reward ; to break the word and depart from the will of the Lord our Go<L — 0.

Vers. 9 — 12. — Temptation to guilty haste. One more attempt is made by the evil
ene on the integrity of our Lord's faithfulness. We note —

I. The evil suqoestion. The idea conveyed to the mind of Jesus, now on the
point of commencing his ministry, was this (as I understand it) : " Here is a glorious
opportunity to make a most successful beginning ; alighting from this height among the
assembled worshippers below, who are all ready to welcome the Messiah, you will gain
such a prestige from so brilliant a miracle that the battle of conviction will bo almost
won by a single blow. There need be no fear ; the angels will sustain you," etc. But
to act in this way would be to proceed along a line totsdly unsuited to the kind of work
which Josus came to do. It would be very gratifying, very stimulating, very agreeable
to human feeling, but it would not be the right course to pursue. Christ came to
build up a vast spiritual empire, and he was to lay its foundations carefully and steadily,
and therefore deliberately and slowly, in the minrls of men. This victory was not one
to be snatched by a sud len impetuous charge; there must be a long and a hard campaign.
Everything coul4 not be done by a brilliant stroke, appealing to the ima|;iuation ;



OH. IV. 1^4.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 101

there must be a long, laborious process, by which the judgment and the conscience ol
mankind would be convinced. There would be fatal folly in an endeavour to force aL
issue. There would be Divine wisdom in " beginning at the beginning," in gradually
working onwards, in toiling upwards amid fatigues and sorrows until the height was
reached. Such are the victories before us now — triumphs over ignorance, over vice,
over unbelief, over superstition, over indifference, over indecision, over spiritual languor.
We should like to be working faster, to be winning the battle at a greater pace. Then
cometh the evil one, and he says, " Leave these slow processes ; mix a little error with
the truth you preach ; be more careful to produce an eflfeot than to deliver the Divine
message; sacrifice purity to power; introduce into the methods of the kingdom of
Christ the principles and the weapons of the kingdom of the world ; hasten to the goal
and snatch the crown of success, instead of working so hard and waiting so long."

II. The firm refusal. Christ declined to adopt the suggestion ; he said that to
do so would be " tempting the Lord his God." It would be expecting God to work a
miracle in order to gratify his unholy eagerness. We must not try to precipitate the
cause of righteousness by an unholy impatience, which is a practical distrust of God's
Word. To expect God to bless means which he has not sanctioned, to own and honour
methods which are not in accord with the principles he has revealed, — this is to lose his
favour and to draw down his condemnation ; it is to invite discomfiture. " He that
ielieveth shaU not make haste." Our wisdom as well as our duty, aa " workmen together
with God," is to (1) adopt God-given methods; (2) ask for the Divine help and
inspiration ; (3) confidently await the Divine blessing in God's own chosen time and
way. — 0.

Ver. 18. — The poor and the gospel. A most significant fact that the first work of the
Messiah should be his " preaching the gospel to the poor." What is the significance
of it?

I. Bt the poor DivmB truth is most needed. Their life on earth is the hardest ;
it is often one of unremitting toil ; often one of severe privation, almost destitute of
comfort and enjoyment ; often one of serious and hard oppression, in which the strong
will of another robs of all liberty of action. The past is sad, the present gloomy, the
future dark. There are no pleasures in recollection, and there is no relief in hope.
How precious, how necessary, to these are the joys which earth cannot give and cannot
steal — the treasures which enrich the heart, the hopes which reach beyond the grave !

II. By the poor Divine truth is most appreciated. " How hardly do they that
have riches enter the kingdom of heaven!" Their time is occupied, their minds are
filled, with pursuits and pleasures which are on an earthly plane, and things higher and
worthier are hidden from view. The poor, though they have indeed their own tempta-
tions and their own errors and failings, are yet more likely to see the Divine hand
beckoning to them, and to hear the heavenly voice calling them to wisdom and service
»nd eternal joy. And, as a fact, they do. The common people still hear Christ gladly,
while the wealthy and the strong and the famous are sitting at the feet of " the
world," to learn its wisdom and to seek its favour.

III. To the poor DiVINB truth IB CLEARLY AND MARKEDLY OrFEEED. It WaS,

In fact, a very great thing to say, " To the poor the gospel is preached." It was one of
the " watermarks " of Christianity that our Master made his appeal, not, as philosiiphy
and theology had done before him, and as science in our day is doing, to human learning
and iiifluence, but to the imlettered and the lowly, to the multitude and the millions
among men, to the common human heart. Other systems had tried to reach the lower
levels by affecting the heights of society first. The gospel of Jesus Christ " moves
upward from below." It teaches, cleanses, raises the people ; and so it purifies and exal ts
the nation. This is the Divine method, and must be ours. It is for the Church of
Christ to follow its Divine Master, to see that the signs of truth are about its handi-
work, and amongst them this leading sign, that " to the poor the gospel is preached."
If this feature should be absent, it will be time for the Church to be considering where
it stands — bow near to or remote from its Master. — 0.

Ver. 18. — Healing the broken-hearted. We have » supreme want^ but we have s
Divine remedy.



102 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. iv. 1—44



I. The BTioKBH HUMAN HEART. Ttiere are two things which break hearts; 1. One
is intolerahle shame; the shame which comes from a crushing sense of sin; it maybe of
flagrant sin, such as commaiitls the deep indignation and strong censure of our fellow-
men, aad involves the loss of our own self-respect; or it may be a sense of that common
gin of which all the souls of men are guilty in the sight of God — the keeping back from
him of all that has been due to him, all the reverence and love of our hearts and all the
service of our lives. Under a deep sense of sin, and therefore of condemnation, affected
and afflicted with the consciousness of Divine disapproval and the fear of Divine
punishment, the heart cries out for refuge. 2. The other is overwhelming sorrow ; it
may be some crushing disappointment, or it may be some wearing and trying sickness,
or it may be some heavy and humiliating loss, or it may be some terrible bereavement
and consequent loneliness of heart and life ; under one or more of these overwhelming
burdens the heart may be bowed down even to breaking.

II. The one Divine Befdge. There is but one availing "Eefuge of our soul" to
whom we can flee with perfect assurance that in him we shall find what we need.
Christ came " to heal the broken-hearted," and he does so by : 1. Offering us the most
tender sympathy. He is the High Priest who is " touched with a feeling of our infir-
mities, having been in all points tried even as we are," and therefore able to enter
perfectly into our griefs, whether of mind, body, or estate. 2. Ministering to us
Divine comfort. By his Holy Spirit's ministry he comes to us, and dwells within us,
and acts powerfully though graciously upon our hearts ; thus he lets the gentle dews of
his comfort cool the heats of our fevered spirit, making himself known to us as the
" God of all comfort," as that " One who comforteth them that are cast down." 3.
Granting us effectual help ; enlightening our minds, energizing our spirits, making lu
capable of doing that which has to be done, animating and reviving us, fitting us to
take our part and do our work. In proportion as we are reverent and pure of heart ia
the time of our prosperity and joy, may we look for his indwelling and outworking in
the "day of desperate grief" and of heart-brokenness. — 0.

Ver. 18. — Spiritual iondage and Christian freedom. Who does not pity the captive?
Saddening to the sympathetic heart is the thought of the man who is confined within
his lonely and dreary cell, shut in from the beauties and melodies of nature, excluded
from the haunts of men, debarred from all fce activities of busy life, unable to enter his
own home, compelled to unwilling solitude and separation from those he loves ! There
is no prayer that we breathe with a finer or fuller feeling than the petition, " Let the
sighing of the prisoner come before thee." Yet is there a bondage that is worse than
any ever inflicted by stone walls and iron chains. It is—

I. The bondage op sin. Sin is at first a transgression, but it soon becomes a
tyranny. It grows into a power ; and it becomes a power which holds the soul in ite
grasp, so that it is practically enslaved ; it attempts to rise, to move, to do that which
befits it and for which it was created, but it finds that it cannot; it is held down; iti
way is barred. This is true of sin in all its forms, and it is true in a number of degrees,
varying from an objectionable constraint down to an almost hopeless despotism. It
applies to: 1. Error, which becomes an inveterate prejudice through which no light
will break. 2. Folly, such as that of procrastination, which in no length of time
weaves itself round the soul. 3. Vice, such as intemperance, or profanity, or impurity
(more especially in some of its foims). There is no bondage more thoroughly deserving
the name than this. The victim of vice is, indeed, " holden with the cords of his
8ins"_(ProT. v. 22); they have him fast in the saddest and most degrading thraldom
in which a human being can be held. 4. Vanity. How many a man is a wretched slave
to the judgment of other men ! The fear of their condemnation, or still oftener of their
ridicule, impels him in a direction in which he knows he ought not to be going, ties
him to a position from which he is hinging to break away. 5. Rebellion agamst God ;
disloyalty, estrangement, the withholding of the heart and life from Gods service, so
long maintained, that, when the soul thinks of repentance and return, it finds itself
held to its wrong and sinful state.

II. The freedom which is in Christ. The gospel announces " deliverance to the
•aptives." And how does it efiect this blessed emancipation? 1. By giving to the
■inner a deep sense of his sin, and filling his soul with shame of himself and loatliiug



ch.it. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 103

of hie iniquity. When men have come to hate sin they are well on the road toward
its conquest. 2. By taking hack the penitent to the favour and love of God. Through
Christ sin is pardoned and the sinner is restored. As one that loves God, and seeks
above all things to enjoy his favour, the man " cannot sin; ' he has acquired a reason
and motive for purity and integrity which gives him the victory over sin. How can
he grieve his heavenly Father, his Divine Redeemer, the Holy Spirit of God ? 3. By
giving him access to a source of Divine power. God is ready to dwell effectually
within, and to work mightily upon the soul that seeks his presence and asks his
power. We can do " all things tn Christ who strengtheneth us." He makes us to
know " the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe," in snapping th«
bonds that bound us, and investing us with " the glorious Uherty of the children of
God."— 0.

Ver. 18. — Spiritual blindness. " The recovering of sight to the blind." We think of —
L Thb badness of blindness, and its degi ees. " It must be very bad to be blind,"
we say ; probably we but taintly realize what it means. 1. It is bad to be physically
blind — ^to look on no scenery, to read no book, to behold no countenance, to recognize
no love in a human face, to grope our way in the thick darkness. 2. It is wone to be
mentally blind — to see, and not to see ; to open the eyes on the beauty and wonder and
glory of the universe and to recognize nothing beautiful, wonderful, glorious, there ; to
be as lonely in a library as in a cell 1 3. It is worse still to be morally blind — blind of
soul, so that a man can see nothing degraded in drunkenness, nothing tihaineful in vice,
nothing revolting in obscenity and profanity, nothing repelling in selfishness; so that
a man can see nothing noble in generosity, nothing beautiful in beneficence, nothing
regal in righteousness and duty, nothing sacred in human love. 4. It is worst of all
to be spiritually blind — worst, because tliat is the root and source of all the others ;
blindness of spirit, a darkness in which the soul fails to see the Highest of all beings,
the loftiest of all truths, the greatest of all facts ; a darkness in which the soul fails to
recognize the essential truth that in God we " live, and move, and have our being," and
that to him we are responsible for all we are and have ; in which it is blind to our
sorrowful state of guilt and condemnation in the sight of God.

II. Tee woest feature of spiritdal privation. That which is the best feature
in physical is the worst in spiritual blindness. Under the men iful principle of accom-
modation, the blind became not only submissive, hut contented and even cheerful in the
darkness in which they dwell. They are able not only to speak of it, but to feel about
it that it is " the shadow of God's wing." That is a very happy thing ; but that is the
very worst feature of spiritual blindness. It is spiritual insensibility that is the most
deplorable — the fact that men don't know that they don't see; that they suppose
themselves to know everything when they know nothing ; that they are not aware
what a world of truth and blessedness is aroimd them and is accessible to them. Who
shall reveal this to them?

III. Christ the obeat Bebtobeb of our spiritual vision. And how does he make
as see that to which, but for him, we should have remained blind? 1. By making
suite plain and certain that which would have remained shadowy and imcertain.
Many truths of vital importance men would, in his absence, have speculated upon and
discussed, but they would not have known them. Coming to us from God, the great
Teacher has turned these uncertainties into living and sustaining truth. He tells us
authoritatively and decisively that God is the one Divine Spirit, the righteous Ruler of
all, the Father of souls, condemning them in their sin, pitying them in their estrange-
ment, inviting them to return; that God has determined that when we die we sluM
live again, shall come forth to a resurrection of condemnation or of life. 2. By bringing
the truth close home to the eye of the soul. When our Lord lived on earth he did this
himself in his own Person ; e.g. in the cases of the woman of Samaria, the rich young
ruler, Nicodemus, he brought the truth of the kingdom home to the heart and the
conscience. Those lips are closed to us now ; Christ speaks not now as he spoke then.
But his Spirit is with us still, speaking through his Word and through his faithful
servants, and through his providence. 3. By more fully enlightening the mind* of
those who go in faith to seek and to serve him. Unto all seeking and trusting souls he
manifests his truth in ever-enlarging fulness; them he leads " into all the truth " thej



104 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [oh. iV. 1—44

na«d to know; and to them it becomes gloriously true that the Spirit of the Lord has
aBointed him, their Saviour, for " the recovering of sight to the blind." — OL

Ver. 18.—I7ie bruised. "To set at liberty them that are bmised." And who may
they be who are thus characterized ? and in what way does Jesua Christ meet their
Mpwsial need ?

L Bruised souls. We find these in: 1. Those who are chafed with the worries of
Nfe ; whose disposition is such, or whose circumstances are such, that they are harassed
•ud fretted by a multitude of minor conflicts with men and things ; who are in danger
of losing or have lost their mental equilibrium as the result of the perpetual strife.
2. Those who are perplexed with the problems of life ; who want to be mentally satisfied
and to see that their theories agree with the existing facts, and who, finding these two
things in frequent antagonism, are troubled thereby in soul ; — such men are never fixed
in their convictions, but always thinking that these require readjustment. 3. Those
who are tmitten by the persecationi of life; who are continually coming into collision
with men. They may have a combative habit, or they may be placed in human
surroundings unfavourable to peace ; but, from whatever cause, they are always in
eonflict, and are perpetually finding themselves the object of attack, of the ribaldry and
the scorn of men ; they bear a bruised feeling about them. 4. Those that are worn
with excessive toil. 6. Those that are wounded by the heavier sorrows of life ; from
whom health, or reputation, or position, or fortune, or the object of strong and desp
affection has been suddenly taken away.

H. The kbpuob thkt havi in Christ. Jesus Christ does not " set at liberty "
bruised souls as a deliverer releases bruised prisoners ; but he does emancipate them by
taking from them their suffering, and giving to them a large measure of spiritual free-
dom. He blesses these bmised souls, and proves to them a Divine Befuge. 1. By his
tjimpathy. In each one of their distresses they can feel sure of the tender sympathy of
their High Priest, " touched with the feeling of their infirmities " 2. By his example.
In all points he has been tempted, or tried, even as we are. We bear no cross which ha
kas not carried before us, and his was heavier than ours. 3, By his aid. He is ready,
at our appeal, to strengthen ns hy his indwelling Spirit, and to grant us such strong
sustaining grace that, instead of groaning under our blows, we may even glory in them
(2 Cor. xii. 9). 4. By his promises ; those "exceeding great and precious promises,'
which not only cover the whole path of life, however long that may piova, but reach
on beyond the horizon-line of death into the blessed and eternal future. — 0.

Var. 22. — The graciousness of the words •f Christ. " The gracious words [words af
grace] which proceeded out of his mouth." The "words of ths Lord Jasua" wara
" words of grace " indeed. They were so whether we consider —

I. Theib substance. They were not, indeed, without seriousness, and at times not
without severity. Christ did say, when the occasion required it, things which startled
his hearers, things which are well fitted to make us pause and even tremble if we are
obnoxious to their severity. He is, as a Divine Teacher and Revealer of God, as far aa
possible removed from the easy good-naturedness which would represent it as a matter
af indifference what men hold and how they live, — the " good God " will make it all
right in the end. No man can listen attentively and reveiently to Christ and settle
down into comfortable unbelief or self-cumplacent sin. Tet were his words predomi-
nantly and pre-eminently "words of grace." By the truths he preached he made
known to mankind that : 1. God is accessible to all ; the Approachable One, who is
always willing to receiv e his children, and who welcomes back those who have wandered
larthest away. 2. Thai a noble life is open to all ; we may be in character and spirit,
as well as in name and in position, the children of God (Matt. v. 45—48) ; we are to
be " the light of the world," " the salt of the earth." 3. That a glorious future is
within the reach of all ; " in the Father's house are many mansions." 4. lliat salva-
tion is very near to all ; the Scripture is fulfilled ; the r.edeemer is come ; the blind may
see; the canlives maybe delivered; this is " the acceptable year," "the accepted time;
" t(j-day i.s the day of salvation." Or whether we consider —

II. Their form. There is about the griicious words of Christ : 1. An accent of ptr-
ntasiveness. He does not angrily threaten, he cordially invites us; he says, winningly.



OH. It. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 106

" Come unto me . . . I am meek and lowly; " " Abide in me, and I [will abide] in you ; "
"Behold, I stand at the door, and knock," etc. 2. A note of considerateness. " Come
into a desert place, and rest awhile ; " "I have many things to say unto you, but ye
cannot bear them now ; " " The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak." 3. A touch
of tenderness. " I will not leave you comfortless ; " " Because I have said these things
unto you, sorrow hath filled your heart."

1. It is perilous to abuse the grace of Christ. There is such a thmg as " the wrath
of the Lamb." 2, It is perfectly safe to trust in his grace. He means everything he
■ays; the worst may obtain his mercy, the most difBdeut may confide in his redemption
of his word. — 0.

Vers. 32, ST.— Fame and power. - His word was with power;" " The fame of him
went out." Fame and power are the objects of eager and arduous pursuit ; they art
supposed to be deserving of the expenditure of our strength, and to reward us for
•11 our anxieties and toils. What is their worth, intrinsic and relative ? What were
they to our Lord ? and what should they be to us ?

I. The woBTHLESSNEsa OF FAME. 1. The fame of Jesus Christ, as a man, is
nmarkable indeed. Born in a little Judsean village, of humble parents, receiving a
Tery scanty education, enjoying no patronage, teaching truths too deep to be under-
stood by the multitude and too broad to be appreciated by the orthodox of his
time, arousing the hatred of the powerful, and dying while yet a young man a death
of utmost ignominy, — his name has become known, his doctrine has been received,
be himself has been honoured and even worshipped by coimtless millions of mankind
under every sky. This is fame of the first magnitude; there are very few names
"under heaven given among men" that can aspire to stand in the same rank, on
the ground of human fame. 2. Jesus Christ shunned rather than sought fame.
"Jesus straitly charged them, saying, See that no man know it" (Matt. ix. 30; Tiii.
4 ; xii. 16 ; xviL 9). " Great multitudes came together to hear and to be healed . . .
and he withdrew himself into the wilderness " (ch. v. 15, 16 ; see also vers. 42, 43).
3. He appears to have been embarrassed by his fame rather than gratified, and his
work seems to have been hindered rather than helped by it (see John vi. 15). And it
is obvious that, as his great and high purpose was one which was far removed from the
superficial and worldly hopes of the people, popularity or fame would not further but
rather retard the work he had in hand. It is worth no man's while to be seriously
concerned about his fame. To seek for and strive after an honourable reputation is
what every man owes to himself, to his family, to his Church, to his Master. But no
man need concern himself greatly about the acquisition of fame. (1) It is obvious
that only a very small minority of mankind can attain it ; therefore any extensive
endeavour after it must end in disappointment. (2) It is of very slight intrinsic worth;
for it is possessed and enjoyed by the bad as well as by the good, by the notorious as
well as by the celebrated. (3) It does not usually crown its hero until he has gone
where it will no longer affect him ; useless to the martyred patriot himself, however
valuable to his country, is the costly tomb, or the splendid monument, or the elaborate
elegy contributed to his memory. (4) Its effect on living meu is exceedingly doubtful;
it may gladden and stimulate, but it may elate and injure.

II. The excellenot or power. "Power belougeth unto God" (Ps. Ixii. 12).
And power belonged to the Son of God. " Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit "
(ver. 14). 1. Christ possessed and exerted power — the power of the prophet, speaking
truth ; " his word was with power " (ver. 32 ; Matt. vii. 28, 29) ; the power of the
Bon of God, working miracles ; the power of holiness and innooency (John vii. 30 ;
xviiL 6) ; the power of love and sympathy, attaching disciples, men and women, to
himself with bonds of affection that no dangers or sufferings could break. 2. He
aspired after other and still higher power than any he exercised — the power which
could only be gained by a sacrificial death. " I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men
unto me." That pure and holy aspiration has been and shall be gloriously fulfilled.
It is well worth our while to seek after a true, living, spiritual power. (1) It is
attainable by us all ; it is within the reach of those who seek It in the fellowship and
the service of Christ, and who ask it of the Spirit of God. (2) It is of real intrinsic
worth ; it is a Divine, a Christ-like, an angelic thing ; it is a source of benefit and



106 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LDKB. [oh. iv. 1—44,

blessing to mankind. (3) It will enlarge our heritage both here and hereafter ; for to
eyery man God will give sacred and blessed opportunity of service " according to hii
■everal ability." — 0.

Ver. 40. — 2%e healing BaiHowr. Thii interesting picture had evidently been
impressed upon the minds of the apostolic witnesses, for all the evangelists record the
fact that the occurrence took place as the sun was setting, or in the evening of the day.
It was, indeed, a sight to be long remembered. Who can imagine the gratitude and
joy which filled the hearts of husbands and wives, parents and children, as they left
that gracious presence and returned to their homes in health and strength ?

I. The supreme malady. The malady of maladies from which we suffer is tin.
For sin is to the soul just what sickness is to the body. 1. Its essential nature. It is
the radical disorder of the human spirit. The faculties of the soul, instead of doing
that for which they were created, are helpless or are perverted, so that the man
himself no longer walks with Gp >d, no longer speaks his praise, no longer works in his
cause. The soul that was meant to find its life and its heritage in revering, honouring,
rejoicing in, serving, glorifying God, is out of all happy relation with him, cannot do
his will, may not even know who he is. Everything is in a state of disorder and
helplessness. 2. Its various forms. As there are " divers diseases " of the fiesh, as
the sickness of the body takes a variety of forms — blindness, paralysis, fever, etc. — so
does sin in the soul and in the life of man. It may appear as doubt, or disbelief,
or even impious denial of God ; or as the deliberate and determined rejection of his
claims ; or as a flagrant violation of his laws ; or as a guilty inattention to his voice
as he speaks to us in conscience, or in his Word, or in his Son ; or as a prolonged and
presumptuous procrastination, ever delaying to do what is recognized as the right and
the wise thing.

II. The only cure. As many of these sick ones knew not what else to do, to
whom else they could apply ; as they felt that the ordinary remedies and the human
skill accessible to them must prove unavailing, and that, if this new and wonderful
Healer did not help them, they must bear their burden of pain and helplessness through
their future days; so njay we feel respecting the supreme malady. Nothing merely
human will prove to be a cure. Only a Divine hand can heal these deep wounds, these
fatal ills. And how does Jesus Christ prove himself the one Healer of the heart?
1. By showing us our sin in its true light, as a grievous wrong done to our heavenly
Father, and thus filling our souls with sorrow and shame concerning it. 2. By offering
himself as that Divine One through whom it may be forgiven, and we be restored to
the favour and friendship of God. 3. By leading us in every path of holiness and
purity, and forming in us a righteous ctjaracter and an obedient spirit.

III. An efficacioub method. " He laid his hands on every one of them." The
touch of that Divine hand communicated health to the body, and at the same time
hope and joy to the heart. It was not absolutely necessary that he should touch them ;
he could " speak the word only," and the patient would be healed. But he preferred
to do so ; it brought him, the Healer, into close and loving contact with those whom
he was healing. We, too, in our way, are healers after Christ. We aspire to move
through our life, dispensing health and happiness to them that are sick and sad of soul.
If we fail in part to do this, may it not be because we do not get into close enough contact
with those whom we are endeavouring to bless ? We must learn to be like our Lord, and
lay our hands on every one of them, and then shall we be most likely to heal them. — C.

Vers. 1 — 13. — Hi* temptation of Christ. From the baptism of Jesus we now pass
to his temptation. In the baptism he received, as we have seen, three gifts from th
Father — the guarantee of & perfect revelation of the Father's will, of a perfect inspira
tion to do that revealed will, and of an assurance of Sonship during the trying ordeal
We are now to notice three temptatiuns, corresponding very accurately to these thre
gifts, and so presenting in must artistic fashion the great drama of Messiah's life
But before taking them up as they are here presented by Luke, let us direct our atten
tion to one or two preliminary mattert<. And first we must notice that Jesui was
" led," or, as Mark puts it still more graphically, was " driven" of the Spirit into the
wilderness (Mark L 12). This clearly implies that our Lord did not " court tempta-



CH. IV. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 107

tion," nor rush with a light heart into it, nor shirk it, but accepted bravely what wm
forced upon him. It is only in such a spirit that we can hope successfully to resist it.
There is no promise of Scripture to sustain any one who rushes madly into temptation.
But, secondly, we observe that a great baptism of the Spirit is usually to prepare the
recipient for some victoriously-to-be-met temptation. Jesus went to the wilderness
filled with the Holy Ghost, and so was enabled to vanquish his tempter. Thirdly, the
scene of the temptation is significant. While its exact location is not indicated, its
general characteristics are. It was some wilderness, where nature affords no food or
sustenance to man. What a contrast to the happy garden where the first Adam was
tempted! Messiah meets the tempter in the most trying circumstances, and the
tempter's defeat there is promise of his defeat everywhere. Moreover, Mark tells ut
he was " with the wild beasts " (Mark i. 13). It is a new Daniel braving the lions and
subduing them. Fourthly, we must observe that he is here tempted in his public
capacity, as Messiah. He had doubtless been tempted previously as a private indi-
vidual ; he had been urged by Satan most probably to leave the privacy of Nazareth
for a more public position, and had put away all these temptations manfully. Now
that he has dedicated himself as Messiah in the Jordan, he must undergo corresponding
temptations.

I. Notice the temptation through appetite. (Vers. 3, 4.) After forty day^
fast, during which time he was suffering temptation from Satan, he finds himself
famishing. The spectacle in the wilderness and among the wild beasts is, therefore^
that of a, famishing Messiah. Never was he nearer death than on this occasion, except
when death actually came. It is at this juncture that Satan first tempts him through
his hunger. He claims to be the Son of God ; this assurance was given him in mi
baptism ; and as the Son he believes he possesses, though as yet he has not exercised,
miraculous power. Let him, then, use his power for self-preservation, which is the
first law of nature, and transform the stones of the wilderness into bread. The fallacy
which underlies this temptation is one to which men are now most prone, viz, that
" men must live," and then this false principle passes through degrees of comparison,
and men say to themselves they must, if possible, live well, and, lastly, they must, if
possibly live very well. But is it necessary that any of us should live ? Who has
given us this revelation ? May not God's revelation be that the best thing we couU
do would be to die for truth and righteousness ? Hence our Lord, instead of listening
to the voice of appetite, declares his resolve to listen to the voice of God, and upon
that revelation he will live. " It is written. That man shall not live by bread alone,
biit by every word of God." It is surely instructive in these times, when appetite h
accepted by many as man's one certain revelation, to have our Lord directiug our
attention to a higher revelation and a more sustaining voice. Bread cannot sustain
tiie whole man ; it can only prop up the physical nature ; but the spiritual needs other
food and higher help, and finds it in God's Word alone I Amid the fierce struggle for
bread, let us listen to him who speaks about the better bread which comes out of the
mouth of God 1

IL Notice the temptation through ambition. (Vers. 6 — 8.) Matthew puts tUa
temptation last, instead of here, and in this is probably chronologically more aconrata
than Luke. But we need not transpose it in order to profit by it. Messiah, then,
though famishing, abides by the revelation of God rather than make a miraculoaa
banquet in the wilderness. But of the revelation the Father gave him this was a
chief part — that he was to become Conqueror and Euler of the world ! Universal
empire was, therefore, his legitimate ambition. It is here that Satan tempts him.
Taking him to some mountain-top, he shows him, in some miraculous fashion, all tka
kingdoms of the inhabited world in a moment of time. Next he claims to be the
rightful ruler of these kingdoms, but is willing to make a bargain with the ambitious
Messiah that, if he will only acknowledge his sovereignty and pay him the homage doi
to earthly kings, all the kingdoms shall be made over to him. The temptation her«
is to gratify ambition at the cheapest rate. No self-denial, no self-sacrifice, no con-
suming spirit, shall be needful, but simply a little homage paid to the world's prince.
It was such a bargain as a worldly mind would have welcomed eagerly. But Jesua
refused the terms. He would not acknowledge Satan to be the world's rightful ruler.
He regarded him as a usurper whom he had come to depose. Hence, in impatienca



108 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. iv. 1— 44.



with (he arch-fiend, our Lord exclaimed, " Get thee behind me, Satan : for it ii written,
Thou Shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve." The question
in the first temptation was that of revelation, corresponding to the first of the baptismal
gifts ; the question in this temptation is that of inspiration, the spirit of service, and
corresponding to the second of the baptismal gifts. Jesus will not render any homage
to the world's betrayer, but will serve God alone I Once more may we see the grand
spirit of self-sacrifice which this implies. Jesus will seek and obtain a universal
empire, but by making no truce with the world ; rather would he himself suffer unto
death and be followed by myriads of martyrs, than gratify k poor ambition in Satan's
suggested and worldly way.

in. Notice the temptation to pbesumption and ostentation. (Vers. 9 — 12.)
As Messiah Jesus must consider what plan would be best for beginning his public
work. This must have been with him a distinct subject of thought. And now Satan
suggests that if he precipitated himself from tlie pinnacle of the temple into the court,
and did so with impunity as God's Son, the people could not but hail him as the
promised Messiah. He should put his Sonship, the tempter suggests, to the test.
He should test the promise about angels bearing up the believer and preventing him
from dashing his foot against a stoue. It was a temptation to carry faith into pre-
sumption, and becoming ostentatious in doing so. Our Lord, then, having resolved
to live by faith, is as firmly resolved to avoid presumption. He will not tempt hii
Father by claiming support in ostentatious circumstances. And so he repels the
insinuation, and resolves not to presume upon his Sonship. Hence we find that, instead
of entering in any such spirit upon his work, he enters upon it publicly when he drives
the traffickers from the temple. It was an amazing method of beginning Messianic
work, and yet it was the best way.* These temptations have their little counterparts
in our own experience. We are tempted through appetite, through ambition, and
through presumption. We must resist the enemy in the Master's spirit. The apt
quotations from the Divine Word show where the sword of the Lord lies, and it is for
us not to let it rust in a napkin, like Goliath's at the tabernacle, but to have it in
constant readiness for active service and faithful resistance.

And now, in conclusion, we have to notice the fact that angels came and ministered
unto Jesus when the crisis was past. We know not what they brought to him —
ambrosial food, the corn of heaven, perhaps ; at all events the most delightful food of
which he ever partook. Then, like Elijah, he went in the strength of the food received,
not, indeed, to the mount of God and the wilderness, but from the wilderness to the
busy haunts of men, and in the power of the Spirit. Satan, meanwhile, having
" completed " the temptation, having done his worst to make him fall, leaves him for
a season free. It must have been a heaven of happiness to be consciously free from
his incessant wiles and snares, and to have won the freedom. So may we in our littl*
measure win some respite from the enemy, if we faithfully follow our Lord in resisting
temptation I — ^E. M. E.

Vers. 14 — 30. — Chrisft sermon in Nazareth. The temptation of Christ strengthened
all the graces within him, so that he felt himself prepared, on returning from the wilder-
ness, for public work. Luke does not take us, as John does in his Gospel, back to the
Jordan ; nor does he take us to the marriage in Cana of Galilee, where the wonderful
works began (John ii. 1 — 13). He prefers to sum up for us his early Galileean ministry
in two verses, before proceeding to a detailed account of his visit to Nazareth and his
rejection by his countrymen. Let us consider —

I. The establishment of his poblio reputation befobb appearing in Nazaeeth.
(Vers. 14, 15.) Had he gone to his own city first without a reputation, he would not
have received the attention he did. Jesus knew that a prophet has no honour in his
own country ; he knew that he need not go among his old companions without having
achieved something remarkable ; hence he made a name for himself in other parts of
Galilee before advancing to the difficult task at his old home. And the method he
pursued was significant. He did not create rival institutions to the existing Churches
He went into the synagogues and availed himself of the opportunities they offered.

> Woolsey'i ' Religion of the Present and the Future,' pp. 24 — 41 ; c£ also UUmann't
• ginleasuess of Jesus,' pp. 123 — 144, 264—291, eto.



ni. IV. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 103

He read the Word, expounded it, and made a reputation for himself aa a popular Teacher.
Of course, along with his teaching, there was a measure of miracle. But his wonderful
works were merely to secure increased attention to his still more wonderful words. His
•xpositions of truth were really the important elemeot to which all else was but sub-
sidiary. It was, therefore, with an established reputation that he advanced to Nazareth
to test his countrymen as to their cordiality towards him.

II. Let us next consideb his visit to Nazabeth. (Vers. 16 — 21.) We are not
informed on what day of the Jewish week he came to Nazareth ; but we are told
what happened on the first sabbath day after his arrival. We shall notice the signifi-
cant facts as they are told us by Luke. 1. He shared in the public worship, ■ If any
one ever had a right to absent himself on the ground of knowing more than others
could tell him, it was surely Jesus. Yet we find him subjecting himself to family
training, and putting all honour he could upon social and public worship. Moreover, it
was his " custom." The habit of waiting upon God at the sanctuary has thus the
highest warrant. In this, as in all else, our Lord is the perfect Example. But: 2. S«
took part in public worship. The Jews in their synagogues seem to have encouraged
greater freedom than Church forms now admit of. They welcomed the help of young
men as readers, and took exhortation from stran<cer8 when they happened to be present.
Our Lord, then, took the place of reader on this occasion, and, as Isaiah's prophecy
was handed to him, he selected as his text the notable passage about the mission of
Messiah. The Anointed One was sent to " preach the gospel to the poor," etc. And
here it is instructive to notice (1) the class Messiah gathers round him. Not those
whom the world would choose, but the poor, the broken-hearted, the captives, the
blind, the bruised, the imprisoned I What a policy to inaugurate 1 Again, (2) it is
significant what treatment he gives them. He gives the gospel, not wealth, to the
poor ; healing, not freedom from trial, to the broken-hearted ; freedom from sin to the
captives ; the recovering of sight to the blind ; liberty to the bruised in spirit ; and
acceptance and jubilee joy to all imprisoned ones. In short, it is spiritual comfort over
and above physical which he brings to them 1 It is here that the world's wisdom fails.
It may do something to alleviate physical distress, but is as helpless as the doctor in
Macbeth in " ministering to minds diseased." 3. Se embodied and illustrated his text.
When he had read the text he gave the book back to the minister and sat down before
the congregation, and proceeded to expound the passage. He had to speak of himself.
He was the Person referred to in it. No wonder the eyes of all were fastened on him.
The Anointed One was in their midst, and he was ready to heal the broken-heated
and to work the wonders in the spiritual realm which were so important. The expo-
sition was really the embodiment of blessing in his own Person. The Healer was there,
the great Physician of souls.

III. Let us next consideb the effect of his sebmon. (Vers. 22, 23.) The first
effect was wonder and admiration. He had evidently interested them by his spiritual
exposition. No such sermon had ever been heard before in Nazareth. It was a case
of ministerial joy at the glad reception of a message.* But if these were the lights of
joy in the picture, they were speedily followed by the shadows of ministerial disap-
pointment. Their admiration gave way before familiarity. They began to say, " Is
not this Joseph's Son ? " They knew his antecedents, and so will put the worst cun-
itruction possible upon his work. But the contempt of familiarity was not their only
danger; they imagined that, as his countrymen, they were entitled to demand such
miraculous credentials as he had given elsewhere. He had lived among them for the
most of thirty years a sinless life, the greatest of all miracles in a sinful world; but
they demand something more, and think that he will have but a sickly reputation il
he does not accede to their request. The physician who cannot cure himself will not
be in much demand to cure others ; so if Jesus will not, by a miraculous display at
Nazareth, establish his reputation which familiarity is undermining, they are prepared
to say it is because he cannot. The mistake they make is in forgetting that Nazareth
had no right to th6 treatment of Capernaum, since it had thirty years of the sinlessuess
of Jesus, which the seaside town had not.

IV. Consideb cub Lord's sovebeign eefusal of theib demand. (Vers. 24 — 27.)
Th« notion of the Nazarenes was that they had a right to a miraculous display frotu

' Of. Gerok's 'Aug Ernster Zeit,' a U7.



lift THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. iv. 1— 44

Christ. As Jews, and as his own townspeople, they fancied they had a claim which
could not be got over. This self-righteous spirit must be put down. Hence our Lord
declares, in the iirst place, that " no prophet is accepted in his own country." To this
law of limited influence through fHmiliarity Jesus himselt has to bow. It is the
principle which secures a missionary enterprise. Men are more influential away from
home than they can ever he at home. Better leave the plain of Shinar than wait only
to have one's tongue confounded and one's influence gone. But, besides, our Lord
from history recalls two illustrations of God in his sovereignty passing ail the Jews by
and selecting Gentiles and outsiders for blessing. The first case was in Elijah's time,
when many an lai'aelitish widow was famishing for want of bread ; but none of them
was visited by the prophet, or got her barrel of meal miraculously replenished, as did
the heathen widow at Sarepta. Again, there were many lepers in Israel in the time of
Bliseus the prophet, but they weie all passed over, and Naaman, the Syrian general,
was cured. It was in both instances to show that Jews, as such, had no claim upon
God's bounty, who could, if he pleased, pass them all by. This humiliation is one of
the great lessons we must all learn if we are to profit by Christ's salvation. Divine
sovereignty is to humiliate in order to exalt ; but if sovereignty is denied to God, the
curse comes instead.

V. Consider the sad issue of the visit. (Vers. 28 — 30.) The Nazarenes are
filled with wrath. They will not accept the invitation, but will contend for their rights,
so called. So indignant are they as to meditate his destruction. Hence they take hira
towards the brow of the hill, with the intention of casting him headlong over it. It
was a diabolical attempt. It was frustrated, however, by the majestic bearing of the
Redeemer. He went through them by simple majesty of bearing, and they dare not
touch him. Over the hills he passed in judicial separation from the misguided city.
And now we are surely taught by this history not to be surprised if we are appa-
rently unsuccessful in our work. It was the same with the Master. All, in such
circumstances, we can do is to lay the truth of God before men's minds, and show
them at once their unworthiness to receive it, and their responsibility in rejecting it.
Moreover, if old acquaintances do not receive our testimony with that eagerness and
respect we imagine it deserves, let us remember that our Master was subject himself to
the same law, and accepted the situation. Patience under disappointment is the great
lesson of comfort from such a passage. — B. M. E.

Vers. 81 — 44. — Our Lord^s labours at Capernaum. As Nazareth knew not the day
of her visitation, and had done her best to make away with Jesus, he had no alterna-
tive but to make another place his centre. Capernaum, a city situated on the lake of
Galilee, and through which the Eastern caravans were accustomed to pass, is selected
by him as the most suitable head-CLuarters for his Galilaean ministry. Accordingly, he
came down from the uplands, where Kazareth lay, to this seaport, and there began his
missionary enterprise. And here we have—

I. The chakactbr op his preachiko. (Vers. 31, 32.) Entering on the sabbath
days into the synagogue, he taught with authority and with success. His teaching
was a great contrast to that of the scribes. They seem to have contented themselves
with quoting authorities. Unless they could back up their views by some great name,
they were not sure about their doctrines. It was a prodigious use of commentators
which they indulged in. But Jesus came and preached what he himself knew as a
matter of certainty. There was a directness and " dead certainty " about his utterances
which struck all the hearers as something new. And surely it is on this line that
preachers still will find the path of safety. What we preach ought to be experience,
the verities of our own spiritual life. And this preaching of certainties had its due
effect in spiritual power. The word went home to the hearers' hearts — they had never
heard truth so clearly presented before ; and so they were lost in wonder and astonish-
ment. The secret of success lies here. It is not by radiating a series of uncertainties
upon men; it is not by bolstering men up in "honest doubt" and leaving them in the
haze, that men will be won to what is high and holy. It is by telling them what
we have learned ourselves — the glorious certainties of spiritual experience. Like the
psalmist, we must {rather men around us to tell them what God has done for our souls
" Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth sjpeaketh," and speaketb well I



■H. IT. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. Ill

IL OUB LOBD DEIIOKSTBATED HIS FOWEB OVEB OKVILS AS WELIi AB OYKB HEN.

(Vers. 33 — 37.) In the synagogue there happened to be an unfortunate man possessed
by what is called an " unclean devil ; " his " inspirations " from this unhappy source
being perhaps of a lustful aad sensual character. The possession of men by demons
was a struggle upon the diabolical spirit's part for • physical instrument to bring him
into relations with the sensible and material world. The humanity of the man became
the slave or hack of the demon. He used the man'i voice to utter his unholy thoughts,
uid reduced the poor subject to utter wretchedness. The presence of the holy Saviour
aroused the demon's fears. He saw that his hour of judgment had come ; and so, as a
last resort, he tried to injure the reputation of Jesus by bearing witness to his holy
character. There are some people from whom it is not desirable to hold certificates or
receive testimonials. And in this appeal to Jesus he speaks for the man as well as for
himself, as if he had a commission to do so. " Let us alone ; what have we to do with
thee, Jesus of Nazareth ? Art thou come to destroy us ? " etc. We have thus set
before us : 1. The separating power of gin. The fellowship of the holy is not desired.
2. The inherent dread of Judgment. The demon felt he deserved destruction. 3. The
overweening sense of success in sin. The demon imagined that the poor possessed one
would be involved in his own destruction. And now Jesus first silences the spirit,
indicating that he desires no such witnesses ; and, secondly, commands him to come
out of the possessed one. In this way the demon is bidden back to that spiritual realm
which he seemed so anxious to escape. There is nothing for it but to obey Christ. In
doing so, however, he does his worst upon the poor possessed one; he throws him
down, and to all appearance has once more the mastery over his prey. It is a last
and unsuccessful effort. The man is found to have come unscathed through the ordeal.
The restoration of human nature to freedom from demoniacal temptation is one great
object of the Saviour's work. Clothing men in their right mind again, enabling them
to think and act for themselves, and to resist the subtle temptations to impurity and
sin, — this is a glorious function of the Holy One of God I The result of the miracle
was the recognition of Jesns as the Sovereign of that spiritual world below man, from
which he is liable to assault. His mighty word not only controlled human hearts, but
extended to demons too. They had to obey his commands, no matter how loath they
might be to do so. And this should comfort us in our temptations.

UL OuB LoBD CABBIES ON IN FeTEB's HOUSEHOLD THE HEALING WOBK WHICH HE

HAD EXEBCISED IN THE PUBLIC coNGBEGATioN. (Vcrs. 38, 39.) Peter's mother-in-
law was ill of a great fever; and when he was come in they besought him for her.
We are thus taught that our Lord likes to be asked for the blessings he is so ready to
afford. Prayer is the natural cry of need, or of intercession, to One who is able to meet
man's difSculties and bless him. And so our Lord, being besought, goes to the patient,
rebukes the fever, takes her by the hand, and lo I it leaves her; and she rose to the
activities of health again. Her ministration showed the immediate and complete
character of the cure, and also the gratitude which should characterize one who is
saved by Jesus. And are we not thus taught that we should bring our fevered souls
to Jesus as the great Physician ? He can take away the fever instantaneously. There
is nothing so wonderful as the way in which we regain spiritual health at the throne of
grace. But let us see to it that it leads to ministration. He gives us back our health
that we may use it for his glory and the benefit of those about us.

IV. OUB LOBD IS NEXT BEEN TAKING DISEASES AND POSSESSED ONKS BT WHOLK-

8ALE, AND HEALING THEM. (Vcrs. 40, 41.) At simsct, whcu the sabbath ended, and
when un(1er the friendly shades of ni^ht the poor sick and deformed ones could
conveniently be brought to him, he finds an immense opportunity confronting him.
Peter's house is turned into a consulting hospital, and, like famous physicians, he is
well-nigh overwhelmed with work. Possessed ones are also brought to him ; and the
demons adopt the same plan as the one noticed already — they begin to testify to his
Messiahship and Sonship. This mass of suffering humanity he takes in hand, and with
infallible certainty heals them every one. He accomplishes the healing, too, in the
most sympathetic fashion, lading his tender hand on each, and conveying through
contact the needful blessing. It was truly " a night much to be remembered " by all
these sons and daughters of afiliction whom Jesus thus lovingly healed I As for the
demons, on the other hand, they receive nothing from him but rebuke. He wUl not



112



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. L™. t. 1— 39.



Lave their testimony to his nature or his mission. At the same time, he shows hia
sovereignty over them in dooming them to silence and solitude, at least so far as
possessing; men was concerned.

V. Odb Lord shows ns his need op retibement after labotjr, and also what
HIS GRRAT COMMISSION WAS. (Vers. 42 — 44.) After these mighty works he feels the need
of retirement to commune with God, and keep his soul in proper tune tor further work.
If Jesus felt the need of prayer, how presumptuous in minor minds to excuse themselves
from it ! They seem to have given him an invitation to settle in Capernaum. And
if he had, he would have had a famous physician's practice, doors besieged from morning
to night, and no time for any other work. Hence he resolved to itinerate rather than
settle down. His wandering from place to place secured him from overwork of %
purely physical character, and enabled him to be the Missionary he was meant to be.
It is au interesting question why he did not make Palestine a healthful land from end
to end. He might have organized deputations and sought out all the sick, and made
the land free from all disease aad suffering. But while he healed all who came or
were brought to him, and sent disciples forth on similar errands, he did not undertake
this wholesale cure. And two answers may be given in the way of valid reason about
it. In the first place, the people did not deserve such a blessing, and would not likely
have been the better for It. A world of sinful men would not be improved if they were
all made and kept healthy men. Health of soul and perfect health of body are to syn-
chronize in the great future which lies before us. But secondly, if he had undertaken
this physical work, he would have lost his opportunities of purely spiritual work, the
preaching of the gospel, for which more especially he had come. Hence we must
admire hia resolve to be an itinerant Missionary rather than a settled and famoua
Physician. Preaching is really the highest work of man, if it is done conscientiously.
The sphere is spiritual, and the results are for evermore. It is well to luagnify the
offioe as magnified by the Master. — B. M. E.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER V.



When St. Luke compiled his Gospel, many
of the ciioumstances connected with tlie
early relations of the leaders of Christianity
with their Founder were so well known, and
had been so often repeated, that it seemed
nuneoessary to rehearse them afresh ; hence
to us the seeming abruptness of the intro-
duction of Simon (Peter), James, and Jolm
in the scene now about to be related. Iq
the preceding, the healing of Simon's
wife's mother of a great fever is related
without any explanation, as though Simon
Peter's connection with the Lord was a fact
too well known to require any comment or
explanation.

The association of Jesus and these chosen
men seems to have commenced as follows •
Simon (Peter) and his brother Andrew
(suns of Jona), John and James (the sons of
Zebedee and Salome), belonged to fisher
families dwelling on the banks of the Lake
of Gennesaret. They seemed to have been
Cut friends, at times even partners in their
eocnpation. Sharers with many others of



the youth of Israel of their time, In a pas-
sionate hope that the hour of the long-pro-
mised deliverance from the yoke of their
foreign oppressors was at hand, the four
became disciples of the Baptist, and by hia
they were referred to Jesus, who in myi-
terious but exalted terms was pointed out by
the great desert preacher, John, as "the
Lamb of God," the Glorious, the Expected
One (John i 85—43). They joined the
Master e)t the bidding of John, and for a
time were associated with him. Still at
first they were only with him apparently at
times, leaving him and returning to theil
homes and occupations, waiting for some
definite and imperative summons to join
his cause permanently. The summons in
question is related in this chapter. The time
was now come when the Lord deemed it
fitting that he should surround himself
with a company of disciples or pupils who
should be constant witnesses of his works,
hearers of his words, and thus be trained
up for the great task of continuing hie
mission when he should have returned to
his home in heaven.



OH. V. 1—39.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LTJKB.



113



We read these GoapelB as the story of the
Master's life often without thinking how
much of that life is never told. After all, we
only possess a few representative incidents —
the events which the twelve and their first
friends had selected as the themes of their
sermons and discnurses in Jerusalem,
Corinth, Ephesus, Bome, and the great
centfes of early Christian activity. Here,
after tlie story of one sabbath day'g blessed
toil in Oapeiuaum, follows a sentence which
passes over, in a word or two, many days of
quiet teaching in populous towns and villages
of the once rich Galilee, and then the
evangelist gives us with some detail the
account of a morning by the lake, where he
preached from a boat to the crowds on the
shore, and then went out a-flshing, and, after
the fishing, bade the fishermen leave all and
come with him, and he would give them •
new work.

Ver. 1. — And it oame to pass, that, as the
people pressed npon him to hear the word
of God. His fame as a great Tencher was
eTldently now firmly established. If it were
known that he intended speaking in public,
a crowd of listeners would gather quickly
round him, whether in the synagogues, or by
the lake-shore, or in the market-place. He
stood by the Lake of Gennesaret. On this
occasion,, as he taught by the qaiet lake
watrrs, the throng was so great that he
borrowed the fishing-boat of one of his
friends, and, just pushing out from the
shore, spoke to the multitude from the little
craft as it rocked on the wavelets of the lake.
Dean Stanley calls it " the most sacred sheet
of water which the earth contains." The
rabbinical derivation is interesting: " Oanne-
$arim, garden of princes ; " bat it is more
probable that Gennesaret is but a reproduction
of the old Hebrew name Chinneroth (Josh,
xii. 8), BO called from its harplike shape.
It is a beautiful sheet of water, twelve or
thirteen miles long and nearly seven broad
at one portion of the lake. The Jordan
flows through it. In our Lord's time it was
surrounded by the richest and most populous
district of the Holy Land; large and flourish-
ing towns were built along its shores.
Capernaum, as has been said, was the
junction of the great roads leading from
Syria and the far East to the Mediterranean
on the west, and Jerusalem and Egypt on
the south. The lake was famous for its
fish, and was crowded with all descriptions
of craft. The whole scene is now changed.
Scarcely a rude boat is ever seen on the
blue silent waters. Desolate ruins fringe
the deserted shores, with here and there a



crumbling mud village. Inhabited by the
poorest and least enterprising of peasants,
so sadly changed is this beautiful and
wealthy district, which the rabbis used to
love to speak of as the one among the seven
seas of Canaan which God had reserved for
himself.

Ver. 3. — And he sat down, as in the syna-
gogue of Capernaum — the usual attitude of
the Jewish preachers.

Ver. 4. — And let down your nets for a
draught. Not necessarily a miraculous
draught; it was probably a supernatural
knowledge which the Lord had of a shoal
of fish to be found in the spot indicated by
him to the fishermen. Tristram (' Natural
History of the Bible') says, "The thickness
of the shoals of fisli is almost incredible to
any one who has not witnessed them. They
often cover an area of more than an acre,
and when the fish move slowly forward in a
mass, and are rising out of the water, they
are packed so close together that it appears
as if a heavy rain was beating down on the
surface of the water."

Ver. 5. — Master. The word in theori^nal
so rendered is not Sabbi, as in the other
Gospels, but iiritrraTO, Teacher. The
Jewish term would not have been under-
stood by the Gentile reader for whom the
story was especially intended.

Ver. 6. — And their net brake. Augustine
beautifully compares the broken and torn
net to the Church that now is, full of divisions
and rents ; the net nnrent and untom will
be the Church of tha future, which will know
no schisms,

Ver. 10.— Fear not A feeling of intense
overpowering awe on a sudden came on
Simon after listening to the words and seeing
this last act of power which so closely
affected him. The very fish of his native
lake, then, were subject to this strange holy
Man) This was no mortal, thought the
fisherman, and he fell at the Master's feet.
•' Finding as it does its parallel in almost all
manifestations of a Divine or even an angelic
presence, it (this awful fear) must be owned
to contain a mighty, because an instructive,
witness for the sinfulness of man's nature,
out of which it comes to pass that any near
revelation from the heavenly world fills the
children of men, even the holiest among
them, with terror and amazement, yea, some-
times with the expectation of death itself"
(Archbishop Trench, ' Introductk>n to the
Epistles to the Seven Churches '). T 1 1 e same
"Fear not "("Be not afraid") was uttered
on like occasions to Isaiah (vi 7), to Daniel
(x. 12), and several times during the earthly
ministry was said to the disciples, and for
the last time the reassuring words were
spoken by the Bedeemer after the Ascension
to his own dear follower, John, who eovld



ai



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. v. 1—39.



not bear the sight of the gloriona majesty
of his risen Loid. Thou shalt catch men.
The imagery contained in these words of
the Master to his fishermen-followers was,
of course, drawn from the late scene. Their
failure in catching fish, their Teacher's
marvellous success, the net bursting with
the great catch of silvery fish ; the Lord's
strange prophetic words which accompanied
their call to his service, — all would in after-
years often come up before the disciples in
their hours of alternating failure and success
in the mighty task he had set them to do.
The great Fisherman, Christ ; his imitators
and servants, fishers; the world of men
pictured as fish, — were ever favourite images
for the pencil, the graving tool, and the pen
of the Christian artist and writer of the
first ages of the fuith. One of the earliest
extant hymns, for instance, of the Church,
by Clement of Alexandria, dwells on the
image. The words are addressed to Christ—

" Fisher of men, the blest.
Out of the world's unrest,
Out of sin's troubled sea.
Taking us, Lord, to thee ;
Out of the waves of strife
With bait of blissful life;
Drawing thy nets to shore,
With choicest fish, good store.
{Hymn of Clement of J lexandria.j

Tho favourite Christian monogram of the
fish, carved on so many tombs in the Cata-
combs, belongs to the same imagery — the

i X t V <r

Vers. 12— 16.— ITie leper it healed tn a
certain eity.

Ver. 12. — When he was in a certain city.
From the scene in the boat on the lake with
the fishermen, Luke abruptly passes to
another memorable incident which took
place probably soon after — memorable be-
cause it is the first recorded instance of
Jesus' contact with that most terrible of
earthly maladies, leprosy. The certain
city was probably the town of Hattim, for
we read in St. Matthew tliat the famous cure
took place as the Ijord was coming down
from the mount of Beatitudes. (This will
be spoken of in its place in ch. vi.) Behold
a man full of leprosy. The expression
"behold" reproduces exactly the scene as
the eye-witness remembered it. There were
many apparently with the Master on that
occasion ; but following him, suddenly, as he
went on before the crowd, one of those ghastly
victims of the frightful disease stood before
him, apparently having eluded observation,
for they were not allowed to appear in the
ordinary haunts of men. The unhappy man
fell down and knelt before the great Physi-



cian, of whom he may have heard so much,
and asks him to exercise his mighty power
on the dread malady which was eating away
his life. The leper evidently had no doubt
whatever of the power of Jesus ; he was only
anxious as to whether he had the will to
cure him. The whole question respecting
the exact nature of the disease is a vexed
one. The word has been used with varying
extent of meaning. As far as we can gather,
the disease in its worst form seems to have
been a progressive decay arising from the
poisoning of the blood. The face and dif-
ferent members of the body were attacked
and gradually destroyed, till the sufferer
became a hideous spectacle, and literally
fell to pieces. It is much disputed whether
or not the malady in any of its varied de-
velopments and stages was contagious. The
strict separation which in well-nigh all
forms of the disease was rigidly insisted on
would seem at all events to point to the
conclusion that, in the popular estimation, it
certainly was so ; some phases of the malady,
however, appear to have been considered as
perfectly free from contagions eflfect — for
instance, Naaman, the captain of the host
of Syria, was a leper. It is not conceivable
that one who was infected with so grave a
malady, considered incurable, would, if con-
lagious, have been permitted to have exer-
cised a function which would have brought
him into constant contact with masses of his
fellow-countrymen. These cases, however,
were apparently few in number, and those
afflicted with what was usually called
leprosy were rigidly separated from their
fellows, not only to dwell apart, but positively
forbidden to approach the dwellings of men.
In the Egyptian legends of the Exodus,
tiie Israelites were said to have been ex-
pelled because they were lepers.

Ver. 13. — And he put forth his hand, and
touched him, saying, I will : be thon clean.
And immediately the leprosy departed from
him. St. Mark adds here, " being touched
with compassion." The Redeemer, at the
sight of the man's awful wretchedness — wast-
ing away, shunned by all men, dragging on a
hopeless, aimless, wenry life— in his Divine
pity, with a sudden impulse tosses aside all
considerations of ceremonial uncleanness or
contagion, and lays his hand on the miser-
able sufferer from whom all shrank, with
his word of power exclaimed, "I will: be
thou clean." St. Ambrose writes here how
" Jesus, because he is the Lord of the Law,
does not obey the Law, but makes the Law."
" Here Jesus obeys that Divine eternal law
of compassion, in its sudden impulse, which
is older and grander than the written Law "
(Farrar). It is observable that in thf^se sud-
den oases, in whii'h the common brotiierhood
of man was iuvolvedi the nobler spirits of



OH. V. 1—39.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEUINa TO ST. LUKE.



115



Israel evei rose above all consideration of
law and custom, and, putting aside all legal,
orthodox restriction, obeyed at once tlie
sovereign dictates of the heart. 80 Elijah
and Elisha, those true saints of God, shrank
not from touching the dead,

Ver. 14.— And he charged him to tell no
man. We find this desire of Jesus to check
publicity after he had worked one of his
great works, especially in the earlier part of
his ministry. (Jhrysostom attributes this
to the Master's regard for the one who
had been healed, desiring that his gratitude
to God for the mercy vouchsafed to him
should not be frittered away in wo ids, in
idle talk with cuiions persons. It is, how-
ever, more likely that the Master wished
to stem rather than to fan the tide of popu-
larity which such mighty works would be
sure to excite among the people. What he
determined to check was a false and mis-
taken desire among the people to make him
king.

Vet. IS. — But so much the more went
there a tame abroad of him: and great
multitudes came together to hear, and to be
healed by him of their infirmities. It is
evident that his wishes and commands were
neglected, possibly out of a mistaken feel-
ing of gratitude. The result was that his
work of teaching was hindered by the
crowds who resorted to him at once as a
Physician of extraordinary power. But he
had graver and much more important work
before him than even the blessed task of
relieving suffering. So he withdrew him-
self, says our evangelist, and again spent
a short season in solitude and prayer.

Vers. 17 — 26. — The healing of the paralyzed
num.

Ver. 17. — ^And it eame to pass on a certain
day, as he was teaching, that there were
Pharisees and doctors of the Law sitting by,
which were come out of every town of
Galilee, and Judaea, and Jerusalem. Again
en interval of time. The fame of the new
Teacher had spread rapidly. One day, some
time after the events told in the last section,
the Master was sitting in the house ap-
parently of some one of consideration in
Capernaum, and, as usual, was teaching.
Grouped round him were a different audience
to the traders and fishermen of the lake-
city ; prominent men of the leading re-
ligious party in the state, not only from
Galilee, but from Jerusalemand other Judsean
cities, such as Hebron, as well as learned
doctors of the Law. These had been drawn
from curiosity, some doubtless by higher
motives, to hear for themselves the teaching
of this now famous Nazarene Carpenter.
Tl'.ose do not appear to have been actuated
witli the jealous malignity of some of those
Utei deputationa from the Jerusalem Samhe-



driu and schools. The house was thronged
within, and the crowd pressed round the
doors. In the course of the quiet teliching,
took place the incident which gave rise to
one of the Lord's great sayings — an utterance
so important tliat it evidently had been
chosen by the apiisties as a frequent theme
or text in the preacliing of the first days.

Vers. 18, 19. — And, behold, men brought
in a bed a man which was taken with a
palsy : and they sought means to bring him
in, and to lay him before him. And when
they could not find by what way they might
bring him in because of the multitude,
they went upon the house-top, and let him
down through the tiling with his couch into
the midst before Jesus. So far there wag
nothing very unusual in the incident. These
healings must have been of common occur-
rence with our Lord. The poor sufferer and
his friends, intensely anxious for an inter-
view with One whom they justly regarded as
the great Physician, were rightly confident
that they had but to see the Master, to state
their case, and to receive the blessing which
they sought. On this occasion it seemed
impossible to get at the merciful Healer.
Now or never, they thought. He might, as
he had done before, withdraw himself. The
chance might never recur. So they accom-
plished their purpose in the way narrated
by the evangelist. It was evidently nothing
very extraordinary — an ingenious device,
nothing more ; only by it the friends of the
sufferer showed that they were intensely in
earnest, that they were confident that the
Master had both the power and the will to
do what they wanted. Much has been
written on the device employed on this
occasion by the fiiends of the paralytic.
Delitzsch, in his 'A Day at Capernaum,'
graphically describes what must have taken
place. Two bearers ascend the roof by a
ladder, and by means of cords t'ley draw up
by the same way the sick man after them,
assisted by two olher bearers. In the
middle of the terrace was a square place,
open in summer to give light and air to the
house, but closed with tiles during the rainy
season. Having opened this passage, the
bearers let down the sick man into the
Inrge inner court immediately below, where
Jesus was teaching, near the cistern fixed
as usual in this court. The trap-stairs,
which led down from the terrace into the
court, would have been too narrow for their
use, and would not have taken them into
the court, but into the apartments which
overlooked it from all sides.

Ver. 20.— And when he saw their faith,
he said unto him, Man, thy sins are forgiven
thee. For a moment the great Physician
gave place to the Heart-reader; and the
Lord spoke those strange, grand woida to



116



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. v. 1— 39.



give comfort and peace to the Buffering,
eilent, sick man. Jeeus read what was in
tlie heart of the poor paralytic ; his sins dis-
tressed him more than his malady ; very
possibly the sad infirmity had been brought
about by his old dissolute life. The soul,
then, must be healed first. It was for thie,
we believe, that the story of the man taken
with the palsy was told and retold by the
first Christian preachers, and go found a
place in the three Gospel narvatives— this
lufty claim of the Master to forgiye sins ; a
claim so grandly supported by a miraculous
act done in the open daylight in the pre-
sence of the people.

Yei. 21. — And the scribes and the Pharisees
began to reason, saying, Who is this which
Bpeaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins,
but God alone 1 It is very probable that
some of those who stood by, had already, at
Jerusalem, witnessed by the Bethesda Pool
a wonder-work done by the same Jesus on
the person or an impotent man lying there
waiting for the troubling of the water
(John V. 5, 9), and had taken part there in
an angry expostulation with the Wonder-
worker, who on that occasion, in his words,
"made himself equal with God" (John
V. 18). We know (see ver. 17) that some of
the Jerusalem scribes were present that day
in the Capernaum house. Again, thought
these learned Jews, "this strange Man is
uttering his dread blasphemies, but now
in even more plain terms than there."

Ver. 23. — Whether is easier, to say, Thy
sins be forgiven thee ; or to say, Bise up and
walk ? The Heart-reader hears, perhaps, the
murmur as it runs round the circle, and
grasping in a moment all that was in the
angry hearts of these men, said aloud, that
all might hear, some such words as these,
" See now what I am about to do. You, in
your dim short-sighted wisdom, think my
forgiving this poor repentant sinner his dark
past, is but an empty, meaningless form of
words. See now whether what I am about
to do further for him is an empty meaning-
less boon."

Vers. 24, 25. — That ye may know that the
Bon of man hath power upon earth to forgive
sins, (he said nnto the sick of the palsy,) I
say unto thee, Arise, and take up thy conch,
and go into thine house. And immediately
he rose np before them, and took up that
whereon he lay, and departed to his own
house, glorifying God. The lookers-on, the
curious, the cavillers, the friendly, too, as
the unfriendly, who crowded that Caper-
naum house, could not see with their eyes
the Bedi emer's remission of the palsied
man's sins. The sufferer alone was cou-
■oious that the great burden which pressed
on his soul was removed at tlie Master's
word, but all cuuld see the miracle which



followed. Any one of those present, had ha
dared, might have uttered the solemn abso-
lution. None but he could surely risk, as
he risked, such words which followed, and
which challenged an instant and visible
fulfilment. It was a strange, great claim
the Master made that day, and we may be
sure it and the mighty sign which followed
sank deep into many a heart. We see why
the memory of this day's work was treasured
up BO faithfully. He took up that whereon
he lay. This could easily have been done.
The bed or pallet would be nothing but a
light portable framework oovered with a
blanket.

Ver. 26.— We have seen strange thing!
to-day. The strange things {vapiSo^a)
alluded especially to the miracle which, aa
it were, solemnly authenticated the sublime
claim to forgiveness of sins on the part of
Jesus.

Vers. 27— 29.— Tfee call of Lem (Matthev
the puhUca/n), and thefeait that foUovsed.

Ver. 27. — And after these thmgs he went
forth, and saw a publican, named Levi,
Bitting at the receipt of cnstom: and he
said nnto Mm, Follow me. Capernaum, as
has been already noticed, had become,
owing to its situation, a commercial centre
of no small importance. It was on the great
highway from the interior of Asia, and from
Damascus to the seaboaid Mediterranean
cities, to Jerusalem, and to Egypt. The
custom-house of Capernaum and the office
of inland revenue there would naturally be
under the control of officials of some im-
portance. The local trade on the lake, too,
we know at that period was very large. It
has been frequently asked — What specially
induced our Lord to select as one of hu
inner circle a man whose life-work was bo
hateful and unpopular to the Jewish people
generally? why did he include in the
twelve one who, from the nature of his de-
tested office, had lost religious caste among
the Jews, and who was compelled to consort
with sinners. Gentiles, and persons who were
considered, either from their birth or life and
associations, outside the pale of the chosen
people? Various replies to this question
have been suggested, such as — by this open
act he threw down the gauntlet to all that
powerful Pharisee class who were beginning
to suspect and to mistake his teaching and
liberalism. Or was his apparently strange
choice dictated by a simple desire to have,
in the inner circle of bis devoted friends, a
business man — one who could manage the
affairs and regnlate the economy of the little
growing society? but this seems to have
been done by Judas ; or was it simply done
in obedience to a sudden impulse from on
High? None of tliese seems satisfactory.
Surely another motive, and that • deepei



OH, ▼. 1—39.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



117



and s nobler one, suggested this enrolment
of the despised publican in that glorious
company of apostles. The Lord was deter-
mined to show, by this choice of his, that in
his eyes all callings were equally honour-
able, all ways of life might lead to the city
of the blessed. Never would the work
ennoble the man, but only the way in which
the work was done. The Baptist, as we
have seen, first taught this Divine libe-
ralism. The Baptist's Lord placed his seal
of approval upon his servant's teachiug by
■uoh acta as the calling of Matthew the
publican, and feasting in his house with
publicans and sinners.

Ver. 28. — He left all, rose up, and followed
Um. No doubt a bard and difScult bit of
self-renunciation. He, at the bidding of
the homeless, landless Teacher, gave up his
lucrative employment, sacrificing all his life
of promotion, of future wealth and position,
exposing himself, doubtless, to sneers and
calumny. With great truth could he re-echo
his friend Peter's words, " Lo, we have left
all, and followed thee."

Ver. 29. — ^Aiid Leyi made him a great
feast in his own house. There is no duubt
that this Levi was the same person as
Matthew the publican (subsequently the
evangelist), whose calling under precisely
similar circumstances is related in the First
Gospel (Matt. x. ; and see Mark ii.). The
name Matthew, " gift of God," was probably
given to him, as that of Peter (or Cephas, " a
rock") was bestowed on Simon, after his
association with Jesus. The words used,
"a great feast," a great company, plainly
indicate that Levi (Matthew) was a person
of consideration and position. And there was
a great company of publicans and of others
thai sat down with them. The great com-
pany was owing to the fact that the publi-
cans and their friends, moved by the
kindness and friendship of the new Teaclier,
assembled at the feast in numbers out of re-
■pect to him ; or, more likely, the assemblage
was owing to the effoi t of Levi (Matthew) to
bring into friendly relations his associates
and friends and the new Master, for whose
sake he bad given up everything.

Ver. 30. — But their scribes and Pharisees
murmured against his disciples. Many of
the older autliorities here omit " their "
(miTav') before " scribes." The older authori-
ties vary slightly in the position of the words
here. The best reading and translation
would give, " The Pharisees and the scribes
among them " — " among tliem," that is,
among the Capernaites; in other words,
"They among them who were Pharisees
and scribes." Tliese scribes (Hebrew, so-
pherim), under this appellation, first appear
after the Exile. Their nccupation was to
eopy and to expound the Law. TLey were



the recognized teachers of the Jews, and
seem to have succeeded that great and in-
fiuential class or order, the "sons of th*
prophets," originally founded by Samuel.
These "sons of the prophets" are repeatedly
mentioned in the books of the Old Testa-
ment which treat of the kingdoms of Israel
and Judah. The scribes were succeeded, in
the year 300 B.O., by the tanaim (repeaters),
under which name the scribes were ofScially,
though apparently not popularly, known
until A.D. 220, after which date these scribes
were termed cmwraim. The Talmud
(Mishna and Gemara) may be said to have
been the work of this great and enduring
teacher order. The Talmud was finally
closed in a.d. 490, by Babbina Abina, the
last of the amoraim. Why do ye Mt wad
drink with publicans and sinners f

Vers. 31, 32. — And Jesus answering said
unto them, They that are whole need not a
physician ; but they that are siok. I came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to re-
pentance. This was one of those sayings of
the Lord which sank very deep into the
hearts of the bearers. All the three, Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, repeat it with very slight
variations; it was evidently a favourite
theme with the great first teachers who
followed Christ. It has borne rich fruit in
the Master's Church; for this vindication of
Jesus of his conduct in going so often into
the society of the moral waifs and strays of
the population has been the real " founda-
tion of all those philanthropic movements
which enlist the upper classes of society in
the blessed work of bending down to meet
in love the lower classes, so that the snapped
circle of humfinity may be restored; it is
the philosophy in a nutshell of all home and
missioiiarv operations" (Dr. Morrison, on
Mark ii. 17).

Vers. 33 — 39. — The teaching of the Lord
eonceming fasting.

Ver. 33. — And they said unto him, Why
do the disciples of John fast often, and
make prayers, and likewise the disciples of
the Pharisees ; but thine eat and ixiiiL t We
learn from the parallel passage in St. Mark
that "they" who asked the Lord this
question were the disciples of John the
Baptist and the Pharisees, who united on
this occasion. These disciples of John do
not seem at first to have regarded Jesus
with altogether friendly feelings. Such a
jealousy was only too natural, and the rigid,
unbending truthfulness of the evangelists
compelled them to tell the story of the way
tlie early foundations of the truth were laid
without concealment of error or mistake.
The Baptist himself practised the sternest
asceticism, and required doubtless of hii
nearest followers ti.at they :^hou1d imitate
his example. The Lord's way of life, his



113



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. v. 1— 39



presenfe at feasttnga and merry-maMngs, his
joriBoi ting with publicans, his choice of one
of them as his disciple and friend, no doubt
surprised and disturbed not a few of the
followers of John j hence such a question as
the one we are now considering, and such a
querulous complaining as we hear of in the
t'liurt^i Gospel (iii. 25, 26). The practice of
fasting among the Jews was as follows : In
the Law of Moses only one appointed fast in
the year was enjoined — that on the solemn
Day of Atonement (Lev. xvi. 29 ; Numb.
xxix. 7). After the Exile the one fast was
increased to foar. But the prophets s;ave
no sanction to this added ritual (see Zech.
»ii. 1 — 12 ; viii. 19). In the time of our
Lord, rigid Jews used to fast twice a week
(oh. xviil. 12) — on Monday and Friday
(the day on which, according to tradition,
Moses went up Mount Sinai). It is evident
that our Lord himself never observed or
even approved of these fasts of the Pharisee
sect. In the well-known and often-quoted
passages. Matt. xvii. 21 ; Mark ix. 29 ;
Acts X. 80 ; 1 Cor. vU. 5 — in many of the
older authorities, {lie word "farting " does nut
occur at all. In the Eevised Version in e ach
of these instances " fasting " does not appear
in the new test. While, then, we must un-
hesitatingly conclude that fasting is no rite
commanded by the Blessed One, still the
Church has practised it with signal advan-
tage and profit on certain solemn occasions ;
but it must ever proceed from the impulse
of the sorrow-stricktn heart, it must be no
penance or duty imposed by authority,
least of all jiust it be regarded as pleasing
in the eye of the Almighty, or in any sense
a substitute for the practice of the hijiher
virtues really loved of God — j Ubtice, mercy,
and truth.

Vers. 81, 35. — And he said unto them,
Can ye make the children of the bride-
chamber fast, while the bridegroom is with
themt But the days will come, when the
bridegroom shall be taken away from them,
and then shall they fast in those days. On
this reply of the Lord Jesus Godet very
beautifully writes, " In the midst of this
feast of publicans, the heart of Jesus is
overflowing with joy; it is one of the hours
when his earthly life seems to his feeling
like a marriage-day. But suddenly his
countenance becomes overcast : the shadow
of a painful vision passes across his brow :
'The days will come,' . . . said he, in a
solemn tone. At the close of this nuptial
week, the Bridegroom himself will be sud-
denly smitten and cut off; then will come
the time of fasting for those who to-day are
rejoicing; there will be no necessity to
enjoin it. In this striking and poetio
answer Jesus evidently announces bis violent
death." The imagery of the bridegroom is



drawn from Hos. U. 19, 20, and perhaps also
from the more mystical Scripture, Ps. xlv.
and the Song of Songs. Jesus here clearly
rep:ards himself as the Christ, as identical
with the long looked-for Divine Deliverer ;
but at this comparatively early stage of his
public career he was fully consoioui that
in his Person, with the triumphant would
be joined the suiferins Messiah. The word
rendered " shall be taken away from (them),"
&irap6ij, only occurs here in the New Testa-
ment; it points evidently to a death of
violence. While the intimation given to
Nicodemus (John iii. 14) was the first
private, so this seems to have been the first
puhlic announcement of the last scene of the
earth-life.

Yer. S6. — And he spake also a parable
onto them; No man putteth a piece of a
new garment upon an old; if otherwisr,
then both the new maketh a rent, and the
piece that was taken out of the new agreeth
not with the old. Oriental teaching has
ever delighted in using these vivid and pic-
turesque metaphors and parables taken from
the everyday life of the people; here the
referenee is, of course, to the question put
by the Pharisees and John's disciples re-
specting fnsting. This and the following
little parable, and the curious simile «hich
he added directly after, is part of the Lord's
answer to his questioners. They charged
him in their query with throwing (by the
neglect of fasting) a slur on the time-
honoured practices and observances of the
most religious men of Israel. His reply
acknowledged that, as fsr as he was con-
cerned, they were right. He hnd quietly put
aside the rigidly ap|>uintcd lasts and other
ceremonial rites by means of which the
great Jewish t' achers — to use their own
expression — had put a hedge about the Law.
They were right, too, in the conclusion they
had come to, implied but not expressed, in
their evidently hostile questioning. His
was a totally new form of the old Hebrew
religion — new altogether in the grandeur of
its conception and in the breadth of its
influence. His was a totally new garment
that he was about to offer to the people ;
now to pnteh up the beautiful new work
with the old one would bo surely to mur
both. In the older authorities the text is
slightly longer and more vivid than the text
from whicli our own more corrupt Authorized
Version was translated. It would run thus :
" No one rending a patch from a new gar-
ment putteth it upon an old garment."

Vers. 37, 88. — And no maji putteth new
wine into old bottles ; else the new wine
will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and
the bottles shall perish. Bat new wins
must be put into new bottles; and both ar«
preserved. In these two verses the Greek



1—39.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



lltf



woidi lendered "bottles" properly signify
" wine - skins." These leathern bottles
throughout Syria and PalPstine are gene-
rally maiie of goat-skins. They are still of
universal Ufu ; the simile of the " old
bottles " refers to " wine-skins " old and
frail, which liad been long In use, and hence
nearly worn out : surh " skins," after long
uaage, aie in the habit of getting seamed
and orarlfed. (Farrar, in an elaborate px-
oursus, urges that must, and not wine in the
ordinary sense, i.e. the fermented juice of
the grape, is signified in the parable here,
grape-juice in the form of unfermented
must being miiuh used as a favourite drink
in the Ka4. This suggestion, although in-
genious and interesting, does not seem
necessary to txplain the imagery used ; it
seems more natural to understand wine in
ils ordinary meaning.) The "new wine"
here represents the teaching of Jesus in all
its freshness, originality, and power, and
the " wine-akins " the men who are to reciiTe
from the Master the great principle of his
doctrine. Now, the recognized teachers in
Israel, termed scribes and rabbis, or doctors
of the Law, were wedded to the old inter-
pretation of the Law — were hampered by
traditions, sayings of the Fatliers, elaborate
ritual observances, prejudices, narrowness,
bigotiy. The vast collection of the Tal-
mud, where wise words on tiie same page
are crowded out witli childish sayings,
well represents the teaching of these soribei
and rabbis. Never would Jesus entrust to
these narrow and prejudiced representative!
of a worn-out religious school his new, fresh,
generous doctrines. It would indeed be
pouring new wine into old, decayed, worn-out
wine-vessels. The new wine must be de-
' jiosited in new wine-skins. His doctrine
must be entrusted to no rabbi of Israel,
fettered by a thouoand precedents, hampered
by countless prejudices, but to simple un-
prejudiced men, who would just receive his
teaching, and then puss it on pure and un-
adulterated to other simple, truthful souls —
men earnest, loyal, devoted, like his fisher-
friends of Genuesari t, or his publican-
follower of Capernaum. He needs, as
Godet well phrases it — changing, though, the
imagery of Jesus — " fresh natures, new men
. . fair tablets on which his hand may write
the characters of Divine truth, without
coming across the old traces of a false human
wisdom. 'God, I thank thee because thou
hast hidden the^se things from the wise
and prudent, and hast revealed them unto
babes.' "

Ver. 39. — No man also having drunk old
wine straightway desireth new: for he
aaith, III ? old is better. St. Luke alone of



the first three evangelists who related In
detail this most important reply of Jesus
when the disciples of John and the Phari-
sees came to question him, adds this curious
simile. The uieaning of the puralile-pic-
tures of the new patch biing sewn on an
old garment, and of new wine being poured
into worn-ont, decaying wine-skins, was
very plain. Pitilessly severe it wouH ring
in the ears of men iirought up in the old
rabbinic Jewish schools. The two first
evangelists, conscious of the truth of their
Master's words, were content to leave the
stern teaching, which pronounced the old
state of things among the religious Jews ai
utterly worn-out, in all its naked severity.
But Paul, under whose guidance we beliera
Luke wrote his Gospel, with that tender
and considerate love which so beautifiei
the earnest and impassioned nature of the
fipostle of the Gentiles, knew that Jesus
had added a few words to the two seemingly
harsh parables; these he bade Luke care-
fully insert in bis narrative. They, contain
what may be termed an almost playful
apology for the slowness and reluctance of
the men trained in the rabbinic schools, or
even of the papils of John the Baptist, to
accept the new, broad, g*nerous view of
truth which he (Jesus) was putting forth
— it was an apology for a slowness and
reluctance, shading too often into unveiled
dislike and open hostility. (What expe-
rience Paul and Luke must have had
of this hostility I) The Master, in his
Divine wisdom, knew how hard it was to
forsake long-cherished prejudices. Time
must be given, allowance must be made,
harsh judgment must be deprecated. These
men, trained in the old system, are here
compared to guests who, after the banquet,
are suddenly asked to change the old wine,
mellowed by age, of which they have been
drinking, for new sweet wine. This new
wine seems, in those days, generally to
have been considered preferable, but to
men who had been drinking the old, age-
softened vintage, the new would seem fiery
and even harsh. The Greek word rendered
in the Authorized Version " better," in the
older authorities is positive instead of com-
parative. The translation should therefore
run, " the old is good." The argument would
be the same : Why change what we have
been drinking for something new ? surely the
old wine is good? Such passages as Neh. x.
35; ProT. iii. 10; Hos. It. 11; Hag. i. 11,
bear out the above statement, that in those
days, among the Jews of Syria, Palestine,
and the adjacent ooimtries, new sweet wine
was a favourite beverage Muong wine-
drinkers.



120 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. v. 1-39.



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. I— 11.— The eaM to be fishers of men. Bach of the missionary circuits ol
Christ has its special features of interest. The first of these circuits is distinguished
by three miracles significant of his work as the Christ of God. Look at the_ miracle of
the draught of fishes, with the narrative to which it is related, as a record illustrative
first of personal conversion, and seooudly of the ministry of the New Testament.

L Ajt illustration of personal cohveesion. 1. There is already a faith. The
four men whom the Lord calls had heard his voice on the bauks of Jordan (John _L
35 — 43), and had followed him. They had journeyed with him in Judaea, and even, it
wotild seem, had baptized in his Name. But, after the return of Jesus to Galilee from
the Passover-keeping noticed in John t., they had gone back to their homes and
their usual callings. They believed in him, but they did not realize the constraint of
a supreme influence. They did not hold themselves as solemnly engaged to him. It
was this engagement to be his, going where he went, aud dwelling where he dwelt,
which was the work of the day by the Lake of Gennesaret. Now, see in this a
reminder that there may be a belief, sincere and true so far as it goes, which prepares
for, but which is not, the faith unto salvation. It establishes a certain intellectual
relation to Christ, but nothing more. The effectual call is still wanting — the call, ».«.,
to an entire self-surrender, leaving all and following him. 2. T?iere is a sovereignty of
grace in this call. Of this soveieignty there is much to remind us in the passage
under review. The great crowd is before the Teacher as he stands by the lake. Of
the many boats drawn up on the beach, he selects two ; of the two he chooses Simon's.
Another evangelist reminds us that out of the multitude he saw two brethren, and
again he saw other two brethren. He saw and he spoke ; there is the look and there
is the word. " The Lord looked on Gideon, and said, Go in this thy might." All that
is done is done so easily. Almost a chance, it might be said. There is he, and there
are they ; he at his work, and they at theirs. It was no chance. It was Christ's
opportunity ; it was their opportunity. " Follow me I " is the comnjand of his royalty.
Such was he then, such is he still. In the crowd he individualizes. The soul found
by him asks, " Whence knowest thou me?" He knows his sheep, and is known of
them. He calleth his own sheep by name. 3. There is an instant response. Christ's
call is " Now ; " " To-day if ye will hear his voice." The answer is " Now ; " " To-
day ; " " Lord, here am I ; send me " — an unreserved, uncaloulating surrender, body, soul,
and spirit, to Jesus. The net is left, and, mark, the nut that has just been or is just
being cast into the sea — the net on which so much had been spent. Net and father
too. He will not come with them. " Farewell, then ; not less do we love you ; but he
is nearer tlian father and mother, and his word is, ' Follow mel'" This is conversion
— the turning of the face of the life to the eternal Lord; the acceptance of God's
Beloved, in the cunsciousncss of acceptance in the Beloved ; the election, as the mark
towards which to press, of the calling of God in Christ Jesus. " Thy people offer
themselves willingly in the day of thy power."

II. But, secondly, see in the miracle which follows a picture of thb truth of
Christian ministry. 1. A conviction which give* intensity to it. Simon Peter, in
the light of Jesus' presence and power, falls down at his knees, crying, " Depart from
me; for I am a sinful man, Lordl" The cry in its matter was foolish, but the spirit
which promi teii it was true. For the first time he had realized his own rmworthinesi.
Had he not all but given Jesus up ? Had he not lived a poor, dull, earthly life ? Who
was he, that the Lord of glory should have sat in his boat, that he should have been
in any way identified witli him ? It is not the " depart " of a will that refuses the
Lord ; it is the self-loathing heart-cry, " Lord, I am vile ; what canst thou see in me ? "
The same heart-cry as that which burst from Isaiah when he saw the Lord and heard
the antiphon of the seraphim, " Woe is me ! ... for mine eyes have seen the King,
the Lord of hosts." It is in such prostration that the lips are touched by the seraph,
aud the live coal is laid on them, and the " Fear not ; thine iniquity is taken away " is
spoken, and the hitherto unprophetic tongue is loosed. In the service which spring!
out of this humility there is always the sign of the baptism with the Holy Ghost and
with fire. 2. An incident which declares the secret ^ ministry. (1) Its inspiration.



OH.V. 1— 39.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 121

"Nevertheless at thy word." Is not the word sufficient? The improhahilities are
all on the one side. The time for fishing has passed. All night, and nothing ; what
could there he in the morning ? " Nevertheless at thy word." " Lord, what ^t thou
have me to do ? " (2) Its power, not in the worker and not In the net. The worker had
utterly failed ; a charm might have been attributed to the net — the net was broken. No ;
the Bufficiency is of God. The one human condition is an absolute self-resignation.

" There is a Stay — and we are strong;
Our Master is at hand."

" Te shall receive power, after that the Holy Ohost is come on you." (3) Its nature.
The fisher caught, and lying on the shore. This is the parable. The work is to
catch men. The power is with the Spirit ; but he calls for the hand to cast the
net. This fishing fur men is a holy art, in which the fishers must be trained.
When the three thousand were added at Pentecost, Simon saw again the miracle of
Gennesaret, heard anew the loving voice, "Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt
catch men." (4) The eo-operaiion to which it stimmons. When Simon's boat is
full, he and Andrew beckon to James and John, their partners in the other ship,
to come and help them. Is not this a hint as to the evongelicRl alliance which
should distinguish all in the various boats that fish the sea? Why should they ply
their task as rivals? Why should they envy the good estate, the success of any
boat? Where Christ can be clearly seen, where the power is manifestly his, forbid that
narrow jealousies hinder the recosnition of the work. Verily there is need for all
willing-hearted workmen, and there is enough and to spare for all the boats. If only
the aim were simply to catch men, not fur the boat, but through the boat for the Lord,
how different would be the aspect of Churches and ministries 1 3. Finally, an action
which manifests the eternal loving-kindness. To obev the Master is no thankless service.
Leave the net ; yes; but we follow him to whom the spacious sea belongs. Could the
brethren whom he called doubt that he was able to make all grace abound always in all
things ? Have not we the certainty that there is a love which sees us as

" We watch our nets alone
In drenching spray, and driving shower,
And hear the night-bird's moan " 7

We toil; let ns ask our hearts if they have been satisfied. How many confess, even in
the midst of abundance, that the toil has been only " vanity, and a striving after
wind " 1 Nay ; but let Christ enter the life, let him be the Leader and Commander,
let him indicate whether the net should be cast ; then shall the emptiness be filled
out of an infinite fulness.

Vers. 12 — 26, — The power present to heal. In the setting forth of facts, there is
another principle of guidance than chronology. We may group them around some
thoughts with the view of illustrating the meaning and scope of the thought. On this
principle let us regard the events related from the twelfth verse to the twenty-sixth.
What they evidence is the power of the Lord that was working in Jesus as a power of
healing. Strange, blessed things we shall see to-day.

I. The work of salvation as bealized in the lepeb. (Vers. 12 — 14.) He is
" full of leprosy," a mass of corruption, dying bit by bit. Notice the cry of this miser-
able outcast. When the father of the epileptic child met the Lord on his descent from
the Mount of Transfiguration, the voice of his agony was, " If thou canst do anj thing,
have mercy on us and help us." Jesus replied, " If thou canst believe, all things are
possible to him that believeth." He hari not yet got to the mountain of faith, and the
father says with tears, " Lord, I believe ; but oh, help me to that mountain-height, help
thou mine unbelief." This wretched leper is already on the mountain height. It is
not, " If thou canst," but " If ihou wilt." The Jewish proverb was, " As God sends the
leprosy, so God alone can heal it." Gud is in this Jesus; therefore he can. Such was
the logic. How he had seen the secret of the Lord, we do not know ; but the trust
was his— it had been sown into his heart in the urgency of his need. Now, mark the
response. Sometimes the Lord seems to tarry. But in this case the way is quite
ready for the blessing. " We are never told," says Dr. Farrar, " that there was a



122 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. v. 1— ii9.



moment's pause when a leper cried to him." " If thou wilt." " I will." And thefotuih.
To touch a leper was an infraction of law. He had to withdraw into the wildemesi
immediately afterwards. He did not wish to provoke any violent opposition. But he
broke the ceremonial law at the demand of a higher law — the law whose source is
the Divine compassion, and whose agent is the power present to heal. The foul body
could not pollute the hand; but the hand of the Infinite Purity could cleanse the foul
body. " Be thou clean. And immediately the leprosy departed from him." How
wonderfully this strange thing brings out what is characteristic of the Saviour in his
thoughts and ways to the sinner I None is beyond the reach of the Icve that could bid
away at once and for ever that leprosy. No cry can escape the ear of a love that has
the answering " I will " ready for the praying " If thou wilt." We have a High Priest
who has touched our sin in its exceeding sinfulness. For ever and ever there stands
the pledge of the world's Healer " I will : be thou clean."

11. But see the same wobk bbalized in "the man that was palsied." The
time is " one of those days that he was teaching." A crowd has gathered so great
that " there is no room to receive them, no, not so much as about the door." lu this
crowd there are Pharisees and doctors of the Law sitting by. Significantly it is added,
" The power of the Lord was present to heal." A notable instance of this power ii
supplied ; its occasion being the letting down of the pallet-bed, on which was laid the
paralytic, through the tiles into the midst of the cruwd before Jesus. There is no
resisting of such faith. Seeing it, the Healer says — what? " Man, thy sins are forgiven
iliee." Now, as to this fulfilment of the imperial " I will," which [iroceeds from the
compassion of the Lord, remark : 1. Hie work which represents the supreme Saviour —
blessing. " That ye may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive
sins." He will listen to the appeal made in behalf of the palsied man ; but there is a
palsy hidden and spiritual with which first he must deal, for until it is dealt with there
can be no ellectual healing. Yes ; the true healing begins within. " Create a clean
heart." And the point at which the Redeemer lays hold of us is the need of forgiveness.
This action of Christ is the first in which he makes himself fully known, the first in
which his spiritual authority is declared. And from tliis moment tiie organized oppo-
sition o( scribe and Pharisee dates. "His kingdom ruieth over all." All agencies of
relief and kindness are his, and are to be used m his name; but his kingiiom is the
kingdom of heaven to all believers, because the Son uf man has power on earth to for-
give sins. 2. The condition on which the power of Christ is realized. " When he saw
their faith." Observe, not his faith. No one, it is true, can stand proxy for another as
to salvation. There must be the personal touch of Christ ; and the narrative, when
attentively regarded, shows that Jesus secured this from the suiVerer. He helped out
the sick man's trustfulness; he established a relation with himself. And then and
thus he did exceeding abundantly above all that could be asked. But he does attach
value to faith in friends for another friend, in the loving for the loved, in those who
have salvation for those who have not. Think of the four bearing the weak and want-
ing man, seeking the means to realize the blessing tor him, their interest wholly unsel-
fish, and unresting until the doure man is really brought to Jesiis. Oh, is not this the
miniature of the Church of Christ in its intercession and labour fir heathendom, lor
the sick and perishing through lack of knowledge V Should it not indicate the truth
to be exemplified in the anxiety of parents as to their children? Should it not remind
us of the highest aim ol all relatives of friendship or confidence? Jesus does " perceive "
this faith. It is the security of blessing unspeakable ; for

•* So the whole round earth is every way
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God."

Were there more of this faith, there would be more abundant sign of " the power of the
Lord present to heal." 3. The hindrance and limitation of the power of the Lord. " Phari-
.seesand do' tursof the Law sitting by," and the power present. It is always present with
the word of his grace. We never need tn seek it as if it were sometimes here and some-
times there. But these Pharisees and doctors are not healed. The grace is present for them
too, but they do not realize it. They sit by as spectators, critics, censors, watching for
uTonnds of reproach and accusation. " The word of hearing did not profit them, because
they were not united by faith with them that heard," Is not this the limitation still ?



CH.T.1— 89.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDIN& TO ST. LUKE. 123

Are there not many in our assemblies who, like these Pharisees, " sit by " ? They
scarcely believe what is said. As old Matthew Henry writes, " It ia to them a tale
that is told them, not a message that is sent them. They are willing that we should
preach before them, not that we should preach to them." It is this sitting by which
checks the work of grace. More and more, as the ministry of Christ proceeds, does the
shadow of the Pharisees sitting by fall on it. A withering, desolating shadow. Thou
Pharisee of town and village, thou critic, sceptic, thy seat the seat of the scomfuL
Mighty power to heal may be present, bnt mighty work of healing cannot be done in
thee until the story of the Pharisee of the Pharisees is repeated in thee, and thy self-
sufficiency smitten down, thou art cast to the earth, to ask, trembling and abtonished,
"Who art thou, Lord ?»

Vers. 80 — 39. — 27ie new and the old. Two classes ot persons are amazed and
offended — those to whom old ways and recognized canons of respectability were of the
very essence of the religious life ; and those whose minds occupied a sort of intermediate
position, who had so far broken from the old, but had not yet received the spirit of the
new time which had begun in Galilee. Here is this Babbi, whose fame has spread far
and wide, who is undoubtedly possessed of marvellous powers, associating with persons
whom every respectable Hebrew shunned, accepting a tax-gatherer's invitation, and
freely mingling with the worthless folk found at a tax-gatherer's table. What an out-
rage on social and religions decency 1 The scribes and Pharisees — the one of these two
classes — ^murmur (observe, against the disciples ; they do not dare to the Lord himself),
" Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners ? " The disciples, simple, guile-
less souls, were probably unable to explain or account for their Master. He himself
replies by quoting an Old Testament Scripture — one of those great prophetic words
which express the spirit of all true religion, and prefacing and following this quotation
by sentences of searching irony. " They that be whole need not a physician, but they
that are sick. But go ye and learn what that meanetb, I will have mercy, and not
■acrifice : for I am not come to call the righteous, bnt sinners to repentance." How sig-
nificant is every clause! "They that are whole." Will the murmurers take that
description as appropriate to them? Then the Jesus whom they surround has nothing
for them ; his work is not for the self-righteous, but for the consciously sinful and
needy. But " whoso " would be teachers of the people as they may be, let them go
and learn the first lesson of Divine wisdnm, viz. that it is the delight of God's love to
find out fatherless souls; that he is satisfied, not by formal acts of worship, rendered in
mere obedience to usage, but by the seeking of poor outcasts from ordinance and
•ociety, by such fellowship with them as reveals the purpose, " I will have mercy, and
not sacrifice." Kow comes the moment at which, along with the Pharisees, the other
of the two offended classes — those occupying an intermediate position between the old
and the new — appears on the scene. Some disciples of the Baptist have been scanning
the movements of the Prophet of Nazareth, and the feast just held gives increased force
to their doubts and difficulties. The joyous life which Jesus and his followers are
living contrasts with the sternly simple, ascetic life which they have been taught to
regard as the best. Can the joyous life be right? Why the disregard of the outward
signs of discipline ? Why is he so lax with those whom he has called ? The answer
returned has an abiding interest for the Church in all times. First, observe Christ's
word with regard to the special issue raised; and, secondly, observe his setting forth of
the general truth as to his gospel and kingdom.

I. The special issub is fastino. Jesus does not deny its utility. He fasted.
Uoreover, in his sermon from the mount, he recognized fasting as one of the elements
of the religious life. What his saying bears on is its observance as a fixed habit or
rule. The time, the rule, Christ teaches, must come from within. He goes to the
root of the matter when ho asks, "Can the children of the bridechamber mourn?"
There is nothing if there is not mourning. Mere non-eating is nothiug; mere aus-
terities are nothing. Self-denial for the sake of self-denial is nothing. It is the
relation to spiritual ends, the power of interpreting and helping spiritual life, that
gives any service its value. " How can you make these children mourn while I am
with them? Their fasting, at pre-sent, would be wholly artificial. It is the worship in
■pirit and truth that I want. When they can really mourn, they will. Until tnpn.



124 THE GOSPEli ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKB. [oh. ▼. 1—39.

let them rejoice." The days did come. The Bridegroom was taken from them. And
they mourned. And still, as then, there are, as one has called them, " fast-days which
Qod appoints souls." Christ's disciples should have their retreats, when the round ot
pleasuie or of care is ^ven up, and the blessing of entire solitude with God is realized.
Only, let these be, not because of a law made for them, but because of the law which
the Lord, by the dealing of his Holy Spirit, writes within their own hearts. And,
supposing the space for such retreats cannot be secured, remember there is a fasting
which all can practise. All can abstain from self-pleasin? and indulgence. All may
consider whether it be not a duty to abstain from things lawful when the use of such
things is an occasion of stumbling to their brethren. And all should recollect th«
grand old words, "Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wicked-
ness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every
yoke ? is it not .to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that ar«
cast out to thy house ? when thou seest the naked, tliat thou cover him ; and that
thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh?"
II. The word as to fasting brings into sight the whole question ab to thb

REQUIREMENTS AND THE NATURE OF THE TRUTH AS IT IS IN JESUS. GlaUCe at the Out-
standing features of the ever-memorable parable between the thirty-sixth and tha
thirty-ninth verses. 1. The bearing of the sentence as to patching. The disciples of John
and the Pharisees virtually ask that Jesus sew the new cloth, which is woven out of his
Person and sacrifice, into an old rotten garment. The answer is "Ko; what has
decayed and is waxing old is ready to vanish ; let it go. When it comes to this, patching
and mending is worthless policy. It does not benefit the old, whilst it spoils the new.
The new will not hold to the seam of the old, and, when it gives way, not only is tha
rent made woise, bat in the end the new must be rejected also." What is particularly
meant by the similitude of the garment is the manner of life, that which forms the
envelopment of the soul. As to this, Christ will have no patching. Christianity is not
Judaism with something sewn on to it. It is not a conglomerate of religions. It
comprehends all that is good anywhere. It destroys nothing. But it is a new robe.
All that is old is made new. And so must it be with the character. It is not a mere
amending at this point or at that that will sufBce. Merely to sew a piece of the new
cloth, to have a fragment of Christ's religion patched to the old self, will that suffice ?
Verily no. Put off the old man. Put on the new. " If any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature." 2. The hearing of the sentence as to wine. By this, as it would seem, the
Lord means the inward spiritual principle, the grace — "that best wine which goeth
down smoothly, gliding through the lips of those that are asleep." This is not some
compound of dregs of old wines ; it has all the strength and flavour of the old, but it is
new. It is the fruit of a grape which none but the Son of God could bruise ; it is the
product of a wine-press which none but he could tread ; it has the power of a sustenance
which none but he could infuse. And this new life must be put into new bottles. It
demands forms of worship and action peculiar to itself — forms of worship adapted at
once to the richness of the sentiments and the simplicity of its utterance, the natural
and becoming vehicles of its own voice of prayer and praise; forms of action in harmony
at once with its spirituality and its humanity. It is too living and strong for any
receptacle of its influence except that which has been created for and by itself. New
wine and new bottles. Let the hearer of the Word ponder this. Note the point of

i' unci ion beiween liberty and discipline in the Christian life. " Where the Spirit of the
Mvd is, there is liberty." But to realize this liberty, the will presented to the Lord
must be so opened and ordered that the movements of his love shall flow in, and the
power of his grace shall be fulfilled. It is all of grace, but the new bottle is needed for
the new wine. The Lord is very decided as to this. The principle of an entire sub-
jection to God must be asserted over every impeding tendency. In our present state
pains must go with prayers, that the lie:irt be kept " believing, true, and clean," a wine-
skin fit for ije new wine. Hereafter, in the eternal yi ar of the Bridegroom -joy, it shall
be otherwise. Then, they who wait upon the Lord shall " run, and not be weary ; and
walk, and not faint."



CH.V. 1— 39.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 125



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 4 — 6. — Weary workers. The passage is one of encouragement to those who
have been labouring in the cause of truth and righteousness, and whose success lias not
been according to their hope. We have a picture of —

L Fruitless toiIi. " Ws have toiled all the night, and have taken nothing ; '* words
that have not only been on the lips of the unsuccessful fisherman, but often enough on
those of the weary Christian workman — the pastor, the evangelist, the teacher, the
philanthropist, the missionary. Weeks, months, even years, may go by, and nothing
or little may have resulted. Especially is this the case in missionary labour among
savages, or where venerable systems of superstition prevail. The workman goes through
kll stages, of lessened hope, of surprise at non-success, of disappointment, of despondency,
until he may get down very near to despair.

IL The command to ooNTimrB. Under discouragement and apparent defeat there
frequently enters the thought of abandonment. The worker says, " I will lay down
my weapon ; it is useless to proceed. I must have better soil, or it must have a more
skilful hand." But when this thought is being entertained there comes a manifestation
of the Master, who by some means and in some language, says, " Go, labour on : toil
on and faint not." To the " fisher of men " he says, " Let down your nets for a draught."
This command to continue may cause us to reflect upon: 1. Our Lord's own example;
for he laboured on most diligently and patiently under heavy and sore discouragements.
2. The ample means placed at our disposal with which to work for Christ and men ; the
glorious fulness and fitness of the gospel of the grace of Ggd. 3. The near presence
and promised aid of the Holy Spirit. 4. The inestimable value of the souls we seek
to save. But whencesoever suggested, the voice we hear is imperative, Divine, " Oo,
iahour on."

III. The spirit and act op obedibnoe. 1. We may be indisposed to resume ; we
may feel, as Peter evidently did on this occasion, that there is nothing to be taken by
our toil ; that for all praciioal purposes we might as well leave the fieldi. 2. But Christ's
will is decisive. Against that there is no appeal. "At thy word I will let down the
net." This is the true spirit of obedience. To work for Christ under every possible
micourageTnent is easy and simple enough ; perhaps it may not take high rank in heaven
so far as its spiritual greatness is concerned. To continue at our post under every
discouragemmt, because we believe it is the will of our Lord that we should still
strive and sow — that is the trying, the honourable, the acceptable thing. It may be
remarked that : 3. Obedience to our Lord is not inoonsistent with a wise change of
method. Launch out " into the deep." They were to cafit their ue( into the likeliest
vaterfc

• Cast after cast, by force or goile^
All waters must be tried."
(See Keble's hymn, " The livelong night we've toil'd in valn.'^

If one method does not succeed, we must try another. We must not ascribe to Gh)d
ft failure which is due to our own inefSciency. We must not ask and expect hii
blessing unless we are doing our best in his Name and in his cause,

IV. The lakqb reward. "When they had this done," etc Patient, obedient
work wrought for Jesus Christ will certainly meet with its recompense. " Refrain
thine eyes from tears, and thy voice from weeping, for thy work shall be rewarded."
We may " go forth weeping," but we shall doubtless " come again with rejoicing." The
success may come : 1. After much labour and prayer and waiting. 2. In a way in
which we did not expect it. 3. Only in part while we are here to rejoice in it ; for often
"one soweth and another reapeth." But sooner or later, in one form or another, here or
hereafter, it will come ; our net will " enclose a great multitude of fishes ; " our hearts
will be fuU, even to overflow, with joy and gratitude. — 0.

Ver. 8. — Z%« totd shrinhing from God. It was the coming of God in the person ol
Jesus Christ that excited in the breast of the apostle such shrinking of soul. Peter
perceived that he stood in the presence of One in whom was Divine power, of One
who was in very close association with the Holy One of Israel ; and, feeling his own



129 THE GOSPEL AOOOBDING TO ST. LUKE. ivu. r. 1—39.

nnwortbinesa, he «zo1a!med, with characteristio candour of ImpulBiTeceM, " Depart
from me ; for I am a sinful man, Lord."

L The way in which God now manifistb hiiiself to the wobld. That way ia
threefold. 1. Nature and providence. The heavens declare his glory, and so does this
wonderful and heautiful and fruitful earth. Not less so do the souls and the lives of men,
created with all their faculties, preserved and enriched with all their joys and hlessings.
"Theinvisihle things of him ... are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
«re made." But more than this was proved to be needed by the sad, dark history (5 man-
kind. Hence we have : 2, Special revelation. " At sundry times and in divers manners
God spake unto our fathers" by Abraham, Moses, Samuel, David, etc.; bat at a later
time he spake unto us by his Son — by his life, his truth, his sorrow, his death, his
resurrection. But this did not suffice. Divine lovo appeared, and human hatred slew
It. Divine truth spake, and human error determinately rejected it. So God gives us
what we need. 3. The direct influencee of hi* Holy Spirit, to arouse, to quicken, to
enlighten, to renew us.

IL The fibbt bffbot upon the soul of this vision of (Jod. What usually happens
b that the soul is smitten with a sense of its sinfulness, and desires to withdraw from
the Divine presence. At this we need not wonder. If conscious ignorance shrink*
from ereat learning, poverty from great wealth, obscurity from high rank, human guilt
from human purity, well may the consciously sinful soid of man shrink from the near
presence of the thiice-holy God. As Adam and Eve hid themselves when they " heard
the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden ; " as Isaiah exclaimed, " Woe is me I
I am a man of unclean lips," when he " saw the Lord " in the temple ; — so do we shrink
from the felt presence of the Lord in view of our own unworthiness and guilt.
Remembering onr spiritual estrangement, our great undischarged indebtedness to God,
onr impurity of heart in his sight, our manifold transgressions of his righteous law,— our
souls tremble before him ; and if we do not say, " Depart from me, O Lord I " as Peter
did, yet our first thought is to escape from his felt presence, to put some distance, ia
thought and feeling, between ourselves and that Holy and Mighty One in whose power
we stand so absolutely, and whose Spirit we have grieved so greatly.

Ill, The intebfosition of oub Savioub. The sacred record does not state what
immediately ensued, but our instructed imagination will very readily supply the
remainder of the incident. We are quite sure that our gracious Master, instead of acting
on Peter's word, and leaving him, drew nearer to him, and "took him by the hand,"
and so reassured him. Thus does he treat us now. Instead of withdrawing from vm
when we know and feel our guilt, he comes nearer to us. Instead of saying to ua,
" Depart from me 1 " he says, earnestly and emphatically, " Come imto me 1 " He says
to us, " If, in my teaching and in my life and in my death, there is (as there ia) the
strongest possible condemnation of sin, so is there also in all these things, in my words
and my actions and my cross, the greatest possible hope for the sinner. Come unto
me ; see in me the Propitiation for your sin, the Way back unto the Father, the Divine
Friend and Helper of the sorrowing and struggling human soul. Do not leave me;
oome to me, and abide in mel "—0.

Vers. 12, 13,— 2%« cleansed leper. Three points Bugn;eat themselves to our thoughts.

L The wavebino of a stbono hohan hope. Outside the outer circumference of
that congregation was a man to whom pity would have drawn us, but from whom an
instinctive repugnance would have repelled us. He was one in whom were not only
signs and spots of that dire plague of leprosy, but in whom it was seen in its most
virulent form — ^he was " full of leprosy." Suffering in body, and afflicted far worse in
mind by the terrible isolation which that disease imp oseH, there suddenly enters his
heart a new and bounding hope; in the dense darkness of his night there rises that
muming star. A new Prophet has come to the people of God. He hears of his Name
and fame (ch. iv. 37); he comes to see; he witnesses the wonderful works which are
wrought (ch. iv. 40). Will not this great Healer have mercy upon him ? Will not he
who casts out the devil cure the leper ? If the poor paralytic, at his biddinn;, could rise
and walk away with his friends, why should not he, at the command of that strong
Voice, be healed of his foul disease, and go home to his family again ? So he cornea
where Jesus is, and listens as he speaks, and when he hears him say, " Ask-, and it ahall



OH. T. 1—39.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LCKE. 127

be given you," he resolves that he will ask that a new life may be given him ; he will
seek : what if he should find ? We have never made to man any request on which so
mucli has hung as that which was now hanging on the answer he should receive at the
lips of Jesus Christ. To him it was not success or failure merely; it was life or death
that was at stake. How must the most eager expectation have wrestled in his heart
with tremulous and agonizing fearl with what faltering voice must he have uttered
those prayerful words, "Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean"!

II. The touch of the Divine hand. " Jesus put forth his hand, and touched
him." All three evangelists record this significant fact. There were three reasons
why he should not do this. 1. Strung instinctive human aversion. 2. The risk he
ran in so doing. 3, The prohibition of the Law combined with social usage disallowing
it. But our Lord set aside all these objections. Why? Was it not to show by
instant action the kindness and compassion of his heart, to place himself practically by
his side as One who felt deeply for and with him, and to teach us that, if we wish to
h(.'al the worst disorders, we must do that, not standing afar ofi^, but, coming into close
personal contact with the men we are seeking to save, by " laying our hand upon
them " ? We, too, must be ready, like our Lord, to do that which is distastefiil, to run
some risks, to disregard conventional proprieties, if we would remove from the land the
'leprosies which still afSict it.

III. The REBF0H8E OF DiviBE LOVE. That leper must have known, when Jesus laid
his hand kindly upon him, that he meant to heal him ; yet sweeter to his ear than are the
most melting strains of music to the lover of melody and song were these words of the
Lord when he said, " I will : be thou clean ; " and then he who " speaks, and it is done,"
spoke the unheard word, and forces of nature came into play, and the life-blood leapt in
the leper's veins, " and immediately his leprosy departed." Sin is the leprosy of the souL
1. It is loathsome. 2. It is diffusive, spreading from faculty to faculty over the whole
nature. 3. It exiles ; it separates man fi-om God, and man from man also. 4. It ii
deathful; it is death in life. When the sinful soul, though he be far gone in sin, " full
of leprosy," makes his application to the great Physician, he has nothing to fear as to
the result of his appeal. (1) Be not troubled, far less hindered, because hope is streaked
with fear; there may be an "if" in the heart, as there was in that of this leper; the
very intensity of the hope arising out of the magnitude of the issue at stake will per-
fectly account for that — such fear is only the shadow of a prevailing hope. (2) He
assured that you have no need to fear. Christ's readiness to save is beyond the shadow
of a doubt ; if we are only in veal earnest to be saved from the leprosy of sin, it is cer-
tain that the hand of Divine love will be laid upon us, and that the voice of Divine mercy
will addreas ub, saying, " I will : be thou clean." — 0.

Ver. 16. — Christ at prayer. The fact that our Lord did withdraw into the wildpr-
ness to pray, and that this was not at all a solitary instance of his devotion, may



I. That pbatbb becomes the steono and the holt as well ab the weak
AND the guilty. Jesus prayed ; the One who was holy, harmless, undefiled, he in
whom was no sin. He had no guilt to confess, no mercy to implore, no cleansing of
heart to seek of the Holy Spirit. Tet he prayed ; and prayer was becoming in him
because he could : 1. Bender adoration to the Gud whom he reverenced and whom he
revealed. 2. Offer gratitude to the Father who ministered unto him even as unto us.
3. Utter his love and his devotedness to him in whom he rejoiced and on whose great
errand of mercy he had come. 4. Ask for the guidance and support he needed at the
Divine hand for the future that was before him. For such purposes as these prayer
will become us as much in the heavenly kingdom as it be6ts us now. When we have
no sins to acknowledge and no forgiveness to obtain, we shall still need to approach the
Divine Spirit to express our adoration, our gratitude, and our love ; also to ask for the
maintenance and the guidance of that strong hand on which, in every age and in every
sphere, we shall be dependent as we are to-day.

II. That prater is pbouliarlt appropriate before and aptbb all special
BERVIOES. We bave good reason to think that these were the circumstances under
which our Lord spent much time in prayer. It is probable that he, under the limita-
tioDB to which he stooped, found it highly desirable if not needful then. Certainly it



128 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. v. 1—39.

is 80 for UB. 1. Berore special services we are in greatest veed — need of strengfh and
inspiiation for the worlt immediately confronting us. 2. After special services we are
in greatest danger; for the human spirit is never so exposed to its spiiitual adversaries
as in that hour when it relaxes after great spiritual excitement.

III. That it is needful to seek and to find oppobttwitibb fob prateb.
Jesus Christ could not have poured out his heart to his Father as he did, and gained
the refreshment and strength he gained in prayer, if he had remained in the midst of
the curious and exacting throngs who waited upon him. He withdrew himself into the
wilderness. We have intimation that he had to make a very strenuous effort to escape
from the multitudes and to secure the seclusion he desired. £nt he made it. And we
shall he wise if we do the same. If we only draw near to God and have fellowship
with him when we happen to be left alone, and when occasions ofTer themselves to us,
we shall be very lacking in our devotion; the fiame of our pi'ty will languish on the
altar of our heart. We must make occasion ; we must seize opportunity ; we must
compel our life to yield the still hour, when, withdrawing ourselves into solitude, we
•re alone with God.

IV. That if needful to cub Lord, how much mobe necessabt must sustained
DEVOTION BE TO 0UE8BLVB8 1 If purity needed to pray, how much more need has guilt 1
if strength, how much more weakness! if wisdom, how much more ignnrance and'
folly! If our Master did not go forth to great trials or temptations without first attun-
ing his spirit and renewing his strength in the near presence of his Father, how much
les-" sliall we venture into the arduous and perilous future without first equipping our-
selves at the sacred armoury, without first casting o'rselves on God and drawing sus-
taining and overcoming vigour from his infinite resources! — 0.

Ver. 17. — Present potoer. One of the noblest of the psalms commences with that
Terse which it would have been well worth while to have lived a long and stormy life
to have written, " God is our Refuge and Strength, a very present Help in trouble." Who
can estimate the thousands of thousands of tempest-tossed human souls to whom these
words have brought help and comfort I The latter part of this passage is in very close
relation to our text. It brings before our minds —

I. The compabativb keaeness of God to us. It may indeed be objected that
the Omnipresent One, being everywhere, cannot be more truly in one place than in
another. Doubtless that is so. But God may be more manifestly present, and therefore
more present to our consciousness, in one place than in another. So the old Hebrew
worshipper felt as he drew near Jerusalem, as he entered the precincts of the temple^
as he went into the court of the Jews, as he saw the priests enter the sanctuary itselt
And once in the history of mankind God did so visit us that he was " manifest in the
flesh;" he was "Emmanuel, God with us" — with us in a sense in which he was not
before and has not been again. 'J'here is a sense in which God is nearer to us in the
sanctuary and at the table of the Lord than elsewhere. He has promised to meet us
there; we go there on purpose to be in his presence; therefore to our consciousness he
is in a peculiar sense present with us — onr very present Saviour.

II. The pbbsenob of his foweb. "The power of the Lord was present." Any
Israelite of ancient time would have told you that God's power was present in the sky,
in the sea, in the corn, in the r.iin. But he was more impressed with the power of
God as manifested in the storm in harvest-time, or in the overthrow of Sennacherib's
mighty host. Yet this was only in his imagination ; the power of God was as trnly and
as graciously present in the ordinary and the regular as in the miraculous. We are
inclined to think that Divine power is most manifest in the shaking thunder or in the
flashing lightning, or in the uplieaving earthquake; but the wiser we are, the more we
" observe these things, and (consequently) understand the loving-kindness of the Lord,"
the more we perceive that God's power is as present in the common and the continuous
as in the startling and the exceptional, is " very present" in the unfohling morning
and the descending night, in the growing of the grass and the ripening of the corn and
tue blooming of the flowers. God's power is present with us always and everywhere,
if we have but eyes to see it and hearts to feel it.

III. Thb fbbsbnoe of his healinq poweb. 1. A very beneficent power is that oi
Imltngi perhaps we never praise God quite so feeling' y s when we bless him tliat



OH. T. 1-59.] THE GOSPEL ACXWRDINQ TO ST. LUKE. 129

" he bas healed our sicknesses.'' God has always been healing men. He has supplied
OB with the substances which are fitted to restore, and he has ^ren us a bodily
system of such a nature that it has great recuperative powers. There are but few
among those who have reached manhood and womanhood who have not had occasion
to know that the power of the Lord is present to heal us now. In the hour of conva-
lescence they gave him the glory and offered their renewed life to him. What are they
doing now that health has been restored and confirmed ? 2. And this healin*^ of the
body is but the ^c<«re and the promise of the healing of the heart. When Jesus Christ
went from village to village, healing all manner Ot diseases, it was partly, if not princi-
pally, to say to all men everywhere of every age, " Umlerstand, ye blind souls that walk
in darkness, I am the Light of the world ; come to me, that you may see indeed 1 Ye
strenathless and sick ones in need of spiritual healing, I am the Divine Restorer ; come
unto me, tnat ye may be strong indeed 1 Ye dying ones, I am the Resurrection and
the Life ; come unto me, that you may live indeed 1" — C.

Vers. 18 — 25. — Superabounding kiTtdntM. We learn from these words —
L Chbist'b ooNsoionsNESS OF HIS OWN QBEATNEss. He assuma the right to for^ve
men their sins (yer. 20), and, when this right is challenged by those present, he asserts
it (ver. 24). And he does not dispute that this is a Divine prerogative. When it ii
claimed that only God can forgive sins (ver. 21), his reply is one that confirms rather
than questions that doctrine. To a very large extent our Lord's Divinity was in abey-
ance. He was voluntarily accepting limitations which caused him to be numbered
among the human and the finite. But his authority and power were in him, poten-
tially ; they were under a commanding restraint. Here and there, now and a.;ain,
as on this occasion, it seemed fitting that they should be put forth. And it magnifies
" the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ," that all the while that he was stooping to such
lowliness, such poverty, such endurance, he was conscious of the fact that Divine right
and Divine power were within him, to be exercised when he would. The Son of man
had power on earth to forgive sins.

II. His AUTHENTICATION OF IT. His grcatuess was often questioned, sometimes
denied ; and often our Master allowed men to think of him as the Teacher or the
Prophet whom they were to judge by his life or by his doctrine. But sometimes he
vindicated his claims in a way that completely silenced, if it did not convince, his critics.
He authenticated himself by some deed of mighty power. He did so now. Not that
the exercise of haaling power was one whit more Divine an act than the forgiveness
of sin; not that an act of pity for bodily incapacity was greater or worthier than one
of mercy and succour to the soul. That could not be. But that the working of the
miracle was a more obvious and signal indication of the Divine than an act of forgive-
i>ess. And by this gracious and mighty work our Lord proved himself to be the One
yrho had a right to say, " Thy sins be forgiven thee." We may say that the gospel of
Jesus Christ is now authenticated by its power. We are sure that the message of grace
ftnd mercy which we preach does come from God because (among other reasons for our
assurance) we witness the mighty power of Christian truth. We find it doing what
nothing else ever tried to do — enlightening multitudes of dark minds, redeeming and
restoring foul hearts, transforming evil lives, lifting men up from the dust and the mire
of sin and shame and bidding them walk in the ways of righteousness.

III. Cub approach to the Savioue. It was the approach of this man to the Lord
that led to Christ's words of mercy and then to his deed of power. The man could
not and would not keep away from his presence ; he was resolved to make his appeal
to the great Healer, cost what it might to reach his ear. This is the approach that is
tuccessfiil — seeking the Lord with the whole heart, with a fixed intent to seek until
he is found. Not a languid interest in Christ, not a pursuit of righteousness which
may be turned aside by the first curiosity or indulgence that offers itself; but a holy
earnestness which will not be denied, which, if one entrance is blocked, will find
another, which knocks till the door is opened, — this is the search that succeeds. Not,
indeed, that Christ is hard to find or reluctant to bestow ; but that, for our sake, he
does often cause us to continue in our seeking that our blessedness may be the
fuller and our faith the firmer and our new life the deeper for our patience and our
persistency.

I.UKB.



180 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ▼. 1 39.



IV. The bupebabukdancb WTncH is in Chbtst. This poor paralytic sought much
of the Lord, but he found a great deal more than he sought; seeking healing for bis
body, he found that, and with that mercy for his soul. Christ has more to give us
than we count upon receiving. Many a man has gone to him asking only for present
relief from a burden of conscious guilt, and he has found that salvation by faith in
Jesus Christ means vastly more than that. He finds that the forgiveness of sin is th«
initial step of a bright and blessed future, that it is the earnest of a noble inheritance.
In Christ our Lord are "unsearchable riches;" and they who have received the most
have only begun to find what a world of excellency and bles^^edness they have gained
by hearkening to his voice and hastening to his side and entering his holy service. — 0.

Vers. 27, 28. — Following Christ. Who can fail to be struck with —

L The commanding authobitt of Christ. It will be observed that he speaks in
the imperative ; not " Wouldest thou," but " Do thou follow me I " He speaks, also,
unconditionally, absolutely, not " Follow me if or when," but simply and without
reserve, " Follow me ! " Consider what large consequences would result from Matthew's
choice— the complete breaking up of his old life, the forsaking of his old pursuits and
of his old friends, the entering an entirely new sphere of thought and action. Yet
Matthew appears to have recognized the right of Jesus Christ to make this demand
of him. Must he not have acted under Divine illumination and guidance to decide so
promptly and so wisely ? So authoritatively and unconditionally the Saviour comes
to us and summons us to his service. His claim rests on incontestable facts which
prove him to be the Son of God who bas a sovereign right thus to address us, to be the
Son of man whose life of love and whose death of shame entitle him to ask the most
and the best of us.

IL The meaning op orm Saviour's call. The form of service our Master desires
of us when he bids us follow him is obviously different from that he asked of Matthew.
What does he want of us ? What is the precise thing he requires us to do ? Taking,
as we should take, one passage with another, we answer that he desires us to come into
the closest possible union which a human spirit can sustain to the Divine ; or, more spe-
cifically, he wants us cordially to accept him, for all that he offers to he to owr soul — to
accept him as our Teacher trom whom we learn all needful truth, as our Saviour in
whose redeeming work we trust for God's abounding mercy, as our Lord to whom we
dedicate our powers and our days, as our Divine Friend and Refuge iu whom we hide.

III. The excellency of an immediate kesponse. Matthew did well that he " left
all, rose up, and followed him." Had he waited for another occasion, he would ha^c
been more em angled in human relationships and worldly interests; he might never
have had so direct and personal an appeal made to him. As it was, by forsaking all
to follow Christ, he lost a profitable calling and a company of friends ; but what did
he find instead ? 1. The protection and friendship of Jesus Christ. 2. A new and
nobler manhood, an exalted life. 3. The esteem and the gratitude of the Church ol
Christ for all time to come. 4. Eternal blessedness in the future. And so with us ;
when the Master comes and calls us, as he may do in one of a number of ways, we act
most wisely when we immediately respond. (1) We lose the least that can be lost.
(2) We make sure of the heritage which the truly wise are determined to gain. Jesus
of Nazareth is " passing by ; " we must avail ourselves of his offer while opportunity
allows, (3) We gain immeasurable good — peace of mind, blessed consciousness of the
favour and friendship of God, spiritual rectitude, a life that is worthy of our origin and
our capacities, a hope that maketh not ashamed. That was a sujireme uour to
Matthew, the crisis of his life : who shall say how soon we may reach the supreme
and critical hour of our career 1 Blessed are they who recognize it when it comes, and
who come forth from it having " laid hold on eternal life."— 0.

Vers. 29 — 32. — Christian association. On what principle shall we regulate out
intercourse with men? How shall we follow Christ in the matter of associating with
our fellow-men? Our answer, suggested by this incident, is —

I. That association with bad men on the okound of friendship ig an
unchristian thing. The Pharisees would have been right enough if Jesus Christ had
mingled with the mercenary and the vicious only !o enjoy their company. Hia tim«



OH. T. 1—89.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 131

might certainly iiave been mucli better spent tlian in partaking of so doubtful a sonrce
of satisfaction, and he would have left an example that would have been better shunned
than followed. For to mingle with the irreverent and the covetous, and, still more,
to associate with the positively vicious, simply for the sake uf passing gratification,
is : 1. To spend time and strength where they are very ill applied. 2. To lead a sanction
to those who need rather to be discouraged than sustained in their course of life. 3.
To incur the serious danger of being lowered to their level. Some intercourse with
the frivolous and the guilty we must have, and there is every reason why our conduct
toward them should be as courteous and gracious as possible. But no wise man will
establish an intimate friendship with another who.se spirit is the spirit of worldliness,
whose conduct is that from which purity and sobriety must shrink. Let the young
especially remember that lifelong association with the unholy and the unworthy, in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, means gradual moral degeneracy, continual spiritual
decline.

IL That association with the good ik the spibit of Christian fellowship is
A WISE AND WORTHY THING. "The assembling of ourselves together," as those who
are agreed on the same fundamental articles of faith, and who are animated by the
same spirit and are promoting the same objects, is admirable for three reasons. 1.
We gain spiritual strength ourselves. 2. We impart it to those with whom we unite.
3. We commend the common principles we hold to those who are without by thr
manifestation of our unity. Those who try to live a life of spiritual isolation not only
make a great mistake by robbing themselves of a source of hallowed influence, but they
neglect a plain duty, for they leave unemployed a weapon of usefulness by which
truth and worth are materially advanced. But the main lesson of the passage is —

III. That association with the bad fob theib elevation is a distinctly
Christian thinq. Those critics of Jesus Christ failed to see that the presence of a
noble, unselfish motive made all the difference in the character of the act. It com-
pletely transformed it. It changed it from the unwise and the condemnable into the
wise and meritorious. Our Lord mingled with publicans and sinners, not as a Com-
panion to share their revelries, but as a Guide to lead them into other and better ways,
as a Helper whose strong hand should raise them from the mire and place them upon
the rock. And as he was here to seek and to save, where should he be found but
among those who were lost ? Where would you have the teacher ? In the company
of the mature and the literate, or in the schoolroom among the young and the
ignorant? Where would you have the physician ? In the homes of the healthy, or
in the hospital and in the homes of the sick ? And where should they be found who
have truth to teach and restoration to impart such as no teacher ot any human science
can make known, no healer of bodily diseases can confer ? We are never quite so
Christian, we never reach a height so near the level on which our Lord was daily
walking, as when we voluntarily and cheerfully forego the pleasanter security to which
our character entitles us, and mingle freely and frequently with those whose spirit and
whose tone is offensive to our taste and our judgment, in order that we may lift them
up to a nobler life. And this is the one and only way in which to work out this great
and beneficent reform. What legislation will not do, what literature will not effect,
what art and science will leave unaccomplished if not untouched, that a holy and
loving association on the ground of Christian kindness will secure. The actual and
near presence of the pure and kind, the touch and the pressure of the hand of humau
love, the voice of invitation and of entreaty proceeding from those whose eyes are dim
with the tears of a sorrowful sympathy, — this is the power which, coming, as it does,
from Jesus Christ, and emanating from his Holy Spirit, will lead sinful souls, covetous
men and erring women, into paths of penitence, and raise them to heights of holi-
ness. — 0.

Vers. 33 — 38. — Christian naturdlnest. We have here —

I. An honest diffichlty fairly and effectually met. It was in no carping
spirit that the disciples of John came to Jesus. We do not detect a tiace of ill will
in their question. It was a spirit of surprise and perplexity that dictated it. They
had always thought that fasting was an essential feature of true piety. Their mastei
John h«d encouraged them in this idea ; but they looked in vain for this feature in



l3Si THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. v. 1— ?ft».



the doctrine of Christ. What could it mean ? Our Lord met this inquiry in a very
different way fiom that in which he might have done so. He might have said,
" Where, in the books of Moses, is fasting enjoined on the people of God ? On what
day in all the year, excej)ting the Day of Atonement, is this practice prescribed ?_ Is it
not a tradition of men rather than a commandment of God 1 " But Jesus did not
meet them thus. He said that his disciples did not fast because fasting on their part
would be untimt'ly, ucsuitable, and therefore unacceptable. "Can the children of the
brideohamber," etc.? "You would not have men fast when they have every reason
for feasting ? you would not have men show themselves miserable when there is every
ground for gladness? you would not have my disciples do such violence to their
spiritual nature ? 'You do not act," Christ goes ou to say, " with such unnaturalness
and incongruity in other departments of life ; you do not bring togc^ther things that
do not agree with one another ; you do not put nnwrought cloth on an old garment ;
you do not put new unfermented wine in old skins that will not stretch ; if you did,
you would pay the penalty in spoiled clothes and spilled wine. Why should you do
anything that is unfitting and incongruous in the realm of religion ? If you do, you
will have a serious penalty to pay. No; let my disciples rejoice while they have
occasion to be glad ; the days will come soon enough when they will have a heart for
grieving : then will they iast in those days."

IL An ikdioation or the trcb tone of Cheistian servicb. The disciples were
glad of heart because their Master was "with them." To be the close companions of
Jesus Christ is reason enough for a prevailmg spiritual joy. As his disciples, indeed,
there are certain special sources of sorrow — grief at the sin and misery of mankind,
regret at our own slowness of growth and slackness of zeal, etc. But for us as his
followers is (1) the joy of faith ; (2) the joy of fellow ship ; (3) the joy of service, the
deliuht of doing good, the blessedness of giving health and peace and hope to those in
spiritual weakness and trouble ; (4) the joy of hope, of immortal blessedness. Is it
for us, with such a heritage in possession, and with such a prospect as this, to comport
ourselves as if we were fatherless, friendless, portionless ? Is it for us to go on our
way homewards and heaven waids as if we were being conveyed to prison or were going
into exile? Nut gloom but gladness, not dreariness but delight, should be the pre-
vailing note of our Christian life.

III. The importance of the fitting in the sphere of tb* saorbd. We learn
this, in the text, from the unwisdom of the unfitting in the sphere ot the secular.
" No man putteth," etc. ; if he does, he spoils his garment, and he spills his wine. So
in the sphere of the spiritual : if we force the sorrowful spirit to assume the toue of the
happy ; or if we reverse this unnatural process, and compel the happy to affect to be
sorrowful ; or if we require the young to manifest piety in the forms that are suitable
to the mature ; or if we insist on those who have been trained in godly and virtuous
habits showing the same form of repentance which we demand of the vicious and the
gross; — we may secure a result wliich gives us momentary saiisfaction, but we shall
have a penalty to pay further on. The unnatural is always a mistake. God does not
desire to be served in ways which are not fitted to the spirit which he has made, oi
are not appropriate to the circumstances in which his providence has placed us. Let
there be no forcing in the sphere of the sacred. Do the fitting, the congruous thing,
and you will do the right and the acceptable thing. " Is any merry ? let him sing
psalms. Is any afiSicted? let him pray." Is any filled with a sense of the value of this
life? let him give himself heartily to holy usefulness. Is any weary and worn with
the strife and burden of life ? let him find cheer and comfort in anticipatiug the rest
which remaineth for the people of God. Do not try to regulate your spiritiul life by
any calendar ; let it flow on in joy or sorrow, in active service or p^tient waiting as the
hand of God is laid on the springs of your human spirit, and is directing the course of
your earthly life. Not the hard, cast-iron service of constraint, but the free, spontaneous
service of the full and overflowing heart, is that for which otir Lord is looking, and
with which be is well pleased. — C.

Vers. 1 — 11. — Fishers of men. We left Jesus itinerating through Galilee and

preaching in thv synagogues. But his centre seems to have been the Lake of Gec-

esaret, and especially Capernaum. The synagogues have become too small for bis



«H. V. 1—39.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. LUKE. IM



audiences, and so he has to take to the seashore, and there meet popularity as best he
can. The pressure of the people is great, and it is to hear the Word of God they have
come. A great Prophet, they feel, has risen up among them, and so they are eager to
know what are the latest tidings from the Most High. There are two ships floating
near ; they are empty, for the fishermen have returned after a fruitless nioht, and are
washing their nets on shore. Into one of the ships he enters, which happens to be
Simon's, and he sits down to teach the mighty multitude which rises tier upon tier
above him on the land. We have thus presented to us —

L The qbeat Fisher of men. (Vers. 1 — .3.) For out of this boat he is really
casting his net to catch men. His word spoken is to draw souls into sympathy and
service. The art of preaching as thus exercised by Jesus Christ was the fisliing for men.
The miracle of subsequent success was to throw lic;ht reai\y upon this primary attitude
of Jesus. Now, let iis consider here : 1. The substance of Christ's preaching. It was
doubtless about the kingdom of Gol^, about membership in it, and about its prospects
in the world. But we must remember besides that he could not, in the very nature of
the case, preach the cross. Hence his preachins: was the purest moral'ty backed up by
a perfect life. So that once, at all events, the preachin>! of morality got a chance of
being most favourably tested. The success thereof we shall mention presently. But
Jesus could preach himself as the Saviour of sinners. And this, indeed, is the sum and
substance of all preaching. The people, however, did not understand the full meaning
of his message at the time. 2. The success of Christ's preaching. There was interest
and excitement. But the result of that f'ay's preaching seems to have been very like
the night's fishing on the part of the disciples. Ah! this is what illustrates the
wonderful consideration of the Saviour. Some one must prepare the way, some one
must do the pioneer work. The Baptist prepared the way for Jesus, and Jesus prepared
the way for the disciples. It is at Pentecost, after the Crucifixion, when the full gospel
can be proclaimed, that the real success begins. The miracle of the fishes subsequent
to the preaching of the Master was the type of the order which the good Lord has
ordained. The " greater works " done by believing disciples are the spiritual miracles
which began in such numbers at Pentecost, and which have been happening ever since
(John xiv. 12).

II. The mibaolb of success. (Vers. 4 — 7.) Our Lord, having Vieen accommodated in
Simon's boat, proceeds to show his gratitude for the obligation. He tells the fishermen
to " launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught." Simon honestly
owns that they have toiled all the night, and taken nothing ; still, though appearances
are against it, he will at Christ's word let down the net. No sooner has he done so
than success comes so overpowering in character that the net breaks. The result is
that they have to beckon for the second boat, and both boats are filled, so that they
begin to sink. Here, then, is success " exceeding abundantly above all they can ask
or think " (Eph. iii. 20). This is to show them that success waits upon the word of
Jesus. It is, of course, mere temporal success — success which in a few moments they
are enabled to despise; yet it is success obeying Christ's word. We need not inquire
into the nature of the miracle. It was most likely a miracle of knowledge. There are
great shoals ot fish manifesting themselves in inland lakes just in the way demanded
by the narrative.' But Jesus, in giving the direction at the proper moment and secur-
ing the di aught at the time that the fish were within reach, showed his command of
all the circumstances. So that, as Robertson thought, this miracle, more perhaps than
all others, shows the personality of God in Ohiist Jesus.' The laws of nature hold on
their way, but the Author of them can calculate to a nicety their working, and accommo-
date himself or his pe pie through their operation. He is King among his own arrange-
ments, at home among his own laws, 'i'he "hierarchy of laws," as they have been
called, acknowhdge him as High Priest. But we should further notice how he arranges
for the disciples' success rather than for his own. As already intimated, his spiritual
success was not great, considering the splendid powers he exercise!. As Bersier some-
where remarks, no one ever had Bo little proportional success as he. No wonder that
luch a passage as Isa. xlix. 4, " I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength

• Ot Tristram's • Natural Historv nf the Bible,' p. 285 ; also Godet, in loe.
» 'The Human Eaoe, and other Seranns,' p. 127, by Eev. F. W. Bobenion.



134 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. t. 1— 3&,



for nought and in vaii ,'' may have been often on his ilps.' Bat he handed on the
elements of success to bis successors. They reaped the harvest of which his apparent
failure and early death were the seed. The whole arrangement reflects glory on the
consideration of the Master.

IIL The effect of the sitcgess upon the fishermen. (Vers. 8 — 10.) They wero
all filled with astonishment. This is the prime effect of a miracle. It astonisoes
people. It brings them suddenly face to face with superhumin power. They stare.
But after the astonishment comes, and it may be very swiftly, sober thought. It
was. 30 here. Peter is broken down at the sight. Goodness has led him to repentance.
His sin is now uppermost) and he cries, " Depart from me ; for I am a sinful man,
Lord." Did Peter wish to be separated from the Master ? Nay ; but he felt he deserved
to be. And here we may notice how prayer is answered. Peter cries to be separated
from his Saviour; but in heart he hopes to remain beside Jesus still. Hence Jesus
answers the heart, and heeds not the literal meaning of his prayer.' The Lord does
not depart from him, but abides with him ; nay, more, arranges for Peter being always
with him. Goodness is me.int to breali sinners' hearts (Rom. ii. 4). Success of all
kinds should have this effect. It is sad when " Jeshurun waxes fat and kicks " (Deut.
xxxiL 15). It is blessed when, like Peter, in presence of unexpected good fortune, we
humble ourselves before him who has sent it, acknowledging that we do not in any
wise deserve it.'

IV. '1'he call of the fishermen to the ministry. (Ver. 10.) Peter was not the
only penitent onboard tliesinkiui? ships, we may be sure. He was first and chief; but
the sons of Zebedee and Andrew were, we may be quite sure, penitent too. Fear pre-
dominates; their notion is that they might justly be cast from Christ's presence for
ever. This is just the spirit in which special work for God begins. And now let us
see how Jesus deals with them. He says to Peter first, but the result shows that the
others were included in his call, " Fear not ; from hencel'urth thou shalt catch men."
They are to be promoted from being fishermen to be " fishers of men." It is a call,
not to the apostolic ofiice which comes later, but to the ministry. 1. It is a call away
from a worldly occupation. For the ministry is an order of men set apart from tem-
poral concerns for spiritual work. Worldly occupations are incompatible with it. A
minister cannot do his work well if compelled to dabble in business. 2. It is a call to
catch men. Now, the fisherman uses every art and artifice to get the fish into his net.
He toils during the night, that the fish may not see the net nor evade his wiles. In
the same way the minister is to use every art, and even guile itself, as Paul confesses,
to get souls into Christ's net. We may object to the methods some people employ to
promote the gospel. They may be worldly arts — advertising, music, paraphernalia of
all kinds. But, before condemning erthusiastic men, we should ask ourselves the
question — Have we left " no stone unturned " to bring men, even by moral compulsion,
under the power oi Christ and his truth (cf. ch. xiv. 23)? But: 3. The instruction
is to catch men alive ((uypay). It is Lere the fishing fails ua as a figure. Fish are
caught and, as a rule, in the catching are killed. They lose their lives in the process.
But when souls are taken in the f;ospel net, they are taken alive — are taken to enjoy
life abundantly. In truth, the greatest kindness we can confer on souls is to get them
into the net. We never live in earnest till we have been brought to him who is the
Life of men. Such, in brief terms, is the meaning of the ministry.

V. The acceptance of the ministerial call. (Ver. 11.) We would say, at first
sight, that the success was singularly out of place. Why grant a shoal of fish, if the
fishermen are to leave them without a moment's hesitation or delay? The purpose
was to assure them that temporal success was Christ's gift ; and secondly, that spiri-
tual success must be preferred to the, temporal, even when the latter is at its height.
It was a greater surrender when they had been so successful at their fishing. But the
noble meu did not hesitate. They brought their ships to land, and then forsook all
their "stock in trade" that they might follow Jesus. The fellowship with Jesus
during his ministry was more precious than the world's wealth could ever be. He

' Cf. Bersier's * Sermons,' tome ii. p. 3.51.
' Of. Arndt's ' Leben Jesu,' zweiter theil, s. 88.

' Cf. Kobertson, ut supra; also Martineaa's 'Endeavours after the Christian Life' itl
edit., p. 147.



fl6.v.l— 39.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, 135



was the great " Fisher of men," and it was from fellowship with him they were to learn
their profession. The training of the twelve was a most real and hlessed thing.* It
was more than any theological learning could ever afford. It was learning of Christ
himself, who is the embodied Truth. And yet to this same test every soul is sooner
or later hrouglit. At death, if not before, we are all asked if we can forsake all to
follow Christ into undiscovered lands. May we all stand that test 1 — H. M. E.

Vers. 12 — 26. — The healing of the leper and the paralytic. We noticed how Jesus
called the fishermen to be fishers of men, and how they nobly responded to his call, and
forsook the fish and boats and friends that they might follow him. We have now
before us two instructive miracles performed during his evangelistic work, and resulting
in an extension of his influence. Between them there is interposed a significant
remark about our Lord's private prayer, so that the order of our thought is miracle,
prayer, and more miracle. It is thus that Divine work goes on. We must, con-
sequently, give ourselves unto prayer as well as the ministry of the Word if we would
follow Jesus or his apostles.

I. Consider the curb op the lephost. (Vers. 12 — 15.) It was manifestly a very
serious case — the man was " full of leprosy. It was the disease in its worst stage.
Humanly speaking, it was incurable. So far as man was concerned, the case was hopeless.
Now, in this respect, the leprosy is a type of svn. Sin is leprosy in the soul. It is
so far incurable by man. But further, the leper was isolated from his kind, not because
the disease was infectious through contact, which seems to be quite disproved,* but
because in this way God would show his abhorrence of sin and its essentially ge^Toratm^
power. The poor lepers, as they went up and down the land with rent garments, and
crying, " unclean 1 " were virtually dead men mourning over their lost and hopeless
condition. But this poor leper had heard of Jesus, had come to him, convinced that ha
was able to save him. He throws himself down consequently at Christ's feet, saying,
"Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean." He was convinced of the Saviour's
power, and he threw liims^elf upon his sovereign mercy in the matter of the willingness
to save. And it is just to this that every sinner must come. Persuaded of Christ's
ability to save, he must throw himself upon his sovereign clemency. For the Saviour
might justly refuse to save any, though, as a matter of fact, he is anxiotis to save alL
And now let us notice Christ's method in saving him. He might have saved him by
a word, but to show his sympathy and freedom from all fear of defilement, he heals
him by a touch, saying, "I will : be thou clean." And immediately the leprosy
departed from him. In the very same way can the Saviour heal the leprosy of sin. lif
we only ask him, he will tenderly touch us, and instantaneously the soul's disease will
depart. But, when healed, the man has certain duties to discharge at the instigation
of Jesus. He is directed first to tell no man ; for Jesus wants to be something more
than a physician of the body, and he might, through the patient's report, be so over-
whelmed with physical cases as not to have sufficient time for the preaching and
spiritual work which with him was paramount. Secondly, he is directed to repair to
the priest, and fulfil all that the Law of Moses required, " for a testimony unto them."
In this way otir Lord desired to demonstrate that he had not come, as they basely
insinuated, to destroy the Law and the prophets, but to fulfil them and to get them
fulfilled. Notwithstanding these precautions, his fame so spread that multitudes came
flocking together to hear and to be healed of their infirmities. We have thus preseuted
to us the way of salvation and its results. It is by coming to Jesus that we are saved
from sin ; it is by doing what Jesus reqiures that we are made useful among men.
Let us test Jesus as the appointed Saviour, and live as our Lord directs.

II. GONSIDEB OUR LORD'S RETIREMENT TO THE WILDERNESS FOB PRAYER. (Vef. 16.)

There is a certain measure of exhaustion in such work as was performed by Jesus.
He bowed to the necessity of private communion with God. Even Jesus could not be
always in public ; solitude was as needful for his soul's health as society for his oppor-
tunity of usefulness. Yinet, in a fine sermon on this passage, says, " We do not believ*

• Of. • The Training of the 'I'welve,' by Dr. A. B. Bruce, passim.

* Cf. Archbishop Trench on ' The Miracles,' 7tb edit., p. 214; Oodet, in loe., adheias U
the old view of its contagious character.



136 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LOKB. [oh. v. 1—39,

that we exaggerate when we say that those who do not love solitude do not love truth." '
It is in the secret place with God that we renew our spiritual strength and are fit for
further service. And what perfect prayers our Lord's must have been. No personal
sin to confess, but simply to confer with the Father about the salvatinn of the world
and how best he could promote the welfare of men. The time of solitude with Gcd
is the most fruitful time. Without it how barren all else proves !

III. Consider the healing of the pabalttio. (Vers. 17 — 26.) It was in
Capernaum, it is believed, and in the house of Peter, that the miracle happened. The
audience was a aitical one with whom Jesus was dealing, composed of Pharisees and
doctors of the Law, out of every town of Galilee and Judaea and Jerusalem. They had
come to pass judgment on the new movement under Jesus. And the Spirit was waiting
there as the Agent to api ly the healing Word of the Messiah to those not unwilling to
be healed. But alas 1 these hard-hearted lawyers pave him no opportunity. But four
friends bring along the street a paralytic neighbour, in the hope that he may be healed
by Jesus. They cannot at first get near, and so they repair to the house-top, and pro-
ceed to tear up the tiles in sufBcient numbers to allow of their lowering their helpless
friend to the feet of Jesus.' Here was the Spirit's opportunity. And here let us
notice the twofold paralysis under which the poor man laboured — the one was the
paralysis of the soul, the otiier the pardlyHs of the tody. Both appealed to the sym-
pathy of Jesus. Besides, he is pleased to notice the faith of the bearers. We are not
told that the paralytic at this time had faith in Jesus, but his friends had for him.
They believed that if they could only get their friend before Jesus, they would not
have to carry him home again. And disinterested faith for a blessing upon others
Jesus respects and rewards. But which of the two paralyses will Jesus cure first?
The more serious — the paralysis of soul through sin. Hence, in endearing accents he
says, " Man, thy sins are forgiven thee." It was a case of dbsoli'tion, as Robertson
boldly puts it in his sermon upon this passage.' And to absolution by one whom they
regarded as a mere man the scribes and Pharisees secretly objected. They rightly
said that none but God alone could forgive sins as against God ; they wrongly con-
cluded that Jesus was not Divine. There was no blasphemy, for this was GKxi incar-
nate. Their objection was not publicly taken. It was a mental note they took of the
matter. Jesus soon shows them that he can read their thoughts, by laying bare their
objection, aud putting his prerogative to the proof. The demonstration he proposes is
this : he has pronounced the absolution. It may be deemed easy to do this, since no
one can tell that it has not taken place. But he is willing to rest his claim to absolv-
ing power by saying the hardir word, " Rise up and walk." According as this takes
place or fails is he willing to be judged. And so, before his enemies and to the palsied
patient, he says, " Arise, and take up thy couch, and go into thine house." Here was
a demonstration of his ability to forgive sins as against God, for the paralysis departs
and the powerless patient iitarts to his leet and reaches home with bis bed as Jesus
commands him. In doing so, moreover, he glorifies God, doubtless, for the double
blessing. Now, these miracles are signs and symbols of spiritual things. This healing
of the body is a sign of what Jesus is willing and waiting to do for our souls. Paralysis
is what has seized on many. What a livin;^ death it is ! It is only Jesus who can free
our spirits from it. If we look to him he will give us his Spirit to strengthen us with
all might in the inner man, and to help us to earnestness and action. And first we
shall show to all about us that we are able to help ourselves, and will no longer be
burdens upon others. The four burden-bearers here were spared their hard work ever
after. This is the first manifestation of spiritual strength in the carrying honestly our
own share of life's responsibilities 1 Secondly, we shall glorify God through our spiritual
powers. We shall praise him for his loving-kindness and tender mercy towards us.
And lastly, we shall lead others to fear and to glorify God too. Hence the great
im porta ice of <Tetfiiie rid of spiritual paralysis and of rising into the exercise of spiritual
power. Wi should also Icarn distinctly from this miracle what possibilities lie await-

' ' Nonvelles Etudes Evangeliques,' p. 228.

' Cf. DelitZ8ch'B'EinTaginOapernaum,'ss.40— 16; Geikie's'LifaandWaiidaaf Ohiist'
vol. ii. p. 23.
' ' Sermons,' vol. iii p. 69l



OB.V. 1— 39.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 137

ing intercessory prayer and disinterested faith. We may do much in bringing helpless
souls to Jesus, that they may be healed by him. He is able to do much for our friends
as well as for ourselves, and the joy of bringing others to Christ is only exceeded by
the joy of coming ourselves. Let us keep coming to Jesus for oursc:lves and with
others, and strange and blessed experiences shall still be ours. — B. M. £.

Yen. 27 — 39. — The call of Levi, and the svhsequent hanquet. We noticed how, at th«
healing of the paralytic, there was a critical assemblage. Secretly did they impugn the
absolution pronounced by the Master, and publicly were they refuted. Immediately
after, it would &eem from all the accounts, Je»U8 takes the bold step of calling a publican
to become his disciple. It was a throwing down of the gauntlet to his enemies. It
was taking up a man whom they had excommunicated and despised, and so bringing
the kingdom of God into collision with the Jewish authorities. Let us, then, consider —

I, The call of Levi, and its ACCEFTAircE. (Vers. 27, 28.) Levi was a leading
" custom-house officer," as we should now call him, situated at Capernaum, where the
caravans from Damascus to the Mediterranean regularly passed. His office was, we
have reason to believe, » lucrative one, so that he had every worldly reason fur remain-
ing in it. Doubtless he had no position in the Jewish Church, but, considering the
Sadducean scepticism which flourished within the Church pale, the worldly advantages
of the tax-gathering would reconcile Levi to excommunication. When Jesus foimd
him he was busy at his tax-gathering. The piles of money were possibly before him.
He was never more procperously occupied before. Bui b I this itinerant Preacher, who
has no settled home, hu aot where to lay his head, ;3Sies along, and calls Levi from
his business to become his foUovTsr. " Follow me," says Christ ; and for Levi it meant
the surrender of his worldly calling, and becoming an itinerant preacher of the kingdom
of God. The step for Levi was most serious. And here notice what Jesus demanded.
It may be expressed in three words : it was faith in himself. In no way could he
better test Levi's confidence than by asking him to surrender the comfort and certainty
of his worldly calling for the uncertainty of the Christian ministry as carried on by the
Master himself. It is the one demand which Jesus always makes, that men should
trust him. And Levi surrenders at once. He leaves all, rises up, and literally follows
him. It is a farewell to tax-gathering, that he may take service in the retinue of the
Prince of peace. Such a surrender without reserve is what Christianity means. Jesus
is put before every one and everything, and his command is our law. The following
of Christ, moreover, includes the whole Christian morality. If we take his way and
carry out his will, and do, day by day, what we believe he would in our circumstances,
then we shall find ourselves holy and useful in increasing measure.

II. Consider Levi's fibst mission aby effort. (Ver. 29.) This was in the making
of the great feast. Hospitality may be missionary in character. If its design is to
bring friends into contact with Jesus, as was literally the case here, then it is distinctly
a missionary enterprise. Levi felt that the best thing he could now do would be to
get all his acquaintances together and to introduce them to Jesus. And ought not
this to be the aim of hospitality still, apart firom all cant and hypocrisy ? Should not
hosts inquire what their motives are in making feasts? Are banquets for display, for
the advancement of worldly ends, or for the Master's sake ? Moreover, this banquet
of Levi shows us the limits of our work. All we can ever do for men is to introduce
them to .Jesus. We cannot do more for their salvation. It is the personal acquaint-
anceship with Jesus into which they m-::»t enter if eternal life is to be theirs. " This
is life eternal, to know [i.«. to be acquainted with] thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ, whom thou hast sent " (John xvii. 3). The missionary enterprise through
hospitality is only beginning to be realized. Hospitality needs to be redeemed, like
many another good thing, from worldly uses. A loving heart will enable a faithful
Christian to accomplish this.

in. Pharisaic objections to Christ's new associations. (Vers. 30 — 32.) Eatiag
and drinking in the East are the universal tokens of mutual confidence. After thia,
the parties will be true to each other until death. Hence the Pharisees with their
scribes (so in Revised Yersiun and best authorities) — the legal experts they had brought
with tbem — object to Jesus and his disciples going in " hand and glove " with excoui-
miinieated men. From their standpoint it argued great laxity on the part of uli>



138 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. l<m.r.l—S9

Lord. Eeally it only meant Mb freedom from Pharisaic pretence. And his defence
was complete. He took the Pharisees on their own ground. He assumed that they
were spiritually whole, as they supposed themselves to be. Of course, he knew how
seriously they were in this matter deceiving themselves. But assuming they were
whole, he would, as a Physician, have been losing his time and missing his opportunity
had he associated only with them. It is the sick, these publicans and sinners, who
need the Physician's care. Hence he hesitated not to enter into Levi's house and mix
with Levi's guests. Now, association with others may, like hospitality, be a form of
missionary enterprise. This should be our motive in associating with others. Why
not be propagandists in all our contact with men ? It is not necessary we should
be " puritanical ; " for that was exactly what Jesus in this case and in every case
declined to be. But we may in all our hearty fellowship with others keep their
spiritual good clear as a star in view. Our Lord's principle, too, as here stated, is
impressive. He did not come to summon to his side the men of reputation, the men
of good public character, the pharisaically righteous, but to call " sinners," those who
despaired of themselves and needed help. In this he states his grand policy. It is for
us to realize its meaning and to imitate him. As self-despairing ones, let us rally
round the Saviour, as he calls us to him, and then let us vigorously publish the call
to other sinners, that they too may be saved.*

IV. 1'he Phabisebs fuetheb objected to Christ's pbactiob. (Vers. 33 — 35.)
Having defended his association with publicans and sinners, he is next assailed
because he did not teach the disciples to fast. The Baptist, in the spirit of the old
regime, directed his disciples to fast, but Jesus took a different course altogether. And
here we must remember that the Law of Moses prescribed fasting only on the great Day
of Atonement, when sin was brought so powerfully to remembrance. The fasting twice
a week, in which the Pharisees indulged, arose out of those " traditions of the elders "
which in many respects overlaid the precepts of the Law. Against these traditions
our Lord set himself firmly. Notice that: 1. Fasting is a comparatively easy form of
self-denial. As Bobertson has said in a sermon on ver. 33, " All can understand the
self-denial of fasting, because hunger is a low want, known to all. But all cannot
understand the self-denial of hard mental work, or that of associating with uncon-
genial minds, or that of honestly pursuing a disagreeable occupation or profession."'
The coarse minds which proposed to criticize Jesus, therefore, took up fasting as the
form of self-denial which they found themselves equal to, and sought to condemn
Jesus for neglect of it. 2. There is no good in fasting for its own sake. The person
who abstains from food merely to be able to say he has fasted and so fulfilled a human
tradition, is not living a noble life. Asceticism had, therefore, no countenance from
Jesus. 3. T?ie Divine life is essentially social. The Trinity of Persons in unity
declares this fact. God has been social from everlasting, and when he appeared
incarnate it was as an eminently social Saviour. H'nce he represents himself on this
very occasion as a Bridegroom, and life with him as a bridal feast. Mourning would be
as impertinent at a marriage-party as fasting would be when Jesus was present with
his people. The sociality of the Christian faith endorses the propriety of the policy
of Jesus. 4. Fasting becomes appropriate when fellowship is interrupted. Our Lord
refers to his own departure as a being t.iken away from them, a violent operation — a
prophetic note about the cross 1 In such days will the disciples fast. The felt absence
of the Lord should so impress us that fasting would be only natural with us. Through
fasting the soul regains its sovereignty over the body, and the gracious presence of the
Master as an expeiience is regained,

V. Odb Lord's spirit of innovation. rVers. 36—39.) The Pharisees expected he
would conform to old customs, as unoriginal minds are wont to do. But they utterly
mistook him. He cajne, as these twin parables tell us, with new cloth and new wine.
This can only mean the Christian spirit, social and missionary in its very essence.
Bobertson is quite wrong, we believe, in making the new wine and new cloth "austers
duties and doctrines," and the old bottles and old cloth as the weak novices in tha
■h»pe of the new disciples (ut supra, p. 196). In what respect these "austere duties

' Of. Gerok's ' Evangelien-Preuigten,' B. 669.
* ' The Human Bace, and other Sermons,' p. 192.



OH. VI. 1-49.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE.



IS9



and doctrines," were new no one, we imagine, could tell us. They were the old wine
and the old garments, easy and palatable to the self-righteous mind, like old wine ; but
the Christian spirit of sociality and missionary enterprise was the new wine which the
self-righteous do jiot particularly care for. Hence our Lord resolved to initiate no such
foolish policy as this, to tack on the free spirit of Christianity to the old pharisaic
spirit of fasting frequently and being generally morose. The two would not work, and
so he courageously resolved to be an innovator, cost what it would, and to conduct his
disciples to a better position than PhHrisaism realized.' The disciples are the new
bottles, and the Christian spirit is the new wine. The free, social spirit, which
Christianity fosters, may not be palatable to the proud minds of men, but the humble
appreciate and preserve it as the disciples have done down to this day. We ought to
have the courage of our convictionB, even when it leads us to take new courses for
men's sake. — B. M. £.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER VI.



Vers. 1 — 11. — The Lord's teaching on the
question of the observance of the sabbath.

Ver. 1. — And it came to pass on the second
sahbath after the first. The expression
accompanying this note of time of St. Luke,
" the second sabbath after the first," more
literally, "the seeond-lirst sabbath," has
always been a difficulty with expositors of
this Gospel. The word is absolutely unique,
and is found in no other Greek author.
Recent investigations in the text of the New
Testament have proved that this word is
not found in the majority of the more ancient
authorities. Of the modern critical editors,
Alford and Lachmann enclose the disputed
word in brackets; Tregelles and Meyer omit
it altogether ; but the Revisers of the English
Version relegate it to the margin in its
literal form, " second-first ; " Tischendorf
alone admits it in his text. The question
is of interest to the antiquarian, but scarcely
of any to the theologian. It was, perhaps,
introduced at an early date into many of the
manuscripts of St, Luke, owing to some
copyist writing in the margin of his parch-
ment in this place " first " to distinguish
this sabbath and its scene from the other
sabbath alluded to four verges further on ;
"second" was not unlikely to have been
written in correction of " first " by some other
copyist using the manuscript, thinking it
better thus to distinguish this from the sab-
bath alluded to in oh, iv. 31 ; ami thus the two
correctioQS may have got confused in many
of the primitive copies. It can scarcely he
imagined, if it really formed part of the
original work of St, Luke, that so remark-
able a word ooiild ever have dropped out of
the text of the most ancient and trustworthy
authorities. Supposing it to have been a
part of the original writing, scholars have
suggested many explanations. Of these the



simplest and most satisfactory are : (1) The
first sabbath of each of the seven years
which made a sabbatic cycle was called first,
second, third, etc., sabbath. Thus the
" second-first " sabbath would signify the
first sabbath of the second year of the seven-
years' cycle. This is Wieselei's theory. (2)
The civil year of the Jews began in autumn
about mid-September to mid-October (month
Tisri), and the ecclesiastical year in spring,
about mid-March to mid-April (month
Nisan), Thus there were every year two
first sabbaths — one at the commencement
of the civil year, which would be called
"jirsl-first;" the other at the beginning of
the ecclesiastical year, which would be
called " second-first." The period here
alluded to by St, Luke would perfectly
agree with either of these explanations.
The latter theoiy was suggested by Louis
Cappel, and is quoted with approval by
Godet. And his disciples plucked the ears
of com, and did eat, inbbing them in their
hands. St. Matthew add^ here that they
" were an hungred," This they might well
have been in following the Master in his
teaching in different places, even though
some of their homes were nigh at haml.
We have no need to introduce the question
of their poverty — which, in the case of
several of them at least, we know did not
exist — here leaHing them to this method of
satisfying their hunger. They had pro-
bably been out for some hours with Jesud
without breaking their fast, and, finding
themselves in a field of ripe com, took this
easy, present means of gratifying a natural
want. The Law exprts.-ly permitted them
to do this : " When thou comest into the
standing com of thy neighbour, then thou
mayest pluck the ears with thine hand "
(Deut, xxiii, 25).

Vcr. 2. — And certain of the Fhariseea
said unto them, Why do ye that wMoh ia



■ Cf. Gess's ' Christi-SelbstzeugnisB,' g. 19.



140



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LTJKB. [ch. vi. 1—49.



not lawful to do on the Babbath days t It
would eeem that these Phariaee:! came rrom
Jerusalem, aud were no doubt privately
commiBsioned to wutch narrowly the acts
of the new Teacher who was beginning to
attract Buoh general attention, and who
already was openly setting at nought the
nuQiberlesa additions which the Jewish
Bcbiiols had added to the Law. Bound the
original " sabbath law " of Moses thirty-
nine prohibitions bad been laid down in the
oral law ; round tliese " thirty-nine " a vast
number of smaller rules had grouped them-
selves. Amongst these greater and lesser
sabbath restrictions were prohibitions against
" reaping and threshing." Now, plucking
ears of com was defined to be a kind of
" reaping," and rubbing the ears in the hands
a kind of " threshing." " See," cried some of
these spying Pliaiisees, "do thy disciples
publicly break the sabbath, and dost thou
not rebnke them?" The Loril's reply does
not attempt to discuss what was and what
was not lawtul on the sabbath, but in broad
terms he expounds the great doctiine re-
specting the significance, limits, and purpo^
of every law relating to outward acts, even
in the event of that law having been given
by God, which was not the case in the pre-
sent alleged transgression. How rigidly
the stricter Jews some fourteen or fifteen
centuries later still kept these strained and
exaggerated traditional sabbath-day restric-
tions, is shown in a curious anecdote of the
famous Abarbanel, " when, in 1192, the Jews
were expelled from Spain, and were for-
bidden to enter the city of Fez, lest they
should cause a famine, they lived on grass ;
yet even in this state 'religiously avoided
the violation of their sabbath by plucking the
groM with their hands' To avoid this they
took the much more laborious method of
grovelling on their knees, and cropping it
with their teeth I "

Vers. 3, 4. — ^And Jesus answering them
said, Have ye not read bo much as this, what
David did, when himself was an hungred,
and they which were with him; how he
went into the house of God, aud did take
aud eat the shewbread, and gave also to
them that were with him ; which it is not
lawful to eat but for the priests alone 1
Their own loved David, said the new Teacher
to his jealous accusers, sciup'ed not, when
he " was an hungred." to set ut uought tlie
twofold ordinance of sacrilege and of sab-
bath-breaking. (The reference is to 1 Sam.
xxi. 5. David's visit to the sanctuary at
Nob took place evidently on the sabbath, as
the fresh supply of shewbread had been
apparently just laid out ; he njust, too, have
violated another rule by his journey on that
day. See Stier, ' Words of the Lord Jesus,'
a Matt. xii. 3, 4.) The leison which



Jesus intended to draw from the example
of the great hero-king and the high priest
wa« that no ceremonial law was to override
the general principle of providing for the
necessities of the body. St. Matthew adds
here a very forcible saying of the IjOrd'i
spoken on this occasion, which goes to the
root of the whole matter, " But if ye had
known what this meaneth, I will have
mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have
condemned the guiltless." These laws, as
God originally gave them, were never in-
tended to be a burden, rather they were
meant to be a blessing for man. After ver. 5^
Codex D — a very ancient authority, written
in the fifth century, now In the University
Library at Cambridge, bnt one which con-
tains many passages not found in any othei
trustworthy manuscript or version — adds the
following strange narrative: "The same
day, Jesus seeing a man who was working
on the sabbath, saith to him, man, if thou
knowest what thou art doing, blessed art
thou; but if thou knowest not, thou art
accursed, and a transgressor of the Law."
As no other ancient authority of weight
contains this remarkable addition to the
recital of our Lord's teaching respecting the
observance of the sabbath, it must be pro-
nounced an interpolation. It belongs most
likely to the very early days of the Chris-
tian story, and was probably founded on
some tradition current in the primitive
Church. The firamework of the anecdote in
its present form, too, shows a state of things
simjily impossible at this time. Any Jew
who, in the days of Jesus Christ's earthly
ministry, openly, like the man of the story,
broke the sabbath in the daiing way related,
would have been liable to be arrested and
Condemned to death by stoning.

Ver. 5. — And he said unto them, That the
Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath. The
Master closed his reply to the Pharisee in-
quirers with one of those short assertions
of his awful greatness which puzzled and
alarmed his jealous foes. Who, then, was
he, this poor unknown Carpenter of despised
and ignorant Nazareth? He was eitlier a
blasphemer too wicked to be allowed to live,

or . The alternative mast have been a

very awful thought to some of the nobler
spirits among those Jerusalem lenrned men.
Across their minds must have flitted not
once or twice in that eventful period some
auxions questionings as towho and w/tat was
the sirangu and powerful Being who had
appeared in their midst.

Ver. 6. — And it came to pass also on
another sabbath, that he entered into the
synagogue and taught: and there was a
man whose right hand was withered. This
was the second part of his sabbath teaching.
The first had taken place in tiie open



<H.TLl— 49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



141



eountry, in one of the corn -fields near the
Lake of Genneearet. The second was
given in a synagogue possibly in the city
of Capernaum. St. Luke inserts thia scene,
which may have taken place several weeks
after the one above related, because it com-
pletes in a way the teaching of the Lord on
this important point of the ceremonial law.

Ver. 7. — And the scribes and Fharisoee
watched him, whether he would heal on the
sabbath day ; that they might find an accu-
fcation against him. The Pharisee emis-
saries from the capital were carefully watch-
ing him. The Master was perfectly aware
of their presence, and well knew the spirit
in which they listened to his words and
marked his acts, and on this sabbath day
he WHS evidently ditermincd to let them
see clearly what was in h's mind respect-
ing the present state of Jewish religious
training.

Ver. 8.— But he knew their thoughts, and
said to the man which had the withered
hand, Bise up, and stand forth in the midst.
And he arose and stood forth. When he
perceived or was informed of the presence
of the afflicted sufferer in the synagogue,
who no doubt had come there with a view
of seeing Jesus and asking his help as a
physician, Jesus publicly bade the sufferer
to stand out in a prominent place iu the
assembly, and then in the hush that folowed
proceeded with his public instruction, the
poor msn with thu withered hand standing
before him. The G-ospel which Jerome
found among the Nazarenes gives at length
the prayer of this man with the withered
hand. "I was a mason earning my live-
lihood with my own hands ; I pray thee,
Jesus, restore me to health, in order that l
may not with shame beg my bread." This
Nazarene Gospel was only used among a
sect of early Jewish Chri^itians, and has not
been preserved. It possibly was one of
those aliudpd to by the compiler of the
Third Gospel in his preface (oh. i. 1).

Ver. 9. — Is it lawful on the sabbath days
to do good, or to do evill to save life, or
to destroy it? The sum and substance of
ihe Master's teaching here is — works of love
done for the bodies and souls of men never
mar or in any Wiiy interfere with the holi-
ness of a day of rest. St. Matthew, iu his'
account of the plucking the ears of corn
on the sabbath day (xii. 5), tells us, on
that occasion Jesus asked how it was that
the priests on the sabbath days profaned
the sabbath and were blameless? The Jews
in later days used to declare, perhaps in
answer to Jesus Christ's famous question
here, "that in the temple was there no
sabbatism." Now, the Lord pressed home
to those who listened to his voice the great
truth that in all labours of love, of pity, and



of kindness, done anywhere, there was no
sabbatism.

Ver. 10.— Stretch forth thy hand! It
must have sounded a strange command to
the people in the synagogue. Uow could
l.e stretch out that withered, powerless limb ?
But with the command weut forth the power.
In other words, " Stretcli forth tha*y poor
hand of thine ; thou canst now, for, lo I the
disease is gone." And we lead that he did
60, and as he stretched out the limb, so long
powerless, the man discovered and the people
saw that the cure was already performed.

Ver. 11. — And they were filled with mad-
ness ; and communed one with another what
they might do to Jesus, The storm was
alieady gathering. From this time wo
gather from the words of SS. Matthew and
Mark, that in the mirjds of others as well
as in the mind of Jesus, the tliought of his
death was ever present. The thought-
leaders of the Jews — the men whose position
was secured as long as the rabbinic teach-
ing held sway in the hearts of the people,
but no longer — from this hour resolved upon
the death of that strange mighty Keformer.
He was, said they, an impostor, a fanatic;
one who led men's minds astray. Had they
no doubts, wo ask ; no qualms of conscience,
no deep searchings of heart? Were these
great ones of earth rually persuaded that he
was a deceiver?

Vers. 12 — 19. — The chnire of the twelve.

Ver. 12. — And it came to pass in those
days. That is to say, in the course of his
ministry in Galilee, esprcially in the thickly
populated district lying round the Lake of
Genessaret, and after the events related
in cli. v. and the first eleven verses of eh.
vi., Jesus proceeded to choose, out of the
comp:iny of those who had especially at-
tached themselves to him, twelve who
should henee forth be always with him.
These he purposed to train np as the
authorized exponents of his doctrine, and
as the future leaders of his Church. Things
bad assumed a new aspect during the last
few months. Jerusalem and the hierarchy,
supported by tlie great teachers of that form
of Judaism wbii'h fur so long a (period had
swayed the hearts of the people, had, although
not yet openly, declared against the views
and leaching of Jesus. His acts — but far
more his words — had gathered round him,
especially in Galilee, in the north and cential
distriets of Palestine, a large and rapidly
increasing following. It was necessary that
some steps should be taken at once to in-
troduce amoi.g the people who had received
his words gladly, some kind of organization ;
hence the tbrmal choice of the twelve, who
from hencelorth stood nearest to him. We
possess the following four liita of these
twelve men : —



142



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vi. 1— 49,



Matt. X. 2—4.
Simoii
Andrew
James
John

Philip

Bartholomew
Thomas
Matthew

James of Alphseos

Lebbeeus

Simon tlie Kananite

Judas Iscariot



16—19.



Mark iii.

Simon

James

John

Andrew



Philip
Bartholomew

Matthew
Thomas



James of Alphesns
Thaddesus
Simon the Kananite
Jadas Iscariot



He went out into a mountain to pray, and
oontinued aU night in prayer to Ood.

Ver. 13. — And when it was day, he called
onto him his disciples : and of them he
ohose twelve. St. Luke frequently alludes
to Jesus spending periods of time in prayer.
He would have the reuders of bis Gospel
never lose sight of the perfect humanity of
the Saviour, and, while ever keeping in view
the liigher objects of his earthly mission,
still is careful always to present him as the
Example of a true life. This is why he
mentions so often the prayers of Jesus.
This time the Master continued in prayer
nil night. It was a momentous task which
lay beiore him on the following morning—
the choice of a few men, the measureless
induence of whose lile and work we, though
we live eighteen centuries after the choice
was made, and see already how the twelve
have moved the world, are utterly unable
to apprehend. In these solemn hours of
communion with the Eternal, we may iu all
reverence suppose that the Blessed One
took counsel with his Father, presenting,
as Godet phrases it, one by one to the AlT-
seing, whUe God's finger pointed out those
to whom he was to entrust the salvation of
the world. Whom also he named apostles,
The literal meaning of this term is "one
who is sent," but in classical Greek it had
acquired a distinct meaning as "envoy or
ambassador" of a sovereign or of a state.
These favoured men, then, received this as
the official designation by which they were
ever to be known. Unknown, unhonoured,
and for the most part unlearned men, they
with all their love and devotion for their
Master who had called them, little recked
that morning on the mountain- side to what
they were called, and of whom they were
the chosen envoys I The four lists of the
apostles copied above vary very slightly.
There was evidently in the matter of the
holy twelve an unerring tradition at the
time when Luke wrote these chronicles at
Rome or Alexandria, at Ephesus or at
A.ntiocll, — all knew every detaU connected



I;uke vi. 14-
Simon
Andrew
James
John

Philip
Bartholomew

Matthew
Thomas



-16l



Acts i 13.

Peter
James
John
Andrew

Philip
Thomas
Bartholomew
Matthew



James of Alphrans James of Alphieiu

Simon Zelotes Simon Zelotes

Judas of James Judas of James
Judas Iscariot

vrith the great first leaders of the &ith.
The bare list of names was enough. The
Church of the first days knew a hundred
facts connected with these famous men.
The Church of the future needed no details
of private history. These apostles, great
though they were, were only instruments in
the Master's hand; what they did and
suffered was, after all, of little moment to
those who should come after. In the foui
bare skeleton lists, though, certain points
are noticeable. (1) Each catalogue falls into
three divisions containing four names. In
each of these divisions the same name
always stands first, as though some pre-
cedence or authority was deputed to this
one over the other three forming the
division. This, in the absence of any
further notice, must not be pressed. It is,
however, a very probable inference. The
names of these three are Peter, Philip,
James. (2) The twelve were thus diyided
into three distinct companies, of which the
first (this is clearly borne out by the gospel
story) stood in the closest relation to Jesus.
Of the twelve, the first five came from
Bethsaida on the lake, and they all ap-
parently — with the exception of Jndas the
traitor, who came from a town in Judssa —
were Galilssans. The names are all Hebrew
(Aramaic) with the exception of Philip and
Andrew, which are Greek. It was, how-
ever, at that time by no means uncommon
for Jews to possess Greek names, so widely
did Hellenio influence extend over Egypt,
Syria, and the Mediterranean-washed coun-
tries of Asia.

Ver. 14. — Simon, (whom he also named
Feter). The Master had already, reading
as he did the future, bestowed upon this
often erring, but noble and devoted servant,
the surname, Cephas, literally, a " mass of
rook." And Andrew. One of the first be-
lievers, and reckoned among the four whose
ofBoe placed them in closest relation to
their Master, and yet for some — to us—
unexplained reason, Andrew did not occupy
that position of intimacy shared by Peter,



OH, VI. 1—49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



143



James, and John. He was apparently the
intimate fiiend and associate of Philip, the
first of the second " font." James and John.
Well-known and honoured names io the
records of the first days. Hark adds a vivid
detail which throws much light on the
character and fortunes of the brothers; he
calls them Boanerges, "sons of thunder."
The burning enthusiasm of James no doubt
led to his receiving the first martyr-crown
allotted to "the glorious company of the
apostles," while the same fiery zeal in the
lured apostle colours the Apocalypse. FMlip.
John vi. 5 may be quoted to show that
the Lord was on terms of peculiar friend-
ship with this first of the second four.
Bartholomew ; Bar-Tolmai : son of Tolmai,
He therefore must have been known alsio
by some other name. In St. John's Gospel
Bartholomew is never mentioned, but Na-
thanael, whose name appears in the Fourth
Gospel among the apostles, and who is not
alluded to in the memoirs of Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, evidently represents the
same person. The real name of the son of
Tolmai, then, would appear to have been
NathanaeL

Ver. 15. — Matthew, in the list contained
in the Gospel which unanimous Church
traditions ascribe to this apostle, "the
publican" (tax-gatherer) is significantly
added. His brother evangelists, Mark and
Luke, in their catalogues, omit the hated
profession to which he once belonged.
Simon called Zelotes. In SS. Matthew and
Mark this apostle is called "Simon the
Eananite." This epithet does not mean
that Simon was a native or dweller in Cana
of Galilee, but the epithet " Kananite " had
the same signification as " Zelotes," the
surname given by St. Luke, which is best
rendered as "the Zealot." Kananite is
derived from the Hebrew word ayp, zeal.
" He had once, therefore, belonged to the sect
of terrible fanatics who thought any deed
of violence justifiable for the recovery of
national freedom, and had probably been
one of the wild followers of Judas the
Gaulonite (Josephus, ' Bell. Jud.,' iv. 3. 9).
Their name was derived from 1 Maco. ii.
50, where the dying Mattathias, father of
Judas MaccabssuB, says to the Assideaans
(Chasidim, i.e. 'all such as were volun-
tarily devoted to the Law '), ' Be ye zealous
for the Law, and give your lives for tlie
covenant of your fathers ' " (Archdeacon
Parrar).

Yer. 16. — Jndas the brother of James;
more accurately, Judas, or Jude, son of
James, or simply James's Jude. So this
disciple is termed in both the writings
ascribed to St. Luke (the Gospel and Acts).
In St. Matthew's list we find a " Lebbaeus,"
and in St Mark's a " Thaddsus " oooupy-



ing a position in the third division which
in St. Luke's list is filled by "James's
Jude." There is no doubt that Lebbseus
and Thaddeeus were surnames by which
James's Jude, or Judas, was known gen&
rally in the Church. The necessity of
some surname to distinguish this apostle
was obvious. Already in the company of
apostles there was a Judas, or Jude, who
was afterwards known as "the betrayer."
One, too, of the Lord's so-called brothers, a
figure well known in the society of the
Church of the first days, was also named
Jude. The meaning of the two epithets
is somewhat similar; they both were pro-
bably derived from the apostle's character
— LebbiBus from tlie Hebrew zh {lev), the
heart. Jude was probably so styled on
account of his loving earnestness. Thad-
dseus, hoja. thad, a word which iil later
Hebrew meant the female breast, was sug-
gested possibly by his even feminine de-
votedness and tenderness of disposition.
The addition in St. Matthew's catalogue to
"Lebbseus, whose surname was Thad-
dseus," which we read in our Authorized
Versiun, does not occur in any of the older
authorities, "Thaddssus" being only found
in St. Mark's list. And Judas Iscariot,
which also was the traitor. Some scholars
have derived " Iscariot " from a»-oara,
stranu;ulation; or from shelter, a lie, Uh
sheker, the man of a lie ; these derivations
are, however, most improbable. The sur-
name is evidently derived from the place
whence this Judas cajne. Kerioth, possibly
the modem town or village of Kuryetein,
not far from Hebron in Judali. Kurioth is
mentioned in Josh. xv. 25, ish-Kerioth, a
man of Kerioth.

Ver. 17. — And he oame down with them,
and stood in the plain. Leaving the upper-
most slopes of the hiU — the modern Kurm
Battin, or " Horns of Hattin " — where he
had spent the night aloue in prayer — Jesus
probably descended a little and rejoined
the band of disciples. Out of these he
called the twelve above mentioned; and
then, with the whole body of disciples — the
twelve, no doubt, closest to his Person — he
continued the descent for some way. On a
level spot situate on the hillside, very
likely a flat space between the two peaks
of Hattin, the Master and his followers
came upon a crowd of inquirers, who had
ascended thus far to meet him. These were
composed, as we shall see, of various nation-
alities. Some came with their sick friends,
seeking a cure; some were urged by curiosity;
others by a real longing to hear more of the
words of life from his Divine lips. It was
to this crowd that, surrounded by the newly
elected twelve, as well as by the largei
company of disciples, that Jesus spoke the



144



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. [ch. vi. 1— 49,



famons dUcourse known as the sermon on
the mount. A great mnltitade of people
out of all JndsBa and Jerusalem, and from
the sea-coast of Tyre and Sidon, which came
to hear him. To the places here enumerated,
St. Matthew adds Galilee, Decapolis, and
the region beyond Jordan. St. Mark
(iii. 8) — where the same period of our Lord's
ministry is treated of — alludes to people
from Idumsea forming part of the multitude
which just then used to crowd round the
Master as he tuuglit. Thus the great ser-
mon was addressed to men of various nation-
alities — to rigid and carele s Jews, to
Romans and Greeks, to Fbcenicians from
Tyre and Sidon, and to nomail Arabs from
Idumeea.

Yer. 19. — And the whole multitude sought
to touch him : for there went virtue out of
him, and healed them all. The words here
used are few, and we pass them over often
without pausing to think of what they in-
volve. It was, perhaps, the hour in the
ministry of Jesus when his miraculous
power was most abunilautly displayed.

Vers. 20— 49.— St. Lahe't repirt of the
discourse of our Lord commonly termed the
sermon on the mount. We consider that the
discourse contained in tlie following thirty
verses (20 — 49) is identical with that lunger
" sermon on the mount " reported by St.
Matthew (v.). Certain differences are alleged
to exist in the framework of the two dis-
courses.

In St. Matthew the Lord is stated to have
■poken it on the mountain ; in St. Luke, in
the plain. This apparent discrepancy has
been already discussed (see above, on ver.
17). The "plain" of St. Luke was, no
doubt, simply a level spot on the hillside,
on the flat space between the two peaks of
the hill.

The more important differences in the
Master's utterances — of which, perhaps, one
of the weightiest is the addition of St.
Matthew to tliat first beatitude which ex-
plains what poor were blessed — the " poor in
spirit " — probably arose from some questions
put to the Master as he was teaching. In his
reply he probably amplified or paraphrased
the first utterance, whiuh gave rise to the
question; hence the occasional discrepancies
in the two accounts. It ia, too, most likely
that many of the weiglitier utterances of the
great sermon were sevei al times reproduced
in a longer or shorter form in the course of
hi* teaching. Such repetitious would be



likely to produce the differences we find ic
the two reports of the great sermon.

The plan or scheme of the two Oospelf
was not the same. St. Luke, doubtless, haj
before him, when he compiled his work,
copious notes or memoranda of the famous
discourse. He evidently selected suoh small
portions of it as fell in with his design. The
t'Vo discourses reported by SS. Matthew
and Luke have besides many striking re-
semblances — both beginning with the beati«
tudes, both concluding with the same simile
or parable of the two buildings, both im-
mediately succeeded by the same miracle,
the healing of the centurion's servant. It
is scarcely possible — when these points are
taken into consideration — to suppose that
tlie reports are of two distinct disconrses.
The theory held by some scholars, that the
great sermon was delivered twice on the
same day, on the hillside to a smaller and
more selected auditory, then on the plain
below to the multitude in a shorter form, is
in the highest degree improbable.

No portion of the public teaching of the
Lord seems to have made so deep an im-
pression as the mount-sermon. St. James,
the so-called brother of Jesns, the first
president of the Jerasalem Church re-
peatedly quotes it in his Epistle. It was
evilently the groundwork of his teacliiug
in the first days. Barnabas, Clement of
Borne, Ignatius, and Folyearp, the nameless
author of the recently found 'Teaching of
the Apostles,' whose writings represent to
us most of the Christian literature which
we possess of the first century after the
death of St. Paul, quote it often. It may
be taken, indeed, as the pattern discourse
which mirrors better and more fully than
any other portion of the Gbspels the Lord's
teaching conoerning the life he would have
his followers lead.

It is not easy to give a prOsit of snch a
report as that of St. Luke, necessarily
brief, and yet containing, we feel, many ot
the words, and even sentences, in the very
form in which the Lord spoke them. What
we possess here is, perliaps, little more
itself than a summary of the great original
discourse to which the disciples and the
people listened. Godet has attempted, and
not unsuccessfully, to give a r(»umt of the
contents of St Luke's memoir here. Still,



tJH.vLl— 49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



145



it must be felt that eay snoh work mnat
necessarily be unsatisfactory.

There appear to be three main diviaiona
in the sermon: (1) A description of the
persons to whom Jesus chiefly addressed
himself (vers. 20—26). (2) The proclama-
tion of the fundamental principles of the new
society (vers. 27 — 45). (8) An announce-
ment of the judgment to which the members
of the new kingdom of God will have to
submit (vers. 46 — 49).

Yer. 20. — Blessed be ye poor ; for yours
is the kingdom of Ood; better rendered,
bUtied are ye poor, etc. It is the exact
equiyalent of the well-known Hebrew ex-
pression with which the Fsalma begin :
is'<Kn n^^tt, which should be rendered, " Oh
the blessedness of the man," etc. I This
was probably the exact form in which Jesus
began the sermon : "Blessed are the poor."
Ha was gazing on a vast congregation mostly
made of the literally poor. Those standing
nearest to him belonged to the masses — the
fishermen, the carpenters, and the like.
The crowd was mainly composed of the
trading and artisan class, and they, at least
then, were friendly to him, heard him gladly,
came out to him from their villages, their
poor industries, their little farms, their
boats. The comparatively few rich and
powerful who were present that day in the
listening multitude were for the most part
enemies, jealous, angry men, spying emis-
saries of the Jerusalem Sanhediin, men who
hated rather^ than loved the words and
works of tlie Oalilsean Teacher. The
literally poor, then, represented the friends
of Jesus ; the rich, his enemies. But we may
conceive of some like Nicodemus, Joseph of
Arimathaa, Gamaliel, or the wealthy patri-
cian centurion, in that listening crowd, gently
asking the Teacher as he taught, " Are only
the poor, then, to be reckoned among thy
blessed ones?" Some such question, we
think, elicited the qualifying words of
Matthew, " Blessed are the poor in mirit,"
with some such underlying thought as,
" Alas I this is not very often the character
of the rich." It certainly was not while the
Lord worked among men. While, then, the
blessedness he spoke of belonged not to the
poor bmauee they were poor, yet it seemed
to belong to them especially as a class,
because they welcomed the Master and tried
to share his life, while the rich and power-
ful as a class did not. It runs indisputably
all through the teaching of Paul and Luke,
this tender love for the poor and despised
of this world; full of warnings are their
writings against the perils and dangers of
riohM. The awful parable of the rich man

LUKC



and Lazarus gathers up, in the story form
best nnderBto<^ by Oriental peoples, that
truth of which these great servants of the
Kedeemer were so intensely conscious, that
the poor <(a»d bHter than the rich /sr the
kingdom of Ood. The kingdom of God. Not
here, not now. Just a few drops from the
river of joy which flows through that king-
dom will sprinkle the life of hia blessed
ones while they live and struggle to do his
will on earth ; but the kingdom of God, in
its full glorious signification, will be only
enjoyed hereafter. It is an expression
which includes citizenship in his city, a
home among the mansions of the blessed, a
place In the society of heaven, the enjoy-
ment of the sight of God — the beatifio
vision.

Ver. 21. — Blessed are ye that hunger now :
for ye shall be filled. A similar question
probably to the one suggested above, brought
out the addition reported in St. Matthew's
account — "after righteousness." Blessed
are ye that weep now ; for ye shall laugh.
There is a mourning which, as Augustine
says, has no blessing from heaven attached
to it, at best only a sorrow of this world and
for the things of this world. What Jesus
speaks of is a nobler grief, a weeping for
our sins and the sins of others, for our weary
exile here. This is "the only instance,"
writes Dean Flumptre, " in the New Testa-
ment of the use of ' laughter ' as the sy oabol
of spiritual joy. . . . The Oreek word was
too much associated with the lower forms of
mirth. ... It is probable that the Aramaic
word which our Lord doubtless used here
had a somewhat higher meaning. Hebrew
laughter was a somewhat graver thing than
that ef Greek or Roman. Comedy was un-
known among the Hebrew people." It is
observable that we read of onr Lord weep-
ing. His joy is mentioned, and his sorrow.
He sympathized with all classes and orders,
talked with them, even ate and drank with
them ; but we never read that he laughed.
There was a tradition in the early Ohurch
that Lazarus, after he rose ft'om the dead,
was never seen again to smile.

Ver. 22. — Blessed are ye, when men shall
hate yon, and when they shall separate yon
from their company, and shall reproach you,
and cast out your name as evil, for the Son
of man's sake. An onlook into the yet dis-
tant future. These words would be repeated
by many a brave confessor in the days when
persecution, at the hands of a far stronger
and more far-reaching government than that
of Jerusalem, should be the general lot o'
hia followers. We find from pagan writers
of the next age that Christians were charged
with plotting every vile and detestable
crime that could be conceived against man-
kind (see, for instance, the historian T»



149



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vi. 1—49.



citns, ' Amiil^ xr. 44 ; Snetonlui, ' Nero,,'
16).

Yer. 23. — Eejoioe j» in that day, and leap
for joy: for, behold, your reward is ^eat in
heaven: for in the like manner did their
fathers onto the prophets. Well and faith-
fully did his foUowera in after-days fulfil
their Master's prophetio charge. Not only
did men like Paul and his brother apostles
welcome persecution " for the Name with
joy, but long after Paul and his fellows had
" fallen asleep," Christians in well-nigh
every populous centre of the empire followed
the same glorious lead. Indeed, we find
the great teachers of the faith positiTely
condemning the fiery zeal of men and
women who even too literally obeyed this
and other like charges of their adored
Master, who positively courted a painful
martyrdom, too willingly throwing away
their lives, so deeply had words like these
burned into their souls. The terrible per-
secutions which many of the old Hebrew
mrophets underwent were well known.
These men of God endured this treatment
during seTeral generations, while evil princes
sat on the thrones of Judah and IsraeL
Thus Elijah mourned the wholesale mas-
sacre of his brotlier prophets when Ahab
and Jezebel reigned (1 Kings lix. 10).
TJrijah was slain by Jehoiakim (Jer. xxvi.
23). Jeremiah himself underwent long and
painful persecution. Amos was accused
and banitihed, and, according to tradition,
beaten to death. Isainh, so the Jews said,
was sawn asunder by order of King Manasseh.
These are only a few instances of the treat-
ment whicli faithful prophets of the Lord
had undergone.

Ver. 21. — Bat woe unto yon that are
rich ! for ye have received your consolation.
These " rich " referred to here signify men
of good social position. Tliese, as a class,
opposed Jesus with a bitter and unreasoning
opposition. Again the same wurning cry
to the so-called fortunate ones nt this world
is re-echoed with greater force in the
parable of the rich man and Lazaius.
" Thou in thy lifetime," said Abraham,
speaking from Paradise to the pour lost
Dives, " receivedst thy good things;" and
yet the very characters represented in that
most awful of the parable-stories of the
pitiful Lord correct any false notion which,
from words like these, men may entertain
respeoting the condemnation of the rich and
grtat because they are rich and gieat.
Abraham, who speaks the grave stem
words, was himself a sheik of great power
and consideration, and at the same time
very rich. Prophets and apostles, as well
M the Son of God, never ceased to warn men
of the danger of misusing wealth and power ;
but at the same time they always represented



these dangerous gifts as gifts from God,
capable of a noble use, and, if nobly used,
these teachers sent by God pointed out,
these gifts would bring to the men who so
used them a proportional reward.

Ver. 25. — Woe unto you that are full 1 for
ye shall hunger. This saying points to men
who used their wealth for self-indulgence,
for the mere gratification of the senses.
" The fulness," writes Dean Plumptre, " ia
the satiety of over-indulgence." Woe unto
you that laugh now ! for ye shall monm anl
weep. These are they who, proudly self-
satisfied, dreamed that they needed nothing,
neither repentance in themselves nor for-
giveness from God — a character too faithfully
represented in the self-satisfied, haughty
Pharisee of the time of our Lord, a character,
alas I not extinct even when the hapless
men to whom the Lord specially referred
had paid the awful penalty of extinction of
name and race, loss of home and wealth.'
The hunger, the mourning, and the weep-
ing were terribly realized in the case of the
men and tlieir proud houses in the national
war with Rome which quickly followed the
public teaching of Jesus. When the Master
spoke the words of this sei-mon the date
was about a.d. 80-31. In a.d 70 — that is,
within forty years — Jerusalem, its temple,
end its beautiful houses, were a mass of
shapeless ruins. Its people, rich and poor,
were ruined. Its very name, as a city and
nation, blotted out. But fr^m parables, and
still more from direct words, we gather, too,
that the hnnger, the mourning, and the
weeping point to the cheerless state of
things in which those poor souls who have
lived alone for this world will find them-
selves after death.

Ver. 26. — Woe unto you, when all men
shall speak well of yon ! Dean Plumptre,
with great force, remarks that these words
"open a wide question as to the worth of
praise as a test of human conduct, and tend
to a conclusion quite the reverse of that
implied in the maxim. Vox populi, vox
Dei." So did their fathers to the false
prophets. A good instance of this is found
in 1 Kings xviii. 19, where Queen Jezebel
honours the false prophets. See, too. King
Ahab's conduct to such men (1 Kings xxii.),
and Jeremiah's bitter plaint respecting the
popularity of these false men (Jer. v. 31).
At this point, according to St. Luke's
report, the Master paused. It would seem
as though he was fearful lest the awful woes
foretold as the doom of the rich, the powerful,
and the persecutor, should impart a too
sombre hue to the thoughts which his
followers would in coming days entertain
of the world of men about them. He woiilci
have his own think of the circle outside the
little world of believers with no bitter and



•H.n.1— 49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



147



revengeful thoughts, but rather with that
Divine pity which he felt and showed to all
poor fallen creatures. " See now," the Master
went on to say, "notwithstanding; the woe
which will one day fall on the selfish rich
and great ones of earth, and to whom yon,
my people, will sorely be objects of dislike
and hate, while you and they are on earth
together, the part you liave to play with
regard to these is steadily to return k>Te for
hate."

Yer. 28. — Fray for them which despitefolly
use you. Jesus himself, on his cross, when
he prayed that his murderers might be for-

fiven, for they knew not what they were
oing, and his true servant Stephen, who
copied faithfully his Lord in his own dying
moments, are beautiful though extreme
examples of what is meant here. It is
St. Luke alone who mentions this act of
Jesus on the cross ; it is St. Luke, again,
who has preserved St. Stephen's words,
uttered wnile they were stoning him to
death. He would show how the Lord's
command could be carried out.

Yer. 29. — And nnto him that smiteth thes
on the one cheek offer also the other This
and the following direction is clothed in lan-
guage of Eastern picturesqueness, to drive
home to the listening crowds the great and
novel truths he was urging upon them. No
reasonable, thoughtful man would feel him-
self bound to the letter of these command-
ments. Our Lord, for instance, himself
did not offer himself to be stricken again
(John iviii. 22, 23), but firmly, though with
exquisite courtesy, rebuked the one who
struck him. St. Paul, too (Acts xxiii. 3),
never dreamed of obeying the letter of this
charge. It is but au assertion of a great
principle, and so, with the exception of
a very few mistaken fanatics, all the great
teachers of Christianity have understood it.
Yer. SO. — Give to every man that asketb of
thee ; and of him that taketh away thy goods
ask them not again. Here, again, it is clear
that faithfully to cling to the literal inter-
pretation would be utterly to ignore the
true spirit of the Lord's words here, wliere
he sets forth his sublime ideal of a charity
which ignores its own rights and knows
no limits to its self-sacrifice. Augustine
quaintly suggests that in the words them-
selves will be found the limitation required.
" ' Give to every man,' but not everything,"
■uggesting that in many cnses a medicine
for tiie hurt of the soul would better carry
out the words of the Lord than the gift of
material help for the needs of the body
(' Serm.' coclix.). But such ingeuioud ex-
position, after all, is needless. Wljat the
Lord inculcated here was that broad, un-
selfish generosity which acts as though it
really Iwlieved those other beautiful words



of Jesus, that " it is more blessed to give
than to receive."

Yers. 32, 33. — For if ye love them which
love yon, what thank have ye 1 for sinnen
also love those that love them. And if ye do
good to them which do good to yon, what
thank have ye t for sinners also do even the
same. There are three manners of return,
as Augustine — quoted by Archbishop Trench
in his 'Exposition of the Sermon on the
Mount 'observes, which men may make one
to another: the returning good for good
and evil for evU, — this is the ordinary rule
of man; then beneath this there is the
returning of evil for good, which is devilish ;
while above it there is the returning of good
for evil, which is Divine, — and this is what
is commanded for the followers of Jesus
here. On the words, " sinners also love
those that love them," Augustine's words
are singularly terse and quaint : " Amas
amantes te filios et parentes. Amat et latro,
amat et draco, amant et lupi, am»nt et
ursi " (quoted by Archbishop Trench,
' Exposition of the Sermon on the Mount,'
p. 234, note).

Yer. 35. — And your reward shall he great,
and ye shall he the children of the HighesL
It has been objected by the enemies of
Christianity that, after all, Jesus offered
his followers a reward by way of payment
to them for their self-sacrificing lives on
earth. What, however, is this reward ? li
it not a share in that Divine and glorious
life of God, who is all love; a hope of par-
ticipation in that eternal work of his which
will go from blessing to blessing, &om glory
to glory ; a certain expectation of dying
only to wake up in his likeness, satisfied ?
The Eternal had already made a similar
promise to his faithful servant Abraham,
when he bade him fear not, because here
on earth God was his Shield, and after
death would be his exceeding great Beward.

Yer. 36. — Be ye therefore merciful, as
y6nr Father also is merciful. '" Yes," goes on.
the Master, "be ye kind, tender-hearted,
merciful ; stop not short at the easier love,
but go on to the harder ; and do this because
God does it even to the unthankful and
evil" (ver. 35). On this attribute of the
mercy of the Most High, James, who had
evidently drunk deep of the wisdom con-
tained in this great discourse of his so-called
brother, speaks of the Lord as " very pitiful,
and of tender mercy" (Jas. v. 11).

Yer. 37. — Judge not, and ye shall not be
judged. Jesus would have bis followers
avoid one great error which was too common
in the religious Jewish life of his time — the
habit of censoriously judging others. This
uncharitable and often untrue censorship of
the motives which led to the acts of others,
was one of the practices of the da^ which



148



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vi. 1— 41



■toDted and marred all true healthy religiouR
life. Condemn not, and ye shall not he
condemned. That pitiless condemnation
which, regardless of circumstances, con-
demned as sinners beyond the pale of
mercy, whole classes of their fellow-country-
men, publicans, Samaritans, and the like.
This haughty judgment of others in tlie
case of the dominant sects of the Jews,
resulted in an undue estimate of themselves.
His disciples must be very careful how they
jndged and condemned others ; their rule
must be, not condemnation, but forgiveness
of others.

Ver. 38. — Give, and it shall be given nnto
yon; good measore, pressed down, and
shaken together, and running over. The
grand characteristic feature of the society
of his followers must be generosity. They
must be known among men as givers rather
than judges. Boundless generosity, limit-
less Mndncss to all, saint and sinner — that
is what he, the Master, would press home to
those who would follow his lead (see 8 John
i, 6). Men would find out in time what
generous friends they were, and would in
tljeir torn fireely give to them. Shall men
give into your bosom. The image is an
Eastern one. In the dress then worn, a large
bag-shaped fold in the robe above the ciac-
tnre or girdle was used instead of a pocket

Ver. 39. — And he spake a parable nnto
fhem. St. Luke closes his report of the
great sermon with four little parables taken
from everyday life. With these pictures
drawn from <«mmon life, the Master pur-
posed to bring home to the hearts of the
men and women listening to him the solemn
warnings he had just been enunciating.
They — if they would be his followers —
must indeed refrain from ever setting up
themselves as judges of others, " See," he
went on to say, " I will show you what ruin
this wicked, ungenerous practice will residt
in : listen to me." Can the blind lead the
blind f shall they not both fall into the
ditoh? It is not improbable that some of
the links in tlie Master's argument here
have been omitted by St. Luke; still, the
connection of this saying and what follows,
with the preceding grave warning against
the bitter censorious spirit which had ex-
ercised so fatal an innuence on religious
teaching in Israel, is clear. The figure of
the blind man setting himself up as a guide
was evidently in the Lord's mind as a fair
representation of the present thought-
leaders of the people (the Pharisees). This
is evident from the imagery of the beam
and mote which follows (vers. 41, 42). Can
these blind guides lead otheis more ignorant
and blind too ? What is the natural result 7
he asks; will not destruction naturally
overtake the blind )ea4er and the blind



led? Both will, of coarse, end by falling
into the ditch.

Ver. 40. — The disciple is not above bit
master : but every one that is perfect shall
be as his master. " Both," he went on to say,
" will be lost hopelessly. You cannot expect
the disciples of these mistnken men, surely,
to be wiser than their teachers; for you
know the oft-repeated saying, ' Every one
that is perfect [better rendered, that hat been
perfected] shall be as his master ; ' in other
words, the pupils of these censorious, evil-
judging, narrow-minded, bitter men will
grow up — as they become perfected in this
teaching — in their turn equally narrow-
minded and bitter as tlieir masters." The
conclusion, filt though not expressed, of
course, is, " But my followers must be some-
thing different to these ; another and nobler
spirit, nobler because more generous, must
rule in their hearts."

Ver. 41. — ^And why beholdest thon tht
mote that is in thy brother's eye, bnt per-
oeivest not the beam that is in thine own
eyel The thought-leaders of the day were
in good truth hypocrites, proud, avaricious,
in many cases self-indulgent, bigoted, and
seltisli; they were utterly unfit to be the
moral teachers of the people — a position they
had arrogated to themselves. The homely
but well-known Jewish proverb of the mote
and the beam picturesquely put before bii
listeners the position as it appeared to the
Lord. The very defects among the people
which the religious teachers professed to
lecture upon and to discuss, disfigured and
marred their own lives. They were — these
priests and scribes and Pharisees — worse
than self-deceivers; they were religious
hypocrites. The now famous illustration of
the mote and the beam is, as has been said,
purely Jewish, and was no doubt a familiar
one to the people. It is found in the Tal-
mud (treatise 'Bava Bathra,' foL IS. 3>
Farrar quotes from Chaucer —

" He can wel in myn eye see a stalke.
But in his owne he can nought see a balke."

The word "mote" translates the Greek
Kapcfios, a chip. In Dutch mot is the dust
of wood. In Spanish mota is the flue on
cloth.

Vers. 43, 44. — For a good tree brlngeth
not forth corrupt fruit ; neither doth a co>
mpt tree bring forth good fruit. For every
tree is known by his own fruit. For a re-
ligious teacher ever to wcrk any real work
of good, the first requirement is that he
should be known as a faithful doer of the
thing he advocates. He must be intensely
in earnest, and to be in earnest he must be
real. This is emphatically what the i»
ligiouS scribes of Israel were not. Tlii«
portion of the report of the great sermon, at



OE. ▼1.1-49.] 1HE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE,



149



one period of the CbnTch'i history possessed
* Bpeoial importance. It was used as one
of the foundations or the system of dnal-
ism taught in the onoe widesprend MRni-
chsean heresy, which apparently reached its
culminating period of popularity in the
fifth century. This heretioiil school taught
that there were two original principles
— one good, from which good proceeded ;
one eeil, from which evil came ; that there
were two races of men, having severally
their descent from the one and from the
other. The Manichiean teachers, while
rejecting many of the Christian doctrines,
made much of the sermon on the mount,
calling it the " Divine discourse," mainly
on account of the statement we are here
discussing. Yet here, when the won Is of
Jesus are carefully considered, there is no
assertion of Manicheean dualism, neither docs
the Master hint that theie is anything
iirevocably fixed in men's natures, so thai
some can never become good, and otliers
never evil, but only that ,8o Umg a$ a man
M a» on evil tree, he cannot bring forth good
fruit; tliat if he would do good he must
first 6e good (see here Augustine, ' Contra
Faust.,' xxxii. 7 ; and ' Do Serm. Dom. in
Mon.,' 11. 24; 'Contra Adimant.,' 26, etc.,
in Archbishop Trench's ' Exposition of
the Sermon on the Moimt,' pp. 309, 310).
For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of
a bramble bash gather they grapes. This
imagery is taken from what is a common
sight in Palestine ; behind rough hedges of
thorn and of the prickly pear, fig-trees are
often seen completely covered with the
twining tendrils of vine branches.

Ver. 46. — ^And why call ye me, Lord, Lord,
and do not the things whioh I say t It is
evident from this heart-stirring appeal of
Jesus that he had already obtained a large
measure of recognition from the people. We
should hardly be prepared to aver that any
large number of the Palestinian inhabitants
looked on him as Messiah, though probably
some did ; but that generally at this period
he was looked on by the common folk, at all
events, and by a few perhaps of their rulers,
as a Being of no ordinary power, as a
Propliet, and probably as One greater than
a prophet. It is scarcely likely that even
they who regarded him with the deepest
reverence wl en he spoke the mount-sermon
would have been able to define their own
feelings towards him. But underneath the
Lord'g words lies this thought : " Those
blind guides of whom I have been telling
yon, they with tlieir lips profess to adore
the eternal God of Israel, and yet live their
lives of sin. You, my followers, do not the
same thing "

Vers. 47 — 49.— 'WloBoever oometh to me,
mi hearsfh my layings, and doetli them,



X will show yon to whom he is like ; he ii
like a man which bnilt a house, and digged
deep, and laid the foundation on a rook : and
when the flood arose, the stream beat vehe-
mently npon that house, and could not shake
it : for it was founded upon a rook. But he
that heareth, and doeth not, ii like a man
that without a foundation bnilt a honse
npon the earth; against whioh the stream
did beat vehemently, and immediately it fell ;
and the ruin of that house was great
" The surrounding scenery may, in this aa
in other instances, have suggested the illus-
tration. As in all hilly countries, the streams
of Galilee rush down the torrent-beds during
the winter and early spring, sweep all
before them, oveifiow their banks, and leave
beds of alluvial deposit on either side.
When summer comes their waters fail (comp.
Jer. XV. 18; Job vi. 15), and what had
seemed a gooilly river is then a tract covered
with d^it of stones and sand. A stranger
coming to bnild might be attracted by the
ready-prepared level surface of the sand.
It would be easier to build there instead of
working upon the hard and rugged rock.
But the people of the land would know and
mock the folly of such a builder, and he
would pass (our Lord's words may possibly
refer to sometl ling that had actually occurred)
into a byword of reproach. On such a
house the' winter torrent had swept down
in its fury, and the storms had raged, and
then the fair fabric, on which time and
money had been expended, had given way
and fallen into a heap of ruins" (Dean
Plumptre). Augustine has some weighty
and practical comments on this simile of
the Master's, with which, as a picture of
what they had no doubt seen with their own
eyes, the listening multitude would be sin-
gularly impressed. The great Latin Father
calls special attention to the fact that in this
picture of our Lord's the declared rejecters
of the truth do not appear mirrored. In
both tlie oases here instanced there is a
readiness to hear the truth. Both the men
of the parable-story built their house, but in
one case the building ends in terrible dis-
aster. " Would it have been better," askg
Augustine (' Serm.' clxxix. 9), " not to have
built at all if the building is thus to perish ? "
He answers, " Scarcely so ; that were not to
hear at all — to have built nothing. The
fate of such will be to be swept away naked,
exposed to wind and rain and torrents.
The doom is similar in both cases; the
lesson of the L'lrd is one easy to grasp.
The wise man will hear, and, when he hesrs,
will do, that is, will translate his impres-
sions into actions. This will be to build a
house upon a rock " (see Archbishop Trench,
'Exposition of the Sermon on the Mount,'
drawn irom Augustine on Matt. vii. 24—27).



150



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vt. 1—49.



There is eomething very BtriMrg In the
■words with which our Master coni^luded his
great sermon, "and the ruin of that house
was great." "After all," men would say,
" it was only the destruction of one human
being." But our Lord's saying reminds us
that in his eyes the ruin uf oim immortal
soul is a thought full of unspeakable sorrow.
" Jesus, in closing his discourse, leaves his
hearers under the impression of this solemn
thought. Each of them, while listening to



this last word, might think that he heard tha
crash of the falling edifice, and say within
himself, ' This disaster will be mine, if I prove
hypocritical or inconsistent'" (Godet). _ In
ver. 48 some, though not all, of the ancient
authoritieg, instead of the wonls, "for it
was founded upon a rock," read, " because
it Lad been well built." This text is adopted
in the Revised Version, the old reading, as
less probably oorrect, being relegated to the
margin.



HOMILETICa

Vers. 1 — 11. — Christ and the sabbath day. No feature of Christ'i ministry ja more
striking than his attitude towards the sabbath of Israel. His first conflict with the
Jewish authorities was associated with the sabbath. St. John tells us the story of
this conflict in the fifth chapter of his Gospel. A man, paralyzed for thirty-eight
years, had heard the voice, " Kise, take up thy bed, and walk ; " and, made instantly
whole, he had gathered up the pallet which for so long had been stretched by the Pool
of Bethesda, and had walked. " It is the sabbath day ! " cried the narrow pedants who
sat in Moses' chair ; " it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed." Prom that hour one
of the things which spies and emissaries were instructed specially to watch was the
conduct of Jesus on the' sabbath. Behold the opportunity of accusation that is sup-
plied in the incidents here related — two incidents, if not on the same sabbath, at least
on sabbaths separated by a very short interval from each other. In these incidents
— the plucking and rubbing of the ears of corn, and the healing of the man with the
withered hand — there are presented lessons of permanent value. Two points in par-
ticular may be noticed.

I. The question — Is the sabbath of the foubth commandment oontintied in
THE New Testament of oub Lobd and Saviodb ? In the light of Christ's teaching
we can distinguish between what was dispensational and temporary and what is
abiding because rooted in the fitness of things. The Christian sabbath is not merely the
Jewish sabbath continued. It is a new day, reminding us of a new state of things,
conjoining with the remembrance of the creation in the beginning the witness for the
new creation, the new making of thingi in heaven and earth, through the resurrection
of the Lord, calling us to acts of worship aud praise and to offerings of love as the
Israelitish sabbath did not. Ours is not the seventh, but the first dky, and this first
day is the Lord's day. To surround it with vexing and irksome restrictions is to
take us back from the substance into the dim land of shadows. But, this said, the
balancing and completing truth must not be omitted. It is urged by some that tha
fourth commandment is no longer our authority. But why is that commandment
one of the ten great words? Is it not because it is the expression of something
essentially and therefore permanently right? because behind it there is the original
commandment of the Creator — that which is written in our human nature? The
sabi ath — this is the testimony of Jesus — was no mere dispensational ordinance, no
mere local or tribal arrangement. Ciraad and solemn is the word, " The sabbath was
made for man." It is not by doing away with it, but by bringing into view its right
proportions and its highest benefits, that he proves himself the Lord of the sabbath.
What is the truth of the supremacy thus claimed ? Some persons take the sentence of
the fifth Terse, " The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath," as implying that any
one bom of woman has authority to subordinate to the sense of his own need the
sabbath which was made for nian. Even supposing that this use of the word " Son
of man " were allowable, is the conclusion drawn permissible? Would the idea for an
instant be tolerated that, because laws are imposed by the ruler for the benefit of his
subjects, each subject might change them or dispense with them at his own convenience ?
But there can be no doubt that the " Son of man " spoken of is Christ himself, the
s«M>nd Adam., the representative Man. He — realizing, on tha one hand, the true
purpose of the sabbath, and discriminating, on the other, between such a use as shall



can. 1—49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 161

k«ep the institution suliordinate to the end, the good of man, and 8Uoh an abuse as
practically inverts this order, making man a mere creature of the institution — ^gires
the true note of the hlessed sabbath-keeping.

n. What is this bleshed sABJATH-EEEFiNa? Observe: 1. There is no disturbance
of the primary conception — rest. That is implied in the very word " sabbatli." Best,
undoubtedly, is the need to which the ordinance immediately refers. " Six days shalt
thou labour" is part of the Divine injunction. "But on the seventh day thou shalt
not do any work." What a blessing is the weekly cessation from weary toil I The
experiment of a tenth-day rest has been tried, and has failed. The septennial period
seems to be the proportion adapted to the human system. In our complex social life
individuals must suffer for the general good ; some must work that the greater number
may rest. But can we too jealously guard the rights of the poorest, ay, of beast as well
as man ? Can we too earnestly demand that there shall be no causeless multiplica-
tion of labour on the day of the Lord ? Yes ; God's sabbath is for repose of body,
brain, mind, spirit. What promotes a healthy rest is in harmony with it; what
hinders is alien to it. A day of pleasure-seeking and excitement is not a help. Take
two men — one spending his Sunday in search of mere enjoyment ; the other spending
it quietly in the midst of his family, at church, taking the quiet walk, doing some little
service for Christ : which of the two is the more rested, soothed, fitted for the labour
of the Munday morning ? Best but not torpor, repose but not inaction, is a want for
which the sabbath was made. 2. But with this comes into view what is distinctive
in Christ's theory of sabbath-keeping. Negatively, in the reply about the rubbing of
the ears of corn. He reminds us that do dull uniformity must overbear pressing human
necessities. These are not to be met by a categorical " It is not lawtul." The con-
sideration of human well-being must allow for a certain flexibility in all enactmento.
But, positively, remark what is shown in the case of the man with a withered hand.
This — ^that a beneficent activity is the highest fulfilment of the sabbath. Therefore
the activity of worship ami instruction ; therefore also the activity of kindness-duing,
of seeking the good of our fellows, of having a part with God the Healer. The ideal
of the rest-day is a day in which a due proportion of these two forms of well-doiag is
maintained — the assembly for the service of God in prayer and praise and mutual
edification, and room for doing good in the home aud in the world. Do we realize, or
even attempt to realize, this ideal as we should ? How listless, how wanting in bright-
ness and usefulness, is the observance of Sunday by even religiuusly minded persons I
Ahl the most lawful of lawful things is to do well on the sabbath day, and the holier
and more refreshing will the day he the more that in it the opportunity is realized of
doing good and saving life, and thus proving ourselves his brethren who, being the Son
of mai;, is Lord also of the sabbath.

Vers. 12 — i9. — The fowndation of the kingdom,. The work set before us in this
portion is great and solemn. It is the beginning of a new epoch of the earthly ministry.
Hitherto Christ had been the Rabbi, the Prophet, the Healer. Now he is to " gird
his sword on his thigh," to take to himself the power of the King. And for this work
observe the preparation mentioned by the evangelist (vers. 12, 13), " All night in
jjrayer to God." The hush breathed over nature; the silence unbroken except by the
cry of the wild beast seekinc;, in its own way, its meat from God ; the glories of the
firmament above, united with the sabbath-quiet of the earth around, — these were the
features which invited, not slumber to the eyelids, but prayer, meditation, conference
with the Father in heaven. We cannot avoid the conclusion that the retreat and the
" all-night prayer " were specially in view of the action of the morrow. Oh, what a
rebuke on our listless, quickly dismissed intercessions! How impressive the reminder
that, for the appointment of men to minister in the house of the Lord, to render any
spiritual service, the right beginning is eflectual fervent prayer ! Would there not be
more fruits of work, more blessing for workmen, if there were more diligent following
of Christ's example? Compare this passage with Acts xiii. 3. Note the two points in
the foundation-laying of the kingdom of heaven — the personal agency, and the Lavt.

L "He called the disciples" — the larger company, including those who had
attached themselves to his Person, many, no doubt, of the healed, of those who kad
been delivered from demons and brought to their right mind ; and " of them he chost



162 Use GOStEL AOCOHDING TO ST. LUKE. [oa. tt 1- ta



twelve." Let ua assume that the number is part of the ordering (see ch. xxli. 29, 80),
Aud recollect also the significance attached to twelve — as the complete number of the
Church — in the Book of Bevelation. Do not exaggerate, but do not underrate, the
significance of the numbers found in Scripture. The naturalist who would learn the dif-
lerences, truths, tind natures of things must take into account the curious parallels,
the typical forms, the numbers which he discovers running through genera and species.
It is the perception of these minute evidences of method, of purpose in details, which
IB part of the scientific man's paradise. And it is the same kind of perception, the
" searching rapturous glance " into the hidden truth of Scripture, which carries the devout
mind through the mere outer boundaries of the garden into the enjoyment of its delicacies
and delights. Observe the statement as to the twelve. 1. I7te Lord chose them, " He
called," it is said in St. Mark, " whom he would." This is the foundation of the
apostolate for each and all. The choice is in his own hands, determined, not by any
plan or rule of mere prudential wisdom, but because of that which, the night before,
he had seen and heard of bis Father. And to this same royalty all selection for
spiritual ofSce is evermore the witness. The action of the Church, through its officers,
is only a supplementary or declarative action. The originating and efficient action is
what we style the call of the Holy Ghost — an inward aptitude or anointing of Divine
love and grace in the character so manifest that we can read the sentence, " Called
because the Lord has willed." 2. The Lord ordained. This is expressly stated by
St. Mark. It is included in St. Luke's " he named." Probably there was an outward
act or symbol — ^that laying on of hands, which carried out well-known Hebrew associa-
tion*, and, for designation to office, has been appropriated by the Christian Church
from the earliest period of its history. Be this as it may, the ordination was also a
disjunction ; it was the final severance from the former calling ; they were henceforth
to give themselves wholly to the Word of God, the Master's meat their meat, the
Master himself their all in all. Immediately before he suffered, Christ reminded
the eleven of that transaction on the moim tarn-side, " I have chosen you, and ordained
you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit." And, again, on the Resurrection morning,
the fuller truth of the ordination symbol was realized when he said, " As the Father sent
me, so have 1 sent you," and having so said, he breathed on them, and added, " Receive
ye the Holy Ghost." 3. What were the functions of the twdvej Following the
guidance of St. Mark, we reply : First, to be with Christ, his associates, sharing his
temptations, eye-witnesses of his glory and majesty, depositaries of his words and of
his inmost confidences. Secoud, to preach, to go forth declariug him and his gospel and
his kingdom. Third, to exercise among men his own power of healing sickness and
castinj, out devils. Keep hold of this sequence — this first, second, third. The first
requirement is always life with Christ, communion with the personal Saviour : there is
no real preaching, no leal power, without that. A man must be taught before he can
teach. And where and by whom shall he be taught ? The university is well. Never
more to be desired than now is a body of Christian instructors learned as well as
godly. Experience of men is well : thence conies tact, the skill by which souls are
attracted and won for higher things. But there is a graduation better still — one which
is necessary to spiritual force — graduation in the school of Christ; the learning of
Christ. And this can be realized only through day-by-day fellowship with him,
beholding his beauty, and inquiring in his temple. Then the second demand is)
preach him, speak out what he speaks in. And so also there is the third function, to work
for him, to be in this world presences of healing and blessing, in Jesus' name "casting
out devils, siieaking with new tongues, taking up serpents, laying bauds on the sick
that they may recover." Thus were the twelve named apostles — the sent of the Lord.
And, having been named, they were made ready by Christ himself for the day when
they should do greater works than any which they had witnessed, because he had
gone to the Father, aud shed forth the promise of the Holy Ghost. A strange kingdom
indeed I The King, that lowl> Man seated on one of the horns of Mount Hattin, and
his princes and companions these poor, uncouth-looking, unlearned men ! Never, it
might be thought, was such a burlesque of royalty seen. But that was, that is, the
monarchy whose sceptre shall stretch from pole to pole, that at tiie same of Jesus
•very knee may bow.
II. He camb down with thb twsltk, it is added, and stood on the plain tb«



OH. Til— 49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 16&

King and tbe kingdom meeting the parliament of man. Yes, the King meek and
lowly, but " the mighty God, the Lord, is about to speak, and call the earth from the
rising of the sun to the going down thereof." He would not speak until he had con-
stituted his Church. For the Man is before the Law, the Toice before the Scripture,
the order before the ordering. This has been done, and he comes down to the great
world with its fevers and diseases and spirits of uncleanness surging before him, and
seeking to touch him from whom, aa a great stream of healing, the power goes forth.
The law, the manifesto of the kingdom, is published. What this law is admits of
being more fully expounded in connection with the Gospel of St. Matthew. The
differences between the reports in the two Gbspels deserre to be studied. It is sufficient
here to indicate the sum and substance of the legislation of Christ the King on
the holy hill of Zion. Clearly the old Law, that delivered from Sinai, if fully in the
mind of Jesus. It is quoted again and again. But how striking the contrast between
that past and this present 1 That past, when

" Around the trembling monntain-basa
The prostrate people lay ;
A day of wrath and not of graoe ;
A dim and dreadful day ; "

this present, the soft grassy slope, the bright sky overhead, the rejoicing world aronndi
the many sitting before him who had received the healing virtue ; hims^f, in tones full
of the music of love, declaring the truth for which the soul of man is made as the eye
is made for the light. Not that the past is ruthlessly swept away. All is preserved
— preserved because fulfilled. But his law-giving is a new law-making, because it
penetrates to the innermost region of the life ; it searches the spirit as with the caudle
of the Lord ; its dealing is not so much with the mere outer conduct as with the inner
motive power. The man is right when the heart is right — this is the cardinal principle.
And the tiermon passes onward, from the beatitudes with which it begins, through
the exposition of true soul-rectitude, to the sublime conclusion which may Gud help
aU to ponder. " Every one that cometh unto me, and heareth my words, and doeth
them, I will show you to whom he is like . . . But he that heareth, and doeth not, ii
like," etc. From the great ruin foretold may the good Lord deliver us 1

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 6 — 11. — Sin disabling, Christ restoring. Being in the right place, our Lord
found an opportunity of doing that for which be came, and much more besides. The
doing of duty often leads to the finding of privilege and the exercise of power for good.
We learn —

I. That sin disables us. This man came into the synagogue ivith a withered
hand. That which was the natural instrument of power — his right hand — was power-
less. Gradually its strength had been disappearing until it had completely gone ; and
that with which God meant him to do his work, to greet his fellows, to make his
mark in the world around him, had become an inefficient and useless member. The
disease from which he was suffering, whatever it may have been, had by slow degreesn
wasted and worn away its vital power, and it could do nothing of all that it was
created to do. Just such is the action of sin. It is a disabling spiritual disease. Its
effect is to reduce and finally to remove those spiritual powers with which our Creator
endowed us, and in the exercise of which our true life is found. Our human power, aa
we came forth from God, was that of worship, of contemplation, of recognizing and
rejoicing in the truth, of delighting in God, of obedience to his commandments, of
acquiescence in his will, of living in our sphere the life he lives in his, of reflecting his
own likeness in our character and our deeds. But sin has been taking this away from
us; away from our race, away from the individual who allows it to reign over his
soul. More and more it disables us from taking the part we were intended to take,
and doing the work we were intended to do. It is the great and sad disabling force
in the spiritual sphere.

IL That Christ oombs to bbstoeb us. He comes to say to ns, " Stretch forth thy
hand ; " reiume thy power ; have again and use again those precious spiritual facultief



15* THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vi. 1—49.



which, under the grievous injury of sin, have lain dormant within thee. And even
M he wrought a cure in this afflicted man which was radical and thorough, making th«
llfit-blood to course through all his veins and nourish every nerve and muscle which
had shrnnk and withered, so does he heal our hearts by a process which is not super-
ficial, which does not merely affect the extremities, but which goes to and proeeeda
from the heart. He shows us our tru« selves — whence we came ; what we were created
to be ; how far we have fallen from our right heritage and condition ; what is our
unworthiness and guilt ; what we may yet become. And he reveals himself to us — the
Divine Mediator, Saviour, Lord, through whom we have access to God, in whom we
are restored to God's favour, unto whom we dedicate, joyfully and unreservedly, all
the faculties of our nature. In Christ Jesus we enter on a new life ; all the springs of
our soul are touched and renewed ; we regain our lost possession ; we stretch forth the
right hand of our spiritual power; we do our work in his world.

III. That Chbist demands of us an immediate, pbactical besponsb. That he
may heal us, he summons us to act. He said, " Stretch forth thy hand 1 " and in the
act of obedience the cure was wrought. To us he says, " Come unto me ! " " Abide
in me I " and as we endeavour to comply we begin to be restored.

IV. That pbaotioal kindness is a principal manifestation of renewed powbb.
The great Restorer was at the same time the great Teacher. By the whole incident,
and especially by his healing act, otir Lord was making known to us for all time that,
whatever may be the worth of religious observances — ^and they have their own great
value — they are distinctly second in his sight to those acts of human pity and benefi-
cence by which we lift a load from a brother's heart, and brighten the rest of his life
on earth. — 0.

Vers. 13 — 16.— Th^ designation of the twelve. Our Lord appears to have formally
designated the twelve, on this occasion, to be his apostles. He had called them singly
before ; now he appoints them tn their post in a more formal manner. This act of his
suggests to us snme thoughts upon —

I. Their likeness to one another, and the consequent bond of union between
one another, 'i'his consisted in: 1. A common nationality, with all that meant to an
intensely patriotic people. 2. A common fnith, including a common hope that a new
prophet would arise and accomplish all that was looked for from the expected Messiah.
3. Similar circumstances, education and sncial position ; not the same, indeed, but of
the same class. 4. A common attachment to Jesus Christ ; in the case of most of
them a trust and an affection that were to deepen every day, in the case of one of
them a faith that was to slacken and to depart.

XL Their diveroences from one another. 1. In the habits of mind -and life
formed by different occupations. 2. In mental constitution and moral disposition.
How different Peter from John, and both from Thomas, and all three from James, etc. !

3. In reputation. Of some of them we know nothing but their names ; we do not know
where they laboured or what was the kind or measure of their service. Tradition has
been busy with their names, but history tells us nothing;. Of others we have a con-
siderable knowledge, and their reputation is great indeed and will be ever growing.

4. In their career : one ending in shame and gloom ; the others in honour and in glory.
III. Theik FtJNcnoNS. These, according to Mark (iii. 14, 15), were threefold.

1. Being with Christ, and witnessing his life ; thus qiiilifying themselves to attest
his purity, his power, his love. 2. Preaching the gospel ; making known to their
countrymen that the Promised One for whom they had so long been looking had come
at last, and had come with the most gracious words on his lips that man had ever
spoken. 3. Verifying the truth by acts of beneficent power — they were to exercise
" power to heal." And it is in no small or mean sense that our Lord summons us all
to do these same thinus. (1) To be with him ; sitting at his feet and learning of him
his heavenly truth ; following him along his course, and becoming filled with a deep
8«Bse of his stainless purity and surpassing love ; kneeling at his cross, and receiving
•11 ike benefit and blessing of his great salvation. (2) Declaring to others all that
w« kttre thus learned of Christ, our Lord and Saviour ; making known to the sad, the
suffariBfc the sinful, what a Friend and Refuge they will find in him. (3) Verifying
the truth of our attestations by comforting stricken hearts, by enlightening darkened



OH. VI.1— 49.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 155

minds, by transforming evil lives, by lifting men up, God helping us, from the depths
of wrong and of despair to the noble and blessed heights of holiness and joy and
hope. — 0.

Ver. 20. — The llessedness of humility. Acting on the established and valid principle
that we must interpret the less by the more complete, we determine the meaning of
this passage by the words as recorded in Matthew's Gospel, " Blessed are the poor in
ipirit," etc. ; and thus taking it, we conclude —

I. Teat narbowkesb ov means is not a desirable THnra. Our Lord could not
have intended to teach that the poor (in outward circumstances) were necessarily
blessed, for poverty itself means privation, inability to command the various bounties
and treasures our Creator has provided for our enjoyment and enrichment. Moreover,
it by no means constantly or certainly leads to anything which can be called " the
kingdom of God ; " on the contrary, it frequently conducts to dishonesty, servility,
demoralization (see Frov. xxx. 8, 9). Neither, therefore, in the present nor in the
future can such poverty be pronounced blessed (see, however, homily on ch. iv. 18, " to
preach the gospel to the poor").

II. That pooe-spiritkdnbss is a dboidbblt citwoetht thino. A " poor-spirited "
man, according to the common usage of the term, is a man no one can esteem, and he
is a man who cannot respect himself. Christ could not have intended to commend
him as the heir of the kingdom of God. He did indeed say much in praise of the
meek, the enduring, the merciful, the forgiving ; he did say much in deprecation of
violence and retaliation. But meekness is a vastly different thing from meanness or
cowardice; and a man may be nobly superior to mere violence who fights bravest
battle* for truth and righteousness. AH struggle is not soldiership ; and he who has
most of what Christ meant when he blessed the poor in spirit may be very valiant and
very aggressive at his post as the champion of all that is true and pure.

III. Teat bdmility of heart is the desirable Tama for sinful hem. Blessed
»7« the men who have in their hearts a deep sense of their own unworthiness. And
they are so because this is : 1. 2%e true and there/ore the right thing. Truth is always
and under all circumstances to be prefened to error. It would make a man much more
comfortable in his mind to persuade him that he is everything that is good, and that
he had done everything that was required of him. But what a hollow and rotten
thing such a satisfaction would be, if the man were wrong and guilty ! How much
better for him to know that he was guilty, in need of cleansing and of mercy I How
pitiable (not enviable) the Church or the nation that supposes itself to be rich and
strong when it is utterly poor and weak 1 How enviable (not pitiable) the man who
has come to understand that he is in urgent need of those resources which he may
have if he will seek them, and which — now that he knows his necessity — he will not
fail to seek I To have a deep sense of our unworthiness before God is to know oursdvei
at we are ; it is to recognize vwr lives (m they have heen. It is to perceive how far
we have failed to be that which we should have been to our Divine Father ; it is to
realize how much there has been in our lives which God's Law condemns, how much
there has been absent from them which his Word demands. It is to hold the truth
in our hearts ; it is, so far, to be in the right. It is a blessed estate as compared with
Iti opposite — that of error and delusion. But it is also : 2. The receptive and there-
fore the hopeful thing. When a man imagines himself to be safe he admits no Saviour
to his heart ; when he knows and feels himself to be in danger and in difiSculty he
opens his door wide to one that will befriend him. The man in whose heart is a true
htimility, who finds himself to be wrong with God, who sees how far he is from perfect
rectitude, is the very man who will welcome Jesus Christ in all his gracious offices.
(1) Conscious ignorance will welcome the Divine Teacher. (2) Conscious guilt will
rejoice in an all-sufficient Saviour. (3) Conscious weakness will lean on Almighty
Power, and be ever seeking the upholding grace of a mighty Spirit. (4) Conscious
error and insufficiency will yield itself to the guidance and direction of a Divine Lord
and Leader. And surrendering ourselves to Christ, we enter the kingdom of Qod. — 0.

Ver. 2\.—Thi» bUttedntu i^ spiritual hunger. On the same principle of interpretation
u that which applies to the preceding verse (see preceding homily), we conclude that



166 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vl 1—49

our Master is referring to those who hunger after righteotaness, who are affected by a
keen spiritual appetite. These are in a state of earnest religious inquiry ; they Me Uke
the young man who ran eagerly and anxiously to " know what he must do to inherit
eternal life " (ch. x-dii. 18). In other words, they are earnestly desirous of gaining the
favour and also the likeness of God ; of being such that God will not condemn them
aa guilty, but count them as righteous ; such also that they will in a very serious sense
be righteous aren as he is righteous, be " partakers of his holiness." Now, wherein
consists the blessedness of this spiritual condition ?

L SEEKora God is the onlt honest and bight thino to do. Those who believe
of God what most men do believe — that he is the Author of their being and the Source
of all their blcsungs, that he is more nearly and importantly related to them than any
human being can be, that they owe everything they are and have to him — are most
strongly and sacredly bound to seek his favour. To be blind when he is beckoning,
deaf when he is calling, insensible when he lays his hand upoa them, — this is to be
wholly, sadly, shamefully in the wrong.

II. Seekino GrOD IS THE LOFTY AND NOBLE THINO. To Seek God, to huDger and
thirst after him and his righteousness, is the true heritage of our manhood ; it is that
which, incalculably more than anything else, lifts us up to a high and noble level.
Not to be a-bungred and athirst after the living God is to be forfeiting the very best
portion for which our Creator called us into existence.

III. Sbbkino God is the one satisftinq thino. "Blessed are ye that himger:
for ye shall be filled;" and those who hunger after that which is lesser and lower are
not fiUed. No earthly joy fills the soul ; it leaves it still craving. 1. Not even the
purer joys of eaith fill the soul ; not even beholding the beauties and glories of creation ;
" the eye is not satisfied with seeing " these. Not even listening to the sweetest
melodies that can i>e heard ; " the ear is not satisfied with hearing " them. 2. Much
less with the grosser delights — making money, wielding power, receiving homage,
indulging in bodily gratifications ; certainly the tongue is not satisfied with tasting,
and " he that loveth silver is not satisfied with silver " (Eccles. v. 10). But : 3. The
love of God, the possession of the friendship of Jesus Christ, the spending of our days
and our powers in the holy, elevating service of a Divine Redeemer, — this is that which
fills the heart with a restful and abiding joy, and which brightens the life with a light
that does not fade.

" These are the joys which satisfy
And sanctify the mind."

These are the joys which last ; which live when the passions of youth have been burnt
out, when the ambitions of manhood are dead, when life is lived through and death
is waiting for its own ; the joys which, as all else grows dim and worthless, become
more and more precious still. " Blessed are they that hunger thus : for they shall be
filled."— G.

Vers. 22, 23. — Tlie blessedness of martyrdom. Using the word "martyrdom" in Mi
broader sense, we have to consider the Lord's saying respecting it. It certainly is
paradoxical enough. Yet his meaning is to he found for the looking. It is, indeed,
true —

1. That the enmity of others is a rorb trial to our spirit. Other things
bruise us beside bludgeons, and other things cut us beside whipcord. The manifest
hatred of other hearts, the cruel reproaches of unsparing lips, banishment from the
society of our fellow-men as being unworthy to remain, blighting a fair fame with
unjust aspersions, — these things cut deep into the human soul, they bruise almost to
breaking tender and sensitive spirits. Some, indeed, are so constituted that the roughest
treatment on the part of others will not hurt them; they can throw it off, can cast it
aside with indifference; it is to them "as the idle wind which they regard ncit." But
these are the excei tion, and not the rule among men. God meant us to be affected by
the judgment of our brethren and sisters, to be encouraged and sustained by their
approval, to be discouraged and checked by their censure. It is a part of our humanity
that, upon the whole, works for righteousness. But only too often its effect is evil ;
vnly too often the pure are pelted with reproaches, the faithful are condemned for theii



ua. VI. 1—49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LUKE. 167

fidelity, the holy are exposed to the hatred and ribaldry of the profane. Then there ii
Butfering which God never intended bis children to endure, — that of the faithful witnest
to the truth, that of the brave, unyielding martyr to the cause of Jesus Christ. And
many are they who would more readily welcume and more easily endure blows or
imprisonment than bitter malignity of heart and cold severity of speech. But then it
is also true —

IL That Cbbibtian oonbidebations triumph oveb all. Out Master and Teacher
would have our hearts to be so fiUed with the other and opposite aspect of the case,
that onr natural inclination to be saddened and stricken in spirit will be completely
overborne, and that, instead of sorrow, there will be joy. " Our reward is great <c
heaven;" so great that we who are reproached for Christ's sake are "blessed;" we ai«,
indeed, to " leap for joy." What, then, are these balancing, these overbalancing con-
siderations? 1, That we are taking rank with the very noblest men : " In like manner
. . . imto the prophets." We stand, then, on the same level with Moses, with Samuel,
with Elijah, with Isaiah, with Jeremiah ; with a noble company of men and women
whO) long since their day and their dispensation, have " gone without the camp, bearing
his reproach;" men and women were these "of whom the world was not worthy," to
be classed with whom is the highest honour we can enjoy. 2. That we take rank
with One who was nobler than all ; for did not he, our Lord himself, bear shame and
obloquy ? was not he crowned with the crown of thorns, because he was here " bearing
witness unto the truth " (John xviii. 37)? 3. That we are serving our self-sacrificing
Saviour. A modem missionary relates that when he and another were assaulted by a
Chinese crowd, and when, putting his hand to his head where he had been hit, he found
it moist with his blood, he felt a strange thrill of exceeding joy as he realized that he
had been permitted to shed his blood for that Divine Saviour who had poured out his
life for him. 4. That we are truly serving our race ; for the truth to which we bear
a rejected testimony to-day will, and partly as the result of our snflfering witness, be
accepted further on, and become the nourishment of the people. 5. 'I'liat we are on our
way to the highest heavenly honour. They who sufi'er shame " for the Son of man's
sake " now shall one A^y be exalted in the presence of the holy angels. Great will be
their reward in the heavenly kingdom. — C.

Vers. 27, 28, 32 — 35. — Seeking the highest good from the highest motive. In these
words our Lord commends to us —

I. The highest conceivable moral excellence. There are four gradations by
which we may ascend from the devilish to the Divine, in spirit and in character.
1, We may hate those who love us. 'ITiere are bad men bad enough, like enough to
the evil one himself, to positively hate those who are trying to redeem them, who
repay the devoted efforts of their truest friends with sneers and revilings. 2. We may
hate those who hate us. Not only may we do this, we do it. As sin has perverted it,
it is in the human heart to return hatred for hatred, blow for blow. 3. We may love
those who love us. Most men are equal to that: " Sinners also love those that love
them." 4. We may love those who hate us. " I say unto you, Love your enemies, do
good to them which hate you," etc. Let us understand whom Christ would have ut
consider our enemies, and whom, as such, he would have us love. These are not only
our national enemies; but they are certainly included. To allow ourselves to be
carried into the current of bitter animosity against those with whom our country is at
strife, so as to rejoice in their suffering and their death, — this is here rebuked by our
Master. But our " enemies " are more often found at home. They include all those
whose relation to ourselves is likely to provoke iU feeling ; e.g. those effectively opposing
US in counsel or debate; those successfully contending with us in business; those
engaged in vindicating their " rights" (as they seem to them) against us; those whose
material interests clash with ours ; those who have sioken against us or have taken
any active steps to injure us. We must also understand what Chritt meant hy our
loving these. Clearly he could not have intended that we should cherish toward them
that full and complete friendship which is the very precious fruit of gratitude and
esteem, and which can only be felt toward those to whom we owe great things, or for
whom we have a real veneration. That Is impossible in the nature of things. But it
if not impossible, it is quite open to us, to extract from our heart every root of bittemes'^



158 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [oh. vi. 1—49.

toward our enemies, to exclude all desire for their ill fortune ; and, going much further
than that, to nourisii in our souls a positively kind feeling toward them, a readiness to
serve them j nay, more, to form the habit of praying for them, and of looking out for
an opportunity to show them kindness. Surely this is the supreme thing in human
morality. No teacher has summoned us to climb higher than this; no learner has
reached a loftier summit. And Christ asks us to do this —

11. From the highest conceivable motive. We might endeavour after this true
nubility because : 1. God positively requires it of us (Mark xi. 26 ; Matt, xviii. 35),
2, It is the noblest victory over ourselC, " He that ruletb his spiiit is greater than lie
that takuth a city." 3, It is the greatest victory over others. " In so doing thou shalt
heap coals of fire on his head." But there is an incentive higher than these — the
highest of all ; it is that which our Lord gives us in the text ; because : 4. By so doing
we resemble Ood himtelf. " Te shall be the children of the Highest : for he is kind
unto the unthankful aud to the eviL" Here is the loftiest aspiration cherished for the
loftiest reason. Think kindly of those who are judging harshly of you; feel friendly
toward those who are feeling bitterly about you ; speak generously of those who are
talking disparagingly of you ; do deeds of kindness to those who are acting unhand-
somely toward you ; bend the knee in prayer on behalf of those who are persecuting
} ou ;— -do this because then you will be breathing the very atmosphere of magnanimity
which God breathes in heaven, because you will then be animated by the very spirit
by which he is prompted in all he is doing there, because you will then be ruling your
humble life by the very principles on which he is ruling his broad and boimdlesi
empire. " Love ye your enemies . . . and yom reward shall be great ; " indeed, you
shidl be " the children of the Highest ; " the mind that is in him shall be in you, yon
shall then be perfected (Matt. v. 48), crowning every other virtue and grace of your
character, even as God crowns all his other attributes, with the glorious, regal, trans-
cendent excellency of an unquenchable, victorious love. — C.

Ver. 31. — The golden rule. We call this precept of Christ " the golden rule ; " pro-
bably we intend thereby to pay it the highest honour we can offer it. But it is the
" precious metal," rather than the admirable precept, to which the compliment is paid
by the association of the two. For if this rule of our Lord were only illustrated in
the daily life of men, they would be enriched as no imaginable quantity of gold could
enrich them. Then would such a revolution be effected as no statesman has ever
dreamed of working ; then would all social evils for ever disappear ; then would human
life wear another aspect from that which now saddens and shames us ; for the golden
rule, enacted in the lives of men, would soon inaugurate the "golden year." We
look at —

L Its scBPASsiiro exoellenct. 1. It is tuithin all men's apprehension. It is no
learned, erudite definition, requiring much culture to comprehend. The most simple-
minded can understand it. 2. It commends itatlf to all meiCs con%(Aenee. It is not one
of those commandments which require much thought and much practice to appreciate.
It is obviously just and fair. It hardly admits of dispute. Every one can see, every
one must feel — if " the light that is in him be not darkness" — that it is the right thing
for him to do. 3. It excludes aU evasions. No man can shield himself under any
misrepresentation of the rule. He must know whether or not he is trying to act
toward his neighbour as he would that his neighbour should act toward him. 4. It
covers the entire range of human life, so far as our relations to one another are con-
cerned. It covers : (1) Action, and also inaction ; including in its sweep not only those
things we do, but those we leave undone — the attention, the kindness, the considera-
tion, the return we should render but may be withholding. (2) The judgment we
form of others ; the right they have to our patient, impartial, intelligent, charitable
judgment ; the claim they may fairly make that we should attribute the worthy rather
than the unworthy, the pure rather than the impure, the generous rather than the
mean motive. (3) Our speech ; the utterance of the kind and true word of our neigh-
bour, and also to him. (4) Conduct — all our dealings and doings, of all kinds whatso-
ever, in all the varied relations in which we stand to our fellow-men. This one rule of
Christ is a powerful test and solvent of all otlier prescriptions. If they can be carried
>ut and yet leave us short, in our practice, of doing to others as they would like us to



CH.VI.1— 49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 159

act toward them, these rules are imperfect. They leave something to be desired and
to be attained.

n. Tee nispiBATioN ws nesd to fiilfil it. This great precept of Christ ii not
to be translated into action like any ordinary military or municipal regulation. We
must gain some inspiration from our Lord himself if we are to keep tiaa great com-
mandment. And we must be prompted by three things. 1. An earnest desire to
follow Christ's own example. 2. A strong purpose of heart to do hii holy will, that we
may please and honour him. 3. A kind and Christian interest in our neighbours ; •
gracious pity for those whom he pitied, and for whom he suffered and died ; • warm
interest in their welfare ; a firm faith that they can be raised and renewed and refined;
a holy lore for all those who love him. — C.

Yer. 37. — Human judgment. These words must be taken with discrimination ; they
must be applied in the exercise of our natural intelUgence, distinguishing between
things that differ. We must observe —

I. The tedth which lies outside the thought of Chbist. Our Lord could
not possibly have meant to condemn the exercise of the individual judgment on men
or things. By so doing, indeed, he would have condemned himself; for did he not say,
" Why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right"? And almost in the same
breath he intimates that men are to be judged by their actions as is a tree by its fruit
(ver. 44). We are commanded by the Apostle Paul to " provt all things, and to hold
fast that which is good ; " and John exhorts us to " try the spirits whether they are of
Gk)d." Things must he judged by us ; new doctrines, new institutions, new methods
of worship and of work, come up for our support or our condemnation, and we must
judge them, by reason, by conscience, by Scripture, that we may know what course we
are to pursue. Men must be judged by us also. We have to decide whether we will
give them our confidence, our friendship ; whether we will admit them into the family
circle, into the society, into the Church. To decline to judge men is to neglect one of
the most serious duties and most weighty obligations of our life. And knowing all
that we do know from Jesus Christ what men and things should be, having learned of
him the essential value of reverence, of purity, of rectitude, of charity, we are in a
position to "judge righteous jndgment," as he has desired us to do.

II. The sinful erbob which Christ condemns. The judging and the condemning
which our Lord here forbids are those of a wrong and guUty order. They are, at least,
threefold. 1. Hasty Judgment; coming to unfavourable conclusions on slight and
insufficient evidence; not giving to the inculpated neighbour any fair opportunity of
explaining the occurrence ; not waiting to think or to learn what has to be taken into
accoimt on the other side. 2. Uncharitable judgment, and therefore unjust judgm«nt ;
for we are never so nnjust as when we are uncharitable — as when wo ascribe the lower
motive, the ignobler purpose, the impure desire, to our neighbour. All uncharitablenesi
is sin in the sight of Jesus Christ ; and when the want of a kindly charity leads us to
misjudge and so to wrong our brother, we fall under the condemnation of this his word,
and under his own personal displeasure. 3. Harsh condemnation ; taking a tone and
using a language which are unnecessarily severe, which tend to crush rather than to
reform, which daunt the spirit instead of inciting it to better things ; condemnation
which is not after the manner of him who " hath not dealt with us aft«r our sins, nor
rewarded us according to our iniquities," who " will not always chide, neither doth he
keep his anger for ever;" condemnation which would be disallowed by him who
rebuked his disciples when they rebuked those mothers who were bringing their children
to his feet, and who forbade these disciples to forbid any one doing good in hii name,
even though he " followed not " with them.

III. The penalty we fat fob oub teansgrbssiow. If we wrongly judge and
wrongly condemn, we shall suffer for our mistake, for our sin. 1. God will condemn
us for our injustice, or our undue and inconsiderate severity. 2. We shall have, some
day, to reproach ourselves. But the most marked penalty will be found elsewhere.
3. Our fellow-men will treat us with the severity we impose on them. It is the
universal habit among men to take up the attitude toward any neighbour which h«
assumes toward them. Toward the merciful we are merciful, even as our Father is ;
toward the severe we are severe. Again and again does the fact present itself to mi



160 THE GOSPEL ACCORD INO TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vi. 1—49,

observation that the men who have been relentless in their punishment of others have
been held fast to the letter of the bond in the day of their own shortcoming; they who
ahow no mercy will find none when they need it for their own soul. But if we judge
leniently and condemn sparingly, we shall find for ourselves that men are just unto the
Just and generooi unto the generous. — 0.

Ver. 38. — Human responsivenesa. This word of Ghrist may be taken with that
other on the same subject, which none of the evangelists recorded, but which we could
ill have spared, " It is more blessed to give than to receive." We may consider —

I. What wk have to oivb. We have much that we can draw from if we desir«
to bonefit and to bless our fellow-men. 1. Our possessions — our money, our time, our
books, our clothes, etc. 2. Ourselves — our thought, our affection, our sympathy.

II. Who should be oub becipientb. These should be : 1. Our kindred according
to the flesh. 2. Our kindred according to the spirit — our fellow-Christians, our
fellow-memberB. 3. Our neighbours, those who, as the nearest and most within reach,
should receive our kind thoughtfulness. 4. The children of want, of sorrow, of
spiritual destitution, both at home and abroad. There is a sense, and that a truly
Christian one, in which those who are in the saddest need and in the darkest error,
aye, and even in the most deplorable iniquity, have the greatest claim on our pity and
our help.

III. What mat bs ons iNOEimYES. 1. That giving ia that act which ia most
emphatically Divine. God lives to give — to bestow life, and health, and beauty, and joy
on bis creatures. Christ Jesus came to give himself for man. 2. That it is truly
angeUe. 3. That it is the heroic thing to do. Men have been true heroes in propor-
tion as they have spent themselves and their powers on behalf of their kind. 4. That
it ii most elevating in its influence on ourselves and, when wisely directed, on those
for whom it is expended.

IV. What will be oub becompbnsb. 1. The Divine approval. " For God loveth
a cheerful giver." 2. The unconscious and uncalculated reaction that will be received
by ourselves, enlarging our heart and lifting us toward the level of the supreme Giver.
3. The response we shall receive from those we serve. This is the recompense which
is promised in the text. " Give, and it shall be given unto you ; good measure . . .
shall men give into your bosom." There is far too much ingratitude in this world ;
more, perhaps, than we are willing to believe, until sad experience has convinced ns.
Nevertheless, there is also a very large measure of human responsiveness on which we
may safely reckon. If we give to others, men will give to us ; if we love them, they
will love us. Do not even the publicans so ? (Matt. v. 46). Even those whose hearts
have been unchanged by the truth and grace of Christ will respond to genuine kind-
ness. Patronage they will recognize and resent ; officialism they will distinguish and
may endure. But the help which comes straight from the heart they will appreciate,
and to him who gives it they will give a free and gladdening response. To the really
generous man, as distinguished from the formal "benefactor" or the professional
philanthropist, there will flow a stream of warm-hearted gratitude and affection which
will far more than repay all the time and treasure, and even all the sympathy and
service, that have been expended. The generous giver will be the recipient of (1) the
regard, (2) the gratitude, (3) the affection, and, (4) when it may be needed, the
luhstantial kindness of those whom he has tried to serve, and of many others outside
that circle. ■ And to these may be added that which, if its worth be less calculable, yet
may be even more valuable and more acceptable than any or all of these — the prayers
of the good. Selfishness often misses its own poor mark, and it always fails to bless its
author with an inward blessing ; but beneficence is always blessed. God rains down
his large benedictions from above, and below men offer their glad and fi*e contribution.
" Give, and it shall he given unto you ... for with the same measure that ye mete
withal it shall be measured to you again," — 0.

Vers, 39, 40. — Christian teaching. We may learn from this parable some truths of
th« greatest consequence to all tliosewho are teachers of religion ; and this will include
■oi only all Christian pastors and evangi lists, but all those who are training the young,
wlwtber at school or at heaie.



OH. Ti. 1—49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 161

L That thi wibdom of the wobld depbndb vebt labqely on that ov its
BELiaiouB TEAOHEBB. The multitude have never yet been able to think great theo-
logical questioni through ; they have not attempted the settlement of them by their
own examination. They have left that very largely indeed to their religious leaders.
It is so in other departments of human knowledge, and so it has been and will be in
the realm of reli^on. What our teachers teach the people will believe concerning the
great and supreme questions affecting our relation to God, to our neighbours, to the
future.

n. That BLDTDirxiB oh the past of the teacher means disabtbous erbob to
THE people. "Both will fall into the ditch." Beligioas truth is the most elevating
of all knowledge ; but error in religion is the most injurious of all errors. Men can
make nuatakes in the realms of literature, of physical science, of philosophy, and
even of political economy, without fatal consequences. But serious errors in religion
are nothing short of calamities. Teacher and taught fall into a deep ditch, from which
they do not escape without much injury, both done and suffered. These evil couse-
quences include : 1, Departure and distance of the mind from the thought of God,
Bom tnith and wisdom. 2. Superstitions which degrade and demoralize ; or, on the
other hand, unbelief which robs the soul of its true heritage, and leaves life without
nobility and death without hope. 3. Morbid fancies which prey upon the mind, or
shocking cruelties practised on the victim of error himself or on others. 4. Spiritual
death.

IIL That thh tbaohsb of tbuth ib liuited ik his iNFLnENCB bt hu own
ATTAiNUENTs. " The disciplo is not above his master." It is indeed true t)^t a
teacher may bring a disciple into connection with Jesus Christ ; and from him and trom
his followers and his institutions he may gain help which his first teacher could not
have imparted; but this is not derived from the teacher himself. This maD,<M teacher,
can only render to his disciples the good which he has in himself — the knowledge he
has in his own mind, the worth he has in his own character, the wisdom contained in
the principles on which he is fashioning his own life. Let every teacher be impressed
with the serious truth of this limitation. He cannot give what he has not gained.
He has to say, " Follow me so far as I am following Christ," — ^not a step further. If he
ceases to acquire, if his path of progress in the knowledge or the l&eness of God is
arrested, there is stopped at the same hour his power of leading his disciples on and
up those sacred and glorious heights. Therefore let him be always acquiring, always
attaining.

rV. That the FAiTHruL tbaoher ]^ab a tebt noble opportonitt. Every one
that has been fully instructed " shall be as his master." If he is a " true philanthropist
who makes two blades of grass to grow where only one grew before," what shall we
not think of him who plants in the hearts of men true thoughts of God, of the
human sou^ of human life, of the future ? This is the teacher's lofty function. And
he can go beyond this. By the power of language, especially when that is illuminated
by deep conviction and intense earnestness of spirit, he can pass on to his disciples so
much of Divine truth, and he can commimicate so much of heavenly wisdom, that they
who "have been fully instructed," who are his mature or "perfect" disciples, will
have in them the mind and temper which are in him. So that they will be " as he is,"
will think as he thinks, will feci what he feels, will live for the same objects for which
he is living. Surely there is no nobler work that any man can do than this ; it is well
worth while the teacher's (1) most careful preparation, (2) most energetic effort,
(3) most earnest prayer. — C.

Vers. 41, 42. — Keenness and dulness of spiritual vision. Of all the surprising things
in this world there is nothing more wonderful than the way in which men mistake
one another and misconceive themselves. Their vision \b so seriously, so thoroughly
distorted.

I. Tee keennebb of spiritual vision some men exhibit. They have the nicest
discernment of faults and failings in their brethren. There is nothing too minute to
escape their notice and their condemnation. Censoriousness is a very great mistake in
ertry light. Those who are guilty of " beholding the mote in their brother's eye " are
wrong in four respects. 1. They do substantial injustice in their judgment and by



162 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vi. 1—49.

tlieir action ; for they lay stress on the one small infirmity while thoy leave uniegarded
Bod unacknowledged many honourable acquisitions, many valuable virtues. 2. They
are inconsiderate of the difficulties which the victims of their severity have had to
contend with, and in doing battle with which they may have put forth the most
commendable exertion. 3. They forget that every one of us is and will be subject to
the judgment and (where it is due) the condemnation of God (see Rom. xiv. 4, 10).
4. They show a perverted ingenuity. It would be a most excellent quality to culti-
vate if they would only exert the same subtlety and patient observation in descrying
ttie virtues and the beauties of those in whom they detect so many failures. ThiB
keenness of spiritual vision is a mistake in two other ways. (1) It is usually unprofit-
able ; for it is more irritating than advantageous to those on whom it is expended.
(2) It is odious to man, and it is unpleasing in the sight of God. Both in the hvmian
and in the Divine estimate, severity ia the unattractive and charity is the becoming
thing.

II. The D0LNF,ss of spibitcal vision other men manifest. They do " not perceive
the beam that ia in their own eye." This fact in human experience is only too palpable.
We see men whose souls are painfully charged with selfishness, or pride, or frivolity, or
cruelty, or irreverence, or impurity, who have no eonception that they are in grave
spiritual delinquency and danger. There is not a mote but a beam in their eye, and
they are blind to it altogether. They are not entitled to offer a judgment on the
defects or transgressions of others, so far are they themselves from the straight line of
truth. And any note of censure from their lips is utterly and even ludicrously
misplaced.

III. OuK WISDOM ni vraw of these mistakes. It is to be far more concerned to be
ri^ht and pure in our own hearts than to be keen in the detection and exposure of other
people's shortcoming. Since men do so seriously and so fatally mistake their own
spirit and condition, it behoves us to do these three things : 1. To examine our own
hearts with impartial and anxious eye. 2. To welcome any friendly counsel or warning
that may be ottered us; and "it is lawful to learn even from an enemy." 3. To be
often and earnestly asking God to show us what is wrong within, that we may see our-
selves as be sees us. " Who can understand his errors ? Cleanse thou me firom
secret faults I " (Ps. xii. 12, 13 ; and see Ps. cxxxix. 23, 24).— 0.

Vers. 43 — 45. — Being and doing. The great Teacher here puts into figurative
language the truth which was afterwards so tersely and forcibly expressed by his most
appreciative disciple, " He that doeth righteousness is righteous." We have here —

I. The foundatiou-truth on which our Lord's word is built, viz. that life is the
outcome of character ; that as men are so they will live. " A good man out of the
good treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good," etc. Granted that a
man is sound at heart, it is certain that he will spend a good life, that he will shrink
from the evil and pursue and practise the holy thing. Granted that a man is radically
corrupt, it is certain that his life will be unworthy and sinful. Character must come
forth into conduct ; behaviour is the manifestation of the secret spring which is within
the soul. " A good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit," etc.

II. The apparent exceptions, which are only apparent, and not real. If this be
true, we want to know how it is, on the one hand, (1) that men we feel sure are bad at
heart are found living lives that are blameless and even devout ; and how it is, on the
other hand, (2) that men we feel sure are sound at heart deviate so often from the
straight line of propriety. The answer to this question is manifold. 1. It must be
remembered that much of that which seems goodness of life, and which seems as
if it must have come from a true heart, is not real goodness — it is only pretence.
Hypocrisy, the affectation of piety and virtue, is not a good fruit, though it may look
very much like it ; it is no more " good fruit " in the garden of the Lord thsui poisonous
berries are good fruit on the trees or shrubs of our visible garden. 2. And it must also
be taken into account that much of that which seems like departure from moral
excellence, and which seems as if it cannot have proceeded from the good heart, Is not
really " evil ; " it is either mannerism that is only skin-deep, to be regretted indeed,
but not to be confounded with essential moral evil ; or it is vndeveloped, struggling
righteousness, the crude and imperfect attempt of » soul that is moving upwards from



OH. VI. 1—49.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE, iBJ

below ; there is many a slip and many a false step, but then there is much honourabla
effort and much spiritual earnestness recognized and owned by the patient Father of
spirits.

III. The PBAonoAL oonolcbion for which we must be prepared. "Every tree it
known by his own fruit." "By their fruits ye sliall know them." Men must form
their judgment about ua ; and they must judge us by the lives they witness. If,
therefore, we do not manifest a Christian temper and a loving spirit, if righteous prin-
ciples are not visible in our daily dealings, if we do not give evidence of caring more
for truth and for God and for the establishment of his holy kingdom on the earth
than we care for our own temporal prosperity or present enjoyment, — we must not com-
plain if men count us among the ungodly. Our godliness, our spirituality, our recti-
tude, ought to shine forth clearly and unmistakably from our daily life.

IV. The pbactical truth which we must apply to ourselves — that, if we would
live a life of uprightness in the sight of God, we must be right at heart in his esteem.
It must be out of the fulness of our soul that we do right actions ; it must be out of
" the abundance of the heart that our mouth must speak " his praise and his truth ;
or our proprieties of liehaviour and our suitableness of language will weigh nothing
whatever in his balances. The first thing for every man to do is to become right in
his own heart with God ; to return in spirit unto him; to go to him in humility and
in faith ; to find mercy of him in Jesus Christ, and, having thus entered into sonship,
to live the life of filial obedience to his Word ; then and thus will the good tree bring
forth good fruit. — C.

Vers. 46 — 49. — Oood and had hiilding. In the moral and spiritual as well as in the
material world there is goud and bad, sound and unsound, safe and unsafe building
We are all builders ; we are all planning, preparinj^, laying our foundation, erecting
our walls, putting on our topstone.

I. The fabric of enjoyment ob of success. That of enjoyment, of the gratifica
tion of indulgence, is indeed hardly worthy of the name of building ; yet are there
those who spend upm it a very large amount of thought and labour. To pursue this
as the object of life is unworthy of our manhooil, is to dishonour ourselves, is to
degrade our lives ; it is to expend our strength on putting up a miserable hovel when
we miiiht use it in the erection of a noble mansion ; it is, also, to be laboriously con-
structing a heap of sand which the first strong wave will wash away. Worthier than
this, though quite unsatisfying and imsatisfactory, is the pursuit of temporal pro-
sperity, the building up of a fortune, or of a great name, or of personal authority and
command. Not that such aims and efforts are wrong in themselves. On the other
hand, they are necessary, honourable, and even creditable. But they are not sufficient ;
they are wholly inadequate as the aspiration of a human soul and the achievement ol
B human life. They do not fill the heart of man; they do not give it rest ; they leave
k large void unfilled, a craving and a yearning unsatisfied. Moreover, they do not
stand the test of time ; they are buildings that wUl soon be washed away. The tide of
time wiU soon advance and sweep away the strongest of such edifices as those. Do not
be content with building for twenty, or forty, or sixty years; build for eternity. "The
world passeth away . . . but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever."

II. The fobtbebs of ohabacteb. It is of this that our Lord is speaking in the
text; and he says concerning it — Dig deep, build on the rock, erect that which the
most violent storm cannot shake to its fall. What is that character which answers to
this counsel? 1. Not that which is founded on cere ;nomy and rite. Reason, Scripture,
and experience all prove that this is a character built upon the sand. 2. Not that
which is founded upon sentiment or occasional emotion. Many are they who like
and who demand to be acted upon by powerful influences, and to be thus excited to
strong feelings. In these moments of aroused sensibility they cry, " Lord 1 Lord 1 " with
apparent earnestness. But if piety ends in sensibility " it is nothing ; " it is worthless ;
it will be washed away by the first storm that breaks. 3. It is that which is estab-
lished in sacred conviction amd fixed determination. This is the rock to which ws
must dig down — sacred conviction passing into real consecration} the conviction
that we owe everything to our God and Saviour, and the determination, in the light
ml \j the grace of 6o^ to yield our he«rto and Utm to hiiB. A character thus built,



164 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vi. 1— 48.

•ustained by Christian services and ceremonies, will be strong against all assault. The
subtlest influences will not undermine it, the mightiest earthly forces will not overturn
it i let the storms come, and it will stand.

IIL The edifice of Christian usefulness. Paul, in his firet letter to the Church
at Corinth, speaks of the wood, hay, and stubble, and also of gold, silver, and precious
stones, t.e. of the combustible and the inflammable materials with which men construct
their building in the field of holy service. And he says the fire will try every man's
work ; so that we have apostolic warning also to take heed how we build. Let the
Ohristiac workman see to it that he too builds on the rock, that he efiects that which
will stand the waters and the fires that will try his work. Let him depend little on
ceremonialism, little on excitement ; let him strive to produce deep, sacred convictions
in the soul ; let him endeavour to lead men on to a whole-hearted dedication of them-
selves to Jesus Christ ; let him persuade men to the formation of wise habits of devotion
and self-government; so shall he be buildin;; that which the waters of time will not
remove, and which the last fires will purify but not destroy. — C.

Ver. 49. — 5f%« greatest ruin. " The ruin of that house was great." Occasionally there
occurs a panic in the commercial world. As the cause or, often enough, as the conse-
quence of this, some great house is " broken ; " its liabilities are too great for its
resources ; it cannot meet the claims that are falling due. And some morning it is
found that when all other houses are open, its doors are closed — it has suspended pay-
ment ; it has fallen ; and it may be said, seriously enough, that " the ruin of that
house is great." Great is the fall and sad is the ruin of (1) a great human reputa,-
tion ; or of (2) a great human hope. With the fall of either of these there is bitter
Borrow, keen humiliation, a dark shadow cast, not on one heart and home only, but on
many. For we stand, in human society, not like detached houses in large grounds,
but like houses that are close together, and when one falls it brings harm and injury
to many that are connected with it. But the ruin, which is great indeed, compared
with which all others are but small, is the ruin of a human loul.

I, The soul is itself a buildinq ; it is the main, the chief building which we are
roaring. Whatever else we may be erecting — material, social, political — the one thing
we do with which other things will not compare in seriousness and in consequence is
to " luOd tip owselves" (see Jude 20). It is a daily, an hourly process; it proceeds
with every thought we admit into our mind, with every feeling we cherish in our
heart, with every purpose we form in our soul. That which we are to-day in the sight
of God is the whole result of all that we have been doing, of all our visible and invisible
acts, up to the present hour.

IL It 18 A BuiLDiNO WHICH MAT BE OVEETHBOWN. We all know the man who
is the wreck and ruin of himself. What he once was he is no more. Instead of
devotion is impiety ; instead of purity is laxity ; instead of the beauty of holiness is
the unsightliness of sin ; instead of hoDOur is shame. The fair house of moral and
spiritual integrity is down ; there is nothing left but the foundations ; and the ruin of
that house is great indeed.

lU. This ovbbthbow is sad beyond expression. For consider : 1. WJutt it cost to
build. We do not mind if a hut or shanty is blown down ; that represents no great
loss. But if a mansion or cathedral is destroyed, wo grieve ; for the result of incal-
culable skill and toil is laid waste. And when a human soul is lost, what labour ii
thrown away, what experiences, what patience, what suffering, what discipline, what
prayers and tears, both on the part of the man himself and of those who have loved
hitn and watched over him and striven for him I 2. Sow intrinsically precious a thing
it is. We do not know the absolute value of a human spirit; our language will not
utter it; our minds cannot estimate it. God alone knows that, and the Son of God
has told us that it is worth more than all the material world (Mark viii. 36). 3. Eow
it drags down oihere with it. As one large " house " in a great city drags down others
in its fall, so does the house of a human spirit. What is it to the family when th«
father or the mother is morally lost ? for the neighbourhood when the minister or the
magistrate sinks and perishes? We do not fall alone; we draw others down witJi us,
and often those whom we are most sacredly bound to uplift or to sustain.

IV. These is a wat or bboovekt. " It is not tha wilt of our heavenly Father



OH. vi. 1—49.] THE GOSPEL ACCJOBDINCJ TO BT. LUKE. 168

that ona . . . should perish." " God so loved the world . . . that whosoever believeth
. . . should not perish." The fallen house may be down beyond recovery ; not so the
human soul. In the gospel of Jesus Christ the way ot restoration is revealed. By the
power of the Holy Spirit the soul that has fallen the furthest may be raised up again,
and be restored to the favour and the likeness and the service of God. By true
penitence and genuine faith we may lay hold on eternal life ; and when the heart heeds
the voice of its merciful Father summoning it to return, and when it hastens to the
feet of Jesus Christ and seeks in him a Refuge and a Saviour, and when it lives a new
life of faith and love and hope in him, it is restored to all that it once was ; and the
rtttoration of that soul is great. — C.

Vers. 1 — 19. — The Lord of the sabbath, and his work. We have just seen how Jesus
treated with deserved dishonour the tradition of the elders libont fasting. He showed
bis disciples a more excellent way. Fasting is not an end, but only a means to an end,
and this is the restoration of the soul to fellowship with its Saviour. In this way
should Christians use fasting. And now we pass on to notice how on sabbath-keeping
tradition again intruded itself and made cumbrous additions to the Mosaic command-
ment. Our Lord once more, as we shall see, set at nought the tradition, while he held
firmly by the Mosaic Law. The evangelist groups two sabbath-scenes for us in the
history here — the first in the corn-fields, the second in the synagogue, but both illus-
trating our Lord's sabbatic principle and practice. As the most interesting method of
considering the subject, let us notice —

L Tee PhABIBAIO PRINOIPLB about SABBATH-SEEPINa WAS THAT VAN WAS MADE

FOB THE DAY, NOT THE DAT FOB THE MAN. (Vors. 2, 7.) Thcso reput«dly religious
men had a certain idea about the day. They must have a holy day, and so it must be
so sacred that all work shall be deemed unlawful, lest it should be secularized. What
they objected to in the first case was not the plucking of the ears of com, but the
rubbing of them in the hands. This was a violation of their tradition. In the second
case they objected to work on the sabbath day, even though it took the form of heal-
ing. Their ideal was, therefore, a day of such physical inactivity as would refuse to
minister to man's hunger or to man's healing. The lallacy tmderlying this idea was
that work is in its essence a secular thing, and that idleness is somehow sacred. To
declare this emphatically, they were ready to rebuke hungry men for satisfying them-
selves in the corn-fields, and to deny healing to the man with the withered arm because
he presented himself for it on the sabbath day. The day above the man, then, was
the Pharisees' notion. Hunger and helplessness must be endured in order that a day
of pretentious idleness may be presented to mankind. Healthy desire must be stifled,
longing for power and self-help must be denied, that a sufficiently idle sabbath may be
secured. The apotheosis of idleness, the vindication of indifference, — all this and more
is involved in the Pharisaic criticism of Christ and of his disciples. Now, it is
important to bring out clearly how contrary to God's idea all this is. Work is not
secularizing in itself. The infinite Father never ceases working, but his work is sacred
all through the year. Of course, men may secularize themselves by the selfishness of
their work, but they may secularize themselves as really by the selfishness of their
idleness. An idle day is not likely to be a h(Jy one ; a busy day may be most holy
if the Klory of God and the good of souls be kept steadily in view.

II. Christ's better principle of sabbath-keeping is that the day is uade for
HAN. (Vers. 3 — 5, 9.) Hence necessity must be recognized as a law for the sabbath.
Even the ceremonial rite should give way before the needs of human nature, as the
case of David's hungry men being saved from famishing by a meal of shewbread indi-
cates. Hence the hungry disciples, in rubbing the corn in their hands, were vindicated
by that sublime necessity which recognizes no higher law. Again, in the case of the
helpless fellow-man whose right hand was withered, our Lord is clear that the sabliaih
should be a day for saving life, and not for allowing it to perish. In other words, Christ
would devote the day to man's salvation, while the Pharisees were prepared to sacrifice
the man to the peculiar sacredness which they thought belonged to an idle day. But
if the day is thus a means towards man's good, is he to employ it as he pleases ? Is
every njan to be lord of the sabbath by doing as he likes upon it ? This would bo a
dangerous prerogative to give to men. Not every one is fit to exercise it. The Phari-



166 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDiNa TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vl 1— 49.



sees, in fact, had taken the sabbath under their control and spoiled It altogether. Hence
the sovereignty of the sabbath must be left in the bands of him who is called the Son
of man. Christ is the Lord who can so order the sabbath that it shall be truly sancti-
fied. It is, consequently, from Christ's sabbath-keeping that we learn what it ought to
be. And we see from his life that he made the sabbaths his special opportunities for
philanthropic effort. Most of his miracles were sabbath-day performances. He seems
to have been busier on the sabbath than on any day of the week. We are safe in fol-
lowing along the lines of his most intelligent philanthropy. The sabbath il made for
man. Ir Christ would have the hungry fed and the helpless healed, he would also
have the souls fed with the bread of life and all spiritual helplessness removed. This
is the purpose, therefore, of those means of grace which are presented with special
earnestness on the Lord's day 1

III. ChBIST DBM0N8TRATBD THE TBUTH OF HIS PEINOIPLB BY THE MIBAOLE. (Ver. 10.)

Now, this miracle, like the healing of the paralytic, was the test of a principle. Li the
former case Christ claimed the prerogative of absolution, and he demonstrated that he
possessed the prerogative by telling the paralytic to rise and walk, and healing him.
In the present case he has taken issue with the Pharisees as to the sabbath being a
day for philanthropy. Healing is to be performed on it, if it is required. And now
he singles out the patient with the withered hand, and by a word cures him. Thus he
put their idea* on sabbath-observance to confusion. Instead, however, of rejoicing
in the poor man's cure, they are filled with madness at their own discomfiture. Misan-
thropy in them is the contrast to the philanthropy of Jesus. But is not the miracle
a sign of those miracles which are performed from sabbath to sabbath ? Man comes
in his weakness, his hand is withered, he can do nothing ; but through the power
of God he is enabled to stretch forth his hand, and enter into the sphere of spiritual
power.

IV. The BELEonoN of the twelve was made bt Chbist a uatteb or vbby
SPECIAL PRATEB. (Vers. 12 — 16.) We are told that he spent a whole night in prayer
to God. This showed how important in his view the selection of the disciples was,
and the establishment of his kingdom among men. He chose them in the morning
after the prayerful view of the whole case before the Father. If Jesus realized the
need of long-continued prayer before selecting them, how prayerfully should we go
about our work for him I It is no easy matter to act wisely in our dealings with men
and in our use of them. The persons selected were such as only Divine wisdom, as
distinguished from worldly prudence, would have chosen. There was not an " influen-
tial " person among them ; and it was not till after the Pentecost that any of them
became what we should now call reliable. Into the analysis of the persons selected we
do not enter. They have been divided into three groups : the first, containing the
names of Peter and Andrew, James and John, gives us the chiefs of the apostolic
band, the men of insight ; the second, containing the names of Philip, Bartholomew,
Thomas, and Matthew, are reflective, and, at first, sceptiad, men ; and the third and
la&t contains the names of James tlie son of Alphaeus, Jude, Simon the Zealot, and
Judas Iscariot, all practical men.* Our Lord has thus use in his Church for all grades
of men, and can even make use of traitors to serve his purpose.

V. The Healeb in the midst of the multitudb. (Vers. 17 — 19.) From the
mountain-top of prayer he descends to the valley of opportunity, and there finds a vast
multitude from the heathen parts of Tyre and Sidon, as well as from the Jewish dis-
tricts of Jud{ea and Jerusalem, who have come to hear and to be healed of their diseases.
Here were the two spheres — the sphere of mind, to which the ear is the great entrance ;
and the sphere of body, where disease may be checked and healing given. The mission
of Jesus was to save men. Miracles were part of his messi^e to mankind. The heal-
ing of the diseases of men was to tell how he can hesi. their souls and save them ever-
lastingly. Moreover, they connected the cure with his Person. From him virtue or
healing power radiated. His Person is the centre of healing influence. And for salva-
tion this also holds good. It is to the Person of the Saviour we must come if we are
to get really healed. It is surely well to have the source of all healing defined— it if
the Feaum, of our Saviour. To him, therefore, let us all come 1 — 'EL. M. S.

> Of. Bxpotitor, vol L pp. 29 -la



OH. Ti. 1—49.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 16'-

Ven. 20 — 49. — Tlie Legislator on the mount. We have seen how, after a whole
night spent in prayer, oiir Lord proceeded to the important work of selecting his
apostles. In this way he organized his kingdom. And now, having healed all who
needed healing, and bad been brought or bad come to him, he has the ground cleared
for legislative work. From this mountain-top in Gralilee he publishes the laws of tbe
kingdom, and thus gives to the world such a high-toned morality as has not been
surpassed or superseded by any ethical speculations since. It may be safely said that
all the Christless ethics which have been offered to the world in lieu of the Christian,
contain nothing valuable which Christ's system has not in better form, and that they
err by defect itL many places. Christ is stiU, in the department of ethics, " the Light
of the world." * The audience to whom the sermon on the moimt was delivered wag
almost entirely Jewish, and they doubtless entertained the usual ideas about the king-
dom of Messiah. This kingdom was, they hoped, to be one where they would enjoy
immunity from trouble, and be in flourishing worldly circumstances. Theirs was a
worldly dream. They wanted a golden age of wealth and worldly power. It was
needful for our Lord, consequently, to correct these superficial notions, and to create a
kingdom which could flourish in spite of the world's opposition and of all possible dis-
advantages. Accordingly, we find the Divine Legislator first quietly describing the
members of his kingdom and distinguishing them from the worldly minded outside ;
secondly, laying down the policy his people should pursue ; thirdly, pointing out the
secret of true leadership among men ; and lastly, the stability of the obedient. To
these points let us devote ourselves for a little in their order.

L CHBIST DIFFERENTIl.TES HIS SUBJECTS FBOM THE WOBLDLT MINDED OUTBIDS. (Vers.

20 — 26.) For the simple statement of the Beatitudes, and of the woes that constitute
their contrast, really draws the line between his kingdom and the world. Matthew,
in his fuller version of this sermon on the mount, gives eight Beatitudes and no woes ;
Luke balances the four Beatitudes by four contrasted woes. The teaching in both
versions is, however, practically identical. And when we look into our Lord's declara-
tions, we find, in the first place, that, in his kingdom, the poor, the hungry, the tearful,
and the persecuted are enabled to realize blessedness. This is the paradox of Christian
experience, that, in spite of poverty, and of hunger, and of sorrow, and of opposition,
Christ enables his people to maintain a blessed spirit. The poor are " rich in faith ; "
the hungry, especially those whose appetite is keen for righteousness (cf. Matt. v. 6),
are certain to be filled;' the tearful have the assurance that God will wipe away all
tears from their eyes, if not on earth, at all events in heaven (cf. Rev. vii. 17) ; and the
persecuted for Christ's sake are enabled to rejoice in view of that great reward in heaven
which awaits all Christ'i faithful martyrs. This blessedness is maintained in all these
cases in spite of everything which mUitates against it. On the other hand, our Lord
shows the rich, and the satiated, and the laughter-indulging, and the popularity-hunt-
ing people that, having received their consolation in this life, there is nothing in the
next life for them but disappointment, lamentation, and woe. This may easily be
verified. Those who " trust in uncertain riches"— and it is to these our Lord refers, as
parallel passages show — must be woefully disappointed when they have to cross the
Sty^an river without their gold. All that they trusted in shall then have failed them
for evermore. Those, again, who are satiated with this world's pleasures, and who
have contracted no higher appetite, will be terribly empty when this world and all its
pleasures shall have passed away like a dream. Those, again, who lived for laughter —
the sportsmen of the world — shall find no provision made in another life for such profit-
less people, and shall mourn and weep over the lost opportunities of life. And, lastly,
the popularity-hunters, who made the good opinion of the populace their great ambi-
tion, and were satisfied when all men spoke well of them, will find, like the popular
false prophets of the past, that the other life is constructed upon such lines as will
assign to each his due, and to popularity-hunting the doom of those who love a^iplause
rather than principle. Upon the worldly minded and successful, so far as this life ii
:onc«raed, there is cast, by the great Lawgiver, the shadow of doom. For such people
there is no reserve fund in a fiiture life; they have eaten up both capital and interest.

IL GhBIST lays down the policy his PEOPLE SHOULD FUBSXTB. (Vers. 27 — 38.)

N'ow, one of the cardinal principles of worldly policy is to " give nothing for nothing.''
> Ot *The Light of the ITorld,' by A. S. WilUns, ICJL. j



168 THE GOSPEL ACOOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vii. 1—50.

The world insists on a quid pro quo. Hence the worldly minded will always ask tha
question aljout the course a person pursues, " What does he expect to gain by it ?" To
act without hope of recompense is what the world cannot understand. And in strict
conformity with this, the world is prompted to " give as much as it gets " in the way
of injury. Curse for curse, hatred for hatred, a blow for a blow, a counterplot for a
plot. This is the gamut of the world's revenge. The great Legislator, on the other
hand, sets his face against all this worldly policy. He ridicules doing good for the
sake of getting good. Such speculative philanthropy is pure worldliness. He must
have a better system within his kingdom. He can dispeuse with revenge and the
quid pro quo, and work his kingdom upon purely philanthropic lines. God the Father
is the great Philanthropist, and men, by entertaining love for its own sake, may
become " children of the Highest " and the elements of a new kingdom. Hence our
Lord directs his people to love their enemies, to do good to those that hate them, to
bless those that curse them, to pray for their persecutors, to give a kiss for a blow, to
suffer violence a second time rather than practise it revengefully; to give to the utmost
of their power to all who ask. In short, they are to love and do good and lend,
hoping for nothing again ; they are to be merciful, like their Father in heaven ; they are
to be free from censoriousness, and forgiving ; and they may rest assured that in another
life they shall get a great reward. What Christ proposes, therefore, is a policy of
patient philanthropy — a policy of consideration, doing always to others what we would
like to receive were we in their circumstances. And it is this new policy of loT« which
is sure to overcome the world.

IIL Cheibt shows the secbbt of tbitb lxadebship auono men. (Vers. 39 — 45.)
But if love is to regulate all our conduct, may not others suffer through the proverbial
" blindness " of love ? There is little danger from the blindness of real love, only from
the blindness induced by selfishness. Our danger, as the Lord here shows, is always
from exaggerated self-love ; we are blind to our own faults ; we see motes in a brother's
eye, and forget the beam in our own. Hence he recommends here severe self-criticism,
such self-criticism as will prevent all hypocrisy, and secure that our eyes be truly
purged. When this is the case, then we can see the little faults in others, and deal
with them after we have dealt honestly with the great ones of our own. And so heart-
ptirity is the great secret of successful leadership among men. If our hearts are set
right with God, if we are washed and cleansed from secret faults, if we are purged
from an evil conscience and dead works, — then are we in a fit state to deal tenderly with
erring brothers and lead them to a better way. And so our Saviour shows, by this
part of his legislation, that only the purified in heart can become successful leaders of
their fellows. It is he who knows his own heart's plagues that can tenderly and skil-
fully deal with the plagues of others, and put them, by GhDd's blessing, on a better way.

IV. Christ finallt bbinos out the stabilitt of the obedient. (Vers. 46 — 49.)
Now, it is important to recognize the position taken up here by the great Lawgiver,
He claims absolute sovereignty. His word is to be law. Once we know his will, we
have only got to do it. But the claim is not unreasonable, nor is it excessive. He
understands the strain and stress of human temptations tjioroughly. He not only
understand these speculatively, but experimentally ; for he " was in all points tempted
like as we are, yet without sin" (Heb. iv. 15). He can consequently give to us the best
advice, advice infallible. If we would stand like a rock amid the temptations of life,
then_ we have got simply and cordially to obey Christ. He is the Rock of ages ;
nothing can shake him; and nothing can disturb those who have learned to trust
him. But those who hear his advice and do it not, shall be swept away by the torrent
of temptation and involved in a ruin that is great. Obedience is the secret, therefore,
of stability. May it be our experience continually I — B. M. S.



EXPOSITION.
OHAPTEB VIL



Yen. 1 — 10. — The lervant (or ilave) of the
tenturion of Capernaum i$ healed.
Yet. 1. — ^Now when he had ended all his



sayings. This clearly refers to the sermon on
the mount. That great discourse evidently
occupied a position of its own in the public
ministry of the Lord. Its great length, its
definite ounouucumeut of the kind S t^ga



■H. Til. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE.



169



he was inangurating over the hearts of
men, its stem rebuke of the dominant re-
ligious teaching of the day, its grave pro-
phetic onlooks, — all marked it out as the
great manifesto of the new Master, and as
such it Bfems to have been generally re-
ceived. He entered into Capernaum. The
rtsldenoeof Jesus, as we liave before pointed
out, during tlie greater part of his public
life. It was, at it were, bis bead-quarters.
After each missionary tour he retumud to
the populous, favoured lake-city which he
had chosen as his temporary home.

Ver.2. — And a certain centoriou's servant ;
literally, slave. The difference is important,
as we shall see in the picture presented to
US of the centurion's character. A centurion
was an officer in the Boman army ; the
grade answers to the modem European
captain — German, hauptmann; the com-
mand included a hundred soldiers. Scholars
are not agreed respecting the special service
of this particul«r officer. Some consider he
was a Greek or Syrian holding a comuiission
under the prince of the country, the tetrach
Herod Antipas ; others, that he was in the
service of the empire, with a small detach-
ment of the garrison of Csesarea, doing
duty at the important lake-city, probably in
connection with the revenue. It is clear
that Boman garrisons at this period were
dotted about tlie various centres of popu-
lation in these semi-dependunt states. At
Jerusalem we know a considerable Roman
force was stationed, professedly to keep
order in the turbulent capital, but really, no
doubt, to overawe the national party. Was
siok, and ready to die. St. Matthew calls
the disease paralysis, and adds that the
sufferer was in extreme pain. The disorder
was probably some dangerous form of rheu-
matic fever, which not unfrequeutly attacks
the region of the heart, and is accompanied
with severe pain, and proves in many in-
■tances fatal. The ordinary paralysis would
■caroely be accompanied with the acute pain
mentioned by St. Matthew.

Ver. 3. — And when he heard of Jesus;
better rendered, having heard ahout Jesu*.
His fame as a good Physician, such as
never had arisen before, coupled with his
reputation as a Teacher, had now travelled
far and wide. The devout centurion
probably had watched with extreme interest
the career of the strange and remarkable
Teaeher-Prophet who had risen up among
the people, and had apparently (see note on
▼er. 7) made up bis mind that this Jesus
was no mortal man. He sent onto him the
elders of the Jews, beseeching him that he
would oome and heal his servant; better
rendered elders without the article ; that is,
■ome of the official elders connected with
bis own synagogue. These would be able,



with more gtace than himself^ to plead his
cause with the Master, telling him how well
the centurion had deserved any assistance
which a Jewish physician could afford him.

"Vers. 4, 5. — He was worthy for whom he
should do this : for he loveth our nation, and
he hath built ns a synagogue. There are
several mentions of these Boman military
officers in the Gospels and Acts, and in
every instance the mention is a &Toarable
one. Still more notable instances occur
in the case of Oornelius — to whom Petei
was specially sent (Acts x., xi.)— of the
centurion who was on guard at the execu-
tion on Calvary, and of the centurion
who conveyed Paul to Borne (Acts xxvii.
1 — 3). On these Gentile soldiers " the faith
and life of Judaism (seen, we may well
believe, to more advantage in the village
life of Galilee than amid the factions of
Jerusalem) had maile a deep impression : he
found a purity, reverence, simplicity, and
nobleness of life wliich be had not found
elsewhere, and so he loved the nation, and
built a npw one of the synagogues of the
town " (Dean Plumptre). The centurion
was appiirently one of those foreigners who
— without submitting to circumcision and
other burdensome ceremonial rites which
were incompatible with the exercise of his
profession — had accepted the faith of Israel,
and worshipped with the people in the
position of one who, in another age, would
have been termed a " proselyte of the gate."
He was evidently one of those true-henrted
men who translated a beautiful creed into
acts, for it was specially urged by the elders,
in their petition to Jesus, that he loved the
people, no doubt emphasizing his generous
almsgivings, and, as a crowning act of his
kindness, had built a synagogue at Caper-
naum. Modern tmvellers tell us that among
the ruins of thi^ city of Jesus are the remains
of a white marble synagogue of the time of
the Herods. This may have been the Boman
soldier's noble gift to Israel. The whole
character of this nameless officer seems to
have been singularly noble. In those selfish
days of undreamed-of luxury, cruelty, and
heartlessness, for a master to care for, much
less to love, a slaoe was, comparatively
speaking, rare. From his message to Jesus
(ver. 7) it would seem as though he bad a
clearer conception who the poor Galileean
Teacher was than any oneelseat that perioil
of the public ministry, not excluding the
inner circle of disciples.

Yer. 6. — Lord, trouble not thyself: for I
am not worthy that thon shouldest enter
under my roof. Augustine's comment ou
these remarkable words is good : " By saying
that he was unworthy, he showed himself
worthy of Christ's entMlng, not within his
walls, but within his heart,"



170



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vn. 1—50



Ver. 7. — But say In a word, and my
lervant shall be healed. The Gentile
soldier's faith was really great. He had
risen above the need of an outward sign,
such as a touch or even the sound of a
living voice. He needed no contact with
tlie fringe of the Master's garment, asked
for no handkerchief or apron that had
touched his person (Acts xix. 12). The
word the Master would speak would be
enough ; the result he willed would as-
suredly follow. " Do not come hither wliere
my servant is, but only speak here where
thou art." The centurion had a just notion
of Christ's power. And our Lord greatly
commended him, whereas Martha, who said,
" I know whatsoever thou shult ask of God
he will give it thee" (John xi. 22) was re-
proved as having spoken amiss; and Christ
thus teaches that he is the Source of bless-
ings, which he could not be unless he were
God (compare Bisliop Wordsworth, in part
quoting from St. Ohrysostom).

Ver. 8. — For I also am a man set under
authority, having under me soldiers, and I
■ay unto one, Go, and he goeth ; and to
another. Come, and he oometh ; and to my
servant, Do this, and he doeth it. What the
soldier really thought of Jesus is evident
when we read between the Hues of this saying
of his : " If I, who am under many a superior
— the chili arch of my thousand, the tribunes
of my legion, my emperor who commands
at Rome — yet receive a ready and willing
obi dience from my soldiers, and have but to
iay to one, ' Go,' and he goeth, to another,
' Come,' and he oometh ; how much more
tliou, who hast no one above thee, no
superior, when thou commandest disease,
one of thy ministers, will it not at once
obey?" The same thought was in Arch-
denoon Farrar's mind when he wrote how
the cent'irion inferred that Jesus, wlio had
the pow )r of healing at a distance, had at
his ooirmand tliousands of the "heavenly
army" (ch. ii. 18; Matt. ixvi. S3), who
would

" At his bidding speed
"And post o'er land and ocean witlmut rest."

(Milton.)

Ver. 9. — When Jesus heard these things,
he marvelled at him. Augustine strikingly
comuieuts here on the expression ieaii.i.a(rf,
he marvelled : " Who had inspired thiit faith
but he who now admires It? " In marvelling
at it he intimated that we ought to admire.
Ho admires for our good, that we may
imitate the centurion's faith ; such movo-
menta in Christ are not signs of perturbation
of mind, but are exemplary and hortatory to
ut (Sj Augustine, quoted by Bishop Words-
worti% on Matt. viii. 10). I have not found
M ipMA faitb, no, not in IsraeL St.



Augustine remarks here that "the Lord had
found in the oleaster what he had not found
in the olive."

Ver. 10. — Betnming to the honsa, fonnd
the servant whole that had been siok.
Farrar suggests "convalescent" as a more
accurate rendering than "whole." The
Greek equivalent is one of the medical
words we iind in this Gospel of St. Luke.
The words, " that had been sick," do not
occur in the other authorities. They are
omitted in the Revised Version.

Vers. 11 — 17. — The Master raiseifrom tJtt
dead the only son of the widow of Nain.

Ver. 11. — And it came to pass the day
after. The Greek expression here, in the
majority of the more ancient authorities, is
vague as a note of time. The Revised
Version renders it " soon afterwards." The
incident that follows the niising from the
dead of the widow's son is oidy mentinned
by St. Lnlre. It is generally assumed that
our Lord only raised three persons from the
dead — this young man of Nain, the little
daup;hter of Jairus the rnler, and Lazarus
of Bethany. But such an assumption ii
purely arbitrary. We have before called
attention to the vast number of miracles
worked by Jesus during the two years and a
half of the public ministry not reported by
the evangelists at all, or only glanced at in
passing. There were, most probably, among
these unreported miracles several iiistanoei
of men, women, and children raised Irom
the dead. St. Augustine, in one of his
sermons (xcviii.), specially oalls attention to
this in his words, " of the numerous personf
raised to life by Christ, three only are men-
tioned as specimens in the Gk>spels." Each
evangelist specially chooses one of the
various examples, no doubt known to him
— that peculiar instance or instances best
suited to the especial teaching of his Gospel.
St. John alone recounts the raising of Lazarus,
St. Luke is the solitary reporter of the miracle
performed on the dead son of the widow of
Nain. We may reasonably infer, says Dean
Plumptre, tliat this miracle, from its circnra-
stanees, had specially fixed itself in the
memories of the "devout women" of ch.
viii. 1, and that it was from them timt
St. Luke obtained his accurate and detaihiil
knowledge of this, as well as of many other
of th'! incidents which he alone relates in
his Gospel. He went into a oity ca led
Nain. Ifrom tlie Hebrew O'JJJ, naim fair,
probably so called from its striking situation
on a steep hill. It is on the slope of Little
Hermon, near Endor, some twenty or more
miles from Capernaum. The name Nein is
still given to a small poor village on the
same site. It is approached by a narrow,
steep ascent, and on either side of the road
are sepulchral oavea. It was in one of thest



OH. 711.1— 60.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. LUKE.



171



that the dead man was about to have been laid
when the Muster met the little mourning
procession winding down the steep road as
he and his crowd of followers were toiling
up the ascent nearing the gate of the city.

Vor. 13. — And when the Lord saw her.
It is rare in the Gospels to find the ex-
pression, " the Lord," used by itself, " Jesus "
being the usual term. It agrees with the
unanimous tradition in the Ohuroh respect-
ing the authorship of this Gospel — neither
Luke nor Paul had been with Jesus. These
had always looked on Jesus, thought of
him, as the Lord risen from the dead, en-
throned in heaven. At the period when St.
Luke wrote, not earlier than a.d. 60, this
title had probably become the usual term
by which the Redeemer was known among
his own. He had compassion on her. In
this instance, as in so many others, our
Lord's miracles were worked, not from a
distinct purpose to offer credentials of his
mission, but proceeded rather from hig
intense compassion with and his Divine pity
for human sufferings.

Yer. 14. — And he came and touched the
bier. The young man was about to be
buried in the Jewish maimer, which differed
from the Egyptian custom. The corpse was
not laid in a co£Sn or mummy-case, but
simply on an open bier, on which the dead
lay wrapped in folds of linen ; so Lazarus
was buried at Bethany, and our Lord in
his rock-tomb in Joseph of Arimathsea's
garden. A napkin, or sudarium, was lightly
laid over the face. It was pollution for the
living to touch the bier on wliich a corpse
was lying. The bearers, in tlieir amazement
that one so generally respected and admired
as was Jesus, the Teaclier of Nazareth, at
this period of his career, should commit so
strange an act, would naturally at once stand
still to see what next would happen.
Toung man, I say nnto thee, Arise. The
Lord of life performed his miracle over
death in a very different fashion to those
great ones who, in some respects, had
anticipated or followed liim in these strange
deeds of wonder. Before they recalled tlie
dead to Ufe, Elijah mourned long over the
son of the widow of Sarepta, Elisha re-
peatedly stretched himself as he agonized
m prayer upon the lifeless corpse of the
Shunammite boy, Peter prayed very earnestly
over the body of Dorcas at Lydda. The
Master, with one solitary word, brings the
spirit from its mysterious habitation back
to its old earthly tenement — " Kum 1 "
" Arise 1 " St. Augustine has n beautiful
eonunent on the three miracles of raising
the dead related in the Gospels. He has
been saying that all our Lord's works of
mercy to the body have a spiritual reference
lo the Hul; he then proctudd to consider



them " as illustrations of Chrisl^s Divine
power and love in raising the loul, dead in
trespasses and sins, from every kind oi
spiritual death, whether the soul be dead,
but not yet carried out, like the daughter
of Jairns ; or dead and carried out, but not
buried, like the widow's son; or dead, carried,
and buried, like Lazurus. He who raised
himself from the dead can raise all from
the death of sin. Therefore let no one
despair " (St. Augustine, ' Sermou ' xcviii.,
quoted by Bishop Wordsworth). Oodet
has a curious and interesting note on what
he calls a difficulty peculiar to the miracle,
owing to the absence of all moral recep-
tivity in the subject of it. "Lrizarus wag
a believer. In the case of the daughter of
Jairns, the faith of the parents to a certain
extent supplied the place of her personal
faith. But here there is nothing of the
kind. The only receptive element that am
be imagined is the ardent desire of lite
with which this young man, the only son
of a widowed mother, had doubtless yielded
his last breath ; and this indeed is sufiioieDt,
for it follows frum this that Jesus did not
dispose of him arbitrarily."

Ver, 16. — And there oame a fear on all ;
and they glorified Qod, saying. That a great
prophet is risen up among us ; and. That God
hath visited his people. Witli the exception
of two or three like the centurion, wiiose
sick servant was healed, this was the freni ral
conception which the i)e0|ile had of Jisns —
a fear is mtntiouml in this place^the natural
result of the marvellous works, espeiially
those woiked in the case of the already
dead, but nothing more. The sublinie
humility of the great "Wonder-worker failed
to persuade the bulk of men and women
with whom he came in contact. They
could not look on this quiet Eabbi-Phygician,
who gently put all state and pomp and
glory aside, as the Divine Messiah; but
that in Jesug Israel possessed a great
Prophet the people were persuaded — they
recognized that at last, after four long
centuries of absence, God again had visited
his people. There had arisen in the coasts
of Israel no prophet of the Highest since
the far-back days of Malachi, some four
hundred years before the days of the Lord
and his forerunner John.

Vers. 18— 35.— /o/i» the Baptut tends
meaeengeri to ash a que$tion of Jetnt. Tht
reply of the Matter.

Ver. 18. — ^And the disciples of John
showed him of all these things. St. Luke
unlike St. Matthew, in the corresponding
passage in his Gospel, does not specially
mention that John was in prison; he evi
dently look it for granted that this would
be known to his readers from the account
of the Baptist's arrest and imprisonment bj



172



TUK GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vii. 1— 50.



Hetod Antipas given in ch. iii. 19, 20._ In
the OiiuiBe of John's imprison ment, it is
probable that very many of his disciples
became hearers of Jesus. During the early
period, at all events, of tbe Baptist's cap-
tivity it is clear that liis frimds and dis-
ciples had free access to his prison. There
is no duubt but tliat, in reply to tbe
anxious inquiries of Jolm, his disciples told
him of all the miracles they had witnessed,
and the words they had heard, especially,
no doubts recounting to him much of the
germon on the mount which Jesua had
lately delivered as the exposition of his
doctrine. We can well imagine these faith-
ful but impatient disciples, after detailing
these marvels which tliey had seen, and the
strange new words of winning power which
they had heard, saying to their imprisoned
master, "We have seen and heard these
wondrous things, but the great Teacher gets
no further ; we hear nothing of the standard
of King Messiah being raised, nothing of
the high hope of the people being en-
couraged ; he seems to pay no attention to
the imperious rule of the foreigner, or the
degrading tyranny of men like Antipas,
the Herod who has wrongfully shut you up.
He rather withdraws himself, and when the
people; fired by his winning words and
mighty acts, begin to grow enthusiastic,
then this strange Man hides himself away.
Can be be Messiah, as you once said? "

Ver. 19. — And John calling unto him two
of his disciples, sent them to Jesus, saying.
Art thou he that should come 1 or look we
for another 1 What, now, was in John the
Baptist's mind, when from his prison he
sent liis disciples to ask Jesus this anxious

Suestion? Disappointed in the career of
esus, possibly himself partly forgotten,
accustomed to the wild freedom of a desert-
life, suffering from the hopeless imprison-
ment, — had his faith begun to waver? or
was the question put with a view of re-
assuring his own disciples, with tbe inten-
tion of giving these faithful followers of his
an opportunity of convincing themselves of
the power and real glory of Jesus? In
other words, was it for hU own sake or for
his diseiplea' takes that he sent to ask the
queslion? Generally speaking, the second
of tliese two ooneluaions — that which
asciibed the questiou to a desire on tlio
part of John to help his disciples (which
we will call B) — was adopted by the ex-
positors of the early Church. A good
example of this school of interpretation is
the following quotation from St. Jerome:
^John does not put this question from
ignorance, for he himself had proclaimed
Christ t» be ' the Lamb of God.' But as our
I«rd asked concerning the body of Lazarus,
•Where have ye laid him?" (John xi. 34),



In order that they who answered the qne*
tion might, by their own answer, be led to
faith, so John, now about to be slain by
Herod, sends his disciples to Jesus, in order
that, by this occasion, they who were jealous
of the fame of Jesua (ch. ix. 14; John
iii. 26) might see his mighty works and
believe in him, and that, while their mastei
asked the question by them, they might
hear the truth for themselves" (St. Jerome,
quoted by Wordsworth). To the same
effect wrote SS. Ambrose, Hilary, Chry-
Bostom, Theophylaot. Among the Reformers,
Calvin, Beza, and Melancthon contended fop
this opinion respecting the Baptist's message
to Christ, and in our days Stier and Bishop
Wordsworth. On the other hand, Tertullian
among the Fathers, and nearly all the modern
expositors, .believe that the question of
John was prompted by hia own wavering
faith— a faltering no doubt shared in by liia
own disciples. This conclusion (which wo
will term A) is _ adopted, with slightly
varying modifications, by Meyer, Ewald,
Neander, Godet, Plumptre, Farrar, and
Morrison. This way — (A) generally adopted
by the modem school of expositors — ol
uuderslanding the Baptist's question to
Jesus, is evidently the conclusion which
would suggest itself to aU minds who went
to the story without any preconceived
desire to purge the character of a great
saint from what they imagine to be a blot;
and we shall presently see that our Lord, in
his answer to the question, where a rebuke
is exquisitely veiled in a beatitude, eyi-
dently understood the forerunner's question
in this sense. It is thus ever the practice
of Holy Scripture; while it tenderly and
lovingly handles the characters of its heroes,
it never flinches from the truth. We see
God's noblest saints, such as Moses and
Elijah (John's own prototype) in the Old
Testament, Peter and Paul in the New
Testament, depicted in this book of truth
with all their faults ; nothing is hid. Only
one flawless character appears in its storied
pages— it is only the Master of Peter and
Paul who never turns aside from the path
of right

Ver. 21. — And in that same hour he onred
many of their infirmities and plagues, and
of evil spirits; and unto many that were
blind he gave sight. "He knew as God
what John's design was in sending to him,
and he put it into his heart to send at that
very time when he himself was working
many miracles which were the true answer
to the question " (Cyril, quoted by Words-
worth).

Ver. 22. — Tell John what things ye havo
seen and heard ; how that the blLid see, th«
lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, iha deal
hear, the dead are raised. These miracIiM



en. viL 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



173



which the meBsengeis witnessed that day,
Btiiking though they were, were no novel
ones in the work of our Lord. They were,
too, precisely similar to those which had
already been reported to him in his prison
(ver. 18). But Jesus, pointing to these
signs, bade the friends of the Baptist return
and tell their master what they had seen
in these words. The gveat Messianic prophet,
whose writings were so well known to John,
had said that Messiah's advent would be
heralded by these very acts. John would
in a moment catch the meaning of the
reply. The passages in question are Isa.
xxix. 18 and xxxv. 4, 6. Wordsworth, on
these works wrought by the great Physician,
very beautifully writes, " One of the most
consolatory reflections produced by these
mighty and merciful works of Christ on
earth is the assurance they give that at
the great day of resurrection he will re-
move all infirmities and blemishes from the
bodies of his servants, and clothe them in
immortal health, beauty, and glory, so as
to be like his own glorious body, once
marred on the cross, but raised by himself
from the dead, and now reigning for ever
in glory" (Bishop Wordsworth). To the
poor the gospel is preached. John would
be able to draw his inference, too, from
this feature in Jesns' work. His messengers
would have heard the Teacher's words,
and would have marked from what olass
especially his hearers were drawn. It was
a new experience in the world's story,
this tender care for the poor. No heathen
teacher of Some or Athens, of Alexandria
or the far East, had ever cared to make
this vast class of nnprofitable hearers the
objeots of their teaching. The rabbis of
Israel cared nothing for them. In the
Talmud we often find them spoken of with
contempt. But John knew that this speak-
ing to and consorting with the poor would
he one of the marked oharaoteristics of
Messiah when be came.

Ver. 23. — And blessed it he, whosoever
ihaJl not he offended in me. Our Lord here
•hows that he understood that this question
oame from the Baptist himself. Dean
Plnmptre calls attention to the tender way
in which onr Lord dealt with the im-
patience which John's question implied.
" A warning was needed, but it was given in
the form of a beatitude, which it was still
open to him to claim and make his own.
Not to find a stnmbling-blook in the manner
in which Christ had actually come, there
was this condition of entering fully into the
Uessedness of his kingdom."

Ver. 21. — And when the messengers of
John were departed, he began to speak onto
fb» people ooneeniing John. When the
meseengen of John were departed, the



Lord, fearful lest the people who had beea
standing by and listening to the question
which the Baptist had put, and his answer,
should entertain any disparaging thought
of a great and sorely tried saint of God,
spoke the following noble testimony con-
cerning that true, faithful witness, it has
been termed the funeral oration of John ;
for not long after it had been spoken he
was put to death by Herod Antipas. What
went ye out into the wilderness for to see 1
A reed shaken with the wind 1 The imagery
was taken from the scenery in the midat
of which John the Baptist had principally
exercised his ministry — the reedy banks of
Jordan. It was surely to see an everyday
sight — a weak vacillating man blown to and
fro with every wind. John, though bis
faith failed him for a moment perhaps,
was no wavering reed.

Ver. 25.— But what went ye out for to
see ) A man clothed in soft raiment 1 Be-
hold, they which are -gorgeously apparelled,
and live delicately, are in kings' oootts.
Was it, again, to see one of earth's so-called
great ones — a favourite of the reigning
monarch, • courtier of the magnificent
Herod? John was no court favourite, no
powerful or princely noble. Dean Plumptre
thinks that here a reference is made to
the fact that, in the early days of Herod
the Great, a section of the scribes had
attached themselves to his policy and
party, and in doing so had laid aside the
sombre raiment of their order, and had
appeared in the gorgeous raiment worn by
Herod's other courtiers. " We may trace,
adds the dean, " with very little hesitation,
a yindiotive retaliation for these very
words in the ' gorgeous robe ' with which
Herod arrayed him in mockery, when the
totrarch and Christ stood for one brief
hour face to foce with each other" (oil.
xxiii. 4).

Ver. 26.— But what went ye out for to
seet A prophet? Yea, I say unto yov,
and much more than a prophet. The great
Teacher proceeds in his discourse. From
the scene and the surroundings — the reeds
of the banks of Jordan — he went on to
speak of the great Jordan preaclier, so
unlike, in spite of this one weak wavering
hour, the reeds in the midst of which he
preached. Jesus thus painted the grave,
austere man, first in his stem enmity to
the seductive magnificence of a court-life,
then in his severe austerity as regards
himself. Who, then, was he — this preacher
to whom the people had resorted in such
crowds to see and hear ? Was he a prophet ?
was he one more of those men who in past
ages had been the salt whioh preserved
Israel from decay? Tee; that is what he
was, that true great oae — a prophet in ttu



174



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vil 1— 5a



deepest, trnest sense of the word. Ah I
higher still, went on the Teacher, John was
much more than a prophet. What then?
and the by-standers marvelled ; what more
could be he? Was he, peradventure, the
Messiab ?

Ver. 27. — This is be, of whom it is written.
Behold, I send my messenger before thy faoe,
which shall prepare thy way before thee.
He quietly answers the question surging
up in the listeners' hearts. No ; not Mes-
siah, but his forerunner. Centuries ago the
mission of this John was foretold, and
exactly described by one of the well-known
and honoured prophet line. They who were
listening, many of them, knew the words
well, as the Teacher quoted &om the great
Malachi. The old ring of the famous
prediction was unchanged ; perhups few of
the by-standers noticed the slight alteration
which was made by Jesus as he quoted.
But in after-days the deep significance of
the seemingly trifling change, we may well
imagine, was the subject of many a deep
solemn hour of meditation among the twelve
ud the early leaders of the faith. The
words in Mai. iii. 1 stand thus : " Behold,
I will send my messenger, and he shall
prepare the way before me." Our Lord so
changes the text that, instead of "before
me," it reads with this slight difference,
" Behold, I send my messenger before thy
face, which shall prepare thy way before
thee." The Lord who speaks by the
prophets in Malachi announces himielf as
the coming angel of the covenant: "my
messenger shall prepare the way before
me;" bat this, the Lord who is come as
the Son of man, may not as yet openly
declare ; it is enough that by the thrice-
repeated irov QHhy face," "thy way,"
** before thee "), he signifies that he is
marked out and referred to by the Father.
Bee how, without directly uttering it, he
nevertheless announces his iya ei/u (" I am
he") in his subUme humility (so Stier,
* Words of the Lord Jesus '). Godet presents
the same tliought from another point of view :
"In the prophet's eyes he who waa sending,
•nd he before whom the way was to be
prepared, were one and the same Person,
Jehovah. Hence the ' before me ' of Mula-
chi. But for Jesus, who is speaking of
himself, and never confounds himself with
the Father, a distinclion became necessary.
It is not Jehovuh speaking of himself, but
Jehovah speaking to Jesus ; hence the form
•before thee.'"

Ver. 28. — Fop I say unto yon. Among
those that are bom of women, there is not
a greater prophet than John the Baptist:
knt he that is least in the kingdom of Ood is
greater than he. These striking words close
tte Master's splendid testimony to the great



pioneer. The usual explanation adopted by
most if not aU modem theologians of the last
clause of the verse is, that, great as John
was, yet he that is least among Christians
who have been bom of Ood and have ac-
cepted as an article of their faith the cruci-
fixion and ascension of the Son of God, is
greater than that great prophet; or, in
other words, the humblest child of the new
kingdom is superior to the greatest prophet
of the old. But many of the wisest and best
of the Fathers of the Church — amongst
others Chrysostom, Augustine, Hilary, and
Theophylaot — find grave difficulty in ac-
cepting this too sweeping and facile ex-
planation of a hard saying. They suggest
what seems to the writer of this Exposition
a more reverential meaning to the Lord's
words here. By "the least" we prefer,
then, with Chrysostom and other ancient
Fathers, to understand Jesus himself. The
literal meaning of the Greek niKpirepos is
•* the lesser," not " least " (in the Eevised
Version, in the text we find " he that is but
little," but in the margin "lesser"). By
" lesser" or "little" Chrysostom supposes that
the Saviour refers to liimself as less than
John in age and according to the opinions of
many. " Thus, then, among the sons of men
no prophet greater than John the Baptist
has arisen; yet there is one among yon
lesser in age and perhaps in public estima-
tion, — in the kingdom of God, though, greater
than he." Wordsworth strengthens the above
interpretation by his comment on the words,
"among those that are born of women."
" No one among those bom of human parents
had appeared greater than this John the
Baptist; but do not suppose that he is
greater than I. I am not yewTjThs yvyatKuVf
but OfoS, and though after him in the
gospel because he is my precursor, yet I
am greater than he." This great expositor,
while on the whole preferring the usual
interpretation, yet considers that the ex-
planation which refers "he that is least"
to Christ, is not lightly to be set aside. If
this interpretation be adopted, the usual
punctuation of the passage must be slightly
altered thus: "He that is lesser, in the
kingdom of God is greater than he."

Ver. 29. — And aU the people that heard
him, and the publicans, jnstifled Ood. This
is not, as many expositors have assnmed,
a statement of St. Luke's own as to the
effect of John's preaching on varied classes
of his hearers, but the words are still the
words of Jesus ; it is a continuation of his
eulogy of the Baptist He says here that the
people, " the folk," listened gladly to him ;
they were persuaded in great numbers of
the necessity of a changed life, and were in
consequence baptized by him. The mean-
hig of the term, "justified God," la thai



OH. vn. 1—60.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



176



these, the common folk, by their actions
•nd ready acceptance of the great reformer-
preacher, thus publicly declared that they
nrknowledged the wisdom and goodness of
Gnd in this his work through the Baptist ;
bvt, as is stated in the next verse —

Yer. 30. — But the Pharisees and lawyers
rejected the counsel of Qod against them-
selves, being not baptized of him. The
ruling classes and the highly cultured in
Israel, turned a deaf ear to the fervent
preaching of the gospel ; as a class, they
came not to his baptism. The result of the
refusal of these powerful and learned men
to hear the reformer's voice was that John's
mission failed to bring about a national
reformation. Bejected the counsel of God
ngainet themtelvet, being not baptized of
him The English Version here is not happy,
and might lead to a false conception of the
words of the original. The Greek would
be better and more accurately rendered,
" rejected for themselves the counsel of
God."

Ver. 31. — And the Lord said, Wherennto
then shall I liken the men of this genera-
tion f and to what are they liket The
Master evidently paused a moment here.
Hd souglit for some homely, popular simile
which would drive home to the listeners'
hearts his sad and solemn judgment of the
conduct of the ruling Jews of this time.
The generation he was then addiessing had
been singularly blessed with two great
Divine messages — the one delivered by
that eminent servant of God, John, about
whom he had been speaking In such glow-
ing, earnest terms ; the other message was
his own. He chose for his purpose one of
those everyday scenes from the people's
life, a scene which they had witnessed often,
and in which, no donbt, in past days many
of the by-standers tliemselves had taken
a part — one of those child-games which
the little ones in his day were wont to play
in the summer evenings, and in which,
likely enough, he in his boyish years had
often shared in, as he played in the little
market-place of Nazareth. He likened the
wayward men of that generation to a group
of children of the people in some open apace
of the city, now playing at rejoicings, such
as take place at wedding festivities, now at
wailings, which in Eastern countries accom-
pany funerals ; that is to say, the little group
womd divide itself into two companies, and
one would say to the other, " Come, now we
will play at a wedding ; here are the pipers
and the singers, do yon come and dance and
make merry ; " but the others would not.
Then the little company of would-be merry-
makers would beat their breasts and cry
with pretended sorrow; but the others stiU
deuiiubd lu juiu in the game of mouiuiug —



would not play " at a funeral,'' just as they
refused to join in the game of "rejoicing
at a wedding." To such a band of imperious
little ones, who were angry if the others did
not at once comply with their demands,
Jesus compared the wayward and evil gene-
ration in wliich he and John lived. Had
they not found bitter fault with John be-
cause he had declined to have anything to
do with their wicked self-indulgent feasting
and luxury ? How often had Pharisee and
scribe railed with bitter railings against
Jesus because he would have nothing to do
with their false and hypocritical fastings,
with their pretended shrinking &om what
they deemed unclean and unworthy of them 1
Dr. Morrison puts it rightly, and forcibly :
" They were dissatisfied with John, and
would have nothing to do with him. ' If
we are to have reformers, commend us to
such aa come near us, and visit our houses,
and sit at our tables, and are sociable like
ourselves.' They pretended, on the other
hand, to scorn Jesus, who, while making so
lofty a profession, yet went about eating
and drinking in people's houses, and even
in the homes of publicans and sinners.
' He should have gone into the desert and
lived an abstemious life. . . , Commend ua
to ascetic men for our reformers.' " The
line of interpretation whicli seems to us
simpler and lilted to the framework of the
little parable is in the main thus adopted
by Meyer, Dr. W. Bleek, Bishop Words-
worth, and Dean Plumptre. " You men of
this generation," writes Bishop Wordsworth,
" are like a troop of wayward children, who
go on with their own game, at one time gay,
at another grave, and give heed to no one
else, and expect that every one should con-
form to them. You were angry with John
because he would not dance to your pipiuj;;,
and with me because 1 will not weep to your
dirge; John censured your liceiitiousnesa,
I rebuke your hypocrisy ; you vilify both,
and reject the good counsel of God, who
has devised a variety of means for youi
salvation."

Ver. 33. — For John the Baptist oame
neither eating bread nor drilling wine.
Keferring to his austere life spent in tlie
desert, apart from the ordinary joys and
pleasures of men, not even sharing in what
are usually termed the necessities of life.
He was, in addition, a perpetual Nazarite,
and as such no wine or fermented drinK
ever passed his lips. And ye say. He hath
a deinl. Another way for expressing theii
conviction that the great desert-preacher
was insane, and assigning a demoniacal pos-
session as the cause of madness. Not very
long after this incident the curtain of death
fell on the earthly scene of John's Ufa.
" We fools accounted his life madness, and



17«



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vn. 1— EO.



his end to be withont honour: how is he
nnmbereti among the children of God, and
his lot ia among the saints I " (Wisd. t. 4, 5).
We may be quite sure that "in the fiery
furnace God walked with his servant, so that
his spirit was not harmed, and liaving thus
annealed his nature to the utmost that this
earth can ^o, he took him hastily away and
placed him among the glorified in heaven "
(Irving, quoted by Farrar).

Yer. 31. — The Son of man is come eating
and drinking ; and ye say, Behold a glut-
tonous man, and a vinebibber, a friend of
publicans and sinners! The reproach be-
longed to the general way of ouv Lord's way
of living, consorting as he did with men and
women in the common everyday life of man,
■baring in their joys as in their sorrows, in
their festivity as in their mourning. But
the words specially refer to bis taking part
in such scenes as the feast in the house of
Matthew the publican.

Yer. 35. — ^Bnt vdsdom is Jnstifled of all Iier
children. One of those bright, wise sayings
of the Bon of man which belong not to the
society of Oapemaum and Jerusalem, but
which ere the heritage of all ages. The
-words find their fulfilment in all those holy
md humble men of heart — ^rich as well as
poor — who rejoice in goodness and purity, in
self-denying love and bright faith, whether
it bepreached or advocated by a F^flon
«r a Wesley.

Van. 86 — 50. — The nameU$$ woman who
tKU a tinner, and Simon the Pharisee. As
regards the incident abont to be told, some
aommentators have believed that the anoint-
ing was identical with that related by St.
John as having taken place at Bethany very
shortly before the Oruoifizion. Without de-
tailing the sevei-al points of difierenoe in
the two recitals, it will be sufficient surely
to call attention to the oharaoter of the
Bethany family, Lazarus and his sisters,
the intimate friends of Jesus, to show how
monstrous it wonld be to attempt to connect
the poor sonl who followed the Master to
Simon's home with the sweet Mary of
Bethany. A widely spread and, in the
Western Ohnroh, a very generally received
tradition identifies this woman with Mary
of Magdala— the Mary Magdalene men-
tioned in ch. Ix. 2, and again after the
Crucifixion, in company with the band of
holy women (eh. xxiv. 10). Out of Maiy
Magdalene, we learn, had been oast seven
devils. This, however, gives ns no due to
tdentlfy the two; rather the oontrary. It



is scarcely likely that the apparently well,
known courtesan of the touching story waa
a demoniac.

The earliest writers say nothing respect-
ing the identity of the two. Gregory the
Great, however, stamped the theory with
his direct assertion, and that the Western
Church generally accepted the identification
of the two is clear from the selection of this
narrative of St. Luke as the portion of
Scripture appointed for the Gospel for the
Feast of St. Mary Magdalene (tliis was one
of the feasts omitted by the English Be-
formers from the calendar of the Prayer-
book of 1552).

It is impossible to decide the question
positively. One modem commentator of
distinction quaintly pleads for Gregory the
Great's rather arbitrary theory, by sug-
gesting that there is no sufficient reason to
disturb the ancient Christian belief which
has been consecrated in so many glorious
works of art; but, in spite of this, the
opinion which considers " the woman which
was a sinner " the same person as " the
Magdalene^" is really based on little else
than on a mediseval tradition.

St. Luke alone relates Ibis toudiing story.
We can conceive the joy of Paul when this
"memory of the Master" came across him.
It so admirably illustiates wbat this great
teacher felt was his Master's mind on the
aU-important subject — the freenest and
univeriality of talvation.

It seems likely enough that Dean Plnmp-
tre's interesting conjecture respecting this
scene in the Pharisee Simon's house is cor-
rect. " Occurring, as the narrative does, in
St. Luke only, it is probable enough that
the 'woman which was a sinner' became
known to the company of devout women
named in the following chapter (viii. 1 — 3)
and that the evangelist derived his know-
ledge of the fact from them. His reticence
— ^probably their reticence — as to the name
was, under the oiroumetances, at once natural
and considerate." No special note of time oc
of tlie locality is appended. If this tinner
was one and the same with the Magdalene,
then the city implied is certainly Magdala,
the modem mud village of ElMejdel, but
at that time a populous wealthy towa oa
the Lake of Galilee. If, as we believe, the
two were not identical, the city is mosl



OH. vn. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



177



probably Capernanin, the nmal reBidenoe of
oar LoT<L

Yer. 86. — And one of the FhariseeB desired
him that he would eat with him. And he
went into the Pharisee's honse. Up to this
period the relations between our liord and
the dominant parties in the capital had not
reached a state of positive hostility. The
Pharisees, as the chief among these parties
in the state, had taken the initiative, and
were sbarply watching One whose influence
among the people they more than snspected
was hostile to them. But they had not
as yet declared him a pnblio enemy and
blasphemer. This wealthy Pharisee, Simon,
was eridentlTi like others of his sect at this
time, waveruig in his estimate of Jesos. On
tlie one hand, he was naturally influenced by
the hostile vie ws entertained at head-quarters
concerning the Qaliltsan Teacher; on the
other, personal intercourse with the Master,
the acto he had witnessed, and the words he
bad heard, disposed him to a reverential
admiration. Simon evidently (ver. 39) had
not made np his mind whether or not Jesua
was a Prophet. His soul, too— this we gather
from ver. 42 — had received some great
spiritual good from his intercourse with the
Master. But though he invited him to be a
guest at his house, and evidently loved him
(ver. 47) a little, still he received his Divine
Guest with but a chilling and coldly cour-
teous reception. Not unlikely Simon the
Pharisee knew lie was watched tliat day,
and that among his guests were men who
would report every action of his on that
occasion to the leaders of his party in
Jerusalem. His cold courtesy, almost lack
of courtesy, towards the Master was thus
[irobably the result of his fear of man and
of man's judgment. And sat down to meat ;
litorally, reclined. The Jews at that time
followed in their repasts the Greek (or
Boman) custom of reclining on couches ; the
guest lay with his elbows on the table, and
his feet, unsaiidalled, stretched out on the
couch.

Ver. 87. — And, behold, a woman in the city,
wbieh was a sinner, when she knew that
Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's house.
The text in the older authorities is more
forcible : " a woman which was a sinner in
that city." Her miserable way of life would
thus be well known to Simon and other of
the guests. This sad detail would serve to
bring out the contrast in more vivid colours.
In these (tiental feasts the houses were
often left 'pcan and uninvited utrangers
frequently passed in through the open court-
yard into the guest-ufaamber, and looked
on. She had heard Jesus already, perhaps
often, and liad drunk in his pleading words,
begging sinners to turn and to come to him

LDKB.



for peace. Perhaps what had decided her to
take this step of boldly seeking out the
Master were words apparently spoken about
this time (in St. Matthew's Gkispel they
foUow directly after the discourse respect-
ing the Baptist just related), " Come unto
me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden,
and I will give you rest," etc. (Matt. xi. 28 —
30). It was t bold step for one like her to press
uninvited, in broad daylight, into the honse
of a rigid purist like Simon ; but the know-
ledge that Jesus (though personally, as she
thought, she was unknown to him) was there,
gave her courage; she felt no one would
dare to thrust her out of the presence of the
strange loving Master, who so earnestly
had bidden the sin-weary come to him, and
he would give them rest I Bronght an
alabaster box of ointment. Pliny mentions
alabaster as the best material for pcits or
vessels intended for these precious oint-
ments. It was softer than marble, and
easily scooped into pots or bottles. These
costly nnguents and cosmetics were much
used by the wealthy Boman ladies. The
precious ointment poured over the Be-
deemer's feet had probably been originally
procured for a very different purpose. The
word nipoy, translated " ointment," was used
for any kind of sweet-smelling vegetable
essence, especially that of the myrtle.

Ver. 88. — And stood at his feet behind
him weeping, and began to wash his feet
with tears, and did wipe them with th»
hairs of her head, and Idssed his feet, and
anointed them with the ointment. It had
been, no doubt, with her a settled purpose
for days, this presenting herself to the
pitiful Master. She had been one of his
listeners, without doubt, for some time pre-
viously, and that morning probably she
made up her mind to approach him. He
was a great public Teacher, and his move-
ments would be well known in the city.
She heard he was to be present at a feast in
the house of the rich Pharisee Simon. It
would lie easier, she thought, to get close to
him there than in the crowd in the market-
place or in the synagogue ; so taking with
her a flask of perfumed ointment, she
passed into the courtyard with others, and
so made her way unnoticed into the guest-
chamber. As slie stood behind him, and the
sweet words of forgiveness and reconcilia-
tion, the pleading invitation to all heavy-
laden, sin-burdened ones to come to him for
peace, which she in the past days had
listened to so eagerly, came into her mind,
unbidden tears rose into her eyes and fell
on the Master's feet as he lay on his couch ;
and, after the mariner of slaves with their
masters, she wiped the tear-wet feet with her
long liair, which she evidently loosed for this
loving purpose, and then quietly poured the



178



THE GOSPEL ACOORDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vil 1—50.



fragrant otntment on the feet where her
tears liad fallen. It was the perfnme of the
oiDtment which called the host's attention
to this scene of sorrow and heartfelt peni-
tence.

Ver. 39. — Now when the Pharisee which
had bidden him saw it, he spake within him-
self, saying, This Man, if he were a Prophet,
wonld have known who and what manner
of woman this is that tonoheth him, It is
clear that it was no mere curiosity which
prompted his asking the Master to be his
(juest. Respect and love for the Galileean
Teacher alternated with dieted of what the
Pharisee order to which he belonged would
think of his conduct. As we have said, he
compromised the matter with his heart, by
inviting Jesus publicly, but then only re-
ceiving him with the coldest formality.
He seems half-glad of this incident, for it
seemed in some measure to excuse his
haughty unfriendly reception of One from
whom he had undoubtedly received rich
spiritual benefit, as we shall see further on.
" Hardly a great Prophet, the ', after all, else
he would have known all ahr, \ her." This
was what at once occurred Simon. For
she is a sinner. Yes, in SimL .'s mind, and
in the world's estimation, but before the
throne of God she was differently viewed.
Bbe had heard the Master's loving call to
repentance, and a new life and a change had
taken place in her whole being since she
had listened to his voice.

Ver. 40. — ^And Jesus answering said nnto
him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
thee. And he saith, Master, say on. How
accurately did the Master read Simon's
heart. Not a real Prophet because he was in
ignorance of the character and life of the
woman whom he suffered without rebuke to
pour the fragrant ointment over him I We
almost lee the half-sad smile flickering on
the Teacher's lipa as he turned and spoke
to bis host. Such a parable-story as Jesus
was about to give utterance to was no un-
common form of teaching on such an occa-
sion when a well-known Rabbi like Jusus
was Guest at a festal gathering.

Vers. 41, 42. — There was a certain
creditor which had two debtors: the one
owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty.
And when they had nothing to pay, he
frankly forgave them both. The illusi ration
WKS from the everyday life of the people.
This lending and borrowing was ever a pro-
minent feature in the common life of the
Jews. Pointed warnings against greed and
covetousness, and the habit of usury, and tlie
love of perpetual trafficking, we fin 1 in all
the Old Testament books, notably in Deute-
ronomy, and then centuries later in the Pro-
verbs, besides repeated instances in the pro-
phetic writings and historical books. The



character of the Jews in this respect has
never changed from the days of their nomad
life — from the times of their slavery under
the Pharaohs to our own day. In this par-
ticular instance the two debtors were of the
common folk, the sums in question being
comparatively small ; but in both casei
the debtors could never hope to pay their
creditors. They were alike hopelessly in-
solvent, both helplessly bankrupt. The
larger sum, considering the relative value
of money, has been computed only to have
represented about £50 of our corrency.
And the two received from their creditor
a free, generous acquittance of the debt
which would have hopelessly ruined them.
In the mind of Jesus the larger debt
pictured the terrible catalogue of sina which
the penitent woman acknowledged she had
committed ; the smaller, the few transgres-
sions which even the Pharisee confessed to
having been guilty of. They were both
sinners before God, both equally insolvent
in his eyes ; whether the debt was mucli or
little was to the almighty Creditor a
matter of comparative indifference — he
frankly forgave tliem both (better, " freely,"
the Greek word dxapia-aro signifies " forgave
of his gtnerous bounty"). The Eevisera
simply tr mslate " he forgave," but some-
thing more is needed to reproduce the
beautiful word in the original. " t^ankly," in
the sense of " freely," is used by Shake-
speare —

" 1 do beseech your grace . . .
. . . now to forgive me frankly."
('Henry VUI,,' act u. so. L)

Ver, 43. — Thou hast rightly judged.
" Come, now, I will show thee what I meant
by my little story, in tliine answer. Thou
hast judged thyself. Thou art the man
with the little debt of sin, as tbon thinkest,
and the little love given in return for the
cancelled debt; for see liow thou hast treated
me thy Guest, and how she has made up for
thy lack of friendship and courtesy." The
following contrasts are adduced by the
Master : " Thou didst not provide me with
that which is so usual to oflfer guests — I
entered into thine house, thou gavest me no
watt-r for my feet" (in tliose hot dusty
countries, after walking, water to wash the
feet was scarcely a luxury, it was rather a
necessity); "in thy house the only water
which has touched my feet was the warm
rain of this sad woman's tears."

Ver. 45. — Thou gavest me no kiss: but
this woman since the time I came in hath
not ceased to kiss my feet. " Thou gavest me
no kiss of respect on entering, to which as a
Kabbi I was surely entitled ; she hath re-
peatedly kissed my feet."

Ver, 46. — My head with oil thou didst not



OH. vn. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



179



anoint; but this woman hath Bnointed my
feet with ointment. " It never entered thy
thoughts to pay me the homage — and yet
I had helped thee, too, a little — of pouring
oil on my head " (this was by no means an
unusual mark of respect in the case of an
honoured guest; to one who, under the
burning sun of Falestiue, had n:alked, per-
haps, some distance, this pouring oil over
the head was a great comfort and refresh-
ment) ; " but she hath anointed, not my
head, she shrank, poor soul 1 from doing this ;
but my feet. And, too, it was no common
oil wluch she used, but precious, fragrant
ointment. A cold, loveleu welcome, indeed,
my Pharisee friend, was thine I Thon
tUnkest it honour enough the mere admit-
ting the carpenter's Son to thy table: no
need of these special tokens of Triendship
for thy Guest — the water for the feet, the
kiss for the face, the oil for the head. It
were a pity, siu'ely, for the great world at
Jerusalem to look on thee as tlie friend of
tlie Nazareth Teacher, as on the one Pha-
risee who loved to honour the Galilssan
Reformer."

Ver. 47. — Wherefore I say unto thee. Her
sins, which are many, are forgiven. Again,
as in the synagogue, and no doubt on many
other ocoasiouB, when these words were
uttered, a thrill would run through the
company present. Who was this, then, one
would ask the other, who with this voice
and mien dared to utter such things ? Only
One could forgive sins I Was, then, the
Nazareth Babbi, the great Fhysiciuu, the
Worker of awful miracles — was he the One
whose Name was lost, but the echo of whose
voice still lingered, they hoped, in that
desecrated Holy Laud ? For she loved much.
Are we, then, to understand by this that
her love for Jesus was the cause of forgive-
ness? Many Roman and some Protestant
expositors have lielieved this is (he meanlrg
of the Lord's words. But at once a contra-
diction is given to this interpretation by a
reference to ver. 42, where, after the remis-
■on of the two debts — the great and tlie
little — Jesus asks, "Whi:?h of these will
love him most ? " But had love been the
cause of a forgiveness of either or both of
the debts, the question should have run,
"Which of the two loved him most?"
not " will love him most." In addition to
which the Master guards against any view
of this kind being entertained, by his con-
cluding words (ver. 60), "Thy faith hath
laved thee; go in peace." The principle
on which forgiveness was granted to the
woman was faith, not love. Stier, in his
comment here, writes that the expression
of the Lord, "Her sins, which are many,
are forgiven; for she loved much," is an
arffumenlum, non a eatud, led ah efeetu ; in



other words, " I say nnto thee. Her many sina
are forgiven, and thou must infer from thit
that she loved much, or, she loves much,
for (that is, beeaute) her sins are forgiven."
Stier gives another example of the meaning
of " for " (3t<) in this place : " The sun if
risen [it must have risen], for it is day"
(Stier, 'Words of the Lord Jesus:' Luke
vii. 47). Some may ask — What great amount
of sin is necessary in order to lovittg much f
Qodet well answers, " We need add nothing
to what each of us already has, for the sum
of the whole matter is — to the noblest and
purest of us, what is wanting in order to
We much, is not sin, but the knowledge of
it. But to whom little is forgiven, the same
loveth little. This saying refers to Simon
the Pharisee ; the first saying (in the former
part of the verse) which we have been con-
sidering refers to the woman. The same
principle exactly is presented as in the first
instance, and viewed from the other side—
the less forgiveness, the less love reaults. Our
Lord is very tender in all this to Simun
and men like Simoo. This Pharisee had
evidently tried to live up to his light,
though his life was disfigured with censo-
riousness, narrowness, harshness, and pride
— the many faults of his class. He too
had heard Jesus, and had been moved and
struck by his words, and, after a fashion,
loved him ; only the world — his world — came
between him and liis love, so that it was
only a poor, pale reflection of the real feel-
ing after all. But our Lord gives him full
credit for that little love. He even excuses
its poverty by saying that he, Simon, had
only received a little forgiveness, and there-
fore only a little love was the result. Though
the Lord implies in his sad irony that the
little forgiveness which he had received wa
Simon's own fault, for he did not thinl;. ia
his self-righteousness, that he had any nerd
to be forgiven. " O Pliariasee, parnm diligis,
quia parum tibi dimitti suspicaris ; non quia
parum dimittitur, sed quia parum putas
quod dimittitur" (St. Augustine, 'Serm.'
xcix.). Godet has a deep reflection on this
state of Simon's. He asks, " May forgiveness
be only partial? Then there would be men
half-saved, half-lost. . . . The real forgive-
ness of the least sin certainly contains in
germ a complete salvation, but only in germ.
If faith is maintiuned and grows, this for-
giveness will gradually extend to all the
sins of a man's life, just as they will then
become more thoroughly known and ac-
knowledged. The first forgiveness is the
pledge of all the rest. In the contrary
case, the forgiveness already granted wiU
be withdrawn, just as represented in the
parable of the wicked debtor (Matt, xviii.) ;
and the \\or1< of irrace, instead of becoming
complete, will prove abortive."



180



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vn. 1—60.



Ter. 48. — And he said unto her, Thy sins
KTe forgiven. Then, turning again to the
woman, in her deep penitence, and at the
same time in her deep joy — joy springing
from her newly found peace — ^he formally
renews to her the assurance of that pardon
which she already was conscious of; but in
renening it the Lord mentioned no more
" her many sins," as in the first place (ver.
47), but simply, " thy sins," thus reducing,
as 8tier remarks, at uwt both her and Simon
to a common leveL



Ver. 50. — And he said to the woman, Thy
faith hath saved thee ; go in peace. Then,
with just one solemn word reminding the
people assembled in that e^uest-chamber of
faith, that firm tmst in the goodness and
mercy of God upon which her forgiveness
rested, he dismissed the woman, rousing her
at once from her dreamy ecstasy, sending
her from his presence back again into the
ordinary life of the busy world, but bearing
along with her now his mighty priceless gift
of a peace whidi paiieth understanding.



HOMILBTICa

y«n. 1 — 10. — The centurion. He Is a Soman, whose Inclinations were nstorally
opposed to all that seemed Jewish. He is a heathen by birth, whose early education
was wholly removed from the worship of the Father. He is a soldier with a charge
in the garrison of Capernaum, tempted, therefore, to indulgence in a domineering
s}drit, and to the following of that voice which whispers, " Take thy fill ere death ;
indulge thee and rejoice." What is the portrait presented ? A man deeply in earnest
about religious things, seeking a fuller satisfaction for his need than heathenism can
furnish ; and on an occasion when human feelings are stirred, showing such kindliness,
such gentleness, such deference along with his trust in Jesus, that, having regard to
these qualities, the testimony is given, "I have not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel. Notice some of the features of this great faith.

L Its humilitt. He does not himself go to Jesus. He is only a Gentile. He
will not so far presume as personally to make a request. He sends the elders of the
Jews. Nay, further still, as the time of Jesus' approach draws near, another feeling
arises. Is it not too great an honour that the Son of the Highest should come to his
house? Other messengers are despatched, begging the Master not to trouble himself ;
it is too much to ask him to come under the roof of one who is not worthy to come to
him. " Say in a word, and my servant shall be healed." Great faith sees the greatness
of its object. This heathen soldier has seen the hidden glory of Jesus. The disciples
saw power ; he saw, felt, holiness ; and herein be is our teacher. On the very day of
the preaching of the sermon, he is the illustration of its first Beatitude. What is the
response of Christ ? He entered under the roof of the Pharisee and sat at his table,
but this to the Pharisee was condemnation. We do not know whether he entered the
house of the centurion, but he came into his soul. As St. Augustine says, " In count-
ing himself unworthy that Christ should enter into his door, he was coimted worthy
that Christ should enter into his heart." " To this man will I look . . even to him
that is humble and contrite in spirit."

IL Its bimplioitt. " Say in a word, and my servant shall be healed." Observe
how far he is in advance of the faith even of those who knew Christ best. The sisters of
Bethany, e.g., " If thou hadst been here, my brother had not died." His soldier experi-
ence and habits have come to his aid. Is not Christ the true King of Israel? Are
not legions of angels at his bidding ? Seasoning from himself, with soldiers under him,
he argues — A sentence will suffice. The faith lies in his discernment of Jesus' real
character, and his ready, implicit trust. Note two features in his word. Law : " I am
under authority." WUl : " I have under me soldiers, and I say to this one. Go, and he
goeth; and to another. Come, and he cometh." These features are transferred to the
conception of Jesus. Grand for its simplicity is this inner apprehension of Jesus'
Person. The value of faith is that it opens the mind to the Lord. It is a poor, empty
hand, but it lays hold of the law and the wiU. It is the " Amen " in which the soul
appropriates the health of God's countenance.

III. Its ikflxtenoi:. See the directions along which it wrought. 1. Zeal far the
worship of God. " He loveth our nation." This of itself is sufficiently strange. But
"he hath built us a synagogue." There was a spiritual want in his neighbourhood
Wbat evuses he might have ofiered I " Helo these Jews ? I don't belong to theii



ua. VII. i— 50.] TUE GOSPEL ACCOKDINQ TO ST. LUKE. 181

nation. I am here only for a time," etc But he loved the God of the Jews; and the
grace of God had educated the conviction that wherever the opportunity of usefulness
opens there is the door of service. Faith is always evidenced by a similar zeal, by •
desire to give as we have received, to witness for him to whom we owe ourselvei.
Andrew finds Simon. The woman of Samaria hastens to the city to preach Chriatk
The centurion builds the synagogue. " I have not hid thy righteousness within my
heart : I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation. I have not concealed thy
loving-kindness and thy truth from the great congregation.' 2. An affectionate interest
in the slave. " Diar to him." Cicero apologized in one of his noblest orations for being
concerned about a slave. This soldier's heart is bound up in the menial who waits on
him. May not this menial have been the instrument of the centurion's enlightenment ?
In the first Christian centuries the slaves were often thus blessed. If so, no wonder
that he was gratefuL Be this as it may, a true &ith is a new bond of union with men.
It gives a higher grace and character to every relation, because it invests the human
life with a new sacredness, and reminds us of the equality of all in the love of God.
In receiving God we receive one another. How does St, Paul write of the slave
Onesimus? " A servant, but above a servant, a brother beloved." The sketch in the
gospel is interesting, as a picture of both the good master and the good servant. " Dear
to him," remarks Bengel, pointing to ver. 8, " because of his obedience." The master's
interests are the servant's care. And to the master the dependent is more than " a
hand." A nobler tenderness elevates the connection, and secures a place in the
■ympathieg of the heart. Is there no homily in this touch of sanctified nature for
our time?

Vers. 11 — 16. — TTie vndovfs son. We are indebted to St. Luke for the touching
incidents recorded in these verses. Observe —

I. The spring of the action. " When the Lord saw her, he had compassioiu"
Some of Christ's most notable words and works were associated with, grew out of,
circumstances which presented themselves in the course of his journeyings. There was
no attempt at miracle. There was neither show nor efibrt. Wl at was done was so
spontaneous that it seemed as if he could not help doing it. Here a sad procession
meets his eye. There are specialities in it which touch the fountains alike of Divine
power and of brotherly sympathy. He is " moved with compassion." A beautiful phrase,
which bids us not merely iato but behind the humanity — into the light of such a
sentence as " God so loved the world." What is redemption but the activity ol Divine
emotion? At Nain the compassion of Christ fulfilled itself by sparing an only mju.
The great love wherewith God has loved us has fulfilled itself by not sparing the
only begotten Son. The compassion of Christ, as he approached the gate of the city,
gave one son back to a mother. God's great love has, through the sacrifice of the
cross, brought back many sons to the outstretched arms of a waiting Father. It is
our faith in this infinite compassion that is the source of all our hopes for men. It
cannot be a matter of indifference to the Fnther that one of even his little ones perish.
Tliere are problems, as beaiing on this, which the facts we observe and some intima-
tions of the meekest and lowliest himself suggest — problems so painful and awful that,
in respect of them, we must hold our peace. But, against them, trust in a living God makes
it almost a necessity to cling to this — that, in all possible states, God's compassion has
a way towards the souls he has made. As regards this particular instance, the appeal to
the compassion is threefold : a mother weeps behind the bier of an only son ; a widow
bewails the loss of her only comforter, the support and solace of her desolate heart ;
it is a son, a young mem, with all the possibilities of use in this world cut off, who is
being carried out. In response to this appeal, he is moved; and has he not, in thus
yielding to a pure human impulse, left us an example ? It is right to hold al I impulses
in obedience to reason. We must hold comj'ai-sion with a firm rein; yet it is not to
be restrained by irksome bit and bridle. The best teacher in all benevolences is the
heart, like that of Jesus,

"... at leisure from itself
To soothe and lympathissA,*

IL Thk hamnsb or thb aoiion. Interesting, with regard, first, to the event relateAi



182 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vn. 1—50

Note : L The whisper straight from the heart of the God-Man to the heart of the
sufferer ; " Weep not 1 " 2. The touch of the open coffin, causing ceremonial defilement,
but expressive of the attitude of him who is the "Resurrection and the Life:" "He
came and touched the bier." 3. Then, as the pall-bearers stand still, the word with
power : " Young man, I say unto thee. Arise 1 " What a change is wrought in that
moment, and by that word I " Death is swallowed up in victory." Suggestive and
eloquent when accepted as a symbol of Saviour love and work. Behold in the
action a picture and a prophecy. 1. Hearken to the voice of God, "Weep not I"
" Cure sin," it has been said, " and you cure sorrow." He who was made sin for us,
of whom the forerunner had testitied, " Behold the Lamb of God, that taketh away the
sin of the world 1 " could alune effectually wipe away the tear. The comfort of others
plays on the surface ; his comfort reaches into the hidden place, the hidden cause of
all trouble — it is the cure of sin. Are there now only faint echoes — echoes becoming
fainter and fainter as the ages roll on — of the sentence uttered at Kain? Kay; this
sentence, now that he has ascended and is the Prince and Saviour, giving repentance
and forgiveness of sins, is fuller in its volume and mightier in its force. All that can
give strength, that can inspire with hope, is confirmed and sealed for evermore.
" Weep not 1 " bruised, broken heart, there is in the " strong Son of God, immortal
love," an oil of joy for all your mourning, a garment of praise for every spirit of heavi-
ness. 2. But the dead is there, with Christ ; and the word for the dead is, " Arise I "
Let ns not think only of the physical death. The spiritual and the physical are always
associated in the thought of Christ; and the work at Nain is a symbol of both. As
special Christ-words conjoin " Weep not 1 " and " Arise I " "He saith," writes St. Paul,
quoting no particular saying of God, but the substance of all God's sayings, " awake
thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light 1 "

III. A SPECIAL APPLICATION OF THE SCENE AND ACTION. " ToUUg man, I Say UUto

thee. Arise! " This is the key-note of sermons and addresses to young men. Brother,
too often asleep to the higher meanings of thine own existence — asleep and unconscious
of the presence of him who loves thee, self-indulgent, dead in the death of the self-
seeking worldly mind, the Lord is touching thy bier; the Lord is calling," Arise I " start
from thy sad indifference. Give those who love thee the joy of the morning without
clouds, the new, better life in God. Hear the voice of the Son of God, and thou too
shalt live.

Vers. 18 — 85. — The message of John Baptist, and the discourse oecationed hy it.
Various answers, not now to be discussed, have been given to the question — ^Why did
John send the two followers with the message recorded? The message does seem to
imply that the confidence of the Baptist had become overcast by the sorrow of the
passing hour. Would it have been strange if, hearing of Jesus in the flood-tide of
popular enthusiasm, working and speaking in the power of the Lord, a moment's feel-
ing of weariness stole over the ardent spirit ? " He there, and I here, within the dismal
walls of the prison I He, thinking of all else, and no thought apparently of me I He
increasing more and more, like the sun advancing to the perfect day ; I decreasing
more and more, my sun setting in the thick darkness I Can it be all a reality? Has my
witness been wholly true? What if—? what if—? Jesus of Nazareth, say, 'Art thou
really he ? Tell me, so soon to pass from this earthly scene, that I have followed no
illusion — that verily there is none else to be looked for.' " Other thoughts may have
filled the mind, other motives for the mission may have influenced ; but it brings the
passage very near to us when we trace in it the faltering of futh. For there are
moments of faltering in the history of faith. The sky of our spiritual life is not
always cloudless. All the while the soul may be thirsting for the living Qod, but
it cannot see him ; from within there come voices demanding, " Where is thy God ? "
If a tormenting scepticism visited the honest heart of John, we can understand It,
and feel the more our kinship with him. The wonderful thing would have been il
misgiving had never ruffled the face of his heart ; if no such film had gathered over
his eye as that signified in the question, " Art thou he that should come, or do we look
for another?"

L 'I'HB quBBTioN HAS NOT TBT MiN ITS oouBSB. It expresses the attitude of the
piety of the people, in the roll of whose greatest stands the Baptist's name. It ie



cH,vn.l— 50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LtJKE. 183

gad that to much of the culture of Israel has separated from Israel's hope, has declared
its contentment with a mere barren pantheism; th^t so much of its piety is busied
with the effort to explain away the obvious meaning of the old prophecies, or to deny
their reference to the Anointed One. But the Jew still lives, and tlie land of the Jew
still waits. Pray for the conversion and restoration of Israel, when the people that sit
in darkness shall see the problem solved which has for so long been the stumbliDg-
stone and rock of offence, " Jesus of Nazareth, art thou he who was promised to oome,
or must we continue to look for another ? "

II. Now, OBSERVE THE Loed's ANSWER. It is : 1. A word to John. The reply to the
inquiry is given " in that hour." The messengers are charged to return and tell (vers. 22,
23) what things they saw and heard. The works of Christ are the credentials of his
mission, not because they are miraculous, but because they are the kind ofwoiks appro-
priate to the Sent of God. Eecognizing the supernatural efficacy of Christ's kingdom,
the witness for him is chiefly what he does, what Christianity effects wherever it is
truly received. We see it breathing a new life, inspiring with a new hope, awaking
new powers, putting to flight the armies of the aliens— a power of God to salvation.
Kg. Lady Barker, in her charming letters from South Africa, says, " I feel it inoimibent
on me to bear testimony, not only in this instance and in this colony, to the enormous
amount of real, tangible, common-sense good accomplished among the black races all
over the world by Wesleyan, Methodist, and Baptist missionaries." So, universally,
it is the kind of life which Christ's teaching produces ; it is the wondrous changes in
man himself, and therefore in man's world, which the spirit of his life accomplishes,
which, to all earnest inquirers, settles the issue, " Art thou he that should come ? "
" Blessed " — with gentle authority the Master adds — " blessed is he whosoever shall
find none occasion of stumbling in me." 2. A word concerning John after the messengeri
ham departed. "A word," says Farrar, "of rhythmic and perfect loveliness " (vers.
24 — 28). Mark the conclusion, however — Greater prophet than he now immured in
Herod's gloomy prison never was born of woman. Yet this must be added, he who is
really within the kingdom, who has really received the kingdom in receiving Jesus as
the King, however inferior to him in gifts and force, is a partaker of fuller blessing and
privilege than he. " With all my imperfections," said Bunscn, on his dying bed, " I
have ever striven after the beat. But the best and noblest is to have known Jesus Christ,"
3. A word to the unsympathetic and opposing Pharisees and lawyers. The people
endorse the eulogy passed on John; but the Pharisees and lawyers frown. It is with
reference to their unreasonable petulance that the sentences vers. 31 — 35 are spoken.
What could satisfy such carpers ? Verily, their successors are to be found in our day.
The mind that is enmity against God will make faults, will twist any evidence, will
imitate the children who will not be pleased, no matter what is done to evoke their
response. Poor pedants! "they must stay in the dark until they are tired of it."
Very different from such are the children of the true wisdom. They recognize and honour
her under different types and forms. Wherever they see the prints of her shoes, there
they love to put their feet also. " Wisdom is justified of all her c'liildren."

Vers. 36 — 50. — The woman who wa» a sinner. It is a truly lovely story which the
evangelist tells— one of those passages in the life of Christ which we are never tired of
reading, and as full of meaning as it is full of beauty. We may regard . t from many
points, and present its didactic force in many ways. Perhaps we shall best ensure
the reception of its various lights by studying the portraiture of character wMch it



L There is Simon the Pharisee — Jesus' host on the afternoon of the day whose
earlier part had been signalized by the mighty work at Nain. The notable thing about
this Simon is that he meets our view as the type of that anonyiuous, yet most
powerful, influence which we call society. He is one of the priests of that goddess
which society, everywhere and in every time, worships — Respectability. A Pharisee !
that is as it should be. The Herodians were a base, courtly party, fawning on the
Hwodian dynasty, and therefore outside religious society. The Sadducees were latitu-
dlnarians. Some of them were clever, and had much to do with the intellectual Me of
the nation ; but, on the whole, they were a cold-blooded sect which could not command
the vote of society. The correct course was to be the Pharisee. That secured the sooia!



1^4 Tfite GOSrEL ACCOSDING TO ST. LtJKE. [oh. Vn. 1—50

place, put one right with the Church and the world, for this life and the next. Th«
odour of sanctity clung to the profession ; it intimated a certain aristocratic position
— a position among the elect of the heavenly kingdom. Simon the Pharisee is in
society. And the desire that Jesus should eat with him, the entertainment which he
offered Jesus, is in behalf of society. That must have its lion. It takes up one
to-day and dismisses him to-morrow, but a lion it must have. Sometimes the lion
is a religious person ; a great preacher or a great author becomes, for the time, the
fashion. Jesus of Nazareth was the hero of the hour. Everybody spoke of him,
of what he did, said, was. This priest of society must give him a dinner. We need
not suppose secret hostility. Simon seems to have been willing to know more of
Jesus than he did know, to study him as a phenomenon with at least a measure of
interest. But he is the patron. The courtesies which would have been extended to
the privileged few are omitted. Is not this Jesus only a Peasant-Preacher? Further
still, the conduct of the Pharisee is representative of the separatist side of society, not only
toward Jesus, but toward the sinner. It is without generosity of feeling ; it is narrow,
bitter when its canons are broken. That horrid creature to come to his table and
touch his guest I — is it not monstrous ? He a Prophet ? That he should let her go near
him, that she should bestow her caresses on him^t^'U is sufficient to dispose of the
claim. He could not imagine any purpose of the visit except an evil one ; and such
a visit was a disgrace to his house. For Bespectaliility, hard in its judgment, is
always selfish, always thinking how a thing will look, what is becoming or proper,
how it can he protected and preserved. Holiness seeks the sinner ; it will give itself
for him. Respectability bids the sinner away. Ah ! this Simon is a figure most con-
spicuous in our lifel Kespectability is the Juggernaut-car which rolls through our
midst ; and, as it rolls, multitudes rush forward and lay themselves prostrate before it.
It has a place for Jesus ; it will patronize him. Jesus has a word for it, a terribly
scathing word. " Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee."

II. Theeb 18 THK WOMAN. Who she was we know not. There is really nothing
to confirm the old tradition which identifies her with that Mary called Magdalene,
referred to in the following chapter, out of whom seven devils were cast. Whoever
she was, she is known by only one feature — she was a sinner, an abandoned woman of
the city. Perhaps she had heard some word of the gentle Prophet as he passed
through the street. In some way " the Dayspring from on high " had visited her.
And — not so dif&cult a matter in an Eastern house — she forced her way to his presence.
Poor, weary one, for whom, for many and many a day there had been no sunshine —
a mere plaything of coarse and wicked menl Observe her action as recorded in
vers. 37, 38. It is to her that the Lord turns ; he has glances and words for her which
he has not for the priests of Bespeotability. From her heart proceed the welcomes
which the Pharisee had denied him (vers. 44 — 16). Yes, in the social outcast there
is often a preparation for Christ, a power of self-abandoning, simple trust, which la
wanting in the Pharisees of society, with their forms and phylacteries, the pomp and
pride and circumstance of the he-worshipped Respectability.

_ III. The dbalino of Jesus is " a precious history, the sweet kernel of which poor
linners will never exhaust." Consider his words about the woman, and his words
to the woman. 1. The word in the forty-seventh verse — let us see that we rightly
apprehend it. The meaning is not, as might hastily be gathered, " forgiven because of
her much love," as if the love were the reason of the forgiveness. That would be equal
to putting the rill before the spring. There are two kinds of " for" — the " for " causal,
and the " for " inferential. It is the " for " inferential which we find in Jesus' saying.
" From the love which moved this sinner to me, which constrained her to lavish on
me the signs of respect which thou, Simon, didst omit, thou canst infer that her aini,
which are many, are forgiven. Even as the tree is known by its fruit, so her forgive-
ness is proved by the presence of its appropriate fruit — ^love." This is the view borne
out bj the short r'arable which was the something that Jesus had to say to Simon
(vers. 41 — 43). Suppose that we insist on an interpretation of this parable which
the terms employed in it might warrant, we are met by serious difSculties. For
instance, it might seem to teach that the more, in amount, the debt remitted, th«
more will be the love realized ; that the more of a sinner one baa been, tite more of
• sunt, after conversion, one will be. But we know that this could not be the i



OH.VU. 1— 50] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 185

ing of Christ ; and it was not. It is not the quantity of sins, hut the conscience of sin,
the eense of its sinfulness and hittemess and tyranny, which determines the ques-
tion of the larger or smaller dehtor. In the case before us, one steeped in iniquity
represents the larger, the Pharisee the smaller. But, to prove that the consciousness
of owing a great debt — the being, in one's own judgment, the five-hundred-pence
debtor, yea, the chief of sinners — does not involve a wicked conrse of life, recollect
the Apostle Paul, who had been zealous towards God above his equals. When he
thinks of his " exceeding madness" against Jesus, he confesses, "I have nothing to
pay. No debt could have been greater than mine, wretched man that I am." The
much love is measured by the sense of there having been much forgiven. The love
is as the knowledge of sin. If you think there is little to forgive, you will love only
little. 2. There are two words to the woman herself (ver. 50). " He said to her.
Thy sins are forgiven." An absolution, accepted by all who heard it, as full and
authoritative. They are amazed : " Who is this that even forgives the sins ? " Oh I
who is he? Hartley Coleridge finely says —

" All the blame
And the poor malioe of the worldly shame
To her were past, extinct, and out of date ;
Only the sin remained, the leprous Btate."

It was to this leprous state that the word went down. With the voice of a declared
pardon, there was felt the power of a new purity. " Daughter, thy sins are sent away
from between thy God and thee. They are blotted out, no more to be remembered.
And lol as thou art justified, thou art washed throughly from tliine iniquity, and
cleansed from thy sin. Thy faith hath saved thee " (ver. 50). The Lord gave no
heed to the murmurs of those reclining at table. He answers these murmurs by not
answering, or rather, by this additional word to the woman. The salvation was the
entrance of forgiving love ; and it was the trust in him that drew her to the Pharisee's
house, which had opened her soul to his healing power. The power is only, is wholly,
in him, but the faith is the condition and the means of the deliverance. " Saved,
rejoicing sinner, go in peace." Wondrous, glorious gospel 1 his, hers, who wills to
have it as the poor woman willed I Sinners of modern Christendom, you must be
stripped of all the soft complacencies of Pharisaic righteousness ; consciously poor and
needy — sinners, and nothing else, you must get to the Christ of God. Until thus
you have reached him, there is only a " something to say to you." The frank forgive-
ness, the fulness of the eternal life, is when he looks into the clinging loul, whan ha
says, " Thy £uth hath saved thee ; go in peace."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 10. — Faith in its/ulnesi. The greatness of the centurion's fidth is attested
by our Lord himself; he declared that it was superior to anything be had "found in
Israel." We see evidence of its fulness in that —

I. It triumphed over nationai. pbejttdiob. Here is a Roman exercising the
most perfect confidence in a Jew — putting one in whom he was closely and deeply
interested into the hands of an Israelite. We must remember all the pride of the
Romans as such, and all their hatred as well as contempt of the Jews, to realize the
fulness of this triumph.

II. It was based on comparatively blender evidenok. "When he heard of
Jesus, he sent." Clearly, then, he had not seen him, had not witnessed his works, had
not listened to his wisdom ; he was without the larger part of the evidence which wae
before the people of that neighbourhood. He had but "heard of" him, and yet he
l>elieved in him.

IIL It was chebibhbd in spite or consoious unwobthinkbs. He took a very
humble view of himself. This we gather from his action in sending the elders of the
Jews to intercede on his behalf (ver. 3), and from his language in stating that he was
not worthy that Christ should " enter imder his roof" (ver. 6). Yet had be such an
assurance of our Lord's kindness of heart that he was persuaded he would pity and
help Mm, notwithstanding this undeservedness on hit part.



186 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE- Ten. -73. 1— 6a



IV. It assumed that Christ would respond to a bespectfuIi and babnest

PLEA.

V. It showed a wonderful confidence in his ability to heal. The sending
of the jeputation, in the first instiinoe, showed the confldence of the centurion in the
power of Christ. But the fulness ol his faith in this direction was manifested in the
sending of the second deputation — in charging them with that most striking message
(vers. 6 — 8). It is interesting to notice how the soldierly profession, which might
well seem to he most unlikely to help a man to discipleship to the Prince of peace, did,
in fact, sprv" him in good stead. It enabled him to grasp fully the idea of Divine
authority. He was, he said, a man who knew well what was meant hy command and
obedience. He was accustomed to obey implicitly those who were over him in position,
and he was also in the habit of receiving the full and immediate obedience of those
who were under him. To them he said, " Come," and they came ; " Go," and they
went. Whatever forces of nature this Divine Healer might wish to employ, he had
only to do the like ; he had but to command, and they would instantly obey. Thus
his military training helped him to a faith in the authority and power of Christ which
distinguished him above others, and which brought down the blessing he sought
(ver. 10). We learn : 1. l"bat unbelief in Jesus Christ is wholly inexcusable in us
Consider how, in contrast with this centurion, we have no prejudice to overcome, but
have been baptized into (or brought up in) the faith of Jesus Christ. Consider also
how, in contrast with this man, we have had constant access to the Saviour, and are
the children of privilege in the fullest sense of the word. And consider also what
evidence we have had before us of Christ's willingness and power to save in all that we
have heard, read, and seen. 2. The validity of any sincere belief, weak or strong. It
may be that something in our spiritual constitution or in our religious training may
make us incapable, at the beginning, of exercising so strong a faith as that here illus-
trated. This need not, and must not, keep us from making an appeal to the Saviour.
N'ot all that sought his aid had faith like this ; yet he healed them also. We must
(lime as we are and as we can. He is One that " does not break the bruised reed."
A faith that is feeble, but sincere, will not go home unblessed, — 0.

Ver. 6. — Patriotism and piety. The mutual respect shown here by Jew and
lloman is very pleasing, and the more so that it was so rare. Disdain rather than
regard, hatred rather than aficction, characterized both peoples ; and it is a very
Agreeable change to find so different a state of mind. Here the Roman loves the
Jewish nation, and the elders of the Jews come out to serve the Roman. The plea
which they present to Christ, that out of attachment to their nation he had built them
a synagogue, was very forcible, and it did not fail. The conjunction of the two
clauses of the text suggests the close connection between piety and patriotism.

I. OuB indebtedness to the relioion op oub hativb land. The centurion
loved the nation, and why ? The Jew had one thing to give the Roman, and that was
a very great thing. Civilization, military science, and law, were of the Roman ; but
" salvation was of the Jews " (John iv. 22). This Roman, who probably saw many
things in Galilee that he pitied, found something that first surprised, then convinced,
then satisfied and ennobled him — he found a true theology and a pure morality. With
this he found rest of soul, domestic purity, health and sweetness of life ; he became
another man, and lived another life. He was indebted to the religion of this country
of his adoption. What do we owe to the religion of the land in which we were bom ?
IIow much more do we owe to the Christianity we have learned in England than the
centurion (of the text) owed to the Judaism he learned in Galilee ! Our holy faith,
taught us in childhood and impressed upon us through all our days, has brought into
our view a heavenly Father, a Divine Saviour and Friend, a Holy Spirit and Comforter,
a blessed service, a godly brotherhood, a noble life, a glorious hope of immortal blessed-
ness. What shall we render to the country of our birth which has trained us in such
truths as these 1

II. Our best acknowledgment. This man " loved the nation and built them
a synagogue." What better thing could he do than this ? What kindlier or tniei
service could he render them ? Those synagogues had been the homes of devotion
Rod the sources of sacred instruction for four hundred years, and they had rendered



OH. TO, 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 187

inestimable seivice to the nation. The influences which radiated from them had kepi
the people loyal to their faith, and had preserred in them all the better qualities they
possessed. And what can we do to serve the country wliich has nouriiihed us in the
faith of Christ? We can do all that lies in our power to promote its material pros-
perity, to secure its freedom, to extend its knowledge and intelligence. But, these not
being left undone, there is one thing more which is greater than these — we ca.a promote
its piety. By so doing we shall serve it in the highest sphere ; we shall be doing that
which will gain for it the favour of Almighty God ; we shall be indirectly serving it in
all other ways, for the children of God will be the best citizens of tijeir country in any
and every department of human action. And how shall we best prumote the piety of
our land? 1. By living a devout and upright life in our own humble spliere. 2. By
making known, in all open ways, the distinctive truths of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
3. By supporting the institutions which are closely connected with it — its edifices, iti
societiei, its homes. — 0.

Vers. 13 — ^16. — C^irist visiting and ahiding. We cannot wonder that the people
exclaimed as they did, " God hath visited his people," when they witnessed such
a miracle as this. It was clear enou<ih that One from the heavenly world was with
them, manifesting Divine power and pity. We have here —

L A TouoHiira fiotube or the extremes of human jot and sobbow. The
great darkness of death had overshadowed a human home ; death had come to a young
man, one who had passed through the perils of early life, and had qualified himself for
the larger duties and weightier obligations of manhood ; one, therefore, to whom life
was peculiarly dear and precious. This young man was an only son, in whom all his
mother's love had centred, on whom she leaned as her one sup|>ort ; and she was a
widow, most needing the solace of affection, least able to dispense with the prop that
was left her. A supreme sorrow was hers. Then came a sudden revulsion of feeling.
Just at the very hour when grief was at its very depth, as the youDg man was being
carried to his grave, he is restored to her. The inanimate form is quickened to a new
life ; there is " a light upon the brows " which is not " the daylight only," but t he light
of consciousness ; the stilled tongue speaks again ; the pallor of death gives place to the
hue of health. Her son is hers again; her home is home again ; she takes back her
life with his. A more complete rebound from uttermost sorrow to intensest peace and
joy can never have been known.

II. Chbist'b cbownino act of AUTHENnoATiOM. When our Lord sent back his
reply to John we are not surprised that he mentions, as the crowning instance of his
power, that " the dead are raised" (ver. 22). Much as it was to give sight to the blind
and hearing to the deaf and activity to the lame, much as it was to cleanse the lepers
of their foul and terrible disease, it was very much more to restore the dead to life.
That was the supreme and sovereign act, proving that Jesus did come forth from God,
and was what he claimed to be. That was a power beyond all tiie skill of human
science, beyond all the arts of necromancy ; it bespoke the near presence of the Divine.
Surely God was visitmg his people.

III. A PBOPHEOY OF THE PEBSENT AND THE liASTINQ MISSION OF THE DiTINB

Restores. What Jesus Christ visited this world to do for the bodies of men he now
lives and reigns to do for their souls — to restore them to newnt^ss of life. He is with
us always, here on earth, " not to sojourn, but to abide " with us, exercising a far more
glorious power than that he put forth at the gates of the city of Kain. That young
man hsd another lease of life ; to the days that he had spent on earth there were
added a certain number more. Then he sickened again, and died ; and death and the
grave claimed their own. But when Jesus Christ, our Divine Saviour, now confers
spiritual life, he awakens us to an existence (1) which is far higher than the mortal
life we are living here, and (2) which is not limited by a few years. The great work
of restoration which the risen Saviour is now accomplishing is that of which his work
below was but the preparation and the promise. 1. The death to which this man
succumbed was the type of the spiritual death which is the sad consequence of Aa.
2. To those thus lost to God and man he speaks with sovereign voice, " Arise I " ha
bids them realize their guilt and danger ; he summons them to repentance ; he invites
them to a whulu-hearteJ trust in himself, the Almighty Saviour ; he bids them walk



188 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. tii. 1—60.

thenceforth in the way of his commandments. 3. He restores them to their friends
as those who, under his gracious hand, will be henceforth what they have never been
before. 4. He calls forth deepest gratitude and reverence from all that witness the
exercise of his power and grace. — C.

Vers. 19 — 22. — Euman goodnen and the permaneney of fh» gospel. W« have
here —

L A CONSTANT CHABAOTSRisTio OF HUMAN GOODNESS. How Came John to send
this message? Was he really doubtful — he who had prepared the way of the Lord,
who had baptized him, who had recognized in him the Lamb of God? Even so.
Many ingenious theories account for it in some other way, but they do not satisfy.
After all, was it surprising that John should begin to doubt ? He had been lying in
that lonely fortress by the Red Sea for some months ; constitutionally active and ener-
getic, he had been doomed to enforced idleness, and had had nothing to do but to form
judgments of other people — a very perilous position ; what he heard about Jesus may
very well have seemed strange and unsatisfactory to him. Our Lord's method was
very different from his own. He was living, as John had not done, in the very midst of
the people ; he was not drawing great crowds whom he excited to tempestuous feeling,
but acting, with calm and deep wisdom, on smaller numbers ; he was not living an
ascetic life; he was not making any very great way according to ordinary human
measurement; and John, writhing in captivity, and longing to be out and about in
active work, allowed his mind to be affected, his belief to be disturbed, by what he
heard and by what he did not hear. Nothing could be more natural, more human.
This is human goodness all the world over. Nobility of spirit, self-sacrifice, devout-
ness, zeal, and infirmity, the partial subsidence of his faith. Who that knows the
history of human goodness can be surprised at this ? We must take this into the
account in our estimate of good men. Infirmity is a constant element of human cha-
racter. Perfection among the angels of God; perfection for ourselves further on among
the glorified; meantime we may bestow our heartiest affection and our unstinted
admiration upon those who are aspiring and endeavouring after the highest, but who
sometimes fail to be all that they and we could wish that they were.

XL The best proofs of the Divine power and vibtub. Christ adduced two
powerful proofs that he was indeed the " One that should come." 1. The exerciu of
benignant power. In that same hour he healed many that came to be cured, and he
said to John's disciples, " Go and show your master what benignant power I am exer-
cising ; not smiting my enemies with blindness, but making the l>lind to see ; not
punishing the liar with leprosy, but pitying the poor leper and makins him clean ; not
raining down fire from heaven on the obdurate, but calling back to life those who had
entered the dark region of the dead ; visiting the homes uf men with health and life
and joy." 2. Love for the lowly. " Go and tell John that I am caring much for those
for whom men have not cared at all, instructing in heavenly wisdom those whom other
teachers have left untaught, lifting up those whom other reformers have been content
to leave upon the ground, making heirs of the outcast, making rich for ever the penni-
less and hopeless — say that ' the blind receive their sight, and the deaf hear,' etc., and
foraet not to add that ' to the poor the gospel is preached.' "

As these disciples came to our Master, so do some approach us now : they come with
serious, earnest questioning. " Is the Christian system which we preach the system
for our age ? is it still the word we want ? Or is not the world awaiting another
doctrine, another method, another kingdom? Is Jesus Christ the Teacher for us, or
do we look for another?" What is our reply? 1. Look at the benignant power of
the gospel of Jesus Christ. Follow the broad, deep river of beneficence which took its
rise at Bethlehem; see what it has been effecting through all these ages; consider
what it has done, not only for the physical sufferer — for the blind, for the lame, for
the leper, for the lunatic — but what it has done for the poor, for the slave, for the
prisoner, for the savage, for the ignorant, for the little child, for woman; consider
what it has done for the sorrowful, and for those laden and crushed with a sense of
goUt; what it has done for the dying; consider how it has been enlightening and
•ipllftilig and transforming the minds and the lives of men ; what a blessed beneficent

'wer it has been exerting and is as capable as ever of exerting. 2. Look at the care



oi.vn.1— 60.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 18S

which the gospel takes of the lowly. Consider the fact that wherever the truth of
Christ has been preached in its purity and its integrity, man as man has l)eeii
approached; all human suulg have been treated as of equal and incalculable worth, the
poor as well as the rich, the sla^e as well as hid master, the illiterate as well hh ttiu
learned, the unknown and untitled as well as the illustrious. The gospel has gniie
among the people, it has made its appeal to the multitude; it is "the common salva-
tion ; " it does not content itself with imposing a faith and a cultus upon the nation ; it
does not rtst until it has permeated the entire people with the knowledge and the love
of God, and wrought in them the practice of its own pure and lofty principles. Surely
this is not a system for Galilee or Syria ; this is not a doctrine for one age of the
world; it is the ever-living truth of God. Christ ii our Teacher, our Saviour, our
Lord ; we do not look for another. — C.

Ver. 22. — The leprosy of sin. Why specify the fact that the lepers were cleansed ?
Why single out this disease from others that might have been named ? Because it
was peculiarly desirable that, when the Messiah came and gave credentials of his
heavenly origin, he should exercise his power in this direction. For leprosy was the
chosen type of sin. All disease is pictorial of sin ; it is to our bodily frame what sin is
to the soul — it is inward disorder showing itself in outward manifestation. But
leprosy was that peculiar form of sickness which the Divine Lawgiver selected as the
type of sin. And surely it was perfectly fitted to \m so regarded. We look at —

I. Itb loathsomeness. Why was the leper so rigidly excluded from society? Wa
have no convincing evidence that this was a dangerous, contagious disorder. But the
extreme loathsomeness of the leper's appearance fully accounted for the decree. It was
not fitting that anything so terribly repulsive and shocking should be seen in the
homes and in the streets. Sin is the most odious of all things ; it is " that abominable
thing which God hates." God "cannot look" upon it. In its fouler forms it is
infinitely offensive to the pure of heart.

II. Its diffusiveness. Leprosy was eminently diffusive. It was communicated
from parent to child; it spread from limb to limb, from organ to organ, until it
covered the entire body. Sin is a thing which spreads. It, too, is communicable hy
heredity, and it also spreads from faculty to faimlty. Sin leads to sin. " There's not
a crime but takes its change out still in crime." Theft leads to violence, drunkenness
to falsehood, impurity to deceit. Sin also spreads from man to man, from child to
child, from friend to friend. You cannot circumscribe it ; it passes all lx>unds that
may be set up.

III. Its PITIFULNES8. Who could regard the leper, doomed to a long, perhaps a
lifelong separation from his family and his business and all favourite pursuits, without
heartfelt pity ? Life was worth nothing to him. Sin is condemnable enough ; but it
is pitiable also. Blame the erring, reproach the faulty, remonstnite with the foolish,
but do not fail to pity those whom sin is shutting out from all that is best below, and
from all that is bright above. Pity these with a profotmd compassion, and help them
with an uplifting hand.

IV. Its SEFASATiNQ influencx. As the leper was exiled from mankind and
banished to a severe isolation, so does sin come in as a separating power. 1. It
separates a man from God, opening the wide, deep gulf of conscious guilt. 2. It sepa-
rates man from man. It is not high walls, or broad acres, or unmeastired seas, that
divide man from man ; It is folly, hatred, malice, jealousy, sin.

v. Its deathfulness. In the leper the springs of health were poisoned; there was
a process of dissolution going on ; it was death in life. Sin is death. " She that liveth
in pleasure is dead whUe she liveth," wrote Paul. And our Lord's words imply the
»ime : " Whoso believeth on me, though he were dead, yet shall he Mve.* A man
living apart from God and in rebellion against him is so far from answering the end of
human life that he may be rightly regarded as dead while he lives.

Vi. Its inoubablenesb bt uan. The Jews did not bring the leper to the pln-
lician ; they regarded him as incurable by the art of man. Sin ia incurable by human
methods. Regulations for conduct, vows of abstinence, parliamentary statutes, legal
penalties, do not cure. They may be very valuable as accessories, but they will not
heaL Onlv the Divine hand can accomplish that for the human heart, Ooe there is



190 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vn. 1—60.

who offers himself as the Divine Physician ; he who sent back to John in prison the
convincing meRsage, " The lepers are cleansed." In him is all-forgiving grace and all-
cleansing power. A living faith in him will lead to pardon and to purity. Instead of
loathsomeness, there will be spiritual beauty ; instead of isolation, communion ; instead
of a living death, eternal life. — C.

Ver. 23. — Christ as an offence. " Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in
me." It was simply inevitable that our Lord, if he laid himself out to do the very
best and greatest that could be done, should be an offence to many. " Not to send peace,
but a sword," was a purely incidental, but it was a necessary result of such faithfulness
•8 he showed.

I. The offence to be found in Christ. 1. 3f%« offence of the Messiahship. Our
Lord offended John the Baptist (see preceding homily) by the quietness of his method
and the slowness of his results. He offended Peter by foretelling the sorrows and the
shame to which he was moving on (Matt. xvi. 22). He offended Nicodemus by the
profundity of his teaching (John iii.). He offended the leaders of religion of his time
by denouncing their formality and insincerity. He offended the people by preaching a
doctrine too broad for their narrow-mindedness (oh. iv. 28), too deep for their shallow-
mi ndednesa (John vi. 62 — 66), too elevated for their earthly mindedness. 2. The
offence of the cross. (1) The memory of a cruci6ed Nazarene was a stumbling-block to
the Jew, who expected something very different from this dishonour (1 Cor. i. 23).
(2) The story of a crucified Jew was foolishness to the Greek. With his venerable
mythology, his honoured philosophy, his pride of patriotism, he was not prepared to
put his trust in a malefactor executed in Judsea. 3. The offence of the kingdom. In
one sense, " the offence of the cross " has ceased. It has become the symbol of all that
Ls beautiful in art, refined in culture, strong in civilization. Yet is there everywhere,
yet will there always be, something in Christ that will offend the human soul. For he
requires of us that (1) we empty our minds of preconceived ideas, and approach him
with the docility of children (Matt, xviii. 3) ; (2) we surrender every evil habit, how-
ever dear or valuable it may seem to us (Matt. v. 29); (3) we give the first place in
our thought and our affections to himself, making even our nearest and dearest human
kindred occupy the second place (ch. xiv. 26); (4) we find onr recompense for faithful
lervice in the spiritual and the eternal, rather than in the material ami the temporal;
(5) we accept his Divine favour and enter his service as those who claim nothing and
accept everything at his hand. Many are they who live in our laud, who read our
Christian literature, who sit in our sanctuaries, and who, for ofle of these reasons, are
offended in Christ.

II. The blessedness of those who do not find it ; who come to learn of him
in all docility of spirit ; who cheerfully part with all that he condemns that they may
follow him; who offer to him their undivided heart; who accept his service that they
may receive a spiritual and a heavenly recompense. Blessed, Indeed, are they; for:
1. Their hearts will be the home of a heavenly peace, and a joy which no man taketh
from them. 2. Their life will rise to a noble height of sanctity, of beauty, of usefulness.
3. On their checkered course will fall the sunshine of their Master's blessing — his con-
secration of their joy, his overruling of their sorrow. 4. Their life will end in a calm
and peaceful hope, which will pass into glorious fruition. Blessed, indeed, is he whoso-
ever is not offended in Christ, but cordially accepts him as the Saviour of his spirit and
the rightful Lord of his life. — C.

Vem. 24 — 28. — Christ's estimate of John ; character and privilege. It is pleasant to
think that, immediately after John had intimated liis doubt respecting the Christ, our
Lord spoke in terms of unmeasured confidence concerning John. His language is
strong and somewhat paradoxical, but it admits of • simple explanation. His first
reference to John affirms —

I. His superiority in respect of character. The nobility of John** character
has already been illustrated (see ch. iii.). Its most marked features were : 1. His
cheerful acceptance of privation; living on in the wilderness with nothing to gratify
taste, and barely sufficient to sustain life, though his popularity as a teacher and
prophet would have enabled him to make a very different provision for bimselC



flH.viLl— 50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 191

2. His incorruptible fidelity to the work committed to his charge (ch. iti. 16, 16)

3. His fearless, holy courage — a courage which was based on a sense of God's nearness
to him and his Divine faithfulness toward him ; a courage manifested in public (eh.
ilL 7 — 9), and, what is more and what is worthier, shown in private also in an inter-
view with one strong man who held his earthly destiny in his hand (ch. ilL 19).

4. His rare magnanimity. Xot merely accepting without resentment the fact that he
was to be supplanted by another, but going beyofid that point in spiritual excellence,
and positively rejoicing in the elevation of that other Teacher; stepping down and
giving place gladly to one younger but greater than himself (John ilL 29). We are
not surprised that he " who knew what was in man," who knew the strength and
the weakness of our human nature, said concerning John, " Among those that are bom
of women," etc. (ver. 28).

11, His inferiobitt is besfect or pbivtleqb. " But he that is least in the kingdom
of God is greater than he." We must take the word " greater " as signifying mort
privileged : it will not bear any other meaning. Most assuredly Jesus did not mean
to say that the man who, being within his kingdom, was lowest in moral worth, stood
higher in the favour of God than John. Such a sentiment is quite inconceivable,

gerfectly incredible. But our Lord may very well have meant that any one, however
umble his position in the kingdom (f grt^e, who yet stands within that kingdom, of
which John stf-^ V'ttside, has a distinct advantage over the great prophet. To know
what we, with all our obscurity and incapacity, do know ; to understand and enter into,
as we may do, the glorious purpose of God in Jesus Christ ; to comprehend that, by
that death of shame upon the cross, the Bedeemer of the world is drawing all men
unto him ; and not only to understand all this, but to enter into it by a personal, living
sympathy and co-operation ; — this is to stand on a height to which even John, though
he came in sight of it (John i. 36), did not attain. 1. We are the children of privilege ;
we are " the heirs of all the ages " of thought, of revealed truth. If we will read
reverently, and inquire diligently and devoutly, we may know the mind of God con-
- ceraing us as the greatest of all the prophets did not know it. 2. Let us take care
that we are the children of God; returned from the far country of estrangement and
indifference ; dwelling in the home of the Father's favour ; walking with God daily ;
finding a filial joy in doing and bearing his holy will ; entering by sympathy and effort
into lus holy purpose. — C.

Vers. 31 — 34. — Christian abstinenee cmd participation. These " children sitting in
the market-place " very well illustrate the perverse and contradictory of ail generations.
Many are they, here and everywhere, who will neither dance at the wedding nor
mourn at the Aineral, who will work neither along one line nor yet along its opposite,
to whom all ways are objectionable because their own spirit is out of tune with every-
thing. But the special folly which these children are brought forward to condemn is
that of objecting to John because he was abstemious, and to Jesus because he partici-
pated in the good gifts of God. The right course to take is not that of objecting to
both, but rather that of accepting and honouring both. We shall find, if we care to
look for it —

I. Christian abstemiousness. John came "neither eating nor drinking." He
acted, no doubt, under Divine direction in so doing. But John was not our exemplar.
W<) are not called to follow John, but Christ ; and Christ came eating and drinking.
Is abstinence, then, a Christian course ? It is so; it is justiSed by the language of our
Lord and by that of his apostles. He said that there were some celibates " for the
kingdom of heaven's sake (Matt. xix. 12). And he urged upon men that they should
pluck out their right eye, or cut off their right hand, rather than perish in iniquity
(Matt. V. 29, 30). His apostle wrote that men should neither eat meat nor drink wine,
if by so doing they put a stumbling-block in the way of another (Rom. xiv. 21). And
it is certain that we are acting in a strictly and, indeed, an emphatically ChristiRn
spirit when we : 1. Abstain because indulgence would be perilous to ourselves. I'his
may relate to food or driuk, or to any kind of amusement or occupation, to anything
of any kind in which we find ourselves under a strong temptation to excess if we once
begin. 2. Abstain because our abstinence will make the path of virtue or piety more
accessille to others. Anything wa can do, any privation we may accept, any habit



199 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vn. l—'='0.

we may form, by which we help men upwardi and Godwards, must be an essentially
•nd radically Christian thing.

II. Christian pabtioipation. " The Son of man came eating and drinking." He
was no ascetic ; he « as present at the festivity ; he accepted the invitation to the rich
man's board ; he did not chuose the coarser garment because it was coarser, or the
severer lodging because it was severer ; he did not habitually and conscientiously
decline the gifts of God in nature. He knew how to decline them when occasion
called for it (see ch. vi. 12 ; ix. 58), but be did not do so regularly and as a sacred
duty. Surely it was well for the world that he acted thus; for, had he sanctioned
asceticism, we should have been continually oscillating, or everywhere divided, between
an unamiable severity on the one hand and a degrading self-indulgence on the other
hand. The wise and the true course is that of a Christian participation ; this is a
partaking of the gifts of God and of the sweets and enjoyments of earth, which is :
1. Sanctified by devout gratitude ; by a continual and wholesome mindfulness that
every good gilt is from above, and calls for a grateful and reverent spirit. 2. Controlled
by a wise moderation ; so that nothing is indulged in which is in the smallest degree
excessive ; so that no injury of any kind is done to the spiritual nature. 3. Beautified
by benevolence; the participation by ourselves being very closely and constantly
accompanied by the remembrance of the wants of others. " Eat the fat and drink the
sweet," but be careful to " send portions to them for whom nothing is prepared." — 0.

Ver. 35. — Our treatment of vnsdom. Whatever might have been expected t« bo
the case, the fact is that wisdom has received but poor and sad treatment from the
children of men. We perceive, without any search for ilr—

I. Its BEJEcnoN bt the wobld. 1. Up to the time of the coming of our Lord.
The Eternal Wisdom uttered its voice by the constitution and course of nature, by
the human reason and conscience, by occasional revelation. Bat that voice was
unheard or unheeded. Few, indeed, in every age and land recognized and obeyed it
in comparison with the vast multitudes that remained in ignorance and folly. The
heavens declared the glory of God, but men knew not the hand Divine that moved
the stars in their course. " The candle of the Lord " was kindled, and it shone within
the soul, but men hid it under the bushel of their unholy habits and their perverting
prejudices. Through those long, dark ages Wisdom spake, and (it might be almost
said that) "no man regarded." 2. The coming of Christ. He who totu the very
" Wisdom of God " himself, he who was " the Truth," dwelt amongst us ; and " he
was despised and rejected of men." Those who should have been the first to appreciate
and to welcome him were the first to dislike and to denounce him. " He came unto his
own, and his own received him not." 3. From that time to our own day. Divine
Wisdom, speaking in the gospel of Christ, has been summoning men to reconciUation
with God, to peace, to virtue, to sacred joy, to immortal blessedness ; and the world,
upon the whole, has turned to it a deaf ear, has gone on its own way of folly, has
refused to walk in its light, and to receive its benediction.

II. Its eecognition by its own sons. 1. There were some in the dark days before
Christ who leard and heeded the voice of God. These may have been more numerous
than we have supposed. " In every nation he that feared God and wrought righteous-
ness was accepted of him." There may have been — we may rightly hope that there
were — great numbers of the " children of wisdom " who recognized its voice and
obeyed its teaching. 2. When our Saviour came there were those who recognized his
voice and responded to it. llany of these were women, many of them " little ones,"
despised by the authorities of their day. They did not think him "possessed," nor
charge him with self-indulgence (vers. 33, 34) ; they perceived in him a Divine Teacher,
a true Friend, a gracious Suviour, and thoy " rose and followed him ; " then, indeed,
was "Wisdom justified of all her children." 3. Throughout these Christian ages the same
truth has held. The psalmist prays, " Do good unto those that be good, and to them
that are upright in their hearts" (Ps. cxxv. 4). And while it is true that men of the
most perverse and froward spirit may be so mightily affected by Divine power and
grace that the truth of God breaks through the thickest armour of opposition, yet is it
generally true that it is only they who have the spirit of wisdom in them — "the

'ildien of wisdom " — wb<i enter the kingdom of truth and righteousness. "Only the



OH. Til. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. 193

good discern the good," writes one of our truest poets and deepest thinkers. It is only
they who are sincere seekers after the truth who reach the goal. It is " to the upright
that there ariseth light in the darkness ; " it is to the pure and the upright and the
merciful that God shows himself to be such, and by them is seen to be such (Ps. cxii. 4 ;
XTiii. 25, 26). We cannot see the wisdom, the faithfulness, the kindness, the mercy of
God, while our hearts are wrong with him. But when we ourselves are right with God,
and wc have so much of the spirit of goodness in us that we may be called the children
of wisdom, then God's dealings with our race, with our Church, with our family, with
ourselves, are recognized as the just and kind and faithful things they are, and in our
experience " Wisdom is justified of all her children." (1) We need not be surprised if
God's manifestations of himself in his Son or in his providence are misinterpreted. That
is to be expected in the case of the children of error. (2) If we are pining and com-
plaining under the hand of God, and are supposing ourselves ill treated, we may be
Bure that what is needed by us is not sometliing done for us, but a cliauge wrought
within us. For that we must seek in humility and in ptayur. — C

Vers. 36 — 50. — Loving and forgiving. The peculiarity of Oriental customs, together
vith the earnestness and eagerness of this penitent, will account for her effecting an
entrance into the house of this Pliarisee, and gaining access to the feet of our Lord.
The lessons we gain from this most touching incident are —

L That there is fkbe and full foeqiveness fob the woest. It is somewhat
striking that, although Old Testament Scripture abounds in passages which attest the
greatness of God's mercy to the repentant, the Jews of our Lord's time had no place
for such in their system or their practice. This could not be from imfamiliarity with
the sacred record ; it rather arose from ignorance of themselves. They did not
acknowledge any sin in their own souls, any shortcoming in their own lives. Simon
probably thought that Jesus was putting the debt which represented his obligation
(fifty pence) at a high figure. And, thus mistaking themselves, it is not to be
wondered at that they took a false view of their neighbours ; that they looked upon
those who were outwardly bad as hopelessly iixeooverable. But not so the Saviour.
By action as much as by language he made it clear that the guiltiest of men and the
worst of women might come in penitence and be restored. That is the valuable and
lasting significance of his attitude on this occasion. His treatment of this woman,
together with his gracious words to her (ver. 48), are to us, as tliey ever will be, the
Btrong assurance that those whom we must unsparingly condemn and most scrupu*
lously exclude may fiind mercy at his feet.

II. That not heh liOVE but heb penitence was the ground of hbb foroivenebs.
When Christ said, " Her sins, which are many, are forgiven ; for she loved much,"
he did not, could not, mean that her love was the ground, but that it was the «m-
sequence of her forgiveness. He meant to say, " You can see tiiat she has been
forgiven, for you see how she loves, and it is only they who have been forgiven what
she has been forgiven that love as she loves. The fulness of her love is therefore the
proof (not the ground) of her forgiveness." What led to her forgiveness was her
penitence. Those bitter tears she shed (ver. 38) were the tears of a true contrition ;
they meant a holy hatred of her past sin, and a sincere determination to lead another
life ; and not being repelled, but accepted, by this Holy and Merciful One, deep and
strong gratitude arose in her ; and penitence, love, and a new and blessed hope surged
and strove together in uncontrollable emotion within her heart. When God shows
us our fault, we go at once to the merciful Saviour ; trusting in him, we are received
and restored ; then a pure, deep, lasting love arises in our souls ; it is the simple,
natural, beautiful outgrowth of penitence and faith.

III. That the sense of God's geacb to us will determine the fulness of oub
affection toward him. " To whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little." If we
have a very imperfect sense of our guilt, and therefore of God's mercy to us, our
response in gratitude and love will be far below what it should be. It is, therefore, of
the gravest importance that we should know and feel our own faultiness in the sight
of God. For clearly it is not the magnitude of our past sin, but the fulness of owr
sense of guilt, which determines the measure of our feeling in the matter of gratitude
and love. 1. It is for this that we must look. We shall find it as we dwell on the

lukk. o



194 THE GOSPKL ACuuKDING TO ST. LUKB. [ch. vii. 1—60

greatness of God's goodness toward us in his providence and his grace ; in the poverty
and leebleness of our filial return to hira for all his love and care and kindness toward
us ; in the fact that he has been requiring purity of thought and rectitude of soul and
sincerity of motive, as vfell as propriety of word and integrity of deed. 2. For this
als9 we must pray ; asking for that enlightening Spirit who will show us our true
selves, and fill us with a due sense of our great unworthiness and oar manifold
transgressions. — C.

Ver. 40. — Christ and Simon i the correcting word. There were some good points
about Simon. 1. He was an eminently respectable man ; he was so in the true sense
of the word, for as a virtuous man he could respect himself, and his neighbours could
rightly respect him ; he conformed his conduct to a high standard of morality. 2. He
was an open-handed, hospitable man. 3. He was an open-minded man. It was not
every Pharisee that would have invited Jesus Christ to supper, or would have given
him such freedom to speak his mind without resentment. But be was a much-mistaken
man. He was quite wrong in three important points.

I. His ESTIMATE OF Jesus Cheist. When he found that Jesus did not resent the
attention of " this woman," he came to the conclusion that he could not be a prophet,
or he would have known that she was a sinner, and, knowing that, he would have
repelled her. Here he was wrong in bis conclusion ; and he was also wrong in his
reasoning. ' His argument was this : a man as holy as a prophet would be certain to
repel such guilt as is present here ; when the Holy Prophet comes, the Messiah, he
will be more scrupulously separate from sin and from sinners than any other has
been. Here he was completely mistaken. The Holy One came to be the Merciful
One ; to say to guilty men and women, " Your fellows may despair of you and abandon
you. I despair of none, I abandon nobody. I see in all the possibilities of recovery ;
I summon you all to repentance and to life. Touch me, if you will, with the hand of
your faith ; I will lay my hand of help and healing upon you."

II. His view of that woman. A sinner she had been ; but ihe was more, and
indeed other than a sinner now. That word did not faithfully describe her state before
God. She was a penitent. And what is a penitent ? A penitent soul is one who
hates the sin that had been cherished, who has cast out the evil spirit from him, in
whom is the living germ of righteousness, who is on the upward line that leads to
heavenly wisdom and Divine worth, on whom God is looking down with tender grace
and deep satisfaction, in whom Jesus Christ beholds a seivant, a friend, an heir of his
holy kingdom. This is not one to turn away from in scorn, but to draw nigh unto in
kindness and encouragement.

III. His estimate op himself. 1. He thought himself a very long way on in the
kingdom of God as compared with that poor woman ; he did not know that, she being
poor in spirit and he being proud in spirit, she was much nearer to its entrance-gates
than he. 2. He thought himself in a position to patronize Jesus Christ, and con-
sequently withheld some of the usual courtesies from his Guest; he did not know
that it was on himself the distinction was conferred. 3. He supposed himi>elf to be
possessed of all the cardinal virtues : he did not know that he lacked that which is
the crowning excellence of all — love, the love that can pity, that can stoop to save.

We draw two main lessons. 1. That Christ makes much of love. Dwelling on the
various manifestations of this woman's feeling, he declares they are the signs of her
love, and he then traces her love to her deep sense of forgiven sin. God wants our
love, as we want the love of our children and of our friends, and cannot accept any-
thing, however valuable, in its stead : so Christ wants the pure, deep, lasting affection
of our souls. No ceremonies, or services, or even sacrifices, will compensate for H$
absence (see 1 Cor. xiii.). And the measure of our love will depend on tlfe depth of
our sense of God's fcrgiving love toward us. Hence it is of the first impoitance that
we (1) should understand how much God has forgiven us, how great and serious
our guilt lias bccu (see preceding homily) ; (2) should recognize how great and full is
the Divine forgiveness, huw much it includes — how much in the sense of overlo^>king
the past, and in the way of granting us present favour and of promising us future
blessedness. Our wisdom and our duty, therefore, is to dwell on the greatness of God's
mercy to us m Jesus Christ, to rejuice much in it, to let our souls bathe in the thonght



OH. Til. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. LUKE. 195

of it, be filled continually with a sense of it. For they who are (consciously) forgiven
much will love much ; and they who love much will be much beloved of God (John
xiv. 23). 2. That we should he ready to receive Ohrisfs correcting word. Simon was
wholly wron<; in his estimate of men and of things; but he was not unwilling to hear
Christ's correcting word. " Master, sa\- on," he replied, when the great Teacher said,
" I have somewhat to say unto thee." Let us see to it that this is our attitude. Our
Lord may have something very serious to say to us, as he had to those seven Churches
in Asia Minor, which he addressed from his heavenly throne (Eev. ii., iii.). When,
through his Word, his ministry, his providence, he does thus correct us, calling us to a
renewed humility, faith, love, zeal, consecration, are we ready to receive his message,
to bow our head, to open our heart, and say, "Speak, Lord; thy servants hear!
Master, say on " ? — 0.

Vers. 1 — 17. — The Saviour of sick and dead. On returning to Capernaum after tha
sei-mon on the mount, the Saviour is confronted with a deputation from a centurion
about his sick servant. To the miracle of healing in vers. 2 — 10 we turn first ;
and then we shall consider the miracle of resiirrection (vers. 11 — 17), by which it la
followed.

L The Saviour of the siok. (Vers. 1 — 10.) 1. Let its observe the self-abasement of
the centurion. And in this connection we must notice the devotedness he had shown
to the Jewish religion. As a proselyte, he had not only espoused Judaism, but built
a synagogue to accommodate his fellow-worshippers. Hence he had an excellent
reputation with the ecclesiastical authorities. But all this did not lead to any boasting
on his part or exaltation of spirit. He remains the humble man before God after all
his liberality. Hence he organizes no less than two deputations to Jesus Christ rather
than obtrude himself upon him. And (1) he sends a deputation of Jewish elders, to
ask from Jesus the cure of his sick servant. He esteems these ecclesiastical rulers as
better than himself; he values them as highly almost as they do themselves 1 In
reality he was spiritually far ahead of them; but he was unconscious of this, and
conscious only of his great personal unworthiness. The elders come, and in their self-
righteous spirit speak of his worthiness to Jesus. He was worthy, they declared, and
had proved his worthiness by building the synagogue. They thought more of the
centurion, and more of themselves, than the centurion did. Yet Jesus recognizes the
humility which dictated the sending of the deputation, and responds to their entreaty
by going: with them towards the centurion's house. (2) He sends a second deputation
of friends to entreat Jesus not to give himself so much trouble in the matter, seeing
he was utterly unworthy of a visit from Jesus. His idea was that, as Christ could
heal his servant without the trouble of coming to see him, could heal at any distance,
then he ouyht to take things as easy as he could. So strong is his conviction on this
lubject, that he gives a military illustration in proof of it. " Evidently," says Eobert-
Bon, " he looked upon this universe with a soldier's eye ; he could not look otherwise.
To him this world was a mighty camp of living forces, in which authority was para-
mount. Trained in obedience to military law, accustomed to render prompt submission
to those above him, and to exact it from those below him, he read law everywhere ;
and law to him meant nothing unless it meant the expression of a personal will. It
was this training through which faith took its form."^ Ciirist was, therefore, to the
soldier's eye, the centurion of all diseases, and they obeyed him, so that he might have
sent the disease of the servant away by a simple word of command, and so have saved
himself all the trouble. Now, it is important to remember that our Lord did not take
the easiest way always. He preferred to show his sympathy and thorough devoted-
ness by taking sometimes the most irksome way. His idea was not to save himself
trouble ; " he spared not himself." He will not use his power to save himself trouble.
2. Let us notice Christ's admiration of the centurion's faith. We have seen how great
humility is accompanied by great faith. The graces grow proportionally. There are
no monstrosities in the spiritual world. And we have to notice what an eye Jesus has
for faith. It is the most lovely product in this vale of tears. Hence he is wrapt in
admiration of it. He recognizes it as greater in this Gentile than it has yet been in
My Jew. The house of Israel had given him as yet no such believer as he had now
' ' Sermons,' second series, p. 132.



196 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vii. 1— 5a

found in the simple soldier. Clearly faith is not always in proportion to opportunity
and advantages. How weak the faith of many who have been all their lives long in
the enjoyment of the means of grace 1 3. Christ responds to strong faith by a word
of power. Had he continued to press himself upon the centurion's attention and
household, it might have led the humble believer to suspect the power of Jesus to save
at a distance. In other words, if Jesus had advanced, it might have hurt the centurion's
faith, instead of ministering to him any additional sense of sympathy. Hence he
Bpoke, and the disease of the servant departed instantly. Now, this miracle is designed
to sliow the beauty of Christian sympathy, the power of intercession, and the tendei
grace of the ISaviour as he responds to the appeals of his servants. Let us take a
similar interest in those who serve us, or are in anywise related to us ; let us bring
their case before the Lord, and he will help them lor our sake, and for his own Name's
sake too I *

II. The Saviour of the dead. (Vers. 11 — 17.) We next turn to the raising of the
vridow's son at Nain (vers. 11 — 17). And here let us notice: 1. The terrible sorrow
which presented itself to Jesus. (Ver. 12.) It was the death of a widow's only son,
Bhe stood before Je»us in all her loneliness — ^more lonely through the proximity of the
crowd. Now, it is to a social Saviour she has come, One who lay in the bosom of the
Father, a member of the " social Trinity," who enjoyed fellowship from all eternity.
Hence her case did not appeal to him in vain. He does not need any intercession.
His sympathetic heart takes up the case. Hence we have : 2. The consolatory word
our Saviour spoke. " Weep not ! " Sometimes, as Gcrok has remarked, this word is
spoken in a well-mpant, yet unchristian sense, by many children of the world, as if
weeping and mourning ought to be put away as out of place ; in other cases, the word
is spoken with a goud Christian intention, but without much human tenderness; but
Jesus shows us here when it ought to be spoken.' He wants the widow not to weep,
for he can put all her sorrow away. Truly it is he who can wipe away the tears from off
all faces (Rev. vii. 17). If we have such consolation to offer, well may we say, " Weep
not." But if we only repeat the words, without offering any consolation, they are not
likely to be of much avail. It is a striking contrast, our Lord's conduct on this
occasion, and on the occasion of Lazarus's resurrection, where he wept himself, instead
of commanding others not to weep (John xi. 35). 3. 3%e mighty word which backed
up his consolation. (Ver. 14.) This was, " Young man, I say unto thee. Arise ! " He
does so as the Prince of life. The result is that he that was dead first sat up, and
then began to speals. Life was thus restored to him, and intercourse with others
followed. Jesus thus demonstrated that he was " the Resurrection and the Life."
4. Tlie restoration of the young man to his mother. (Ver. 15.) The purpose of the
resurrection was the restoration of those relationships which death had so rudely
severed. The bereaved mother is enabled to rejoice in her son again, and to see her
home-circle restored. The great truth of recognition and restoration through resur-
rection is thus set before us.' 5. T?ie effect of the miracle upon the people. (Vert.
16, 17.) They feared, because the miracle demonstrated that God was awfully near.
Yet the fear inspired them to glorify God for the advent of such a Prophet, and the
gracious visitation which he brought. They felt that the miracle was eminently
worthy of God. An eminent scientific man, who doubts revealed religion, yet aocepti
ipuitualism, has said, " Few, if any, reputed miracles are at all worthy of a (Jod."*
But in face of such a tender and touching work of grace as this at Nain, no such
declaration could be made by an impartial mind. It was worthy of God, and tended
to his glory. 6. Consider, lastly, the type and promise it affords of what Christ tnill
do in the world at last. For, as a poet has suggested, this earth is the " bier whereon
our race is laid," and to it will Christ at last come, and, arresting the long procession
of the dead, will say, " Arise I " when lo I a race shall wake from clay, " young,
deathless, freed from every stain," And the " Weep not i " shall also be heai^ then, for

» Of. Gerok's ' Evangelien-Predigten,' s. 793, teq.

* Of. Gerok's ' Aus Ernster Zeit,' 8. 564.

» Of. Dr. Macmillau's ' Our Lord's Three Raisings from the Dead.' pp. 7S— 129; Qerok'i
•Erangelien-Predigtin,' s. 710.

* A. R. Wallace, ' Ou Miracles and Modern Spiritualism,' p. 14.



OH. vn. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. 197

from hi8 people's faces every tear shall be wiped away.' The miracle thus throws ■ cleat
and steady light upon those lai>t things which perplex so many people now. — H. M. £.

Vers. 18 — 35. — The deputation from, John. Jesus pursued a policy of mercy and
of salvation. He healed all who asked for healing or were brought to him ; he raised
the dead ; he was a Philanthropist rather than a Judge. The fame of his miracles was
spread abroad, and made its way to the castle and its keep, where John the Baptist
was now Herod's prisoner. The result is a deputation of two disciples sent by the
illustrious prisoner to Jesus. We are to study the interview and the subsequent
panegyric on John.

L Consider John's difficulty. John had preached about a coming One, accord-
ing to such prophecies as that of Malachi. He had preached that Jesus was coming
to judgment. His fan was to be in his hand ; he was throughly to purge his floor ;
he was to gather the wheat into his garner ; and he was to bum up the chaff with
unquenchable fire (ch. iii. 17). And in the spirit of the Old Testament, which was
largely a dispensation of judgment, John louked for Messiah to be mainly a Messiah
of judgment. The kingdom ot Messiah was to be set up, John thought, like all world-
kingdums, by " the thunder of the captains and the shouting," by some remarkabU
series of judgments ; but now that Jesus is devoting himself to philanthropy pure and
simple, John thinks that perhaps another messenger is to be looked lor, who will make
judgment his role. John's difficulty is what we all experience when we imagine tliat
a more impressive and decisive method of advancing God's cause might be adopted.
Human nature has great faith in blows I

II. OcK Lord's response. (Vers. 21 — 23.) This consisted of: 1. Miracles of
mercy. All that needed healing in the crowd received it in presence of John's
disciples. He cured many of their infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits ; and
many blind ones received their sight. The Healer was there ; philanthropy was in
full swing. 2. He preached the t/ospel to the poor. He backed up the miracles by a
message ; he made his mercies to the body the texts from which he preached deliverance
to the souls of men. 3. He directed the disciples to report to John what they had seen
and heard, with the additional warning, " Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended
in mo." His policy was one of love, of disinterestedness ; and John was to study it
more thoroughly and come to a better conclusion. We thus learn that the iest defenct
of a suspected work is trie patient performance of it. It will vindicate itself in due
season, if it be good and genuine. IJhrist came not to wade through seas of blood
to a temporal throne, but by persevering love to win men's hearts and rule over their
lives from within !

III. His PANEGYEio UPON JoHN. (Vers. 24 — 28.) It was after the deputation had
departed that Jesus pronounced John's panegyric. Most people would have pronounced
it in their hearing, that they might carry it to John; but Jesus says the good and
noble things behind John's back, having given all the warning he needed before, so to
speak, his face. It partakes, as Godet remarks, of the nature of a funeral oration.
Like Jesus himself, John is anointed with considerate praise before his burial. And
here we have to notice the order ot the panegyric. 1. Christ describes John negatively.
Borrowing his simile from the desert, where the reeds bow before the breeze and do not
break, he insists that John was not like one of these. In other words, he was a man
of imflinching integrity, who would break rather than bend before the breeze of opposi-
tion. He preferred to be Herod's prisoiier in the dungeon rather than his fawning
sycophant in the palace. Nor, again, was John a courtier gaily and silkenly clad. The
camel's hair garment was a perpetual protest in the castle, before he was thrust down
into the dungeon, against the effeminacy of the court. If he had come to be "court
preacher" to Herod, he had come to be one in earnest. 2. He describes John positively.
He was a "prophet." Great honour was it to be recipients and communicators of
reveliUions. John was charged, like other Old Testament prophets, with messages
from (iod. But he was more — he was the forerunnt-r of Messiah, in applying to John
the prophecy in Malachi, Jesus was asserting his own Messiahship and Divinity.* This
was a great honour for John to be the immediate predecessor of the Lord. Still

• ' The Changed Cross, and other Poems : ' " The Widow of Nain."

• Cf. Gesa's ' Christi Selbstzeugniss,' s. 40.



198 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vn. 1—50. ,

further, our Lord asserts that of woman-bom there bns not been a greater prophet than
the Baptist. This is unstinted praise. And it is just. When we consider all John
attempted and ihe means he had at hand, wben we consider that he attempted the
regeueration of his country and asked no miraculous power to accomplish it, — then he
comes before us in moral grandeur exceeding that of the first Elias. 3. He describes
him candidly. The panegyric is judicious. Our Lord declares that, great though John
undoubtedly is, he is surpassed by "the least in the kingdom of God." This may
mean that the least Christian has greater insij;ht into the nature of the kingdom than
John. Or it may, perhaps, rather mean that he who is consciously the least in the
kingdom of God, by whom we must understand the most advanced spiritually, is
greater than John. The insight of a Paul, for instance, who felt himself to be less
than the least of all saints, was greater than that of John, climax though he was of
Old Testament prophecy. Or, finally, may it not mean Jesus himsell, who was the
meekest and lowliest in the Kingdom of God.

IV. The chakactkr of John's success was like that op Jesus. (Vers. 29, 30.)
The evangelist seems to add the significant words that it was among the common
people, the publicans and the poor, not among the Pharisees and lawyers, that he
secured his penitents. So that John's revival was really among the Immbler classes,
where the work of Jesus was being now wisely prosecuted. The self-righteous rejected
John's appeal for repentance ; the common people and the publicans embraced it, and
"justified God" by repenting before him. For we must acknowledge God's perfect
justice in condemning us for our sins, before we can appreciate his justice and mercy in
forgiving us for his Sou's sake. Luke's observation, then, makes Christ's panegyiic a
perfect picture.

V. The two aspects op truth, and the obnehal rejection op both. (Vers.
31 — 35.) Jesus, in these verses, contrasts John's ministry with his own. Little
children at play sometimes find their fellows utterly intractable. Tried by a funeral,
they will not join in the mournful procession ; tried by a marriage, they will not join
in the bridal party. They are too ill-natured to take part in either. Nothing pleases
them. So was it with the Pharisees in their attitude to the preaching of John and
to the preaching of Jesus. John presented the truth in its severe and mournful
aspects. He was unsocial, to lead men to a sense of sin and to repent of it. But the
Pharisees would not believe the self-denying preacher from the desert. Jesus presented
the truth in all its winsomeness and attractiveness; but they found as much fault with
Jesus as they did with John. John had a devil, and Jesus was a glutton and a wine-
bibber. Neither could pleasei these prim, self-satisfied ones. But the vindication of
wisdom was on its way. The penitents of John and the joyful disciples of Jesus would
yet justify the truth which John and Jesus preached.' The Pharisees might reject
both missions, but the common people who received them justified the truth in both
by lives and conversations becoming the gospel. We may in the same way leave our
work with confidence to the verdict of the future, if we feel that it is true. Opposition
from a self-rii:hteous party is itself a vindication of the truth which we liave emboiiied
or declared. — R. M. E.

Vers. 36 — 50. — Love the proof of pardon. The generation to which Jesus had come
■with his social gospel thought him too " free and easy " with sinners. The Pharisees
thought he had no ri>;ht to associate with publicans and sinners, although he did so to
gave them. But the wisdom of his policy would be justified by the conduct of his
converts, and here we have a justification ready to hand. One of the Pharisees invited
him to eat with him. He accepts the invitation, and is reclining at his table, when, lo !
a poor woman " off the streets " comes in behind him, and in her penitence and grati-
tude prepares to anoint with spikenard his blessed feet. She had heard him preach,
■he had received pardon for all her sins, she could not resist this exhibition of gratitude
for it. But as she is about to anoint his feet, her pent-up grief refuses further restraint,
and bathes them with copious tears, and, having no towel with her or ofi'ered to her,
she unties her flowms hair, content to wipe with it the beautiful feet of him who had
brought her glad tidings. Having thus washed and wiped them clean, she proceeds
o anoint them with the ointment. To this conduct the Pharisee secretly objects, and
' Cf. Robertson's ' Human Race and other Sermons,' p. 182.



OH. VII. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. 191

takes it as proof positive that Jesns is not the discerning Prophet be professes to h»
Our Lord's parable soon corrects the error and reveals the truth, and the poor sinner,
■o penitent and so grateful, is dismissed in peace.

I. Great sin should not hindeb ant op os fbom comino to Jeb0S fob pardoh.
This is one of the difficulties which men make for themselves — they fancy that great
sin may keep sinners from pardon. Kow Jesus made it very plain that great sinnera
might receive fiardon just as well as little sinners. The psalmist once prayed, " Pardon
mine iniquity, for it is great" (Ps. xxv, 7), and some of the most notorious sinners ever
seen have become monuments of mercy and joyful through pardon. This case befor«
ns is one in point. Jesus had so presented bis message of salvation tbat this woman
from the town embraced it and rejoiced in the thought of forgiveness. While, therefore,
no one would recommend a sinner to sin in order to intensify his sense of guilt and
quilify himself for receiving Christ's salvation, we would recommend every sinner to
believe that the very enormity of his sins will move Christ's pity, and, when purged
and pardoned, illustrate his saving power. Suppose a patient is brought to a hospital
a mass of disi ase or of wounds ami bruises : will not the very magnitude of his distress
constitute such an appeal to pity as will secure his immediate admission? In the same
way, great sin is an argument with the Saviour in favour of mercy, rather than any
obstacle to it. Besides, we shoiiM always remember that our sense of sin is alwayg
vastly below the reality, and that we in most penitent mood have really a better
opinion of ourselves than the circumstances warrant.

II. Wb ouoht couRAGEonsT.T TO PROFESS Christ BEFORE MEN. This poor woman
Deeded courage to profess Christ in Simon's house. Simon and his guests belonging to
the Pharisaic party loathed her. It was a place where she was certain to be scorned
and perhaps expelled. But her sense of obligation to Jesns and her love for his Person
were so great that she could not forego her desire to make her way to his feet. And
BO she steals in and gi-ts behind her Master, and proceeds to lavish her attention on big
feet. So courageous is she, that she leisurely and most carefully washes his feet and
wipes them with her hair and anoints them with the ointment ; so that she actually,
as Godet remarks, did the honours of the house, which Simon had neglected.' W«
need similarly to add to our faith courage (2 Pet. i. 4). We ought to give our heart!
free play in their loyalty to Jesns. We must profess him beifore men, at whatever
cost.

III. jKSTja WILI, ALWAYS TAKE OTTR PART AOAINST THOSE WHO MISTAKE OUR MOTIVES

OB DESPISE US. Jesus will acknowledge our profession of him in the next world, and
even in this. In the case before ns we see him taking the Pharisee to task for his
mistake about the woman. Simon made several mistakes. 1. About the woman
being unpardonable and unpardoned : she was neither. 2. About Jesus as being
undiscerning and so ignorant of the woman's state : he was more thoroughly acquaiuted
with her than she or Simon could be. 3. About himself, as marer God's kingdom
than she was: he was really further from Christ than she.^ And Jesus consiquently
takes up the woman's cause and vindicates her character as a changed woman now and
pardoned. This he does in parabolic language, 'i'he two debtors who are both forgiven
nave not the same sense of gratitude. Their gratitude is in proportion to their forgivo-
cess. Hence the jioor wonian, feeling how much she has been forgiven, is propor-
tionately grateful. The defence was triumphant. And in the same way will Jesui
defnnd us if we are courageous in following him.

IV. Love is the proof of pardon. We are not pardoned because we love our
Saviour, but we love him because he has pardoned us. Hence the stronger the love,
the stronger must be our sense of the amount of sin we have been forgiven. Our love
will grow just in proportion to our appreciation tf our pardon.' Hi-nce the man wl o
comes to believe, " itli Paul, that he is " the cliief of siimers," will love the Lord accord-
ingly. He will leel constrained through his sense of obligation to love God with all
his being.

• Cr Pnnrin's 'Sermons,' tome iii. sermon ii.

• Cf. Ker's ' Sermons,' pp. 16—28.

• Cf. Maclareu's ' iSermoua,' L p. 28 ; Gerok's ' Evangelien-Predigten,' ■. 751 ; Saphii's
'Couvei'sion,* p. 2fjii.



800



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. Tm, 1—66.



V. Chmst'b AssTmANCB OP PARDON BECORES PEACE. The poor Biiiner's peace was
threatened through the contempt of the Pharisees. But Jesus gives her special
dssurance, and sends her off in peace. So will it be in our own experience if W9
sincerely trust him. — ^B. M. £.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER VIII.



Vers. 1 — 3. — St. Luke's brief notice of the
women who formed part of the company of
Jetat.

Ver. 1. — And it came to pass afterward.
St. Luke here notices an alteration in the
Master's way of life. From this time forward
Jesus ceased to make Capernaum "his
city," his usual residence ; he now journeys
with his little band of followers from place
to place. From this time there was also a
distinct change in the tone of his teaching.
The Greek word rendered "afterward" is
the same as that translated " in order " in
ch. i. 3. Showing the glad tidings of the
kingdom of God. The public work of Jesus
may be well arranged under three heads :
his work as Master, as Evangeliet, and as
Prophet. The first liad especial relation to
his own immt'diate followers, women as
well as men. In the second, as the Preacher
of the grace, mercy, and the love of God, he
peculiarly addressed himself to the general
population ; — this was the special side of the
Lord's work which St. Luke loved to dwell
on ; this is what he alludes to here. In the
third, as Prophet, the Master spoke gene-
rally to an evil generation, and especially
to the political and religious leaders of the
Jewish society of his day.

Ver. 2. — And certain women. It has
before been noticed that St. Luke, in several
places, especially notices the love and devo-
tion of women to tlie Master. The present
position of women is owing to the teaching
of the Lord and his disciples. Fellow-heirs
with men of the kingdom of heaven, it was
obvious that they could no longer occupy on
earth their old inferior and subordinate posi-
tion. The sex, as a sex, has made a noble
return to the Master. Much of the untold
misery and suffering which tormented the old
world has been at least alleviated in great
measure by the labours of the women of
Christianity. Several of these kindly grate-
ful souls here alluded to evidently belonged
to the wealthy class ; some even occupied a
high position in the society of that time.
It was by their gifts, no doubt, that Jesus
and his company were enabled to live during
the thirty or more months of the public
ministry. Ho had given up, as had also his
companions, his earthly occupation, and we
Vnow that he deliberately refrained (irom
over using his miraculous power to supply



his daily wants. The presence and loving
interest of these and such like kindly gene-
rous friends answers the question — How did
the Master and his disciples, poor men
among poor men, live during the years of
public teaching? Mary called Magdalene.
The name Mary (Miriam) was a very favour-
ite name among the Hebrew women ; we meet
with several in the gospel story. This one
was called " Magdalene," or " of Magdala,"
to distinguish her from others bearing the
same name. Magdala was a little town
near Tiberias. There is nothing definite to
connect her with the " sinner " of ch. vii.
The early tradition which identified these
two women was probably derived from Tal-
mudio sources. There are many wild stories
in these writings connected with one called
Mary of Magdala, a grievous sinner. The
" seven devils " probably allude to some
aggravated form of demoniacal possession.
Two sets of ecclesiastical legends busy them-
selves with the after-life of Mary of Magdala.
The one represents her as coming with
Lazarus and Martha to Marseilles ; the otlier,
as accompanying the Virgin and John to
Ephesua.

Ver. 3. — Joanna the wife of Chuza Herod's
steward. She must have been u person of
wealth and high rank at the court of Uerod
Antipas. There were evidently not a few
believers in that wicked and dissolute centre.
Some years later we read of Manaen, the
foster-brother of Herod, as a notable Chris-
tian (Acts xiii. 1). Even Herod himself, we
know, at first hciird John the Baptist gladly ;
and, after the terrible judicial murder, we
find that unhappy prince fancying that his
victim had risen from the dead. It has
been suggested that this Chuza was the
nobleman of Capernaum whose dying son
was healed by Jesus (John iv. 46). If this
be the case, there would be a special reason
for the loving devotion of this Joanna to the
Master. She reappears among the faithful
women in the history of the Resurrection
(ch. xxiv. 10). Susanna. The name signi-
fies " lily." The Jews were fond of giving
the names of flowers and trees to their girls;
thus Bhoda, a rose (Acts xii. 13), Tamar, a
palm (2 Sam. xiii. 2), among many instances.
Of this Susanna nothing further is known.

Vers. 4 — 15. — The parable of the tower,
and the Lord's interpretation of it.

Ver. 4. — And when mnoh people wert
gathered together, and were come to hia



OH. vin. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



201



ont of every city, he spake by a parable. A
great chauge, it is clear, took place in our
Lord's way of working at this period. We
have already (in the note on ver. 1) remarked
that from henceforth he dwelt no longer in
one centre, his own city Capernaum, but
moved about from place to place. A new
way of teaching was now adopted — that
of the '■ parable." It was from this time
onward that, when he taught, he seems
generally to have spoken in those famous
parables, or stories, in which so much of liis
recorded teaching is shrined. Hitherto in
his preacliing he had occasionally made use
of similes or coinparisuus, as in ch. y. 6
and vi. 20, 48 ; but he only began the formal
use of the parable at this period, and the
parable of the sower seems to have been
the earliest spoken. Perhaps because it
was the first, perhaps on account of the far-
reaching nature of its contents, the story
of " the sower " evidently impressed itself
with singular force upon the minds of the
disciples. It evidently formed a favourite
" memory " among tlie first heralds of the
new faith. It is the only oue, with the ex-
ception of the vine-dressers, one of the latest
spoken, which has been preserved by tiie
three — Matthew, Mark, and Luke. It is
identical in structure and in teaching in all
the three, whieh shows that they were re-
lating the same story. It differs, however,
in detail ; we thus gather that the three did
not copy from one primitive document, but
that these " memories " were derived either
from their own recollections or at least
Etom different sources. Now, what induced
the Master thus deliberately to change the
manner of his teaching? In other words,
why, from this time forward, does he veil so
much of his deep Divine thought in para-
bles ? Let us consider the attitude of the
crowds who till now had been listening to
him. What may be termed the Galilsean
revival had well-nigh come to an end. The
enthusiasm he had evoked by his burning
words, his true wisdom, his novel exposition
of what belonged to human life and duty,
was, when he left Capernaum and began
his preaching in every little village (ver. 1),
at its height. But the great Heart-reader
knew well that the hour of reaction was at
hand. Then tlie pressure of the crowds
which thronged him was so great that, to
speak this first parable, he had to get into a
boat and addrebs the multitude standing on
the shore (Matt. xiii. 2); but the moment
was at hand which St. John (vi. 66) refers
to in his sad words, " From {hat time many
of his disciples went back, and walked no
more with him." It was in view of that
moment that Jesus commenced his parable-
teaching with " the sower." As. regards the
great mats of the people who had vrowdsd



to hear his words and look on Us miraclei,
the Lord knew that his work had practically
failed. At the first he spoke to the people
plainly. The sermon on the mount, for
instance, contains little, if anything, of the
parable form ; but they understood him not,
forming altogether false views of the king-
dom he described to them. He now changes
his method of teaching, veiling his thoughts
in paraijles, in order that his men, to whom
privately he gave the key to the right under-
standing of the parables, should see mora
clearly, and that those who deliberately mis-
understood him — the hostile Pharisee and
Sadducee, for instance — should be simply
mystified and perplexed as to the Teacher's
meaning; while the merely thouglitless
might possibly be fascinated and attracted
by this new manner of teaching, which
evidently veiled some hidden meaning.
These last would probably be induced to
inquire further as to the meaning of these
sti ange parable-stories. Professor Bruce, who
has very ably discussed the reasons whioh
induced Christ at this period of his ministry
to speak in parables, sayi there is a mood
which leads a man to present his thoughts
in this form. " It is the mood of one whose
heart is chilled, and whose spirit is saddened
by a sense of loneliness, and who, retiring
within himself by a process of reflection,
frames for his thoughts formswbich half con-
ceal, half reveal them — reveal them more per-
fectly to those who understand, hide them
from those who do not (and will not) — forms
beautiful, but also melancholy, as the hues
of forest in late autumn. If this view be
correct, we should expect the teaching in
parables would not form a feature of the
initial stage of Christ's ministry. And such
accordingly was the fact." As regarded the
men of liis own generation, did he use the
parable way of teaching almost as a fan to
separate the wheat from the chaff? " That
he had to speak in parables was one of the
burdens of the Son of man, to be placed
side by side witli the fact that he had not
where to lay his head " (Professor Bruce,
* Parabolic Teaching of Christ,' book i.
ch. i.). And when much people were gathered
together, and were come to him out of every
city. The impression of the witness who
told the stoiy to Luke and Paul evidently
was that at this period of the Lord's ministry
vast crowds flocked to listen or to see. St.
Matthew expresses the same conviction in a
diiferent but in an equally forcible manner.
Only the Lord knew how hollow all this
seeming popularity was, and how soon tha
crowds would melt away. He spake by a
parable. Roughly to distinguish between
the parable and the fable : The fable wonld
tell its moral truth, but its imagery might
be purely fanciful ; for instance, animals, oi



202



THE GOSFJEL AUCOUDING TO ST. LUKE. [cji. vin. 1— 56,



even treet, might be representert as reason-
ing and Bpeaking. The parable, on the
contrary, never violated probability, but
told its solemn lesson, olten certainly in a
dramatio form, but its imagery was never
fanciful or impossible.

Ver. 5. — A sower went out to sow his seed.
The Master's words, ia after-days, must
often have come home to the disciples. They
would feel that in each of tliem, if they
wero faithful to their work, the " sower " of
the parable was reproduced j they would
remember what they had heard from his
lips; how he had warned them of the recep-
tion which their words would surely meet
with ; how by far the greater proportion of
the seed they would sow^ would perish. But
though the disciples and all true Christian
men in a greater or less degree reproduce
the sower of the parable, still the gi-e.it
Sower, it must be remembered, is the Holy
Spirit. Every true teacher or sower of the
Word does but repeat what they have learned
from liim. And as he sowed, some feL by
the wayside. Dean Stanley, on the sceneiy
of the parable, thus writes : " Is there any-
thing on tlie spot to suggest the images thus
conveyed ? go I asked as I rode alonsr the
tract under the hillside, by which the Plain
of Gennesaret is approached. So I asked
at the moment, seeing nothing but the steep
sides of the hill, alternately of reek and
grass. And wljen I thought of the parable
of the sower, 1 answered that here at least
W8B nothing on which the Divine teacliing
could lastou ; it must have been the distant
ooru-fields of Samaria or Esflraelon on which
his mind was dwelling. 'J'he thought bad
hardly occurred to me wlien a slight recess
in the hillside, close upon the plain, dis-
closed at once, in detail, and witli a conjunc-
tion wliicb I remember nowhere else in
Palestine, every feature of the great parable.
There was the undulating corn-field de-
Bcending to the water's edge; there was
the trodden pathway running through the
midst of it, with no fence or hedge to prevent
the seed from falling here and there on
either side of it, or upon it ; itself hard with
the constant tramp of horae and mule and
human foot" ('Sinai and Palestine,' ch. xiii.).

Ver. 6. — And some fell upon a rook. The
picture here is not of a soil full of stones,
out of a r( icky portion of the corn-land where
the rock is only covered with a thin layer
of earth.

Ver. 7. — And some fell among thorns.
" Every one who has been in Palestine must
have been struck with the number of thorny
thrubs and plants that abound there. The
traveller finds them in his path, go where
he may. Many of them are small, but some
grow as high as a man's head. The rab-
binical writers say that there are no less



than twenty-two words in the Hebrew B;vle
denoting thorny and prickly plants " (F to-
fessor Hacket).

Ver. 8. — And bare fruit an hundredfold.
This is by no means an unheard-of increase
even in the West, where vegetation is less
luxuriant. Herodotus, quoted by Trench
('Parables'), mentions that two hundred-
fold was a common return in the Plain of
Babylon, and sometimes three hundredfold;
and Niebuhr lueutions a species of maize
that returns four hundredfold. On the
marvellous fruit-bearing which would take
place in the days of the Lord's future king-
dom on earth, Irenseus gives a quotation
from Papins, who gave it on the authority
of those who had heard St. John speak of
the teaching of the Lord to that effect.
Priifcbsor AVestcott ('Introduction to the
Study of the Gospc h.' Appendix C, 21)
thinks that the tradition was ba&ed on the
real ditcoursi s of the Lord. It is, of course,
allegorical, for is it not a memory of a con-
versation between Jusus and hia disciples
arising out of this parable of the sower?
" The Lori 1 taught of those days (of his
future kingdom on earth) and said. The
days will come in vcliich vines shall spring
up, each having ten thiusand stocks, and on
eafh stock ten thousand branches, and on ea/ih
branch ten thousand shoots, and on each shoot
ten thousand bunches, and on each bunch ten
tliounand grapes, and each grape when pressed
shalt give Jive and twenty measures of wine.
And when any saint ehdll have seized one
bunch, another shall cry, I am a better banch ;
take me ; through me bless the Lord. Like-
wise also (he said) that a grain of wheat
shall produce ten thousand ears of com, and
each grain ten pounds of fine pure flour } and
so all other fruits, and seeds, and each herb
according to its proper natare. . . . And he
(Papias) added, saying. Now, these things
are credible to them that believe. And
when Juilas the traitor believed not, and
asked — How, then, shall such productions
proceed from the Lord ? the 1 .ord said, They
shall nee who come to those (t7Mii«" (Papias;
see IreiLTjus, t. 33. 3).

Ver. 9. — And his disciples asked him,
Baying, What might tliis parable he t This
is the only parable St. Luke gives as spoken
by our Lord in this place. St. Matthew —
who gives the additional detail that on
account of the pressure of the crowd on the
lake-shore it was spoken from a boat moored
close to the bank — relates seven parables
here in sequenue. It is probable that the
Master spoke some of these at least on this
occasion, but St. Luke, poesildy on account
of its extreme solemnity, possibly because
he wished to mark this parable as the first
of this new kind of teaching, relates it
and its interoretation onlv, saying nothing



CH. Yiii. 1— 56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



203



further respecting that day's parable-teach-
ing. It is most probable that all these
reported discuuiees, parables, expositions,
or sermons, are simply a r€»wm€ of the
original words. Tlie disciples evidently by
their question — which St. Mark tells us was
put to Jesus when they were alone with
him— were surprised and puzzled, first at
the stiange change whicli that eventful
day inaugurated in the method of their
Master's teaching, and secondly, at the
peculiar character of this his first great
parable-lesHon. It was, indeed, a sombre
and depressing nnnouncement whatever way
it was looked at — sombre as a picture of
the results of I is own past ministry, de-
pressing if regarded as a prophecy of their
future suocess as teaoiiers.

Ver. 10. — And he said, Unto yon it is
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom
of God : but to others in parables ; that see-
ing they might not see, and hearing they
might not understand. In St. Matthew we
have the Lord's reply given at greater
length; the same prophecy of Isaiah whicli
here forms the basis of St. Luke's account
of Jesus' reply is given in full. St Mark
weaves the Isaiah-wonls into the Master's
answer. The thought, however, in each of
the three accounts is exactly the same.
The parable mode of teaching was adopted
by Jesus who, as Heart-reader, was aware
now by sad experience and still sadder foj e-
knowledge, that liis glorious news rather
repelled than attracted the ordinary hearer.
They did not want to be disturbed from
their earthly hopes and loves and fears.
They preferred nut to be healed as God
would heal them. The Master then spoke
his parables with the intention of veiliTig
his Divine story from the careless and in-
different. T'lese, he knew, would for the
most part be repelled by such teaching,
while it would special I j' attract the earnest
inquirer. " The veil which it (the parable)
throws over the truth becomes transparent
to the attentive mind, while it remains im-
penetrable to the careless" (Godet). It was
therefore his deliberate wish that such
hearers might neither see nor understand.
Dr. Morrison ('Commentary on St. Mark')
well and clearly puts the Lord's thouglit
here : " It is the sinner's deeply rooted wish
that he should not see and un>lerstand, and
the sad explanation of this wisli is given by
St. Mark — the sinner is afraid lest he should
be prevailed to turn. Lest at any time tUey
should he converted (Mark iv. 12)."

Vers. 11 — 15.— The Lord's interpretation
of the parable of the sower.

Ver. 11.— The seed is the Word of God.
It was his own sad experience the Master
was relating. The picture was of things,
too, which bad already happened in the



case of many of his own true servants, the
prophets. It mirrored, too, the many future
failures and the few future successes of the
listening disciples ; it warned tbem not to
be deluded by appearances, not to be dis-
couraged by apparent failure. The Word,
of course, in the first instance is his own
teaching; it comprehends, however, any
preaching or teaching, whether of prophet
of the past or minister of the future, wliich
tries faithfully to copy his own.

Ver. 12. — Those by the wayside are they
that hear ; then oometh the devil, and taketh
away the Word out of their hearts, lest they
should believe and be saved. The wayside
hearers represent the great outer circle of
men and women who more or less respect
religion. It must be carefully borne in
mind that in none of the four classes pic-
tured in the parable are despisers of God,
declared enemies of religion, portrayed.
To the=e the gospel, with its warnings and
its promises, rarely if ever speaks. These
of "the wayside" are they whose hearts
resemble a footpatli, beaten hard and flat
by the constant passing to and fro of wishes
of the flesh, of thoughts concerning earthly
things, mere sordid hopes and fears. Into
these hearts the Word can never really
penetrate. Momentary influence now and
again seems to have been gained, but the
many watchful agents of the evil one, with
swift wings, like birds of the air, swoop
down and snatch away the scattered seed
which for a moment seemed as though it
would take root. Judas Iscariot the Jew,
and Pontius Pilate the Roman, might be
instanced as types of this class. These —
before tlieir awful fate — both appeared to
have been moved. The one for long months
followed the Lord and was trusted by him;
the other pitied, and for a moment in his —
Pilate's case — pity seemed passing into love
and admiration, and tried to find a way of
escape for the innocent Prisoner. But the
one betrayed, and the other delivered to
death, the sinless Son of God I

Ver. 13. — They on the rock are they,
which, when they hear, receive the Word
with joy J and these have no root, which for
a vMle believe, and is time of temptation
fall away. These represent natures at once
impressionable and excitable; impulsive
men and women who, charmed with the
beauty, perhaps (to them) the novelty, of
the gospel message, receive the Word, take
up the Master's yoke with joy, but without
thought. These hastily make a reli°;iong
profession, but they forget altogether to
count what the real cost of such a pro-
fession amounts to. Upon these superfioial
but kindly natures come trouble, perplexity,
discouragement, perhaps persecution ; then
quickly the once-loved religion withers



204



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vin. 1—66,



away like com growing on rooky places
beneath the burning Bummer sun. Jolin
Mark, the wiiuld-be missionary companion
of Paul and Barnabas, was one of this
impulsive but little-enduring class; and
Demas, once the friend of Paul, but who
loved too well the present world. Another
instance would be the man who offered to
follow Jpsns " whithersoever thou goest," aa
he phrHsed it, till he found, by the Lord's
grave answer, that the Master he offered to
fciUow had neither home nor resting-place ;
then he seeing quickly to have turned
back.

Ver. 14. — And that which fall amjng
thorns are they, which, when they have
heard, go forth, and are choked with cares
and riches and pleasures of this life, and
bring no fmit to perfection. There is some-
thing very sad in tliis, the thorn-choked
class of believers. Each of them represents
the vie vMnqu^e; the beautiful flower just
spoiled as it was bursting into full bloom.
These hear the Word, and, hearing it, grasp
its deep solemn meaning, and for a part of
each day honestly try to live the life which
that Divine Word pressed home to them.
But with these tliere is another life; siile
by side with the golden grain has grown
up a crop of thorns, which, unless destroyed
in time, will choke and utterly mnr, as, alas,
it often does, the true corn. Such men
and women, the double-minded ones of St.
James, try to serve two masters — God and
the world. Dr. Morrison has a good note
on the parallel passage in St. Mark, where,
after suggesting that the cares, the riches,
and the pleasures of this life in our time
are such things as houses, land, works of
art and virtu, posts of honour, gaiety of
garments, grandeur of entertainments, and
in general tlje myriail appliances of luxury,
he goes on to say, "These come more or
less in upon all men, but some men lay
themselves peculiarly open to their in-
fluence, and allow them to twine and
twist themselves like the serpents of Lao-
coon around every energy and suscepti-
bility of their being." The rich young
ruler whom Jesus luved is », fair instance
of this nut uncommon character, which
perhaps is more often met with among the
more cultured of society than among the
poor and the artis-an class. There must
have been much that was really beautiful
and true in that young man, or Jesus never
had singled him out as one whom he
especially loved, and yet in his case the
thoins of riches and luxury had so twined
tliemselves among the real corn that, as far
as we know, it never brought fruit to per-
fection. Ananias and Sapphira may, too,
be instanced. They had given up much for
the Name's sake, associated themselves with



a hat^d and persecuted sect, saorifloed a
large portion of their property to help the
poor <.f the flock, and yet these apparently
devoted ones were living a double life ; the
thorns had so grown up and twined about
the com that in their field nothing ever
ripened.

Ver. 15. — But that on the good gronnd
are they, which in an honest and good
heart, having heard the Word, keep it, and
bring forth frnit with patience. In this
portraiture of the fourth class of our Lord's
great life-picture of bearers of and in-
quirers concerning religion, the Greek
words rendered in the Authorized Version
" honest " and " good " (" in an honest and
good heart ") were words well known and
In familiar use among the widely spread
Greek-speaking peoples for whom especially
St. Luke's Gospel was compiled. Professor
Bruce (' Parabolic Teaching of Christ,' ch.
i.) remarks that " the man who united the
two qualities expressed by the term ' honest '
(better rendereil ' noble ') and ' good,' tepre^
sented the beau-ideal of manhood. He was
one whose aim was noble, and who was
generously ilevoted to his aim. The ex-
pression rendered ' honest ' (better translated
' noble,' Ka\6s) has reference to aims or chief
ends, and describes one whose mind is raised
above moral vulgarity, and is bent, not on
money-making and such low pursuits, but
on the attainment of wisdom, holiness,
and righteousness. The epithet rendered
'good' (aytt86s) denotes generous self-
abandonment in the prosecution of lofty
ends ; large-beartedness, magnanimous, over-
flowing devotion." Mary of Bethany, with
her devoted love atd her generous friend-
ship ; the centurion Cornelius, with his
fervent piety and his noble generosity to-
wards a despised and hated race ; Barnabas,
with hiasplendid liberality, his utterabsence
of care for self, his bright, loving trust in
human nature, his true charity, " hearing all
things, hoping all things;" — are good ex-
amples, drawn from different sexes and
from varied races, and out of diverse paths
of life, of these true inquirers, who not only
hear the Word, but keep it.

Vers. 16 — 18. — A solemn conclusion of
the Lord's to his exposition of his first great
parable.

Ver. 16.— No man, when he hath lighted
a candle, covereth it with a vessel, or putteth
it undor a bed; but setteth it on a candle-
stick, that they which enter in may see the
light. The meaning of the Lord's saying
here Is — the disciples must not look on this
parable-method of teaching, which from
henceforth he purposed frequently to adopt,
as mysterious, or as containing anything
beyond ordinary human comprehension.
The explanation of " the sower," which he



OH. Tin. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



205



had jnst given them, showed them how
really simple and adapted to everyday life
his teaching was. " No man," said the Lord,
"when he hath lighted the eandle of the
true knowledge, really wislies to hide it —
he rather displays it that men may see the
light; and that is wljat I have buen doing
for yon in my careful explanation of my
story."

Ver. 17. — For nothing is secret, that shall
not be made manifest ; neither anything
hid, that shall not be known and come
abroad. "All will gradually become clear
to them. Whilst tlie night thickens over
Israel on account of its unbelief, the dis-
ciples will advance into even fuller light,
until there is nothing left in the plan of
God which is obscure or hidden. The
heart of Jesus is lifted up at this prospect.
This accounts for the poetical rhythm which
always appears at such moments " (Godet).
This is very gmid, but Goiiet scarcely goes
far enough. The Master's words surely
promise that, as the ages advance, moie and
ever more light on the subject of God's
dealings with men will be vouchsafed to
the humble, patient searcher after the Divine
wisdom. This apophthegm steins to have
been a very favourite one of our Lord ; he
evidently used it on several occasions (see,
for instance. Matt. x. 26, where the same
words are reported to have been spoken in a
different connection).

Yer. 18. — Take heed therefore how ye
hear : for whosoever hath, to him shall be
given ; and whosoever hath not, from him
idiall be taken even that which he seemeth
to have. A grave warning to his disciples
primarily, and then to all who take upon
themselves any work, even the humblest,
connected with teaching Divine truth. The
real student, patient, humble, and restlessly
industrious, he shall be endowed with ever-
increasing powers; while the make-believe,
lazy, and self-sufficient one shall be punished
by the gradual waning of the little light
which once shone in his soul.

Vers. 19 — 21. — Interference of Christ' $
mother and his brethren.

Yer. 19. — Then came to him his mother
•nd his brethren. St. Mark, in his third
chapter, gives us the reasons which led to
this scene. It had been bruited abroad that
a species of frenzy had seized upon that
Btrange Man who bad been brought up in
their midst, and who bad lately aroused
■nch enthusiasm in all the crowded lake-
district of Galilee. It is difficult to estimate
aright the feelings of his own family to-
wards him ; admiration and love seem to
have struggled in their hearts with pre-
judioe and jealousy — ^not in the case of Mary,
ttnt in the case of the so-called brothers.
They leem ever to hare been close to him



during his public ministry, not among hii
"own," but still near him, watching him,
and listening to him with a half-wondering,
half-gmdging admiration. But John tells
us (vii. 5) that they did not believe in him.
It needed the Resurrection to convert them.
The crowd round the Master at this juncture
was so great that they — his kinsmen.— could
not press through it to speak to him. Thi>y
conveyed to him, however, a mi ssape. The
Heart-reader knew well what were the
motives which induced them to come to
him just then; the brothers were so dis-
trustful that they had suffered themselves
to bo carried away by the Pharisees' evil
surmises, that Jesus was possessed by a
devil. The mother, influenced by her
earthly fears for her Sou, was induced to
accompany the brothers, no doubt hoping
to induce him to withdraw himself from the
scene of excitement, at all events for a
stasou.

Ver. 21. — And he answered and said unto
them, Uy mother and my brethren are these
which hear the Word of Ood, and do it. The
Master used the opportunity to send home
into the hearts of the many listeners the
stern, grave lesson that there was some-
thing more solemn even than family ties,
and that these, holy and binding though
they were, must not be allowed to stand in
the way of plain, unmistakable duty.
Vers. 22 — 25. — The lake-storm is stiUed.
Yer. 23. — But as they sailed he fell asleep:
and there came down a storm of wind on the
lake ; and they were filled with water, and
were in jeopardy. In the three Gospels of
Matthew, Mark, and Luke, this and the
three following incidents are closely united
— the lake-storm; the devils sent into the
herd of swine; the raising of the little
daughter of Jairus; the healing of the
woman afflicted with the issue of blood.
Although this cycle of acts is always united
by the three, yet they do not occupy the
same position chronologically in the three
Gospels. The explanation of this probably
is that in the primlti re apostolic teaching it
was usual to relate these four incidents of
the Master's work together. In St. Matthew,
between the recital of the healing of the
demoniac and the raising of the daughter of
Jairus, are intercalated the healing of the
paralytic, and the call of Matthew, and the
feast which followed. These incidents, in a
more extended primitive discourse, were no
doubt joined to the other four recitals. Had
they used a common document, the three
would surely have placed them in the same
connection with other events. They most
likely were worked, with many other signs,
somewhere in this period of public work,
and were chosen by the first preachers of
" the Name " as specially illustrative act^



206



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. viii. 1— S6



showing the Lord's power over the ele-
ments, over the unseen spirits of evil, over
death, over wearying chronic sickness. On
the su'lden storm, travellers remark how,
without warning, winds from the snowy
summits of the neighbouring Hermon rush
down the mountain gorges into the warm
tropical air of the lake-basin, and in a short
space of time the calm Galilee sea is lashed
into etoim and foam. The graphic descrip-
tion of Mark is, as usual, the most vivid, and
gives us, in a few master-touches, the aspect
ot the scene. The weary Master sleeping in
tlje stern of the fishing-boat; the pillow be-
neath his head ; the disciples, terrified by the
sudden uproar of the waves surging round
tiieir frail bark, as the wild winds rushed
down on the lake, hastily awaking their
tired Master. The danger must have been
very real to have alarmed these Gennesaret
fishermen ; the storm must have been some-
thing more than the usual lake-tempests.
The very words the I^ord used when he
lifted up his head and saw the dangler, St.
Mark preserves for us. With his " Hush ! "
he silenced the wild roar of the winds and
waters ; with his " Be still I " he quieted the
heaving waves. Some commentators, reason-
ing from the Master's personal address to the
elements — the winds and the waters — sup-
pose that, in the midst of the storm, was some
evil presence, who, taking advaiita;.;e of our
Lord's helpless condition — asleep in that
frail fisher's boat— raised up the wild storm,
hoping, perhaps, to cut shoit his life. The
idea of spirits thus blending with the ele-
ments is one by no means unknown to
Scripture. " Who maketh his angels winds
[rather than the usual, better-known trans-
lation, 'spirits'], his ministers a flaming
fire" (Pg. civ. 4; Heb. i. 7 ; Job i. 12).

Vers. 26 — 39. — The evil spirit in the
Gergetene demoniac is dismissed into the herd
of svjine.

Ver. 26. — And they arrived at the country
of the Cadarenes. There is a perplexing
difference in the reading of the older manu-
scripts here, but it is simply a question nf
the precise name of the locality wiiere the
great miracle was worked. In the three
uariatives of Matthew, Mark, and Luke the
older manuscripts vary between " Gerge-
senes," " Gerasenes," and " Gadarenes." Ga-
dara was a city of some importance, about
three hours' journey distant frum the southern
end of the Lake of Gennesaret. Its ruins are
well known, and are distinguished by tlie
remains of two amphitheatres. Gerasa was
also a place of mark, and was situate about
fifty miles from the lake. These cities
might in the days of our Lord have eitlier
given its name to a great district stretching
to the borders of the lake. Gergesa was a
small and very obscure town nearly opposite



Capernaum. There are some ruins now on
this spot still known by the very slight
corruption of Kerzha. There is scarcely
any douht that the scene of the miracle
on the poor demoniac, and of the subsequent
possession of the swine, must be looked for
on this spot. But it was an obscure, little-
known spot, and in very early days the
preachers who told the story of the great
miracle may have often spoken of the
country as the district of the well-known
Gerasa or Gadara, rather than of the un-
known village of Gergesa. Hence probably
the variations in the name in the, older
manuscripts here.

Ver. 27. — There met him out of the city a
certain man ; better rendered, there met him
a man of the city. He had been a dweller
in Gergesa in old days before the terrible
possession began. St. Matthew, in hia
account, tells us of two demoniacs. SS.
Mark and Luke, however, both only mention
one, the other for some reason or other had
passed out of their thoughts — possibly the
mala^ly was much less severe, and the
strange dialogue and its results had not
taken place in his case. Which had devils
long time ; better, dasmnns (daimomia).
One of tlie current Jewish traditions was
that these evil spirits were not fallen angels,
but the spirits of wicked men who were
dead (see Josephus, ' Bell. Jud.,' vii. 6. 3).
The plural form " devils " — bitterly referred
to later by the sufferer, when he was asked
his name — seems in his case to speak of a
very aggravated form of the awful malady.
And ware no clothes, neither abode in any
house. These were no uncommon features
of the soul-malady — the horror at any bodily
restraint, either connected with clothes or
dwellings; a similar shrinking is not un-
usual even in the comparatively modified
modem phases of madness. But in the
tombs. Until the teaching and spirit of
Jesus had suggested, even among men who
had no faith in his Name, some thought and
consideration for the helpless sufferers of
humanity, neither hospital, nor home, nor
asylum existed where these unhappy ones
could find a refuge. In these gloomy tombs
hollowed out of the rock on the mountain-
side — polluted spots for the living, according
to the Jewish ritual — these maniacs found
the utter solitude they craved for.

Ver. 28. — When he saw Jesus, he cried
out, and fell down before him, and with a
loud voice said, What have I to do with
thee, Jesus 1 " The sight of Jesus appears
to have produced an extraordinary impres-
sion upon him. The holy, calm, gentle
majesty, the tender compassion, and the
conscious sovereignty which were expressed
in the aspect of our Lord, awakened in him,
by force of contrast, the hembling conscious-



OH. vni. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



207



Qesa nf his own state of moral diBorder "
(Godet). Thou Son of God most hi»h.
'J'bere seems some probability that this
expression was frequently UfOd in cases of
exorcism of evil spiiits; for again in Acts
xvi. 17 the poor slave-girl, who we read had
k Pytliones»-spirit, which brought in no
smHll ^ain to her masters, speaks of Paul
and hid friends, just before the apostle in
his Master's Name cast the spirit out, as
servants of the most high God. I beseech
thee, torment me not. In this form of posses-,
si on one remsirkiible and very terrible feature
seems to have been the divided conscious-
ness; the suifeier identities himself with
tlie demons, and now one speaks, now
the other. St. Matthew adds a dread detail
to this petition to the Lord, "hefore the time : "
the evil spirits thus recognizing a period
when certain torment would be tlieir hapless
destiny. The expression "torment" meets
US in the parable of Lazarus ; the dwelling-
place of the rich man after death is a place
of torment. In Matt, xviii. 34 the ministers
of judgment are the tormentors. One very
solemn reason why this special case of
exorcism on the part of our Lord is related
with so much detail and repeated by the
three evangelists, SS. Matthew, Mark, and
Luke, seems to be the glimpse which the
dialogue between the evil spirits and the
Mister opens to us of the dread realities
hidden in the future for those who sin
delibeToiely against the will of God. The
existence of the place or state of torment is
afSrmed very pointedly by our Lord and
his disciples; but liaving done this they
dwell but little on it. There is a striking
and solemn quotation in Dr. Morrison's
'Commentary on St. Mark' on this clear
but guarded reference to the final sufferings
of those who will not be submissive to the
mora) will of God, " Further curiosity as to
the when, the where, and tlie haw, does not
become be n rs whose main business and
greatest witdim is to fly from, not to pry
too close into, these terrible secrets of the
dark kingdom."

Ver. 30. — And Jesus asked him, saying,
What is thy name? And he said, Legion:
because many devils were entered into him.
The Master vouchsafed no reply to the
demons' prayer, but puts a quiet suggestive
question to their unhappy victim. The
Lord's words, as Dean Plumptre suggests,
would serve "to recall to the man's mind
that he had once a human name, with all
its memories of human fellowship. It was
a stage, even in spite of the paroxysm that
followed, in the proc'css of recovery, in so
far as it helped to disentangle him from the
confusion between himself and the demons
which caused his misery. But, at first, the
question seems only to increase the evil.



'My name is Legion, for we are many.'
The' irresistible might, the full array of the
Koman legion, with its six thousand soldiers,
seemed to the demoniac the one adequate
symbol of the wild, uncontrollable impulses
of passion and of dread that were sweeping
through his soul."

Ver. 31. — And they besought Mm that he
would not command them to go out into the
deep. This time the voice and the request
apparently proceed from the terrible presence
which had made the soul of the unhappy
man their temporary haliitation. The dire-
ful confusion in the state of the poor
demoniac is shown by this request. By
whom was it marie ? The bystanders could
discern no difference between the possessed
and the spirits dwelling in the aifiicted
human being. So St. Mark, in his relation,
puts tliese words into the demoniac's mouth,
" And he besought him much that he would
not send them away out of the country;"
apparently here partly conscious of his own
personal being, and partly identifying him-
self with the demoniac forces which were
afBicting him. The request is a strange
one, and suggests much anxious thought.
What is the abyss these rebel-spirits dreaded
with so great a dread? It would seem as
though, to use Godot's thought, that for
beings alienated from God, the power of
acting on the world is a temporary solace
to their unrest, and that to be deprived of
this power is for them just what a return
to prison is for the captive. St. Mark's
expression here is a curious one. He repre-
sents the spirits requesting Jesus "not to
send them away out of the country." The
two accounts put together tell us that these
spirits were aware, if they were driven out
of the country — wliatever that expression
signified, this earth possibly — they must go
out into the deep, the abyss, what is called
"the bottomless pit" in Rev. ix. 1, 2, 11.
Any doom seemed to these lost ones prefer-
able to that. The whole train of thought
suggested by the incident and the words of
the Lord is very terrible. We see at least
one reason why the first preachers of the
Word have selected this exorcism. It indeed
lifts a bit of the curtain which hangs between
us and the niu;ht of endless woe I

Ver. 32. — And there was there an herd of
many swine feeding on the mountain : and
they besought him that he would suffer
them to enter into them. And he suffered
them. For what end was this request?
Was it simply the way they chose to enter
the abyss by? Wo know that the lives of
the creatures, after the permission was given,
lasted but a few minutes at most. Was it
a desire to do more mischief during their
brief sojourn on earth ? Theophylact (eighth
century) suggests that the purpose of tti



208



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vin. 1— 5&



evil spirits, in their request, was to injure
Jesus in that part of the country by arous-
ing fears among the covetons inhabitants
lest they too might lose, in a similar way,
their herds. But to the writer of tin's note
it seems best to confess that no satisfactory
answer can ever be given here. We know
so little of these dread spirits of evil. The
reason of the Lord's permission is more
obvious. Some such Tisible proof as the
sight of the evil and unclean forces that
had mastered him so long, transferred to
the bodies of other creatures and working
their wild will upon them, was probably a
necessary element in his perfect cure. It
is likely also that Jesus wished to show his
indignation at the flagrant disregard of the
Mosaic Law, at the open disobedience to the
Divine injunctions respecting swine, which
was shown by the presence of so vast a herd
of these animals pronounced unclean by the
Mosaic Law under which these people were
professedly living (St. Mark gives the
number as two thousand). In this district
the large majority of the inhabitants were
Jews. The keeping or the rearing of swine
was strictly forbidden by the Jewish canon
law. Other Oriental peoples also held these
animals as unclean. Herodotus (ii. 47) tells
us that in Egypt there was a special class
of swineherds, who alone among the in-
habitants of the country were forbidden to
enter a temple. This degraded caste were
only allowed to murry among themselves.
The eating of swine's flesh is referred to by
Isaiah (Ixv. 8, 4) as among the acts of the
people which continually provoked the Lord
to anger.

Ver. 33. — And the herd ran violently
down a steep place into the lake, and were
choked. Some exception has been taken at
our Lord's action here in connection with
the swine, but it has been well said "that
the antedating of the death of a herd of
unclean animals was as nothing compared
with the deliverance of a human soul."
But it seems better to see, in the permitted
destruction of the herd, the Lord's grave
rebuke to the open disregarders of the holy
ritual law of Israel, for the sake of selfish
lucre.

Ver. 34. — When they that fed them saw
what was done, they fled, and went and told
it in the oity and in the country. The men
who kept the swine had witnessed the whole
transaction ; and as the Master uttered the
word " Go," they saw a change in a moment
pass through the vast herd. A wild panic
seemed to seize the creatures, something had
filled them with a great fear,— they would
hurry from the unseen hut felt pretience ; the
cool blue waters of the lake, clearly seen from
the upland down where they were feeding,
■eemed to promise the best refuge; they



rushed from the plateau down a steep in-
olinp, which travellers since think they have
identified, and the deep waters of Genne-
saret put • quick end to the creatures'
torments.

Vers. 35, 36. — Then they went out to see
what was done; and came to Jesns, and
fonnd the man, ont of whom the devils were
departed, sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed,
and in his right mind : and they were afraid.
They also wMch saw it told them by what
means he that was possessed of the devils
was healed. The swineherds told their
story, quickly the news spread; » great
conuourse from all the country-side soon
gathereil round the scene of the catastrophe.
It was quiet then; the waters of the lake
had closed over the tormented creatures.
The demoniac, so long the terror of the
neighboui hood, now sane, clothed, too, like
one of them, was sitting peacefully full of
deep, awe-ful gratitude at the Master's feet ;
the disciples were standing round; Jesus
was no doubt teaching them the deep im-
port of the scene they had lately witnessed.

Ver. 37. — Then the whole multitude of
the country of the Gadarenes round about
besought him to depart £rom them ; for they
were taken with great fear: and he went
up into the ship, and returned back again.
The recital had no effect upon the head-
men of the neighbouring towns and villages.
They were probably for the most part
owners of similar herds of swine, perhaps
sharers in nameless sins, all specially hate-
ful to the Rabbi Jesus, whom they no doubt
knew well by repute. But he was, they
saw, something more than a poor wandering
moral Teacher; he possessed strange and
awful powers: had they not had terrible
experience of them? Which of them in
that law-breaking, dissolute neighbourhood
misht not be the next victim whose un-
clean possessions were to be swept away 7
So they would have none of him : let him
as quickly as possible depart &om their
coasts. They felt they could not keep both
the Saviour and their swine, and of the two
they preferred tlieir swine I And returned
back again. The chance, as far as the
Gadarene district was concerned, was gone
for ever. Jesus probably returned thither no
more. Within forty years this district was
the scene of one of the terrible calamities of
the great Boman war. The sack of Gadara,
and the desolation and ruin which was the
hapless lot of this once wealthy but evil-
living district, is one of the many melan-
choly chapters of the hopeless Jewish revolt
(see Josephus, * Bell. Jud.,' iii, 7. 1 ; it. 7. 4).
A modem traveller. Dr. Thomson, remarks,
singularly enough, that the old district of
Gadara at the present day is infested with
wild, fierce hogs: "Everywhere," he writes,.



OH. VIII. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



209



"the land is pTougheii up by wild hogs in
search of roots on which they live " (' The
Land and the Book,' ii. oh. 25).

Ver. 38. — Now the man out of whom the
devUs were departed besought him that he
might be with him: bat Jesus sent him
away, saying. The restored man longed to
remain with his Deliverer, but thia was not
permitted — ^the great Teacher bude him
stay behind in his own country. Perhaps,
thought the Redeemer, " mme of these haid-
heaited Gadareiies will be won by his
testimony — one of themselves, too, and so
notorious a sufferer." His work, the Master
told him, was there amnn? his own people;
so he stayed, and the next verse (39) tells
ns how he worked as a diligent evangelist
It is noteworthy how the Master referred
the great act of deliverance to God. But to
the restored, Jesus was at once his Deliverer
and his God. The text of hia preaching
was "how great things Jesui had done
onto him."

Vers. 40 — 56. — The healing of fhe icoman
aith the itsue of blood, and the raising of Ike
daughter of Jairut.

Ver. 40. — When Jesus was returned, the
people gladly received Mm : for they were
all waiting for him. Allusion las already
been made, in the notes wliich preceded the
parable of the sower, to the entliusiasm for
Jesus in the Galilee lake-cities and their
neighbourliood. This, as the Master well
knew, was only a temporary religious re-
vival, but still while it lasted it gathered
great crowds in every place where he visited.
He had not been long in the Gadarene dis-
trict, but his return was eagerly looked for
in Galilee. This verse describes his recep-
tion on his return by the people, and intro-
duces the recital of two' famous miracles
which he worked in this period of his
ministry after his brief visit to the other
shore of tiie lake. St. Matthew, before
speaking of the request of Jairus that the
Master would visit his dying child, relates
the healing of the paralytic at Capernaum,
and the calling of Matthew the apostle. It
is scarcely possible now to arrange the
events related, in their proper chronological
order. The Gospel histories pretty faith-
fully represent the teaching of the first days,
in which it was evidently the practice of
apostles and apostolic men to group their
accounts of particular incidents in the
Lord's life with a view to teaching certain
lesaons connected with doctrine or with
daily living, often disreganling the order
in which these iiicidents really happened.
Henre so many of the differences in detail
in our Gospels.

Vor. 41. — And, behold, there came a man
named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the
lynagogue. The public request, made too



with intense earnestness, of one holdiiig
such a position, is a clear proof that the
Galilee enthnsiasm for Jesus was by no
means confined to the poorer part of the
pnpu ation, or even to the more careless and
thoughtless ; such a man as Jairus is a fair
representative of the well-to-do, perhaps
wealthy, orthodox Jew ; strict and rigid in
his ritual observaucea, and held in high
honour by his fellow Jewish citizens. The
name is only a form of the Hebrew Jair
(Judg. X. 3).

Ver, 42. — One only daughter. This is not
the only place where the same touching
detail is reconled by this evupigelist. Com-,
p^ire tlie story of the widow's .-on at Nain
(ch. vii. 12), and the healing of the lunatic
boy (oh. ix. 38). St. Luke's Gospel owes
these and many similar tenches of deep
true sympathy to the great loving heart of
the real author of the third Gospel, Paul.

Vers. 43, 44. — And a woman having an
issue of blood twelve years, which had spent
all her living upon physicians, neither ooold
be healed of any, oame behind him, and
touched the border of his garment. It
may be assumed that the disease from
which she suffered made her, according to
the Levitical Law, ceremonially unclean;
this had separated her in a great measure
for a very long period from all contact
with the outer world. This would well
account for her shrinking from any public
appeal to the great Physician. The border
of the Lord's garment which the woman
touched was one of the four tassels which
formed part of the Jewish tallith, or mantle ;
one of these was always arranged so as to
hang down over the shoulder at the back ;
it was this one which the surterer's fingers
grasped. There was a certain saurednesi
about these tassels, as being part of the
memorial dresa enjoined by the Levitical
Law, which, no doubt, induced the woman
to touch this particular purtion of the
Saviour's dresa. And immediately her issue
of blood stanched. This is nut the only
instance of this kind of ^tranjic fiith mingled
with superstition being signally rewarded.
The case of the miiacnlous eflicacy of the
handkerchiefs and apri/iis whicli had had
contact with Paul's body (Acts xix. 12) is
an interesting example. A still more
startling one exists in the healing infiuenee
of the tliadou) of I'eter falling on the sick
as he pa>sed along the street (Af is v. 15).
The lesson evidently intended to be left on
the Church of Clirist by thia and aiuiilar
incidents ia a very instructive one. Faith
in Christ is a broad inclusive term : it is
accepted and blest by the Master, aa we see
from the gospel stury, in all its many
degrees of development, from the elemen-
tary shape wliich it assumed in the case of



210



THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vm. 1—56.



this poor loving superstitious soul, to the
splendid proportions which it reached in the
lives of a Stephen and a, Paul. Faith in
bim, from its rudest form to its grandest
development, the Master knew would ever
purify and elevate the character. It would,
as it grew, be the best teacher and the
truest monitor of the noble, generous life
he loved. Therefore he watched fur it,
encouraged it, helped it; and his Church,
if it would imitate its Muster, would do well
to follow his wise and loving example by
fostering in every form, however crude, faith
in Jesus Christ; for this incident in the
Divine and perfect life which we liave just
dwelt on, teaches us with striking eleauiess
that he can and will bless the dimmest, most
imperfect faith, the faith of the little child,
and of the poorest untaught one.

Ver. 45. — Who touched me t The Master's
words here and the statement of ver. 46,
" For I perceive that virtue is gone out of
me," tell us something of the earnestness
and faith of the snppliant. Many, as Peter
said, in that crowd were touching Jesus as
they pressed round him to look on his face
or to listen to his words, but of them all
none save this poor sufferer " touched " him
in the' true deep sense of touching, with the
fixed idea that contact with his blessed
Person would benefit or heal tliem.

Ver. 48. — Daughter, be of good comfort.
This is the only place in the Gospels where
our Lord is reported to have used this loving
word to any woman. Eusebius preserves a
curious legend in connection with this aot
of healing. In his time (fourth century) the
house of this happy one who met Jesus in
her sad life-journey, was shown at Paneas,
a town in the north of Palestine. At the
entrance of the house, on a stone pedestal,
stood two brazen statues — one represented
a woman kneeling; the other, a man with
his cloak over his shoulder and his hand
stretched out toward the kneeling woman.
Eusebius relates how he had seen the house
and btatues and heard the legend (' Hist.
Eccl.,' vii. 18). In the apocryphal Gospel
of Nicodemus, a very early writing, though
not one possessing much critical value, the
name of the woman is stated to be Veronica.
It was she, goes on the story to relate, who,
on the Via Dolorosa, when the Lord, on his
way t» Calvary, stumbled and fell, gave the
handkerchief to wipe the blessed face.

Ver. 49. — While he yet spake, there cometh
one from the ruler of the synagogue's house,
saying to him, Thy daughter is dead j trouble
not the Master. This interruption, which
must have occupied some time, was, no
doubt, a sore trial to the ruler's faith. His
little daughter was, he knew well, dying ;
and though he trusted that the famous
Babbi bad power to arrest the progresis of



disease, he never seems for a moment to
have contemplated his wrestling with death ;
indeed, the bare thought of recalling the
spirit to the deserted clay tenement evidently
never occurred to any of that sad household,
while the hired mourners (vers. 52, 53, and
Mark v. 38), too accustomed to tlie sight of
death in all its forms to dream of any man,
however great » physician, recalling the
dead to life, transgressing all courtesy, posi-
tively laughed him to scorn. It seems to
us strange now that this supreme miracle
should have seemed so much harder a thing
to accomplish than the healing of blindness
or deafness, or the creation of wine and
bread and fish, or the instantaneous quieting
of the elements, the waves, and the win£
While sufferers and their friends and the
Lord's disciples, in countless instances, asked
bim to put forth his power in cases of
disease and sickness, neither friend nor
disciple ever asked him to raise the dead to
life. To the last, in spite of what they had
seen, none, till after the Besurrection, could
persuade themselves that he was, indeed,
the Lord of death as well as of life.

Ver. 50. — Bui when Jesus heard it, h«
answered him, saying, Fear not: believa
only, and she sTxsJl be made whole. No
shadow of hesitation crossed the Bedeemer's
mind ; with unruffled calmness he whispered
his words of cheer to the grief-stricken
father, and bade him fear nothing, for that
all would yet be well with the child. Them
follows the well-known, often-read story
told in such few words, yet are they so vivid,
so dramatic, that we seem to be looking
on the scene. The grief-stricken household,
the hired mourners, the still death-room,
the white motionless form of the dead
girl — the ruler's only child — lying on her
little bed, the group of the six with tea^
dimmed eyes standing round j the loving
Master bending over the little dead, his
smile as for a moment he took back the all-
power he had laid aside a little season /or
our sokes; the far-off look in his eyes as f<»r
a moment his vision ranged over his old
home of peaue and grandeur ; and then the
two words spoken in the familiar Aramaic
(Hebriw), which Mark, or rather Mark's
master, Peter, remembered so well, " Talitha,
kumi I " and the dead child rose up again,
the spirit had returned to its frail tene-
ment.

Ver. 53.— They laughed him to scorn.
These were, no doubt, the hired mourners.
Familiar as they were with deatli, they
ridiculed the idea of one whom they knew
had passed away, awaking again as from a
sleep. These public mourners were custom-
ary figures in all Jewish homes, even in the
poorest where a death had occurred. Ther
are still usual throughout the Levant. Th»



OH. vm. 1—66.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



211



expTeBsion, "laughed him to scom," is fouad
in Shakespeare —

" Our castle's strength
Will laugh a siege to scorn."

(' Macbeth,' act T. sc. 5.)

The Aramaic words, Talitha, humil "Maid,
arise I " were just homely words, spoken in
the language which the little girl was in
the habit of hearing and using. The
Master's tender care for the child was shown
not merely in the choice of the language
and the words, but in his loviag thought
after her resurrection, for we read how —
Ver. SS. — Ha commanded to give her



meat. She had been grievously ill, sick,
we know, even to death ; and now that the
old strength and health had come back
again, the Master felt she would at once,
after her long abstinence, need food. Even
the child's mother was not so motherly ai
Jesus.

Ver. 56. — He charged thorn that they
should tell no man what was done. The
enthusiasm in Galilee just then needed no
extra spur. Tlie crowds which followed
him were increasing. The excitement, the
Master felt, was unreal and evanescent ; he
wished rather to calm it than to increase iL



HOMILETICa

Vers. 1 — 21. — Z%e evangelistic circuit. Observe —

I. Thb P1.AN OF ciBcuiT. (Ver. 1.) "He went," or "went about," or "kept
journeying." Hitherto Capernaum had been the centre from which short excursions
were taken, the Lord always returning to it. Now he moves steadily on from place
to place, " passing in patience until his work is done." " Through cities and villages,"
He will not omit any abode of man. If social influence and power had been the aim,
this Prophet would have limited his operations to the chief centres of life; but his
meat is to do the Faiher's will, and where there is even one soul waiting for the
message, there is he. To the Father, to him, there is the same value in the soul of
the peasant as in that of the prince. " Preaching and bringing the good tidings of the
kingdom of God." The distinction between the words, " preaching and showing the
good tidings" — or, to give the exact English rendering, "evangelizing" — ^is not to be
pressed too far; but the latter word seems to mark an advance of thought on the
former. The " preaching " was the more genera) proclamation, and the " evangelizing "
was the presentation of the gospel thus proclaimtd to the diversities of experience and
need, the opening up of its several aspects of blessing, so that men from their
different standpoints might realize the great love of God and behold the glories of his
kingdom. Kings grant pardons, but they only send them ; this King comes himself
with the pardon, and deals |iersonally with the sinner. "How beautifal upon the moun-
tains are the feet of him thus bringing good tidings, and publishing peace ; bringing
good tidings of good, publishing salvation, saying unto Zion, Thy God reigneth I "

II. A NEW STYLE OF DISCOURSE. One which thenceforth becomes a marked feature
of the teaching. He had frequently used comparisons, traced likenesses between the
natural and the spiritual. But what had been an occasional trait now became a
characteristic mode of conveying truth, and for the reason given by himself (ver. 10).
To us, familiar with the sound and meaning of the parable, nothing can seem more
apposite and happy as a means of communicating thought. By it the highest and
deepest mysteries of the kmgdom are most gently infused into the apprehension of
the mind, whilst there is always a reserve of meaning on which we can draw. But
the parable was not all this to those who heard it. It stimulated inquiry rather than
imiiarted knowledge. It brought the disciples to Jesus, saying, "Expound to us;"
" Wliat might this story be ? " Those who did not wish to learn were sent away with
the feeling, "A dark saying has been uttered: who can hear it?" Jesus says that
this defined his purpose in adopting it. He meant it to be a test of the spirit of
the mind. Thus he laid his hearers in the balances. May we be of those " to whom
it is given to know the mysteries of the kingHom of heaven "!

III. The parable op the sower. This is the only one of the famous seven given
in Malt. xiii. which St. Luke places in our view. It falls more naturally to be con-
sidered at length in connection with the former of the accounts. Observe here — on
this St. Luke is explicit — the point to which the discourse of Jesus looks (ver. 18),
" Take hei'd therefore how ye hear." In this connection recall the lour kinds of place



212 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [on. rai. 1—56.

in which the seed is sown : the wayside, where the seed is trodden down and devoured
by the fowls; the rock, OT stony places, where the seed gprinscs up, but soon withers
through want of moisture ; the thorny ground, where the seed and the thorns grow
together, and the thorns choke the seed ; and the good ground, where the seed springs
up and bears a hundredfold. These places are ideijtified (vers. 12 — 15) with classes of
hearers. There are the wayside hearers — those in whom there is no mental exercise on
that which they hear, who.se minds are thoroughfares for all sorts of thought. And
what follows? As soon as they hear, the devil comes — some impish fancy or distracting
influence, and takes away the word. "I never heard a sermon," said a man, who for
years attended church, " I attended, but, whilst you were speaking, I reviewed the last
week's task and arranged for the next." There are the rocky-place hearers — those who
hear with interest, with emotion ; you can see the response to the word in the anima-
tion of the coimtenance, in the tokens of lively feeling. But the message does not
grasp the character, the centres of the life remain unchanged, and thus " in time of
temptation they fall away." There are the thorny-ground hearers — those who have
heard and yielded to the truth, but the busy, care-crowded, or pleasure-seeking world is
waiting for them ; the seed is not altogether lost, but the mind is choked with alien
interests or pursuits. The poet Robert Burns compares himself to a lonely man
walking where fragments of marble columns lie on the ground, overgrown by rank, tall
weeds. There are the good-soil hearers — those in whom the earnest longing to know,
to do, God's truth is a preparation for the word; who, having heard, hide the word in
the heart, and patiently and habitually submit to it, and, through the blessing of the
Holy Spirit, bring forth fruit abundantly. To which of these types of heiirers does
each of us belong ? Oh the responsibility of hearing ! Note the distinction, in ver. 18,
between those who have and those who seem to have, or think they have. What is
the warning ? Whoso only thinks that he has, or is content with the appearance of
having, is losing his possession. The life is really moving on other lines than those
laid down in the word. The power of reception is diminishing: " Whosoever hath not,
from him shall be taken even that which he thinketh he hath." " Take heed therefore
Juna ye hear." It is ihe manner of hearing that is the main thing — the motive, the
desire, the extent to which the heart and the soul are engaged whilst hearing. Persons
»re apt to blame the speaker, to lay the want of effect at his door. It may be so ; no
doubt it often is so. But what of these persons themselves? Let each examine
himself. Eloquence, it has been said, is in the audience; and, undoubtedly, the
•ympathy of the audience has much to do with the power of the utterance. Christ
reminds us that, where there is failure, the hearer at least divides the blame. He
reminds us, too, that the life declares the quality of the hearing. Vers. 16, 17, " For
nothing is hid, that shall not be made manliest; nor anything seciet, that shall not be
known and come to light."

IV. The helpeks and the hindereks in the ministry. The twelve are with him.
It is their university curriculum. Would to God th^t all who pass through universities
and seminaries realized this curriculum also — "Eye-witnesses first, and then ministers
of the Word"! But he has other compimions than the apostles ; and the noteworthy
thing as to these other companions is that they ministered to him of their substance.
" The Son of God," says Godet, " lived by the love of those whom his love had made to
live." Who ale they? Women. 'J'hroe names are singled out. Mary of Magdalfi," from
whom seven devils had gone out'' {vide previous section), once passionate, perhaps
depraved, in her life ; but henceforth the most loving and devoted ; the one to whom
the risen Saviour first appeared (John xx.). And with her are named the wife of
Herod's steward, and Susanna, of whom nothing is known. " Many others," we are
told. But we do not find, as Farrar has pointed out, the wives of Peter or of the
married apostles nor yet the mother of our Lord. The ministry of woman to Jesus!
There i- a deep sympathy between the true woman-heart and the Lord; the sell-
sacrificing love su pure and strong in the true woman-heart being the special attraction.
Christianity has exalted woman, has raised her position, and purified her influence.
But woman has more than paid back all that she owes to Christianity in respect
of this. Who, indeed, that has been blessed by Christian mother, wife, sister,
friend, does not know that God has created the ministry of his Word male and
female? — giving to the female an even more winning beauty and a more spiritually



OH. vni. 1— 56.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 213

educative service than the male. The apostles are with Jesus; but certain women
minister to him of their substance. These are the helpers : who are the hinderers t
Eis mother and Ms hvethren (ver. 19). The Lord is compelled to say that, whilst the
relation according to the flesh is respected, they are not at that moment connected
with him by the afiSnities which alone are permanent. See how this bears on the
idolatrous honour paid by the Roman Church to Mary. She has been prevailed on by
her children, not to intercede with Jesus, but to join them in the effort — probably
meant in kindness, but Showing deficiency of insight — to prevent him from con-
tinuance in toils and pravera. And note, he distinctly declines to recognize any rights
grounded on the motherhood with regard to his work ; only spiritual relationships will
he ri'cognize. Even when he loi ks down from the cross and sees her standing, he says
to the beloved disciple only, " Behold thy mother." But, apart from this, is it not
•uggestive, mournfully suggestive, that the hinderers are the nearest of relations —
mother and brethren ? So it has been often since. An unsympathetic home and circle
of friends sometimes constitute the sorest trial which one must face who wills to
have fellowship with the Son of God. " He goeth forth weeping, bearing the precioui
seed."

Vers. 22 — 25. — Storm and calm. " He entered into a boat, himself and his disciples."
The association of Christ with the boat, with which we are so lamUiaT in the gospel
history, has been preserved in much of the poetry, the literature, and the art of the
Church. A very old seal-ring represents the Church as a ship struggling against the
winds, supported by a great fish in the sea beneath, and with two doves sitting on iti
mast and prow. The shape often given to Christian places of worship in the early ages
was that of a boat. And the idea has entered into all Christian song and thought.
Eeble catches up the tone of centuries when he inserts the verse in the evening hymn —

" Thon Praraer of the light and dark,
Steer through the tempest thine own ark :
Amid the howling wintry sea
We are in port if we have thee."

The key-note to all this symbolism is given in the incident reported in these verses.

I. It IS A PICTURE OF LIFE. The sea was at rest when the disciples took Jesus as
he was. As they sailed on the smooth waters the weary Prophet fell asleep. On
a sudden down comes the squall — one of those furious hurricanes which sweep across
s lake six hundred feet lower than the ocean, with gigantic funnels supplied by deep
ravines cut by the action of wild watercourses. All is changed ; there is heard now
only the despairing cry, " Master, carest thou not that we perish ? " Such ia life :
changeful, now the smiling sunshine with the clear blue sky, again the driving cloud
and rain, with angry waves breaking over the craft. Job was at rest ; his sons and
daughters feasting together ; he himself, with abundance and peace, fearing God and
eschewing evil, when the one terrible day came on which messenger chased messenger,
completing a tale of destruction and bereavement. How often does destruction fall as
in a moment 1 The fitful weather of the inland lake is a type of the fitful climate,
followed by the rapidly dissolving scenery, of the present time. How foolish to set the
affection on things below ! How sad when there is no Christ in the ship! when there
is no fixture, among the stmdry and manifold changes of this world, where the only
true joys are to be found !

II. It is a bion op Christ. The stilling of the tempest is a miracle. We seem to
see the sleeping Master quietly raising himself, looking around, meeting the gaze of the
all but frantic men, standing erect in the boat, sending forth the majestic, " Peace ; be
still 1 " " What manner of man is this, for he commandeth even the winds and the
water, and they obey him ? " Yes ; what manner of man 1 He is himself the miracle,
the One "made of God to us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and
Eedemption." The work is the sign of himself in that deeper work in which he is
manifest as the Saviour of sinners. What is that work but the rebuking of the storm
of passion, and all the influences which are adverse to peace of mind and holiness
of life ? " Be still," is the Christ-word ; " Peace to you," is the Christ-breath. In the
world of man, " he maketh the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still Then



214 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vni. 1— 5ft.

are they glad because they are quiet ; so he hringeth them unto their desired haven."
Ib Dot this the experience of every truly converted life? Miss Havergal's vtsrse
expresses it.

** There were strange soul-depths, restless, vast and broad,
Unfathomed as the sea ;
An infinite longing for an infinite stilling.
But now thy love is perfect filling ;
Lord Jesus (Jbrist, my Lord, my God,
Thou, thou art enough for me I "

And so for all the days. "Let Christ he awakened," writes Augustine, "Though the
tempest beat into, yet it will not fill, thy ship; thy faith will now command the windg
and the waves, and thy danger will bo over." Oh, see to it, that thou take Christ into
thy heart, even as he is. Blessed for thee, netdy sinner, when the Master is really
the occupant of thy life, thy " present Help in trouble."

III. It is a kepboop op little faith. " Why are ye so fearful?" is the part of
Jesus' word reported by Matthew. Why, when you know who is with you; when
you know that he is there, that it is not some enemy, some devil, that has the control
of elements, of circumstances ? Why are ye so easily cast down ? Why do ye give way
so readily ? Why do ye fall into such despondencies, such paroxysms of grief? May
we not, in many an hour of shrinking, if not of terror, hear this " why " sounding in
our hearts? "Where is your faith?" is the part of the word reported by Luke.
Assume that you have it, that you are really trusting in Christ as your Master:
whither does the faiih vanish when you are so fearful? Is it not the moment of trial
that proves the readiness and serviceableness of the faith ? Do we not often need to
■eek it when we have occasion for it ? Verily a question most pertinent to us in the
varying circumstances and demands of our life. Think, think over the adverb, so
Buggestive, " Where is your L.ith ? "

Vers. 26 — 39. — The demoniac whose name was Legion. Two miserable creatures are
mentioned in Matthew. No sooner has Jesus come forth on the land than they rush
towards him. Human, yet without the mental attributes of humanity, shunned by
all, left in the lonely place, to rend the air with fearful cries, to dash themselves against
stones, wretched beyoud all names of wretchedness. One of the two is singled out by
St. Luke, and described (vers. 27, 29). Observe the effect of Jesus' presence. Instantly
Bome long-silent chord was touched, some new sense of the awful misery into which
the man had been plunged was awakened, some conflict between a mind made
Buddenly active, and the nameless power of darkness was originated. The maniac
falls down, and with a loud voice cries, as if some other one were crying through him,
"What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I beseech
thee, torment me not." Marvellous confession ! which, however, had been preceded by
a word of authority (ver. 29), and which is followed by a kind of confused perception.
"What is thy name?"_ What name had he? What personality? The only word
which seemed to describe the situation was the Roman name for a host, " My name
is Legion; for we are many." Poor Legion! there is in thee a groaning which cannot
be uttered ; and that groaning, unawares to thyself, has the form of the old prayer,
"Unite my heart to fear thy Name!" Lo! he who knows the mind of the Spirit
has heard thee, and he has given a new song to thy mouth. Henceforth thou shalt
say, "I will praise thee, Lord my God, with all my heart, and I will glorify thy
Name for evermore. For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou hast delivered
my soul from the lowest hell." Thus far, all, though wonderful, is beautifid and
Christ-like. But now comes the strange portion of the narrative. Jesus is described
as giving the demons which had laid waste the son of Abraham leave to possess the
herd of swine feeding on the mountain-side ; the consequence being that the herd ran
■violently down a steep place into the sea, and were choked. Against this destruction
many objections have been brought ; it is a stone of stumbling and ofi'ence even to
Iwlievers. Even to faith it seems at variance with the mercifulness of the Lord, and
the transference of the evil power from the man to the herd of swine bristles with
things bard to be understood. Explanations offered, some of them ingenious, all
unBatisfactory, ore not here to be dwelt on. It is assumed that we take the evangelist



CH. VIII. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LTJKB. 215

to be a trustworthy guide as to events which are out of the plane of ordinary life.
Somewhere, somehow, the work done is reconcilable with the true nature of things,
with the mercy and the truth which are around all God's paths. Observe two pointa
by way of practical improvement.

I. To THE DEMONIAC HIMSELF THERE WAS GIVEN A TESTIMONY NEVER TO BB
FORGOTTEN OF THE SIN AND MISERT FROM WHICH THE STRONGER THAN THE STRONG

ONE HAD DELIVERED HIM. The effect On character, the influence which sume action
or course of conduct would have in the establishment of trust in himself or in the
education of the disciple, was always before the mind of Christ. Now, what an
evidence — in a form which one whose shattered intellect was not yet fully restored
could understand — was given of the awful waste of spiritual life, the awful force ol
an untrained, unsanctifled nature, by the sight of that precipitate rush down the steep
place into the seal Recollect, too, that, accordinz to the correspondences of Scripture,
these swine represent the more liestial and corrupt propensities of our nature. Pascal,
in one of his most cynical sayings, speaks of man as "half-beast, half-devil." There
il something of the beast in men ; and what happened that day is the token of
what does happen when the lower animal is acted on by spirits of malif;nity or
darkness — when, from some cause operating from without, that which is animal il
acted on by that which is devilish. Is not that same violent rushing down steep
places of poor animalized beings, their true life checked and destroyed, witnessed
every day? Do we not constantly see infatuations similar to that portrayed in the
herd of swine ? In England more than a hundred and twenty thousand persons die
every year directly in consequence of indulgence in strong drink. If, as has been
asked, there was such a destruction of cattle or swine in the country, what attention
would be called to it ! what a host of remedies and measures with a view to its pre-
vention would be propounded ! But the matter passes with little notice. Undoubtedly,
the event at Gergesa is a sign of what mere carnal appetite, when fed by some
exciting cause, brings about; and, being so, it is a standing witness for the blessings
of his salvation, whose gospel is a new order as well as a new life, who controls what
is lawless by the law of liberty, and at whose feet the man from whom devils are
departed sits clothed and in his right mind.

II. To ALL OF trs THERE IB A SAD SIGNIFICANCE IN THE OONDtJCT OF THE GaDAHENES.

The two facts bef >re them were— the swine lost, and tbe man gamed. Which of the
two was the greater? The svnne lost. That spoke to them of a fearful power in the
Man who had landed on their shore. Perhaps their consciences were uneasy. If they
were Jews, and some of them must have been, they knew that, for the purpose of
gain, they had broken Moses' Law. Why should he cuntinue in their midst whose
glance burnt like an oven? Anyhow, instead of remembering what attracted and
spoke of healing in the cure of the man, they remember only what had caused them
loss in the destruction of the swine. " Away 1 " they cry, " thou holy and terrible One !
We don't wish to be disturbed in our way. Trouble us no longer 1 " Fearful prayer!
But do not more than the Gadarenes pray it? Are there not many whose secret
heart protests, "Let us alone, Lord God! Let us make money as best we can; eat,
drink, and enjoy ourselves. Away with the spiritual — with Chiu-oh, with God ! Give
us our Bwine, and let heaven go I " Fearful prayer, and fearful answer I " God answers
sharp and sudden on some prayers, and flings the thing we have asked for in our

face a gauntlet with a gift in it." " He entered into a boat, and returned." There is

only one of another spirit in the multitude. He who a few minutes before had cried,
" What have I to do with thee ? " now beseeches, like Ruth of old, " Entreat me not to
leave thee : where thou goest I will go, and where thou dwellest I will dwell." Nay,
he must remain--Ohrist's missionary and witness to his unbelieving, countrymen. Not
to Itixuriate in him, but to live and work for him, is tbe call to the redeemed. "And
he went his way, publishing throughout the whole city how great things Jesus had done
for him."

Vefg, 41, 56, Jaints, and, what happened on the way to his house. A beautiful

Scripture, whose beauty we feel all the more that, in this Gospel, it follows the
rejection of Christ by the " witless Gadarenes." Its exact place in the history cannot
with certainty be fixed ; for the accounts of the three synoptists vary as to the time



216 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. viii. 1— 56L

of the works. But whatever the precise period in the biography to which it belongs,
the tale told is one which appeals to the more domestic affections of the heart; one too
which gives a graciously lull manifestation of Jesus the Resurrection and the Life.
The transaction realized as he went illustrates chiefly Christ the Life ; that which
was dont- in answer to the mler's pleading illustrates chiefly Christ the Besurrectiou —
the two aspects of the incarnate I Am.

Wiiu regard to the lormer of ti ese events, consider the touch of the Lord by the
woman who had found her way to his presence, and what came of the touch.

L The touch represents the onlt hope. She had nothing else to which to cling.
For twelve long years she had been a sick and weary woman. There is something
interesting in the circumstance which Luke the physician records, that all Her means
had been spent on physicians, but that she could not be healed of any. Mark adds
that she rather grew worse. The physician-evangelist has no such addition; but
" he knew what human skill could do, and, still better, what it could not do, and
he bowed himself humbly in the presence of Christ." Well, all the living has been
spent. A little belore the moment of Jesus passing, she might not have been bo
ready. A portion of her income would still have been left. The temptation would have
been to try another doctor. But now there is only this chance. It is the energy of
despair. " Thou must save, and thou alone." Ah 1 sinner, if thou wouldst know
the virtue that there is in the Son of God for thee, thou must come to an end with
self, with all strivings after a righteousness of thine own. Thy living, all that is thine,
must be wholly removed from thy sight. Jesus wholly ! Jesus only !

II. The touch represents an immediate act or will. "When she had heard,"
says Mark, " the things concerning Jesus, slie came." There is no delay over questioiui
such as, " How can I reach his presence ? How can I get through this multitude ?
Will he care for me? " All such self-inquiry is at once dismissed. The true faith is
busied only with its Object. The mind is too much in earnest to stop over problems
concerning the act or the manner of faith. " If thou wert sick for want of God, how
swiftly wouldst thou move ! " Two things are seen — the need, and Christ the only
answer to the need ; and, these things seen, the will is supreme over all that savours
of intellectual doubt and difiiculty. " If I may but get to him, I shall be whole."

III. The touch represents a peesonal contact. " Only to put my hand on the
clothes, or even the fringe of the garment." So she says to herself. Not, perhaps, *,
very lofty faith. A ^ood deal in it, possibly, of the superstition to which she had been
accustomed ; of an idea of magical charm, and so forth. But the real thing in it was
the conviction that he was able to save to the uttermost ; that the cure was certain
if she could get to him. The touch meant herself in her want laying hold of Christ
himself, the Saviour and his salvation. And this is the vital force of faith. Notions
may be confused, may be very poor and deficient ; the Lord will rectify that. The
saving ^race is such a confidence as will bring into direct relation to the love of
God in Christ. And this touch is at once distinguished. Every one who has to do
with multitudes imdefstands, so far, the secret of the quick "Who touched me?"
He knows by intuition the souls that are really sympathetic with him. These touch ;
the others only press around. In the crowd surging abnut Jesus there is only one who
touches. The people have welcomed him, and are following him ; but their handling
of him and her touch are quite different. Blessed among women 1 type of the souls
blessed eternally : " I perceived that power had gone forth from me."

rV. The touch is the way to the cure both of body and soul. " Immediately she
was healed." " Straightway," says Mark, " she felt in her body that she was healed."
What a sensation that instant bound of health ! Observe that " immediately " or
" straightway " in the reports of Jesus' works of healing in the Gospels. The health
does not come as the end of a laborious discipline or regimen ; it is not the end,
but the beginning of a new life. We do not work to salvation ; we work from it.
The moment a life is really surreudeied to God and the affiance of the soul with
the Redeemer is fulfilled, that moment it is healed, it is cleansed. There is a new
life introduced — a life which is henceforth the power of God to salvation. It is
not perfect, but it is there. This Divine life is the hedth of the soul. It is then
in a healthy condition before God. And henceforth, according to his power that
wnrketh in us, he completes and perfects the life which himself has imparted. Was it



OH. vra. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 217

not 80 with the woman ? After she was healed he brought her into the spiritual
knowledge of himself and his will. She had stolen to Jesus, but she must not steal
from him. He searches her out. She sees that she is not bid; and trembling, fearing,
she falls down and tells him all the truth. Precisely what he desired. And what be
desires evermore is frankness, openness to him. There must be no guile and no conceal-
ment ; there must be perfect truthfulness between the Lord and the soul. When any
shadow comes in there, the cleansing of the conscience, the working out of the
salvation, is hindered. Notice the word " daughter," the only woman who received this
title from the Lord, and she the woman who was brought to tell all the truth.
" For this let every one that is godly pray unto thee."

This interview, with its great work, is by the way. He who desires the opportunity
.>f usefulness meets the opportimity even in travelling to the duty more immediately
contemplated. All the while another work has been waiting. What parent does not
enter into the feeling of the ruler of the synagogue? His only daughter, the darling,
the desire of his eyes, is dying. And he must stand and listen to the talk which
involves some delay. And then the message, " Thy daughter is dead : trouble not the
K\t*;er ! " We do not hear of any complaint or impatience, of any word of reproach like
tbit which fell from the sisters of Bethany. Jesus meets a confidence such as this
wi^L loving frankness : "Fear not : only believe, and she shall be made whole." Look
at tiw sign that is given of Christ the Resurrection. '

I. \\ HAS ITS SPECIALTY OP MBANIN8. Of the three acts of raising from the dead
related by the evanfrelists, it is, adhering to the chronology of Luke, the second. The
son of the widow of Nain was not only dead, but the body was being carried out to
burial. Lazarus had been four days dead. The girl of twelve had only expired. The
attendants knew that she was dead ; Luke the physician is careful to add this. It was
no trance ; she was undoubtedly dead, but Death had only a short time before put his
stamp on the countenance. Trench, writing on the miracle, beautiftilly speaks of
" the frt-sh-trodden way between the body and the soul which has just forsaken it,
and which lingers for a season near the tabernacle where it has dwelt so long. Even
science itself," he adds, " has arrived at the conclusion that the last echoes of life ring
in the body much longer than is commonly supposed ; that, for a while, it is full of the
reminiscences of life." Observe, when Christ says, "She is not dead, but sleepeth,"^
the unbelieving mourners laugh; they have only scorn ioc such a saying. The
sorrow is hard, cheerless sorrow, when there is no conception of death — as a sleep !
" Asleep in Jesus ; " "He fell on sleep ; " — such words the Church has substituted
for the cold, forbidding word " death." Look, mourner in Zion, on the lifeless form
of thy dear one, and as thou thinkest of " the fresh-trodden way between the body
*nd the soul which has just forsaken it," remember the saying of him who is the
resurrection : " Not dtad, hut sleepeth." . Believest thou this ?

II. Note the witnesses op the work. It is the first occasion on which the three
of the apostolic band are singled out — Peter and James and John. None except they
and the parents are allowed to enter. There is a sacredness in great grief which
demanJj protection from the rude gaze of mere ctiriosity. The hured momners, with
their shouts and cries, their ostentation and display, are abhorrent to the Lord. Sim-
plicity and genuineness of emotion befit the house of the dead, and all connected with
death and burial.

III. See the gentle thoughtpulness op Chkist. When the maid arises, he com-
mands thivt meat be given her. The life restored must be supported. He is sparing of
the supernatural and extraordinary. Where the ordinary and natural come into play,
there the call is to use them. The Church, in her spiritual work, must learn of her Lord.
"Keep life living," said Bunsen. When the Divine life is bestowed, it must be
nourished by the appropriate means of grace ; it must be fed by food convenient to it,
nourished through the Word, sacraments, and prayer, unto everlasting life.

IV. Contemplate the whole action. How simple I how quiet I The touch of the
hand, the head bent over the child ; the voice soft yet clear in the familiar Aramaic,
" Talitha cunii! " — these are the features of the action. Thus simple and quiet was the
way of the Lord when, in the beginning, he " said, Let there be light! And there was
light." Thus simple and quiet is bis way when he comes to the human soul " as the
rain, as the fuimer and latter rain on the earth." The wind bloweth, indeed, where it



218 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vm. 1— 56.

listeth, sometimes with the ftiry of the hurricane tearing up the old refages and joys of
the life. But the hurricane prepares for the Lord. The Lord is in the still small voice
which comes after. Wherefore he saith, in tones of imperial authority, but of thriling
tenderness, to thee, little maid, to thee, young man rejoicing in thy youth, to thee on
whom the weight of years is resting, " Awake thou that sleepest, and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light 1"

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 1. — The gospel of the kingdom. In a parallel passage in Matthew pv. 23)
we read that Jesus went about all Galilee, " preaching the gospel of the kingdom ; " here
we read of the same thing in a very slightly different form — " showing the glad tidings
of the kingdom of God." It will clear away all possible confusion of thought respect-
ing "the gospel" and "the kingdom," if we dwell upon the gospel (or the glad tidings)
of the kingdom.

I. The kingdom of God. This kingdom of God, or of heaven, or of Christ (for our
Lord sometimes spoke of it as his own), is something transcendently nobler than any-
thing which the most pious or the most sanguine Jew ever hoped for in his heart or
pictured in his imagination (see homily on ch. i. 31 — 33). As Jesus Christ conceived it,
and as it will be when it has been fully and fina ly established, this glorious kingdom
is or is to be : 1. A kingdom of Ood ; one in which God himself will be the one Sovereign,
all men everywhere being his subjects, owning his sway and loyal to his wilL 2. An
essentially spiritual kingdom ; all the obedience and submission rendered being that of
the hf art and the will, as well as of the tongue and the hand. 3. A righteous kingdom ;
in which every citizen will act in accordance with " the golden rule " (ch. vi. 31). 4.
A beneficent kingdom; the spirit of kindness, of practical helpfulness, animating every
subject. 5. A universal kingdom ; coextensive with the human race. 6. An ever-
lasting kingdom; going down to the remotest generation. Snch, in its purity, its
nobility, its inherent greatness, its absolute uniqueness, is the " kingdom of God."

II. The gospel (the glad tidings) jop the kingdom. The features of this king-
dom which so much commend it to the hearts of erring, sinful, dying men, constituting
" the glad tidings of the kingdom," are : 1. 7%at entrance into it is open to every child
of man. This is now so familiar to us as to be quite commonplace. But look at it in the
light of the doctrine of Divine favouritism once prevalent ; in the light of the incident
recorded in the fourth chapter of this Gospel (vers. 23—29); — then we caunot be too
thankful that the gates of this blessed kingdom are open, stand wide open, to every
comer — to the poor, to the despised, to the neglected, to the barbarous, to those whom
men may consider irrecoverable or not worth redeeming. 2. That its Divine Sovereign
is actively seeking all souls, that they may enter. It is not only that no one is
excluded; the good news, the glad tidings, is more and better than that — it is that
every one is being individually, lovingly invited, nay, pressed and urged to enter; it is
that out into the "far country" of forgetfulness and dislike the heavenly Father goes
in parental yearning, and bids each wandering child " Return ; " it is that away over hill
and mountain of estrangement and guilt the good Shepherd goes, seeking and finding
ind bringing back the sheep which was lost ; it is that long and lovingly, at the door of
each human soul, the patient Saviour stands and knocks, and cries, " If any man will
open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him." 3. That admission is open to
every humble and trustful soul at once. If we have grieved some human friend and
become estranged from him, and if there be a proposal to seek reconciliation, our
decision will probably be determined by the consideration whether we shall he at once
fully restored or whether there will be a long interval before full reconciliation is
effected. It is the gospel (the glad tidings) of the kingdom of God that every penitent
and believing soul is immediately and without any delay whatever taken into the favour
of God. As soon as the submissive spirit of the man says, " Father, I have sinned," so
loon is grace bestowed, so soon is the name entered on the roll of the heavenly citizen-
ship. 4. That citizenship now means citizenship for ever. It is a large part of the
gospd of Jesus Christ that this earth is only an antechamber of the Father's house, or

lily a anall outlying province of his boundless empire. To be a faithful citizen hera



HH. viii. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 21&

and now means beina; a happy citizen somewhere for evermore. Life under the benign
sway of this heavenly King is not counted by years or decades ; it is without a bound ;
it is continued, perpetuated, in other regions of his glorious domain. This is the
"frlorious gospel" of the kino;dom. Is it well to wait for a better? Dare we hope
that, if we reject these glad tidings, we shall ever hear any that we shall accept?
" Behold, now is the accepted time." — C.

Vers. 2, 3. — Christianity and woman. We have seen (ch. ii. 36 — 38) that woman,
in the pen-ion of Anna, welcomed the infant Saviour to the world ; it was most fitting
that slie should do so, for Christianity and womanhood have had a very close relation-
ship, and undoubtedly will have even to the eud.

I. What Christianity owes to woman. 1. Its Divine Author and the Object of
its worship was, "as concerning the flesh," bom of a woman (Gal. iv. 4). The Son
of God was, in a true and important sense, the " Son of Mary." 2. He owed the care
and the training of his childhood to a human mother. 3. He received, during his
active life, the generous provision of ministering women (see text); these, out of" their
substance," supplied his necessities. 4. He found some of his best disciples and of his
most faithful attendants in women (Matt, xxvii. 65). 5. He had the comfort of the
near presence of three devoted women in his last agonies (John xix. 25). Closer to
him in that awful hour than the ruthless soldier and the taunting enemy, rendering
him a silent and sorrowful but not unvalued sympathy, stood three women who loved
him for all that he was in himself and for all he had been to them. 6. Last at the
cioss, women were first at the sepulchre (ch. xxiii. 55, 56 ; xxiv. 1). 7. Women were
united with the apostles in the upper room, waiting and praying for the further mani-
festation of the Lord after his ascension (Acts i. 14). 8. The apostle of the Gentiles
owed much to women in his abundant and fruitfm labours (PiiiL iv. 3). 9. Prom
that time to this, women have been rendering valuable service to the cause of Jesus
Christ ; the mother of Augustine, the mother of the Wesleys, and many hundreds more
have, by their holy and faithful motherhood, done signal service to the gospeL In
these later days, moved by the Spirit of God, women have, by their writings and by
their " prophesyings," effected great things for the furtherance of the truth as it is in
Jesus C&rrist. And it is right that it should be so ; for we have to consider —

II. What woman owes to Chbistianitt. 1. We know what barbarism does, and
fails to do, for woman. 2. We know also what Greek and Roman civilization did, and
failed to do, for her ; in how unsatisfactory a condition it left her ; how completely it
failed to raise her to her true spiritual ditinity. We know what Christianity has done
and is doing for her. (1) Jesus Christ taught and enforced the transceiident value of every
human soul. (2) He admitted women into his kingdom on the same terms on which
he received men : " In him is neither male nor female." (3) He gave to women a
sphere of honourable service in his kingdom; not only (as above) accepting their loving
ministry for himself, but for his disciples also. (4) Influenced increasingly by these
ideas, the Church of Christ has been giving to woman a place of growing honour and
usefulness ; it has made her the full helpmeet and equal companion of man ; it has
opened for her the gateway of knowledge and influence; it has placed her on the
highest seat to receive its respect, its affection, its service. We may look at —

III. The special contbibutions which woman mat bender. 1. When not bound
by domestic ties, she can offer, as these women did, of her worldly substance. 2. She
can minister, as man cannot, to the sick and suffering; she has a gentle touch of hand
and a tenderness and patience of spirit for which we look to man in vain. 3. She can
train the child in the home, and, by giving to him or her the earliest and deepest
impressions concerning Divine love, prepare for noblest work in after-years in various
fields of holy service. — 0.

Vers. 4 — 8. — Failv/re cmd success in hearing. The produce of our spiritual fields does
not always answer to our hopes or reward our labours; there is much sowing, but little
reaping. How do we account for it ?

I. The account op the failubb. 1. Inattention on the part of the hearer. The
truth is spoken faithfully, but so little heed is given to it that it is no sooner uttered and
heaid than it has disappeared from view. Sown on the hard wayside (ver. 5), it does



220 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST, LUKE. [oh. viii. 1—56.



not enter into the soil, and is readily borne away. They who do not know how to
listen when God speaks to them, need not be sarprised if they are of those who are
" ever learning, and never coming; to a knowledge of the truth." " Give earnest heed "
as the Word is being spoken. 2. Want of reflection. (Ver. 6.) Many listen with delight,
and consider themselves the better for their present gladness. But they do not reflect
on what they have heard ; there is nothing to nourish the feeble life — no " moisture,"
no " earth," no thoughtfulness and prayer ; and the en'l is that the emotion that was
aroused as the hearer listened withers away. 3, Incapacity to slaad tests. (Ver. 7.)
There may be earnest attention, and this may be followed by some consideration and
even prayer ; but the root of conviction does not go down far enougb to become reso-
lute cousecration, and the result is that the " thorns " choke the com as it is growing.
There are two kinds of thorn which are of a deadly influence in the spiritual field —
one is that of worldly cares, and the other that of unspiritual pleasure. These are not
evil things in themselves, but, just as the weeds in the field draw up and into them-
selves the nourishment which should be given to the useful plant, so do these lower
anxieties and gratifications absorb the time, the thought, the energy, which should go
to the maintenance of the new spiritual life, and, being unfed and unsustained, it
languishes and perishes.

II. The conditions of success. What is the good ground ? What is the honest
and good heart (vers. 8 — 15)? It is that of: 1, Sincere inquiry. The hearer goes
t« learn what is the will of God concerning him — to " inquire in his temple." Th«
question of his heart is, " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " Hence he listens
eagerly and continuously. 2. Devout meditation. He ponders, he dwells upon, he
prays over, the truth he has been receiving. 3. Intelligent, deliberate dedication. The
man takes all things into his mind that must be taken ; he counts the cost ; he con-
siders what the service of Christ means, and how much it involves in the way of
surrender and of activity, and he solemnly devotes himself to the service, or, as the
case may be, to the work of the Lord.

Jesus cried, " He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." He spoke that word in a
striking, impressive, emphatic voice. He would say to us : 1. Your privilege in having
access to the gospel is very great, and as is your privilege so also is your responsibility.

2. Many are the children of opportunity who are not heirs of the kingdom of God ;
many go into the " house of God " who remain outside the Church of Christ ; who
hear but do not heed, or who listen but do not ponder and pray, or who pray but do not
determine and devote ; who at some point or other fall short of the kingdom. It is a
sad thing to be " in the way of salvation," and yet to be unsaved, 3, Very blessed
are the children of wisdom. When the Word of God takes deep root and brings forth
fruit, its fertility is great indeed; the increase may be " an hundredfold" (ver. 8), In
the heart itself in which it is sown, it may produce all the graces of the Spirit of God ;
and in the better life thus called forth there may shine all the excellences which are in
Christ Jesus our Lord and Exemplar; and /rom that life there may flow forth influences
for good, of which the number and the nature and the duration only God can tell, — C.

Ver, 16, — Covered character. If we have a large object immediately before us in the
daytime, and yet are unable to see it, we are driven to the conclusion that, if we are
not blind, there must be something opaque between the object and our eye. Now :
1, There is much of solid goodness in Christian men. All who name the name of
Christ are under bond to depart from all iniquity ; their life is a life of holy endeavour
after the character of their Lord ; they are seeking daily the aid and inspiration of the
Divine Spirit ; they must be wiser and worthier than those who are living for them-
selves. 2. This light of Christian character is shining straight before the eyes of
unholy men. In the great field of the human world the wheat and the tares grow
together. Here we meet together, good and bad, the irreverent and the profane, under
the same roof, at the same table and hearth, in the same shop and warehouse. We
\yitnes8 one another's lives. Christian character i» near enough to be seen by alL

3. We are sometimes asked to be shown the light of Christian worth. Men say,
" Where is this excellency, this supposed superiority of spirit and conduct, these fruits ?
we should like to see them." What shall we say to this challenge ? That they who
thus complain do nut see what they look for because there is something tine- matter



OH, Tin. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 221

with their vision, because it is distorted by prejudice ? Or shall we say that where no
goodness is seen it is because there is none to see ; that piety, being popular, is simu-
lated, and they are looking at those who are only pretending to be Christian men, and
that godliness is no mnre accountable for hypocrisy than the good coin is answerable
for the counterfeit ? We might often make one of these two replies, with right and
reason on our side. Bat that would not meet the case ; it would leave the question
partially unanswered. The fact is that goodness is often unseen in consequence of the
intervening of some surface favUs which hide it from view. There is —

I. The covebikq of bbticenob. Many a man is right at heart, sound in faith,
well fitted by his knowledge and intelligence to render essential service ; but he is so
reserved, so self-contained, so inaccessible, lives so much in the inner circle of his own
familiar friends, that he is far less forcible and influential than he is capable of being; —
he is hiding the light of his character under the covering of reserve, instead of setting
it on the candlestick of open-hearted ness and expressiveness.

II. The C0VEBIN& of besentfulness. Other men are warm-hearted, good-natured,
diligent, and devoted in every good work, capable of rendering admirable service; but
they are quick-tempered, irascible, ready to take offence ; so hasty and resentful that
they are shunned when they would otherwise be approached; — they hide the light of
their character under the vessel of ill temper.

in. The C0VEBIN& of self-asseetion. Some men are upright, honourable, zealous,
resolute, forcible, well fitted to eflect great things, but they hide their light under the
bushel of self-assertion ; they insist on everything being done in the way they prefer ;
they make co-operation impossible ; they cut their influence in twain by their want of
conciliation and concession.

IV. The covbbino of discouktesy. There are those who are honest, and even
earnest and hardworking Christian men, acting along the lines of holy usefulness;
but they cover their character with the vessel of bluntness, or ignorance, or positive
rudeness, instead of putting the light of piety and zeal on the candlestick of courtesy.

Now, it has to be remembered that onr children and our neighbours, all with whom
we have to do, judge of our character not only by its solid and essential elements, but
also (and rather) by its superficial features ; they will be affected and influenced, not
more by that in us which is deep and decisive than by those outside qualities which
are visible to them just because they are outside. Hence, if we care, as we are bound
to do, that our character should be telling on those with whom we are connected, and
for whom we are responsible, we shall strive and pray to be not only pure and just and
true, but also frank and amiable and courteous. If we would not go through our life
with our Christian character covered over and lost by some superficial failing, if we
would have it fixed on the candlestick on which it will " give light to all that are in
the house," — we must not only think on the things which are true, honest, just, and
pure, but also on those things which are " lovely and of good report." — C.

Ver. 17. — Revelation — a duty, a fact, a certainty. These words of our Lord may
have been a familiar aphorism of his time, or they may have been a sententious saying
of his own, having many applications. Certainly they are significant of many things.
They may be regarded as expressing for us —

I. A SACRED DUTY WE ARE CALLED UPON TO DISCHAEQE. It IS ir thiS SeUSe OUr

Lord used them on the occasion reported by Matthew (x. 25 — 27). What was thea
hidden in the minds of the disciples they were to reveal to the world in due time ; the
truth which the Master was making known to them " in the darkness " they were to
" speak in the light." And this duty is of universal obligation. What God reveals to
us and what is, at first, hidden in our own soul we are bound to bring forth into the
light of day. It may be any kind of truth — medical, agricultural, commercial, econo-
mical, moral, or directly and positively religious ; whatever we have learned that is of
value to the world we have no right to retain for our own private benefit. Truth is
common property ; it should be open to all men, like the air and the sunshine. When
God, in any way, says to us, " Know," he also says, " Teach ; pass on to your brethren
what I have revealed to you ; ' there is nothing secret that shall not be made manifest,
nor hid that shall not be known.' "

II. A SERIOUS FACT WE DO WELL TO CONSIDER. Guilt loves secrecj. " Erery one



222 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [ch. vin. 1—56.

that doeth evil hateth the light . . . lest his deeds should be reproved." Men that sin
againsr God and their own cunscience would be only too glad to know that their deedg
were finally buried and would never reappear. But no man may take this consolaiioa
to his soul. Secret things are disclosed ; there is an instinctive feeling expressed in
the common belief that " murder will out," that flagrant wroni will scioner or later be
exposed. We may not say that no crimes have ever been successfully concealed ; but
we may safely say that no man, however careful and ingenious he may be in the art
of concealing, can be at all sure that his iniquity will not be laid bare. And this will
apply to lesser as well as larger evils. Habits of secret drinking, of impurity, of dis-
honesty, of vindictive passion, will sooner or later betray themselves and bring shame
on their victim. Indeed, so closely allied are the body and the spirit, so constantly
does the former receive impressions from the latter, that there is no emotion, however
deep it may be within the soul, which will not, after a time, reveal itself in the coun-
tenance, or write its signature in some way on " the flesh." If illegible to the mauy,
it is still there, to be read by those who have eyes to see, and to be seen of God. There
is a very true sense in which " nothing is secret that shall not be made manifest " even
here. But this is more perfectly and strikingly true of the future.

III. A CERTAINTY IN THE FOTURB WE SHALL WISELY ANTICIPATE. There 18 a " day

when God shall judge the secrets of men " (Rom. ii. 16), when he " will bring to light
the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts"
(1 Cor. iv. 5). Then shall these words be indeed fulfilled. Then may we know how: 1.
This language will prove a terrible prediction; our buried and forgotten iniquities being
brought back to us, God "repmving us, and setting them [our sins] before our face"
(Ps. 1. 21). 2. This warning luny be met and modified ; our sins, having been repented
of and forgiven, will be buried in those depths of Divine mercy whence they will never
be brought back (Ps. ciii. 11, 12 ; Micah vii. 18, 19). 3. These words may constitute
a blessed promise — all acts of I'ity, of patience, of kindness, of mercy, of magnanimity,
of self-sacrifice, reappearing lor Divine appioval aud awardu " Then shall every man
have praise of God." — C.

Vers. 19 — 21. — Christ's one relationship. How is Christ related to us? And is he
related to us in a way other than that in which he was related to men and women
during his life on earth? The answer to this question is that there is only one way
in which he has been or will be permanently related to mankind. We look at —

I. The very tempobaky character of his fleshly relationship. He was, of
course, most intimately associated, in purely human bonds, with "his mother and
his brethren." But he gave the clearest intimation that this was only to last during
his sojourn on the earth, and that it was not to be relied upon as a source of life even
then. 1. He checked his mother in her eagerness at the very fir^t miracle he wrought
(John ii. 4). 2. He intimated in the text that his human connections were already
merging in those of a higher, a spiritual kind. 3. He disengaged himself, tenderly
but decidedly, from his human, filial oblisationa as he was about to consummate his
redemptive work (John xix. 26). 4. He declined the demonstrativeness of his
warm-hearted disciple as partaking too much of the fleshly, and intimated that all
approach thenceforward must be of a heavenly and spiritual character (John xx. 16,
17). 5. He instructed his apostle to declare that all further knowledge of Jesus Christ
must not be " after the flesh," but spiritual (2 Cor. v. 16). 6. He gave no position
in his Church to his mother or his brethren because they had been such. They did
not derive anything, in their after-relation to him, from the fact of their motherhood or
brotherhood ; they stood related to him just as all other souls did, by their reverence,
their trust, their love, their service, and by these alone.

II. The permanent and intimate character of his spiritual relations with
us. " My mother and my brethren are these which hear the Word of Grod and do it."
" Whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in heaven, the same is my brother,
and sister, and mother " (Matt. xii. 50). From these words of truth and grace we
gather : 1. That what unites us to Christ is practical godliness. It is reverent attention
followed by obedient life; hearing and doing the will of God. It is well to place our-
selves where the will of God is made known ; better to listen attentively when it is
revealed ; better still to be excited to solemn and earnest feeling couc^rniug it ; but



en. VIII. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL AOCiiRDlNG TO ST. LUKE. 223

we do not become Christ's, we are not numbered amongst his oum, until we so hear
and heed and feel that we resolve to be and strive to do what we know is his holy will
concerning us. We may fail frequently to realize our own intention ; we may strive
upwards and God« ards with many a stumble on our way ; but if there be an honest and
earnest effort towards ihe good and the true, animated and inspired by the fear and the
love of God, then Christ acknowled>;es us a.s his, we are citizens of his kingdom. We
are something more than that ; for we learn from the text : 2. That those who are
truly uuited to Chiist are in very close affinity with him. So much are they to him
that the nearest and dearest human relationships are called in to express it. Dear as
the mother is to her child, as the sister to her brother, so dear are all true and earnest
gouls to their Divine Lord. With filial, with brotherly love will he watch and guard
them, will he provide for their necessities, will he sympathize with them in their
sorrows, wQl he attend their steps, will he secure their lasting interest in the Father's
home.— 0.

Vers. 22 — 25. — Christ the Lord of nature. We shall find two things concerning
the miracles of Jesus Christ — that he never refused to put forth his power if by its
exercise he could do an act of pure pity and kindness ; and that he never consented to
do so for the mere purpose of display. Hence there is a most marked difference
between his "works" and the pretences of the impostor. The perfect suitableness of
the occasion and the moral character of the action are the signature of Divinity. Yet it
was fitting that the strong desire on the part of the Jews to see a miracle wrought " in
the heavens" should, if occasion offered, have at least one fulfilment. And such it
certainly had in this stilling of the st^rm. And in this incident we have —

1. An ijjprbssivb illustration of Christ's Divine command. It would only be
right, we may argue, that our Lord should give to his disciples one illustration of his
Divine power that would be exceedingly impressive, and therefore convincing and
permanently effective. There was no more virtue or force in the stilliug of the
storm on the lake than in the expulsion of the demon on the other side of the water ;
to control the elements of nature did not require more Divine power than to control the
will of an evil spirit ; perhaps less. But the moral effect upon the observer's mind was
much greater in the former instance than in the latter. It appealed most influentially
to the imagination as well as to the reason. And considering all that these disciples
would be called upon to pass through in his cause, remembering the severity of the
trial of their fnith, it was surely well that, in addition to many other proofs of their
Lord's Divinity, they should be able to recall this scene upon the lake, and be assured
that he whom the winds and the waves obeyed was the Christ of God indeed.

IL An assurance that he is Lord of the circumstances op our life. As
we ply our little bark across the lake 'of our life, we shall find storm as well as calm,
rough adverse winds as well as favourable breezes. It will help us to think that the
Divine will which subdued that tempest is the will that is ruling wind and wave beneath
every sky ; that Christ is Lord of the circumstances of our life ; and that if only we
have him on board as our chief Passenger, we may coimt on his controlling power in
the time of danger or of trouble. But we must be sure that Christ is with us ; for the
promises of gracious guidance and merciful interposition can only be pleaded by those
who are loyal to him and to his cause.

III. A PICTURE OF THE PliF-SENT ChRIST IN THE TRIAL-HOUR OP HIS ChUROH. In

that little boat was the Christian Church : if that vessel had sunk, the Church would
• have perished with it. But the Church that has Christ with it cannot sink. The
question of questions, therefore, is this — Is Christ with us or not f And the answer to
that question will be found, )iot in the shape of the vessel, but in the character of the
crew ; not in the peculiarity of the ecclesiastical structure, but in the spirit and character
of those who compose and who direct the Church. Is his truth, is he himself, preached
and taught in our sanctuaries and our schools ? Are his principles inculcated in our
homes and illustrated in our lives? Is his spirit breathed by us in our intercourse
with one another, and with " them that are without"? Theseare the questions <ve
mu.-.t answer satisfactorily if we would reply in the affirmative to that one vital
question — Is Christ with us or not ?

IV. A REMINDER OF THE DiVINB PeACE-BRINQBE TO THE HUMAN SOUL. There U



224 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LL'KB. [ch. viii. 1— 54.

Bomething unspeakably grand in a storm in nature ; we are affected, awed, subdued, by
it. But in the estimate of Divine wiBdom 'here is something of profounder interest in
the unrest and perturbation of a human soul. Jesus Christ cares more to speak peace
to one troubled human heart than to produce the most striking change in the whole
face of nature. There are many sources of spiritual disquietude ; but the most constant
and tlie worst of all is guilt, the sin with which we have sinned against the Lord and
the sense of his condemnation we carry iu our hearts. It is that which takes the light
out of our skies, the joy out of our homes, the beauty and the brightness out of our
lives. The deepest question that wells from the human soul is this —

"Oh 1 whore shall rest be found —
Best fur the weary soul ? "
And in reply—

" The Toice of Jesus sounds o'er land and sea ; "

a voice which has brought and will ever bring peace to the aching, burdened, stricken
heart ; " Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest."— 0.

Ver. 23. — The tleep of Christ. "As they sailed he fell asleep." Christ asleep!
Christ asleep in the daytime! Christ asleep in the storm! Christ asleep with his
disciples in danger and distress 1 What have we here ?

I. The Son of man asleep ik the hour of uis own BoniLv weariness. A hard
and long day's work had the Master had that day. lie had thought much, taught
much, wrought much ; and each one of these had been laborious and exhausting to One
who was what he was and felt as he felt. He was completely spent with his strenuous
and sustained exertion. And as they sailed he fell asleep; so fast asleep that, though
the winds raged round him and the spray fell upon him, he did not awake. The incident
points to: 1. The devoted diligence of his life. Other things might have accounted for
this simple fact of being overcome, but that was the true account of it. How laboriously
he must have worked to do all that he did in the few months at his command ! we
might well argue ; how devotedly he did labour the memoirs of the evangelists
assure us. 2. The generous impulse which he allowed himself in the conduct of his
life. That life was not without plan, arrangemeut. But our Lord permitted himself
to be guided by the conduct and attitude of others ; he went back when repelled (ver.
37), he went on when invited (ver. 41). On this occasion he allowed the importunity
of the people to hold him longer in teaching and healing than he would otherwise have
remBined ; thus he left room in his life for the play of generous impulse. By all
means let us be methodical, laying out our time intelligently and wisely ; but let us
leave room also for an unselfish res|)onsiveuess in the structure of our life, even as our
Lord did. 3. 2%e thoroughness of his humanity. Who but the Son of God could, of his
own will and in his own name, command the mighty elemeuts of nature? Who but
a veritable Son of man could be overcome by weariness, and sleep in the midst of the
raging of the storm ? He was one of ourselves — walking wearied him, teaching tired
him, healing exhausted him ; he expended himself as be wrought aay by day ; his
manhood was real and true.

IL The Master asleep in the hour of the disciples' danger and distress.
Christ sleeping when the boat was sinking 1 It looked like negligence 1 "(Jarest thou
not that we perish?" That negligence was only apparent; there was no real danger.
As it was ri^ht for him to sleep under such exhaustion, he could with perfect safety,
commit himself and his cause to the care of the unsleeping Father. As it was, the
greatness of the apparent peril brought about an illustration of Divine power which
otherwise they would have missed. That was not the last time that the Master seemed
negligent of his own. To his Church in its storm of terrible persecution, to his people
(in their individual lives) in the tempests of temptation or adversity through which
they have passed, Christ may often, indeed has often, seemed to be heedless and
indifferent, but he has always been at hand, always ready for action at the right
moment. We have but to make our earnest appeal to him, and if the right time has
come for the manifestation of his power — ^though on this point we may be mistaken
(see John iL 4 ; Acts i. 6, 7) — he will most effectually respond ; he will say to th«



OH. vni. 1—66.] THE GOSPEL ACOORDING TO ST. LUKE. 225

mightiest forces witli which we are ia conflict, " Peace, be atill I " and there will be
" a great calm." — C.

Vers. 38, 39. — Our return for Ood's greater kindnesses. The outcasting of a demon
from a man was certainly one of tbe greater miracles Christ wrought, and the greater
benefits he bestowed. It required special power, and it conferred a boon of the highest
order. We look at —

I. The greater kindnesses wb beoeive feom God. It might be argued that all
God's mercies are great, inasmuch as (1) coming from his heart, all his kindnesses are
loving-kindnesses; and (2) they are all so thoroughly undeserved. God sends us a gift
when he might send us a blow, a blessing when we deserve a rebuke (Gen. xixii. 10).
Yet some of God's gifts to us are greater than others, and we may ask which they are
that might fairly draw such words as these from Christ concerning them, " how great
things God hath done for thee." And it is worthy of remark : 1. ITiat some of them are
little marked hy us. Among these are : (1) Our ie,ing itselii our intelligent, immortal
nature, with all its illimitable capacities. We so gradually awaken to the realization of
this, that the boundless value of the gift does not impress us as it should. (2) Our
health. We accept this as a matter of course, little affected by it until we lose it. (3)
Our kindred. So does the mantle of parental, filial, fraternal love wrap us round from
our infancy, that its beauty and its blessedness do not strike us as they might well do,
and we live on for years, failing to appreciate all the mercies which are associated with
the one word " home." (4) Our edv,cation ; all tliose educational influences and privileges
which build and shape our mind and character. But it is clear: 2. 2%ai <Aere are
special kindnesses we cannot fail to note. Of these are (1) deliverance from sudden
peril, fi:om the railway accident, from death by drowning, etc.; (2) recovery from
dangerous sickness; (3) rescue from the grasp of some fell temptation; (4) special
Divine influences, those which make the truth of God clear to our understanding, and
bring it home to our heart and conscience, thus placing eternal life within our reach.

II. The beturn which we make to God for these greater kindnesses. Jesus Christ
bade this man to whom he rendered such signal service return and show his friends
what great things he had received; and he did so freely and fully. What is our
response to our heavenly Father, our Divine Saviour? 1. What are we being to him?
What is the measure of our thought concerning him who never for one moment forgets
us, and who, in so full and deep a sense, " remembered us in our low estate " ? of our
feeling toward him who has spent on us such generous, such self-sacrificing lore ? of
our service of him whose we are and to whom we owe everything we are and have?
2. What testimony are we bearing to him — what testimony concerning the goodness,
the patience, the faithfulness of God are we bearing in the hom^ in which we live ?
Are parents impressing on their children by their whole bearing and demeanour that,
in their deliberate judgment, the service of Christ and likeness to Christ are things of
immeasurably greater concern to them than the making of money or the gaining of
position ? Are elder brothers and sisters doing their best to uommend the truth they
have come to appreciate to the understanding and the affection of those who are
younger, and who are taking their cue from them ? What testimony are we bearing
in the shop and i)x& factory, to our fellow- workers, to those whom we are employing?
What testimony in the Church ? Are we avowing our faith, our lore, our hope, our
joy ? Are we, who have received greater kindness by far than even this poor demoniac,
80 acting that as much is ascribed to us in God's book of account as is here recorded of
him, that " he published throughout the whole city how great things," etc. ?— 0.

Vers. 37, 40. — Jesvs Christ : rejection and welcome. We have in these two passages
a very striking contrast ; we have in the one a very deliberate and consentaneous dis-
missal, and in the other a very cordial and unanimous reception of our Lord, — it is
illustrative of the treatment he is now receiving at the hands of men.

I. The ebjechon of Jesus Christ. 1. It may be deliberate and determined. In
the case of the Gadarenes it was emiihatically so. They aU came together to seek him
and to entreat of him that he would leave their neighbourhood. Their request was
unqualified with any condition ; it was decisive, absolute. It is not often that men
suddenly arrive at the conclusion that they will not hare the Son of man to reign over

liUKB. *



226 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST, LUKE. [oh. vm. 1— 5ft

them ; but the long postponement of bis claims leads on and down to a decisive rejec-
tion ; at length the mind is fully made up, the soul resolved that it will seek its good
elsewhere, that the patient Saviour may knock but he will wait in yaia. 2. It may
proceed from motives that are distinctly unworthy. It was a procedure on the part
of these Gadarenes that was simply shameful ; they preferred their swine to a Divine
Restorer ; they would rather keep their property than entertain One who would bring
health to their homes and wisdom to their hearts. When men reject Christ, they
seldom put before their minds the alternative as it really is iu the sight of God ; but
traced far enough, seen in the light of truth, viewed as it will have to be one day
regarded, it is an unholy and an unworthy preference of the human to the Divine, or
of the present to the future, or of the fleshly to the spiritual ; it is a preference which
God condemns, and for making which the soul will one day reproach itself. 3. It may
be only too successful. It was so here. Jesus did not contest the point ; he did not
assert his right to go where he pleased and labour where he liked. He yielded to their
urgency ; " He went up into the ship, and returned back again." Man has a power
which may well make him tremble, of resisting and rejecting the Divine ; of sending
away the messenger and the message which come from God himself; of silencing the
voice which speaks from heaven " How often would II... but ye would not ; "
" Te shall not see me until," etc. (ch. xiii.). This is the record of many a soul's history
in its relation to Christ. We send away from our hearts and homes the Lord that
would heal and save and enrich us.

11. The welcome of Chbist. " The people gladly received him " (ver. 40) ; they
welcomed him, " for they were all waiting for him " — were in expectation of his coming.
1. The spirit in which it is offered. We cannot suppose that every one then present
had the same feeling about our Lord's return. Probably there were those who were
influenced by a legitimate but unspiritual curiosity ; others by a desire to be healed,
or to secure his services as Healer of sickness for tlieir friends ; others by a wish to
learn more of his wondrous wisdom ; others by a reverent thankfulness and a desire
to manifest their gratitude to him. Many motives take men into the presence of
Christ. Some are low and very near the ground, that may or may not go unblessed.
Others are higher and more hopeful. And yet others are certain to be recompensed.
They who receive Christ's word in the love of it, who go to him to learn of him and
to be healed by him, or who want to be employed by him in his cause, may make sure
of a full-handed welcome by him. 2. Its reception by our Lord. We know that this
is cordial and full of blessing. " If any man , . . open the door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with me." If, when Jesus Christ offers himself
to us as our Teacher and Saviour, we heartily welcome him as such, there will be for
us an enrichment of soul surpassing all that we can imagine — reconciliation to the
living God ; his own blessed and unfailing friendship ; a life of sacred service, holy
usefulness, and abiding joy ; a death of peace and hope ; an immortality of glory. — 0.

Vers. 45, 46. — Chrisfs discriminating notice. Who can help being interested in the
woman who is the subject of this sacred story ? She has suffered long ; she has wasted
her substance in vain endeavours to be healed. Now a new hope springs up in her
heart ; though excited by this hope she shrinks from the publicity which she fears is
necessary for its fulfilment. At last faith and hope triumph over timidity, and she comes
into the presence of Christ. We are sympathetically present in that crowd ; we see
her stealing into it, pushing her way nearer and nearer to the Master, at length timidly
stretching out her hand and touching the sacred fringe of his garment. We almost
pity this trembling woman, albeit we know that she is healed, as Jesus turns and says,
" Who touched me ? " We know that it is only by a great spiritual effort that she
tells her story to the Master in the presence of the people, and our hearts draw yet
nearer in trust and love to that Divine Healer, to our Divine Lord, as we hear him say,
" Daughter, be of good comfort : thy faith hath made thee whole ; go in peace." The
incident may speak to us of —

L The diffbbencb between bodily and ebal spiritual oontaot. * There are
times when hands touch ours, but only send an icy chill of unsympathizing indifference
to the heart; when eyes gaze into ours, but with a glazed look that cannot read our
Kuls ; when the multitude throng and press us, but we cannot say, * Somebody hath



OH. vin. 1—56.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 22?

touched me,* for the contact has not been between soul and soul, but only between
tbrm and form." We are very much thronged in this modem life we live, but we are
not vefy often touched to newness of thought and feeling; and except we live a life of
prayer and genuine human sympathy, we must not expect to " touch " other souls so
as to quicken and inspire them.

IL The uselessness of ant remedy but thb gosfbl fob cue spiritual need.
This woman in her helplessness is a picture of humanity. It is sick with the worst of
all maladies — sin. It is suffering all the wretched consequences of guilt — weariness,
restlessness, misery, remorse. It often spends its resources on things which have no
healing virtue, and which leave it ill as ever. At length it repairs unto him in whom is
no disappointment, in the shelter of whose cross, and in the shadow of whose love, and
in the suushine of whose service is pardon for every sin, comfort for every sorrow, rest
for every soul.

in. The duty of declaring what G-od has done for us. That sensitive heart,
trying to screen herself from the observation ot the crowd, and wishing to come and go
unnoticed, was not rejected. Nevertheless, the Lord, by his repeated questioning, con-
strained her to come forward and acknowledge the blessing she had received. Christ
does not wish for an ostentatious piety ; he hates all pretence ; but he approves and
desires a suitable and grateful avowal of our indebtedness to him. Though we come
with a tremblin"; heart, yet we are to come and tell our friends what great things the
Lord has done for us.

IV. The DisTrNGUisHiNG notice Christ takes of us. " Who touched me ? " asked
the Lord. " Master, the multitude throng thee ; is it wonderful that somebody should
touch thee? Anybody might chance to touch thee in such a crowd ; can it matter who it
was?" urges Peter. "Ah! but that is not enough. Somebody, some one, hath touched
me ; there is one individual, whom I distinguish from the others, that has laid an
appealing hand upon me. You see nothing in that touch but an accidental encounter.
I see much more than that — the approach of a human mind, the appeal of a human
heart, the contact of a human soul with mine." This is the spirit of our Lord's reply.
And it conveys to us the important truth that we are not lost in the crowd. It is not
so true to say, " God loves man," as to say, " God loves men." " He tasted death for
every man ; " " He loved me, and gave himself for me." There are no limitations in the
Infinite One. The fact that he controls the universe is no r?ason why he should not
watch the workings of each humblest human souL The vaotness of the range of his
observation does not diminish the fulness of his knowledge of every member of his
family. Disciples see only a pressing, pushing throng ; but the Master singles out the
woman who has come to see whether her last chance will fail her. The crowd may
hide us from one another, but not from our Lord. God sees us, every one ; follows us ;
pursues us with his watchful and redeeming love; guides uu with his hand; leads us
into his kingdom. But we must see that our touch is one that will call forth such a
response as this. Christ discriminates between the touch of this woman and that of
the unmannerly crowd. It is not necessary for us to have a full and perfect under-
standing of bis nature, or even a perfect, unwavering assurr.nce of the success of our
appeal. This woman had neither of these. It is necessary that we should have what
she had — earnestness of spirit, and a measure of genuine faith in him. Then will he
say to us, as to her, " Be of good comfort ... go in peace."— C.

Ver. 49. — A needless anxiety concerning Christ. " Trouble not the Mastt^." This
ruler of the synagogue showed a commendahle desire not to give useless trowbVe i} the
Prophet of Nazareth ; he could not expect that his power would extend so fa. as t^
raise the dead, and he wished to save him fruitless trouble. Equally oreditat^e waa
the behaviour of the centurion whose action is recorded in & previcus chapter (-yii. 6\
He/elt that the Lord could accomplish in the distance the i-bjeot of his perhaps tou
gome journey, and he sent to say, " Trouble not thyself: for I ann mt wotihy that thov
shouldest enter under my roof." It was right that, by cersidera'e kindness, the Son
of man should be saved all that those who loved and homi'ivid bim could save hin.
from. And the same is true enough to-day of the Son of G(>d. There ere —

I. Wise and eight solicitudes concerning him. We nv) bouna to refrain mos'
carefiUly and conscientiously from troubling the Master by : 1. Doiikg in his name that



228 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. viii. 1—56

which he would disown ; e.g. carrying on a cmel, though it may be a refined, persecu-
tion of those who " follow not with us " in the mode of our worship, or the method
of our Christian work. 2. Asking his blessing on that which he disapproves ; e.g. on
the war which is an unrighteous one, on the cause which is an unsound one, on the
business which is not conducted on principles he can acknowledge as his own. 3. Mis-
representing him by the spirit which we manifest ; instead of breathing the spirit of
gitK^usness and self-sacrifice toward those who are weaker or younger or less cultured
or less privileged than ourselves, adopting a tone of haughty superiority, or doing that
which " causes them to offend." 4. Failing to approach him in prayer, to seek his aid
and his influeace, to apply for his redeeming touch. Christ may be much troubled by
our distance and neglect ; he is not likely to be burdened by our earnest approaches
and i^peals.

n. Kbedlesb anxieties ooncerniko him. 1. Inviting him to stay too long with
ut. The centurion, modestly and properly enough, felt that he was not worthy that
Christ should come under liis roof. We may feel that also, and especially that we are
not worthy that he should make our hearts his home, as be has promised us. But we
must not refrain from inviting him to come and to stay with us. We must ask him
earnestly to " abide with us from mom till eve," not " to sojourn, but abide with us."
He will not count that a trouble ; he will honour our faith and appreciate our welcome.
" Abide in me, and I [will abide] in you." 2. Going to him too often. He places no
limit on our spiritual approach to him. He says ever to us, " Come unto me ; " " Draw
nigh unto me ; " " Seek ye my face." We shall not burden him by our fellowship ; we
may grieve him by our absence and by our preference of the society of those who are
hia enemies. 3. Ashing to» much of him — either for ourselves or for others. There is
no magnitude or multitude of sins we may not ask him to forgive ; no depth of evil we
may not ask him to eradicate ; no severity of disease we may not ask him to undertake.
The maiden may be dead (text), the cause may be very low, the heart may be very
cold, the character may be very corrupt, the life may be very base, the case may seem
very hopeless ; but do not shrink from " troubling the Master ; " his touch " has still its
anoient power ; " to the lifeless form he can say, " Arise 1 " and into the cause that
seems wholly gone, and the soul that seems utterly lost, he can infuse newness of life.
4. Doing too much in his cause for him t» watch and bless. The more often we ask
him to crown our holy labours with his energizing touch, the better we shall please his
yearning and loving spirit. — 0.

Vers. 1 — ^21. — Incidents in evangetistie work. We have now to contemplate Jesus
M fairly loosed from Capernaum as the centre of his mission work, and as making
systematically the tour of the province of Galilee. The " beloved physician " gives to
us here just such an insight into the material conditions of Christ's evangelistic work
u we naturally desire. Let us, then, notice —

L The spibitual and temporal bides op oub Lobd's evangelistic work. (Vers.
1—3.) Twelve men and a number of holy women form Christ's band — a choir, so to
speak, of joyful evangelists. The substance of the message was " the glad tidings of
the kingdom of God." Christ himself was Preacher. None of the others could enter
into the nature of this coming kingdom. But it was to be a kingdom of peace and of
joy to all who became members of it. Hence the preaching was " glad tidings." The
spiritual side of the work was, therefore, joy-inspiring. The temporal conditions of the
work are here revealed. Our Lord liveii on charity, or, as we should put it, on love.
Hospitality, especially to •very one who professed to be a rabbi, would supply Christ
with much ; but it could not cover the whole case ; consequently, certain women, who
had been delivered from demoniacal possessions, and wiio were correspondingly grateiul
to their Deliverer, were proud to follow him and minister to him of their substance.
Joanna, whose husband seems to have looked after Herod's housekeeping, transfers her
attentions to a greater King, and becomes chief minister, we may believe, to her
Master's wants. The twelve disciples were candidates for the ministry under training ;
the holy women were the oaterem for the college; and so our Lord, as President, received
the help of men and women in their respective spheres.

n. The element op judoment in pababolic tbaohino. Before noticing briefly
tlia parable of the sower, we must ask attention to the change in our Lord's method



OH. vm. 1—56,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDmO TO ST. LUKE. 229

of minigtration. It would seem that np to this time he had preached less figuratively,
but as the Pharisees had taken up their position of hostility, it was absolutely necessary
for him to pxercise what may be called intermediate judgment (cf. Godet, »n toe).
This was by taking to parabolic teaching. While to a docile and childlike spirit a
parable sets truth in its most attractive aspect, to a proud, self-snfScient spirit it veils
and hides the truth. It is light or darkness according to our spiritual attitude. Hence
the change in the Preacher's method heralded a new stage in his work. The common
people would still hear him gladly, but the proud would be kept at a convenient
distance through the veiled character of the truth presented in parables.

III. The pakablb op warnino. (Vers. 4—8, 11 — 15.) This, according to all the
evangelists, was the fiist parable. It was breaking ground in the delivery of parables.
Hence its character as a warning. Its subject is the hearing of the Word. Its warning
is that there are three bad ways of hearing as against one good way. These are : 1.
Careless hearing — represented by wayside seed devoured by the birds before it can fall
into the earth and bear any fruit. The devil visits careless hearers, and takes the
Word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved. 2. Rapturous hearing
— represented by seed falling into rocky soil and springing up suddenly, only to wither
away. Hence the danger of hearing with rapture and resting in the rapture. It is the
religion of feeling:, of happy times, and such superficialities. Something deeper is needed
than this. 3. Careworn and preoccupied hearing — represented by seed falling into
soil that is not cleansed of roots and thorns, and where the seed is choked. We cannot
hear to advantage if we put anything before the Word. Unless it is put before worldly
concerns, there will not be much fruit. 4. Honest and good-hearted hearing — represented
by the seed falling into good and cleansed ground. In this case there is fruit-beariug,
in some cases up to an hundredfold. Hence the warning voice, " He that hath ears
to hear, let him hear." Unless the multitude hearing Jesus, unless in particular the
disciples, took the Word of God ministered by Jesus patiently and honestly into their
consideration, they could not bring forth fruit unto perfection.

IV. The application to the twelve. (Vers. 16 — 18.) The disciples had received
Jesus' explanation of the first parable. And now he further applies it to their case.
They are intended, he tells them, to be lights in the world ; and he has no intention
of putting them under a bushel or bed, where the light would be lost and useless, but
on a candlestick to illuminate all who enter the house. In this beautiful and figurative
way our Lord indicates the position he means to give them in his Church. Consequently,
they must remember that every secret thing is on its way to manifestation (ver. 17), and
Bo their lives, no matter how secret and apparently insignificant, are public lives. By
this thought all hearing will be intensified with a new sense of responsibility. Besides,
he tells tliem that the law of capital obtains in hearing as well as in everything else.
This is the law by which the person, who has something to start with, gets something
more. For example, if we bring to the contemplation of the truth a " good and honest
heart," then its goodness and honesty will be intensified and increased by the truth ;
whereas, if we bring a vacant heart, an inattentive mind, thea our heart will be still
more vacant, and our mind still more inattentive. We lose power by indifferent hear^
ing, just as we gain power by attentive and honest hearing. This was a most important
lesson for the candidates about him. Doubtless they profited by it.

V. Blood-eelationship VERSUS spibitdalbelationship. (Vers. 19 — 21.) We learn
from the parallel passages that this incident occurred in consequence of our Lord's
enthusiasm. His relatives thought him mad, and that he ought to be put under
restraint. His reply to their message is most significant. As Gess says, " He draws
his true disciples the more closely around him as the hostility of his own relatives
increases, and calls them his family." * We have thus, as Saurin puts it, the family
of Jesus Christ according to the flesh contrasted with the family of Jesus Christ
according to the Spirit. The spiritual relationship is put before the blood-relationship,
other things being equal.* It is not that Jesus loved his brotners and mother less, but
that he regarded the Father's will and those who obeyed it as more to him than they
can be. His conduct on this occasion most likely conduced to the conversion of his
kindred to believe upon him. It enabled them to see exactly the principle of his work

• ' Christi Selbstzeugniss,' a. 48.

• Cf. Saurin's ' Sermons,' tome vi, pp. 227—264



230 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. vni. 1—58

And in this loyalty to members of God's family we must follow our Lord. We must
not allow others to usurp their rights under any pretence of relationship or authority,
— B. M. E.

Ters. 22 — 56. — A group of miracles. The mother and brethren of Jesus had tried
m vain to interfere with the important work in which he was engaged ; he clung to
his disciples as the real members of his Father's family. And so we find his career as
a merciful Miracle-worker continuing. We have here a group of notable mirficles ; it
was, as Godet suggests, the culmination of his miraculous work. Nature, human
nature, and death yield to his authority in their order.

L Safett in the booiett of Jesus. (Vers. 22 — 25.) The disciples and Jesus had
embarked to visit the country of the Gadarenes. His object in doing so, as we shall
presently see, was to rescue from diabolical possession a single soul. But to rescue this
soul they had all to pass through storms in crossing. It was surely worth all the risk
they ran 1 The weary Saviour fell asleep soon after embarking, and it was while he was
sleeping the storm arose in nature, and the storm of fear in the souls of the disciples.
It argued little faith on their part to suppose that they were in danger when beside
them is the sleeping Christ. Yet so it was. Jesus may lead his people into danger,
but he always shares it with them, and leads them in due time out of it. No sooner do
they appeal to him to save them from perishing, than he arises, rebukes the wind and
the wave, so that, contrary to custom, there is an immediate calm ; and then proceeds
to rebuke the storm within their souls, and make all these also to be peace. In this
way our Lord showed his sovereignty over nature, and his sovereignty over man. He
can rebtike " the noise of their seas, the noise of their waves, and the tumult of the
people " (Ps. Ixv. 7). No wonder that the strangers who were in the boat with the dis-
ciples were astonished at One who could command wind and wave, and they obeyed him 1

II. Jesds the Misisteb to minds diseased. (Vers. 26 — 40.) In the greatest peace
the disciples and their Master approached the shore. But here a more terrible storm
confronted him — the mania of the poor possessed one. " The beloved physician," who
writes this Gospel, brings out the characteristics of the mania as a physician would.*
No sooner does the case present itself to Jesus, than he commands the devil to depart
from him. No protest on the part of the unclean tenant avails ; the spirit and his
companions are compelled to prepare for departure. They bargain hard not to be sent
" into the abyss " (tis t^k &fivaaov), where their final doom awaits them, and, as an
alternative, ask to be permitted to enter into an adjoinins herd of swine. This associa-
tion of evil spirits with animals is illustrated in the Edenic temptation, and it may
account for the reign of tenor in the geologic times." The possession of the animals
may be different from that of a moral being like man, as Godet suggests ; yet it shows
surely the sensualism into which evil spirits can descend. The prodigal son only
desired to satisfy himself witk the swinish life ; but these demons actually made the
experiment (cf. ch. xv. 16). But now the swine, reinforced by the devils, rush
madly onwards to the sea, and perish in the waters. The result is that one human
being is delivered from his mania, while" a herd of swine are sacrificed. If such an
alternative is presented, there can be no doubt as to the decision. Better that all the
swine in the world should perish, it as the result a single human soul is delivered from
his mental disease. Hence the wretched souls, who came from the city and lamented
the loss of the swine instead of rejoicing in the cure of the demoniac, show thereby
that they deserved the judgment which had overtaken thera. Jesus can "minister to
minds diseased ; " he can bring the maniac to his right mind again ; and he can cure
us of the insanity of sin and have us sitting clothed at his feet and anxious to be with
him evermore. When, besides, the Gadarenes desire his departure, he can make
arrangements for witness-bearing, so that when he returns after a time, the unwilling
people shall be found to have renounced their unwillingness and to gladly welcome
him. So may we all witness among our friends to the power of our Lord.

IIL The touch of faith. (Vers. 43 — 48.) We have next to notice the healing of the

> Of. Hobart's 'Medical Language of St Luke,' pp. 13, U; also Treuoh on <Ih<
Miracles,' p. 171, etc.
■ Ot Bersiei's 'La Solidarity,' p. 119.



CH.IX.1— C2.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE.



231



woman with the issue of blood. This was the solitary miracle where faith anticipates
our Lord's consent, and finds healing through the touch of his garment. Havinj; pre-
sented herself so often to the physicians, she in this case refuses to obtrude upon hii
notice, but thinks she will escape in the crowd. But our Lord, perceiving that from
his sacred Person healing power had flowed, inquires for the patient, who in due season
comes and confesses all. But she has been brought before him that he might convey
to her the lesson that it was her faith, and not a mere physical touch, which had saved
her. That is to say, the process was mural, and not merely physical'. And surely this
case of the issue of bluod is to represent certain aspects of sin. It is a drain upon the
moral system which man cannot staunch. But once we look to Jesus by faith and
touch the hem of his garment, we are instantly healed, and power begins agaiu to rise
within us. We ou<;ht not to let our vital power be undermined when such a Saviour
is at hand to heal us 1

IV. The awakening of the dead. (Vers. 41,42, 49 — 56.) This case of resurrection-
power presents Jesus in the culmination of his miraculous work. The command of
nature and of human nature is important, but still more ma.;niflcent is the command
of death, the power to enter into the gloomy realm, and there assert one's authority.
This is what Jesus does. He is humbly asked by Jairus to ccime to his dying daughter.
He finds that he has to face the little daughter already d^ad. The father, ready to
despair, is told to " believe only, and she shall be made whole." He believed, and lol
he found in Jesus One who could awake the dead! The resurrection is witnessed by
the parents and three iiisciiiles — chosen witnesses. And after she is raised, he gives
directions that she should be fed, and then that they should be silent about the miracle.
He did not desire to be overwhelmed by the miraculous part of his work, but that he
might be able to give a due proportion of his attention to teaching.* Similarly may
each of us experience Christ's resurrection-power in our souls now, and in our bodies
alterwardg. — B. M. E.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER IX.



Vers. 1 — 6. — The Matter eendi ont the
twehie on a mission.

Ver. 1.— Then he called Ms twelve dis-
ciples together. The Galilee ministry was
just over; outwardly it had been a trium-
phant success; vast crowds had been gathered
together. The Master was generally wel-
comed with a positive enthusiasm ; the
people heard him gladly. Here and there
ivere visible, as in the cases of the woman
•vho touched liim and the synagogue ruler
who prayed him to heal his little daughter,
just related (oh. viii.), conspicuous examples
of a strange or mighty faith ; but the success,
the Master knew too well, was only on the
surface. The crowds who to-day shouted
•' Hosaima I " and greeted his appearance
among them with joy, on the morrow would
fall away from him, and on the day follow-
ing would reappear with the shout "Crucify
him 1 " It was especially to warn his Church
in coming ages of this sure result of all
earnest devoted preaching and teaching, that
he spoke that saddest of parables, "tlie
sower" (oh. viii.). But before he finally
hrought this Galilsean ministry to a close,
he would gather in some few wavering souls,



whose hearts he knew were trembling in tha
balance between the choice of life and good,
and death and evil. To help these he sent
out this last mission. The word rendered
" called together " indicates a solemn gather-
ing. And gave them power, etc. This
and the further detail of the next verse (2)
roughly describe the work he intended
them to do, and the means bestowed on
them for its accomplishment. Very extra-
ordinary powers were conferred on them —
powers evidently intended to terminate
with the short mission on which he now
despatched them.

Ver. 2. — ^And to heal the sick. St. Mark
(vL 13), in his brief notice of this mission of
the twelve, mentions the special instrument
of their power over siukness — the twelve
anointed the sick with oil, and healed them.
It is probable that tlje early Christian
custom alluded to by St. James (v. 14), of
anointing the sick with oil, arose from our
Lord's direction to his apostles on the occa-
sion of this mission. The practice was con-
tinued, or possibly was revived, long after
tlie original power connected with it had
ceased to exi^t. It still survives in tha
Boman Catholic Church in the sacrameut ol
extreme unction, which, singularly enough



' Cf. MacmiUan's ' Our Lord's Three Eaisings fiom the Dead,' pp. 3 — ^72.



232



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix. 1—62^



is administered when all hope of the patient's
recovery fiom the siukuess is over Anoint-
ing the sick with oil was a favourite practice
among the ancient Jews (see Isa. i. 6 and ch.
X. 34). It was to be used by the twelve as an
ordinary medicine, possessing, however, in
their hands an extraordinary efifeet, and was
to be, during this mission, the visible medium
through which the Divine influence and
power to heal took effect. We never read
of Jesus in hie miracles using oil ; his usual
practice seems to have been simply to have
used words. At times he touched the suf-
ferer ; on one occasion only we read how he
mixed some clay with which he anointed the
sightless eyes.

Ver. 3. — ^Take notTiing for your journey.
Dr. Farrar well sums up the various direc-
tions of the Master to these his first mission-
wrles : " The general spirit of the instructions
merely is, < Gro forth in the simplest, humblest
manner, with no hindrances to your move-
ments, and in perfect faith ; ' and this, as
history shows, has always been the method
of the most successful missions. At the
same time, we must remember that the
teanta of the twelve were very small, and
were secured by the free open hospitality
of the East."

Ver. 4. — And whatsoever house ye enter
into, there abide, and thenoe depart. On
entering any new place they were to select,
after due and careful inquiry (Matt. x. 11),
a family likely and able to assist them in
their evangelistic work. This "house"
they were to endeavour to make the centre
of their efforts in that locality. This rule
we find continued in the early years of
Christianity. In the history of the first
Churches, certain " houses " in the ditferent
cities were evidently the centres of the
mission work tliere. We gather this from
such expressions in St Paul's letters as
" the Church which is in his house " (comp.,
too. Acts xvi. 40, where the house of Lydia
was evidently the head-quarters of all
missionary work in Philippi and its neigh-
bourhood),

Ver. 5. — And whosoever will not receive
yon, when ye go out of that city, shake off
the very dust from your feet for a testimony
against them. It was the custom of the
Jews when they returned from foreign
(Gentile) lands, as they crossed the frontiers
of the Holy Land, to shake the dust from
off their feet. This was an act symbolizing
that they had broken, now on their return
to their own land, all communion with
Gentile peoples which a residence among
them had necessitated for a season. The
bitter hatred and loathing of the Jews, after
their return from the Captivity, for all Gen-
tile races can only be understood by the
student of the Talmud. So comprehensive



and perfect a hatred, enduring, too, for
centuries, has never been witnessed in the
case of any other peoples. This accounts
in great measure for the retaliative persecu-
tion which more or less has been carried on
all through the Christian era against this
marvellous race. In our day — the day of
a liberalism possibly exaggerated and unreal
— in many parts of Europe the untrained
sense of the mosses strangely revolts against
this spirit of toleration; and wild excesses,
massacres, and bitter persecution — the Ju-
denhetz, hatred of the Jews in Germany and
in Bussia — are among the curious resnlts of
the liberality and universal toleration of the
time.

Vers. 1—9.— Heroes terror.

Ver. 7. — Now Herod the tetraroh heard
of all that was done by him. This was
Herod Antipas ; he was a son of Herod the
Great; ^is mother's name was Malthace.
After his father's death he became tetrarch
or prince-ruler of Galilee, Fersea, and of a
fourth part of the Boman province of Syria.
His first wife was daughter of Aretas, a
famous Arabian sheik spoken of by St
Paul as " king of the Damascenes " (2 Cor.
xi. 32). This princess he divorced, and
contracted a marriage at once incestuons
and adulterous with his niece Herodias, the
beautiful wife of his half-brother Philip.
Philip was not a sovereign prince, and it
was probably from motives of ambition that
she deserted Philip for the powerful tetraroh
Herod Antipas. It was owing to his fear-
less remonstrances against this wicked mar-
riage that John the Baptist incurred the
enmity of Herodias, who was only satisfied
with the head of the daring preacher who
presumed to attack her brilliant wicked
life. What Herod now heard was the re-
port of the widespread interest suddenly
aroused by the mission of the twelve — a
mission, we know, supported by miraculous
powers, following close upon the Galllsaan
ministry of the Lord, which, as far as
regarded the numbers who thronged his
meetings, and the outward interest his
words and works excited, had been so suc-
cessful. Bumours of all this at last reached
the court circle, wrapped up in its own
selfish and often wanton pleasures and false
excitement. Because that it was said of
some, that John was risen from the dead,
Herod Antipas was probably inclined to the
Sadduoee creed, which believed in neither
angel nor spirit. But Sadduceeism and the
easy doctrines of Epicurus, which no doubt
found favour in the luxurious palace of
Herod, are but a flimsy protection at best
against the ghastly reminiscences and the
weird forebodings of a guilty conscience
The murder of John had been, Herod knew,
strongly condemned by the public voice.



CH. IX. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



233



He would not believe it was his old monitor
risen, but yet the prince was anxious and
pertnibed in his mind. The murmur that
the great prophet was Elias (Elijah) dis-
quieted him, too. Herod could not help
recalling to his mind the lifelong combat
of that great and austere servant of God
against another wicked snverei^ and his
queen, Ahab and Jezebel, whose great
crime was that they, too, had slain the
Lord's prophets. That history, Herod felt,
had to some extent been reproduced by
himself and Herodiag. There was a rooted
expectation among the Jews that Elijah
would reappear again on earth, and that
his appearance would herald the advent of
the Messiah. There are numberless refer-
ences in the Talmud to this looked-for
return of the famous Elijah.

Ver. 8. — One of the old prophets. Jere-
miah and also Isaiah, though to a lesser
degree than Elijah, were looked for ns
heralds ofthe coming Missiah (see 2 Esdr.
ii. 10, 18, and 2 Maco. ii. 4—8 ; xv. 13—16).
It was expected that Jeremiah would reveal
the hiding-place of the long-lost ark and of
the Uiim.

Ver. 9. — And he desired to see him ; that
is, Jesus. The desire of Herod was gratified,
but not then. He saw him the day of the
Crucifixion, when Pilate sent him to Herod
for judgment;, but the tetrarch, weak and
wicked thougli lie was, declined the respon-
sibility of shedding that blood, so he sent
him back to the Roman governor. Here, in
SS. Matthew and Mark, follows the dra-
matic and vivid account of the death of
John the Baptist. St. Luke probably limits
it, as his Gospel, or rather Paul's, was
derived from what they heard from eye-
witnesses and hearers of the Lord. As
regards SS. Matthew and Mark, the latter
of whom was probably simply the amanu-
ensis of St. Peter, the awful event was
woven into their life's story. It was most
natural that, in their public preaching and
teaching, they should make constant mention
of the tragedy which so personally affected
Jesus and his little company. St. Luke and
his master, Paul, on the other hand, who
were not personally present with the Lord
when these events took place, would be
likely to confine their memoirs as closely as
possible to those circumstances in which
Jesus alone occupied the prominent place.

Vers. 10— 17.— TA« Lord feeds the five
thousand.

Ver. 10.— And the apostles, when they
were returned, told him all that they had
done. And he took them, and went aside
privately into a desert place belonging to
the oity called Bethsaida. This, pernaps
the most famous and oftenest told of the
Lord's miracles, was worked directly after



the return cf the twelve from their mission.
He and they were no doubt very weary of
the crowds which continually now thronged
them. The excitement of the multitude
about Jesus was now at its height. Directly
after the discourse at Capernaum (John vi.),
which immediately followedthe great miracle
we are about to discuss, the popular enthu-
siasm began to wane. Intensely weary,
dispirited too at the story of the murder
of John the Baptist, which was told the
Master by the disciples and the friends of
John on their return from their mission,
Jesus determined for a brief space to with-
draw himself from the public gaze. He
crossed the Lake of Gennesaret in one of
his friends' fishing-boats to a town lately
identified by modern research as Bethsaiiia
Julias, a small city recently beautified by
Herod Philip, and named Bethsaida Julias,
after the daughter of Augustus. Bethsaida,
"house of fish," was a name attached evi-
dently to several of these fishing centres
on the shores of the lake. Many of the
multitude of whom we read subsequently
in the account of the miracle, had watched
his departure in the boat for the neighbour-
hood of Bethsaida Julias, and had gone on
foot round the head of the lake to join the
popular Teacher again. The distance round
the north end of the lake from the point
of embarkation, most likely Capernaum, to
Bethsaida Julias is not very considerable.
The crowd which soon joined him in retire-
ment would be considerably swelled by many
of the Passover pilgrims just arrived at Ca-
pernaum on their way to Jerusalem to keep
the feast. These would be anxious, too, to see
and to hear the great Galilsean Prophet,
whose name just then was in every mouth.
Not very far from Bethsaida Julias there is a
secluded plain, El Batihah ; thither Jesus no
doubt went after leaving his fishing-boat,
purposing to spend some time in perfect
rest. Soon, however, the usually quiet
plain becomes populous with the crowds
following after theGalilaean Master. Though
longing intensely for repose so necessary fur
himself and his disciples, he at once, moved
by the eagerness of the multitude to hear
and See him again, gives them his usual
loving welcome, and begins in his old
fashion to teach them many things, and
to heal their sick.

Ver. 12. — And when the day began to
wear away, then came the twelve, and said
unto him, Send the multitude away, that
they may go into the towns and country
round about, and lodge, and get yiotuals:
for we are here in a desert place. Simple
consideration for the crowds, among wljom
we know were women and children, pro-
bably dictated this remark of the twelve,
though it has been with some ingenuity



234:



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix 1—62.



suggested that the advice of the disciples
was owing to their fear that, as darkness
would Boon creep over the scene, some
calamity might happen which would give
a fresh handle against Jesus to his many
enemies.

Ver. 13. — But he said unto them, Give ye
them to eat. Godet here beautifully ob-
serves that this reply, and the great miracle
that followed, was the result of a loving
thought of the Redeemer. " John has dis-
closed it to us (vi. 4). It was the time of
the Passover. He could not visit Jerusalem
with his disciples, owing to the virulent
hatred of which he had become the object.
In this unexpected gathering, resembling
that of the nation at Jerusalem, he discerns
a signal from on high, and determines to
celebrate a feast in the desert as a com-
pensation for the Passover Feast." We have
no more but five loaves and two fishes;
except we should go and buy meat for all
this people. The main lines of this story
are tlie same in each of the four accounts
which we possess of this miracle ; but each
of the four evangelists supplies some little
dutail wanting in the others. It is clear
that there was no original written tradition
from which they all copied. St. John tells
us it was a little boy who had this small,
rough provision. The boy probably was
in attendance on the apostles, and this was
no doubt the little stock of food they had
provided for their own frugal meal. The
barley loaves were the ordinary food of the
poorest in Palestine, and the two fish were
dried, as was the common custom of tlie
country ; and such dried fish was usually
eaten with the bread.

Ver. J 4. — They were about five thousand
men. 8t. Matthew adds, " besides women
and children." The multitude generally had
come from a considerable distance, we know ;
there would not be, comparatively speaking,
many women and children among them.
These were grouped together apart, and, of
course, fed, but were not counted among the
five thousand. And he said to his disciples,
Hake them sit down by fifties in a company.
" Jesus has no sooner ascertained that there
are five loaves ami two fishes, than he is
satisfied. He commands them to make the
multitude sit down. Just as though he had
said, ' I have what I want ; the meal is
ready ; let them be seated I ' But he takes
care that his banquet shall be conducted
with an order worthy of the God who gives
it. Everything must be calm and solemn ;
it i> a kind of Paesover meal. By the help
of the apostles, he seats his gueats in rows
of fifty each (St. Matthew), or in double
rows of fifty, by hundreds (Mark). This
rderly arrangement allowed of the guests
Hing easily counted. St. Mark describes



in a dramatic manner the striking spectacle
presented by these regularly formed com-
panies, each consisting ot' two equal ranks,
and all arranged upon the slope of the hill.
The pastures at that' time were in all theii
spring glory. SS. John and Mark both
bring forward the beauty of this natural
carpet. 'Much grass' (St. John); 'on
the green grass ' (St. Mark) " (Godet). St.
Mark's vivid picturesque details show the
observant eye-witness. The words rendered
"in ranks" ("they sat down in ranks")
literally mean they were like flower-beds
set in the green grass. The bright-coloured
Eastern robes of these men, as they sat in
long rows, suggested the happy comparison.

Ver. 16. — Then he took the five loaves and
the two fishes, and looking up to heaven,
he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the
disoiples to set before the multitude. The
blessing was the usual introduction of a
pious Jewish family to a meal. It was pro-
nounced by the head of the household.
An ordinary formula was, " May God, the
Ever-blessed One, bless what he has given
us I " The Jewish barley loaves were broad,
thin cakes ; these were usually hroken, not
out —hence the expression, " and brake." In
SS. Mark and Luke the tense of the verb
rendered " gave," in the original Greek, is
an imperfect, and signifies, " he gave, and
kept on giving." This supplies a hint as
to the way of working the miracle. Each
disciple kept coming to him for a fresh
supply of bread. It was, however, as it has
been well said, a miracle of the highest
order, one of creative power, and ia to as
inconceivable. The evangelists make no
attempt to explain it. They evidently did
not care to ask. They beheld it, and related
it to us just as they saw it in its simple
grandeur. Neither disciples nor crowds seem
at first to have grasped the stupendous
nature of the act. St. John tells us of its
effect on the crowds, who, when they came
to see what had been done, wished to take
him by force and make him king. For a
brief space they were convinced that in the
poor Galilee Rabbi they had found King
Messiah — none but he could have done this
great thing. They were right.

Ver. 17. — And they did eat, and were all
filled : and there was taken np of fragments
that remained to them, twelve baskets. A
very impressive lesson from the Creator him-
self against waste or extravagance. St. John
expressly tells us that this order to gather
up the fragments of their meal emanated
from Jesus himself. Carefulness, thri ft, and
economy in small things as in great, form
part of the teaching of the loving Master.
From such passages as Mark vi. 37 ami
John xiii. 29, it seems probable that the
discipks, acting under their Master's direc-



OH. IX. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



235



tion, were in the habit of diBtributiTig, out
of their comparative abundance, food to
those persons in the villages who were poorer
than themselves. It was, no doubt, for some
such hallowed object as this that the careful
collection of the fragments which filled
twelve baskets was made. The " baskets "
(cophinus) were usually carried by travelling
Jews to keep their food from contracting Le-
vitical pollution in Gentile places. Juvenal,
in a well-known passage (' Sat.,' iii. 14),
writrs of the Jews travelling about Italy
with no baggage save a little bundle of hay
to serve as a pillow, and this cophinus, or
basket, for their food. So abundant had
been the provision created by Jesus, tliat
the fragments collected far exceeded the
original stock of food which the disciples
gave to Jesus to bless, to break, and to dis-
tribute among the five thousand and up-
ward who were fed that memorable after-
noon. This miracle is the only one in the
entire Galilssan ministry which is told by
all the four evangelists. It evidently had
a yery prominent place in the teaching of
the first days. Eationalizing interpretation
in the case of this miracle is singularly at
fault. After eightei-n centuries of unre-
mitting hostility to the teaching of Jesus
Christ, nut even a plausible explanation of
this miraculous multiplication of the loaves
and fishes has been found by adverse critics.
In our own days, Eenan, following the
ancient interpretation of Paulus, simply
suggests that the multitudes were fc d by
materials provided by thtmselves. " Every
one took his little store of provision from
his wallet ; they lived on very little " — an
explanation, as it has been happily termed,
" ludicrously inadequate."

After the relation of the great miracle of
feeding the five thousand, St. Luke omits
in his Gospel a variety of incidents and
several discourses told at greater or lesser
length by the other evangelists. For in-
stance, the reverential amaziment of the
people when the nature of the stupendous
miracle in connection with the creation of
the loaves and fishes flashed upon them,
— they wished to recognize him as King
Messiah; the walking on the sea; the
long and important discourse on the true
Bread at Capernaum, the text of which was
the late great miracle of the loaves; the
journey among the heathen as far as Tyre
and Sidon; the meeting with the Syio-
phcenician woman ; the feeding of the four
thousand, etc. These incidents are re-
lated in Matt, xiv.— xvi. 12 ; Mark vi. 45—
viii. 30; John vi. No commentator lias



satisfactorily explained the reason of this
omission of important portions of our Lord's
public ministry. The reason for St Luke's
action here probably will never be guessed.
We must, however, in all theories which
we may form of the composition of these Gos-
pels, never lose sight of this fact, that while
SS. Matthew and Peter (Mark) weie eye-
witnesses of the events of the life, St. Luke,
and his master, Paul, simply reproduced
what they had heard or read. We may,
therefore, suppose that St. Luke exercised
larger discretionary powers in dealing with
materials derived from others than the
other two, who desired, no doubt, to repro-
duce a fairly general summary of their
Divine Master's acts. On such a theory of
composition, a gap in the story like the one
we are now alluding to, in the more eclectic
Gospel of St. Luke, would seem scarcely
possible in the first two Gospels. We, of
course, make no allusion here to the Fourth
Gospel ; the whole plan and design of St.
John was different to that upon which the
first three were modelled.

Vers. 18 — 27. — Jeius' question to his own:
Who did they think he was ? Se tells them
of a suffering Messiah, and describes the lot
of his own true followers,

Ver. 18. — And it came to pass, as he was
alone praying, his disciples were with him :
and he asked them, saying. Whom say the
people that I am? With th< se abrupt
words, St. Luke changes for his readers the
time and scene. Since the miracle of feed-
ing the five thousand at Bethsa'ida Julias,
Jesus had preached at Capernaum the
famous sermon on the " Bread of life " (re-
ported in John vi.) ; he had wandered to
the north-east us far as the maritime cities
of Tyre and Sidon ; had returned again to
the Decapolis region for a brief sojourn; and
then once more Jiad turned his footsteps
north ; and it was in the extreme confines
of the Holy land, in the neighbourhood of
Csesarea Pnilippi, and close to the great
fountain, the source of the sacred Jordan, at
the foot of the southern ridge of Hermon,
where he put the momentous question here
chronicled, to his listening disciples. Much
had happened since the five thousand were
fed. The defection which the Master had
foreseen wlien he commenced his parable-
teaching with the sad story of the " sower."
had begun. After the great Capernaum
sermon (John vi.), many had fallen away
from him ; the enthusiasm for his words
was rapidly waning ; the end was already
in sight. " Well," he asks his own, " what



236



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix. 1—62.



are men i^ajring abont me t Whom do they
think that I am?"

Yer. 19. — They answering said, John the
Baptist; hut some my, EUas; and others
say, that one of the old prophets is risen
again. It was a strange answer, this report
of tlie popular belief concerning Jesua.
There had been fur h long period among the
people expectations more or less defined,
that certain uf the great national heroes
were to reappear ugain to take up their
incomplete work, auJ to play the part in
Israel, of heralds of the looked-for glorious
King Messiah. The popuUir belief respect-
ing Jesus was that he was one of these.
Some thought of Elijah. The two miracles
of creating the loaves and tislies for a great
famishing crowil especially suggested tlds
idea. There was a shadowy, but not an un-
real resemblance here to the well-remembered
miracle of Elijah, woiked for the Sarepta
widow and her son, with the cruse of oil and
the barrel of meal wliich failed not (1 Kings
xvii. 14). The words of Malaelii (iv. 5)
pointed in the &aiiie direction. The image
of the recently murdered Baptist was present
with some. Herod's words, already com-
mented on, point to this, perliaps. wide-
spread belief. Jereminh would be a likely
instance of "one of the old prophets.
Tradition had already asserted that the
spliit of that great oue had passed into
Zeohariah; surely another similar transmi-
gration was pussible. Jeremiah, popular
tradition said, had safely hidden the ark and
the tabernacle and the altar of incense
somewtiere in the mountain where Moses
died by the " kiss of God " Already had
he appeared to the brave and patriotic
Judas Mac«absBus in a vision as a man grey-
haired and exceeding glorious, as one pray-
ing for the peijple as their guardian-prophet,
and had given the gallant Maccabsean hero
a golden sword from God. It was one of
these old heroic forms, so loved of Israel,
once more in the flesh, that the people
believed Jesus to be.

Ver. 20.— But whom say ye that I amt
Peter answering said, The Christ of God.
And the Master listened, apparently withnut
ciimment, to this reply, which told him what
the people said of him, and then went on,
"But you, my disciples, who have been ever
with me, what say, wiiat think you about
mei" Peter, as the representative of the
others in that little chosen company,
answers, " We believe that thou art more
than any prophet or national hero or fore-
runner of the Messiah; we think that thou
art the Messiah himself." Dr. Morrison
very b( autifully pictures the disciples' state
of mind at this juncture. " No doubt the
true light vu the subject had often glenmed
through the darkness of their minds (see



John i. 29, 33, 34, 41, 45, 49, eta.). But,
thou<;h gleam succeeded gleam, in flashes
that revealed the Illimitable, the darkness
would ever, more or less, close in again.
They could not altogether help it. They
were witnesses of a 'humiliation' which
they could not reconcile with the notions
they had inherited in reference to the power
and pomp of the Messiah. And yet it was
evident that he was entirely unlike all other
rabbis. He was the Master of masters, and
a mystery over and above. An inner lustre
was continually breaking through. It was
glorious; it was unique. His character
was trauscendently noble and pure. He
had not, moreover, obtruded self-assertions
on them. He had left them, in a great
measure, to observe for themselves; and
they had been observing." It was, indeed,'
on the part of the^e feeble disciples a pure
and lofty expression of the effect produced
on their hearts by Jesus Christ's teaching.
But though these men, afterwards go great,
had attained to tliis grand conception of
their adored Master, though they alone,
among the crowds, through the sad coloured
veil of his low estate, could see shining the
glory of Divinity, yet they could not grasp
yet the conception of a sufiering Messiah,
and in spite of all the teaching of the
Master, the cross and the Passion made them
unbelievers again. It needed the Besurrec-
tion to complete the education of faith.

Ver. 21. — ^And he straitly charged them,
and commanded them to tell no man that
thing. It would have been no hard task for
the disciples to have gone about with an ex-
pression of their earnest conviction that the
great Prophet was indeed the long looked-
for King Messiah, and thus to have raised
the excitable crowds to any wild pitch of
enthusiasm. It was only a very short time
back tiiat, moved by the miracle of the
loaves, the multitudes wished to crown him
King by force. That was not the kind of
homage Jesus sought; besides which, any
such enthusiasm thus evoked would quickly
have died away, and n hostile reaction
would have set in when the high hopes
excited by the idea of King Messiah were
contradicted by the life of Buffering and self-
denial which Jesus sternly set himself to
live through to its bitter end. This life he
sketched out for them in the severe language
of the next verse.

Ver. 22.— Saying, The Son of man mnit
suffer many things, and be rejected of the
elders and chief priests and scribes, and he
slain, and he raised the third day. "See
how," as Riggenbaoh, quoted by Godet, says
(' Vie de Je'sus,' p. 318), " Jesus was obliged,
in the very moment of self-revelation, to veil
himself, when he had lighted the fire to
cover it again." This dark and terribl*



OH. n. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



237



prediction came upon the disciples evidently
S8 something new. It was their Master's
reply to their confession of faith in him. It
said in other words, " You are right in your
conception of me and my work. I am the
promised King Messiah; but this part of
my reign will be made up of afSiotion and
mourning and woe. The great council of
the people will reject me, and I shall only
enter into my grand Messianic kingdom
through the gate of suffering and of death.
But do you, my own, be of good cheer.
Three days after that death I shall rise
again." The enumeration of " elders, chief
priests, and scribes" is simply a popular
way of describing the great oonncil of the
Jewish nation, the Sanhedrin, which was
composed of these three important and in-
fluential sections of the people.

Yer. 23. — ^And he said to them all. If any
man will come after me, let him deny him-
self, and take up his cross daily, and follow
me. Before sketching out the life which
the true disciples of a suffering King Mes-
siah must lead on earth, our Lord seems to
have given notice of one of his public dis-
courses. Even though his great popularity
was now on the wane, to the last he was
evidently listened to by crowds, if not with
enthusiasm, certainly with eager and im-
patient curiosity. The sermon, of which we
have the outline in the next five verses, and
the subject-matter of which was, " No cross,
no crown," was preached evidently to tiie
masses. Thia is plain from the opening
words of ver. 23. The sermon was evidently
K hard saying, and, no doubt, gave bitter
offence to many of the hearers. " If any man
will," that is, wishet to, " come after me, to
follow me where I am going" (Jesus was
going to his kingdom), " let that man be pre-
pared to give up earthly ease and comfort,
and be ready to bear the sufferings which
will be sure to fall on him if he struggle
after holiness." This readiness to give up
ease, this willingness to bear suffering, wiU
be a matter, they must remember, of every-
day experience. The terrible simile with
which the Lord pressed his stern lesson
home was, of course, suggested to him by
the clear view he had of ttie fearful end of
his own earthly life — an end then so near at
hand, though the disciples guessed it not.
Th» oross was no unknown image to the
Jews who that day listened to this Master.
The gloomy procession of robbers and of
rebels against Borne, each condemned one
bearing to the place of death the cross on
which he was to suffer, was a sadly familiar
image then in their unhappy land.

Ver. 24. — For whosoever wUl save his
life shaU lose it: but whosoever will lose
Us life for my sake, the same shall save it.
The Greek word bare rendered "life"



signifies the natural animal life, of which the
main interests are centred in the earth. If
a man grasp at thts shadowy, quickly pass-
ing eartlily life, he will assuredly lose the
substantial enduring hearen-life. If, on the
other hand, he consents, " for my sake," to
sacrifice this quickly fading life of earth, he
shall surely find it again in heaven, no
longer quickly fading, but a life fadeless,
eternal, a life infinitely higher than the one
he has for righteousness' sake consented to
lose here. Tlie same beautiful and comfort-
ing truth we find in that fragment, as it is
supposed, of a very early Christian hymn,
woven into the tapestry of St. Paul's Second
Epistle to Timothy—

"If we be dead with him.
We shall also live with hint:
If we suffer,
We shall also reign."

(2 Tim. U. 11, 12.)

Yer. 25. — For what is a man advantaged,
if he gain the whole world, and lose himself,
or be cast away 1 Godot's comment here is
pithy and quaint : " Jesus supposes, in this
tweuty-fifth verse, the act of $aving on^t
own life accomplished with the most com-
plete success . . . amounting to a gain of
the whole world. But in this very moment,
the master of this magnificent domain finds
liimself condemned to perish I What gain
to draw in a lottery a gallery of pictures . . .
and at the same time to* become blind I"
"O flesh," writes Luther (quoted by Dr.
Morrison), " how mighty art thou, that thou
canst still throw darkness over those things,
even to the minds of the holy I "

Ver. 26. — For whosoever shall be ashamed
of me and of my words, of him shall the
Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come
in his own glory, and in his Tather's, and of
the holy angels. Here follows the punish-
ment in the world to come. It consists in
the Judge's solemn award to the man who
has succeeded in saving his life in this
world. The award is, " Depart from me : I
know you not." Of such a selfish soul, who
here has loved his own ease, and has
declined all self-sacrifice, will the Son of
man, in the day of his glory, be justly
ashamed. The suffering Messiah thus com-
pleted his vivid picture of himself. Not
always was he to suffer, or to wear the robe
of humiliation. The Despixed and Bejected
would assuredly return with a glory in-
describable, inconceivable. His assertion,
i.dva iced here, that he will return as
Almighty Judge, is very remarkable. In
the parallel passage in St. Matthew (xvi. 13)
it is put even more clearly. There Jesus
asks his disciples, " Whom do men say that
I, the Son of man, am?" In ver. 27 Jesus
goes on to say, " The Son tj ma



238



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [en. ix. 1—62



come in the plory of Ms Fathor, with hin
angels, and then he shall reward every man
according to his works." The lesson was
very clear. His own might surely be con-
tent. Only let tliem be patient. Lol in
the poor rejected Babbi now before them,
going to his bitter suffering and his death,
they were looking really on the awful form
of the Almighty Judge of quick and dead.
These words, veiy dimly understood then,
in days to come were often recalled by his
hearers. They formed the groundwork of
many a primiflve apostolic sermon.

Ver. 27. — But I tell yon of a truth, there
be some standiag here, wMoh shall not
taste of death, till they see the kingdom of
God. This magnificent promise has always
been more or less a difiBculty to expositors.
Two favourite explanations which (1) in
the Transfiguration mystery, (2) in the fall
of Jerusalem and destruction of the Jewish
state, see the fulfilment of this great pre-
diction, must be put aside as inadequate,
as failing utterly to satisfy any idea of the
kingdom of GodL Concerning (1), it must
be borne in mind that the words were
addressed, not only to the disciples, but to
a mixed multitude; the expression then,
"there be eome standing here," etc., would
seem to point to more than three (Peter,
James, and John were alone present at the
Transfiguration) who should, while living,
see the kingdom of God. Concerning (2),
those who were witnesses of the great catas-
trophe which resulted in the sack of Jeru-
salem and the ruin of the Jewish polity,
can scarcely be said to have looked on the
kingdom of God. It was rather a great
and terrible judgment; in no way can it
fairly be termed the kingdom, or even its
herald; it was simply an awful event in the
world's story. But surely the Lord's dis-
ciples, the holy women, the stiU larger outer
circle of loving followers of Jesus, who were
changed by what happened dui-ing the
forty days which immediately succeeded the
Eesurrtution morning — changed from simple,
loving, fearful, doubting men and women,
into the brave resistless pieachers and
teachers of the new faith — the five hundred
who gazed on the risen liord in the Galileean
mountain, — these may in good earnest be said
to have seen, while in life, " the kingdom of
God." These five hundred, or at all events
many of them, after the Eesurreetion, not
only looked on God, but grasped the meaning
of the presence and work of God on earth.
The secret of the stiange resistless power of
these men in a hostile world was that their
eyes had gazed on some of the sublime
glories, and their ears had heard some of
the tremendous secrets of the kingdom of
God.
Yen. 28— Sa,— TV Transfiguration.



Yer. 28. — And it came to pass about an
eight days after these sayings, he took
Feter and John and James, and went up
into a mountain to pray. Some eight days
after this question asked in the neighbour-
hood of Csesurea Fliilippi, and its reply, and
the sermon to the people on the subject of
"No cross, no crown," which immediately
followed, our Lord summoned the three
leading disciples and took them up into a
mountain to pray. They had spent the
last few days apparently in quiet converse
together. SS. Matthew and Mark speak
only of six days. St, Luke gives the period
in round numbers, counting portions of the
first and last days as whole days. We may
well imagine that this was a period of
intense depression in the little company of
Jesus. Their Master's popularity was fast
waning among the people. His powerful
enemies seemed gathering closer and closer
round the Teacher whom they were deter-
mined to crush. The late utterances of
Jesus, too, whether spoken to them alone,
or publicly to the people, all foreshadowed
a time of danger and suffering in the im-
mediate future for him and for them —a time
which, as far as he was concerned, would
close with a violent death. To raise the
fainting spirits of his own, to inspire them
with greater cunfidence in himself, seems to
have been the iihmediate purpose of that
grand vision of glory known as the Trans-
figuration. It is true that to only three
was vouehsafed the vision, and silence was
enjoined on these, but the three were the
leading spirits of the twelve. If Peter,
James, and John were brave, earnest, and
hopeful, there was little doubt that their
tone of mind would be quickly reflected
in their companions. Tradition, based
on the fairly early authority of Cyril of
Jerusalem, and of Jerome (fourth century),
speaks of the mountain as Tabor, but the
solitude evidently necessary for the mani-
festation would have been sought for in
vain on Mount Tabor, a hill wiiich rises
abruptly from the Plain of Esdraelon, not
very far from Nazareth to the south-east,
for the summit of Tabor at that time was
crowned with » fortress. The mountain
most probably was one of the lower peaks
of Hermon, at no great distance from the
fountain source of the Jordan and Csesarea
Philippi, in which district we know Jesus
and his companions had been teaching only
a tew days before.

Ver. 29.— And as he prayed, the fashion
of his countenance was altered, etc. The
marvellous change evidently passed over
Jesus while he was in prayer, probably
because of his intense prayer. Real, close
communion with God ever imparts to the
countenance of the one who has thus entered



CH, IX. 1—62.2 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



239



into communion with the High and Holy
One, a new and strange beauty. Very many
have noticed at times this peculiar and
loTely oliange pass over the faces of God's
true saints as they prayed — faces perhaps old
and withered, grey with years aud wrinkled
with pare. A yet higher degree of trans-
figuration through communion with God is
recorded in the case of Moses, whose face,
after lie had been with his God-Friend on
the mount, shone with so bright a glory
that mortal eye could not bear to gaze on it
until the radiance began to fade away. A
similar change is recorded to have taken
place in the case of Stephen when he pleaded
his Divine Master's cause in the Sanhedrin
hall at Jerusalem with such rapt eloquence
that to the by-standers his face then, we
read, " was as the face of an angel." Stephen
told his audience later on, in the course of
that earnest and impassioned pleading, that
to him the very heavens were opened, and
that his eyes were positively gazing on the
beatific vision. Tet a step higher still was
this transfiguration of our Lord. St. Luke
tells ns simply that, "ag he prayed, the
I'asliion of his countenance was altered." St.
Matthew tells us liow it was altered when
he writes that "his countenance shono as
the sun." And his raiment was white and
glistering ; literally, lightening forth, as if
from some inward source of glorious light.
The earthly robes were so beautified by
contact with this Divine light that human
language is exhausted by the evangelists to
find terms and metaphors to picture them.
St. Matthew compares these garments of
the Blessed One to light ; St. Mark, to the
snow ; St. Luke, to the flashing lightning.

Ver. 30. — And, behold, there talked with
him two men, whioh were Moses and £lias ;
literally, there were talking. Evidently
these two glorified beings had been con-
versing with JesuB some time before the
three apostles, heavy with sleep, had noticed
their presence; wearied and tired, slumber
had overtaken them ; we are not told how
long they slept. The glorious light which
environed them and the murmur of voices
probably ronsed them, and in after-days
tl ley recounted what, after they were awake,
they saw, and something of wlmt they heard.

Ver. 31. — Who appeared in glory. Why
were these two chosen as the Lord's com-
panions on that solemn night? Probably
(1) because they were what may be termed
the two great representative men of tlie
chdsen race of Israel. The one was the
human author of the Divine Law whioh for
ao many centuries had been the guide and
teacher of the covenant people. The other
had been the most illustrious of that great
or<lfrof prophets who, during the centuries
oi theu eventful history aa a naiiun, had.



under the commission of the Most Highest,
kept alight the torch of the knowledge of
the one true God. Aud (2) because these
men alone of the race of Israel apparently
had kept their earthly bodies as the shrines
of their immortal spirits. Elijah, we know,
was translated alive into the other and the
grander world; and as for Moeeg, God, his
lieavenly Friend, closed his eyes, and then
hid bis body from mortal sight, and, the
mysterious words of Jude (ver. 9) would
seem to tell us, from mortal corruption.
Aud spake of his decease which he should
accomplish at Jerusalem. Why was thi»
the ihosen subject of the august conference
between the Lord and the heavenly pair?
(1) In all reverence we may feel that one
reason for the visit of these blessed spirits
on that solemn night was the strengthening
the sinless Sutierer himself. The vista
which lay immediately before Jesus, of
rejection, desertion, the death of agony, and
the dreadful sufferings which preceded it,
— all this had been very present before him
lately. He had dwelt upon these things,
we know, to his own. He had pondered
over them, no doubt, often when alone. It
was not only in Gethsemane that his "soul
was sorrowful even unto death." As in the
garden-agony "appeared to him an angel
from heaven strengthening him," so here
on the mount came to him these glorified
spirits tor the same blessed purpose of
ministering. And (2) it was to help the
three disciples. Their wavering faith would
surely be strengthened if the words which
they heard from those heavenly visitants
dwelt with reverent awe and admiration on
the circumstances of their Master's self-
sacrificing career of agony and suffering.
It must be remembered that a few days
earlier they had listened to him, when he
spoke to them of these things, with shrink-
ing terror and incredulous amazement.
They wovdd now know what was thought
of all this in the courts of heaven.

Ver. 32. — And the two men that stood
with him. It has been asked — How did the
disciples know the names whioh those
glorified ones had once borne? Three
replies are at least probable. (1) They
may have heard their Master address them
by their old earthly names. (2) In subse-
quent conversations the Lord may have
disclosed them to the three. (3) Is it not
a very thinkable thought that the blessed
bear upon their spiritforms their old
individuality transfigured and glorified?
Were such a vision vouchsafed to us, should
we not in a moment recognize a Peter, »
Mary, or a Paul ?

Ver. 33. — And it came to pass, as they
departed from him, Feter said unto Jesus,
master, it is good for us to be here : and



240



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix 1— 6Z



let us make three tabemaoles ; one for thee,
aud one for Uoses, and one for Elias : not
knowing what he said, The three evange-
listi who relate the Trnnsfiguration ecene,
with trifling variations repeat this remark
(if Peter's. It is valuable to ua when we
remember that the tradition of the mar-
Yelloua event comes from Peter, James, and
John; and that they repeat the strange
mconsequent words uttered by one of them-
selves — their acknowledged spokesman. No
thought of self-glorification evidently tinged
this strange memory of theirs. They simply
wished to record the plain truth just as it
happened, and in the course of the narrntive
they had to repeat their own poor, babbling,
meaningless words — for the remark of Peter
is nothing else. Their own remark, which
immediately follows, is the best comment
apon them, "not knowing what be said."
There was a deep feeling that in such •
company, bathed, too, in that glorious and
unearthly light, it mas well with them. But
they saw the heavenly visitants preparing
to leave them. They would stay their de-
parture if they could, so they stammered,
" Let 08 build some shelter ; let us erect
Bumc temple, however humble, to do honour,
Lord, to thee and thy companions."

Ver. 34. — While he thus spake, there came
a olond, and overshadowed them : and they
feared as they entered into the olond. This
luminous cloud, bright though it was, yet
veiled the more intolerable brightness within.
That such a bright olond had the power
of overshadowing and concealing, is nut
strange, for light in its utmost intensity
hides as effectually as the darkness would
do. God dwells in light inaccessible, whom
therefore " no man hath seen, nor can see "
(1 Tim. vi. 16). Milton writes—

" Dark with excess of light"

Philo speaks of the highest light as identical
with darkness. Anselm thug understands
tbe cloud here, quoting the words of 1 Tim.
vi 16, referred to above, and then the
words of Moses, "And Moses drew near
nnto the thick darkness where Ood was"
(Bxod. XX. 21), and then this passage from
the Transfiguration, and comments thus :
" Ilia oaligo et ista nnbes, atquo ilia lux
idrm sunt" (see Archbishop Trench on
" Transfiguration," in * Studies in the Gos-
pels,' 8). The fear which these eye-witnesses
remember ai one of their experiences that
viieniorable night was a very natural feeling.
As the oloud stole over the mountain ridge,
anil the glory-light gradually paled and
waned, the sensation of intense pleasure
and satisfaction, which we may assnme to
be the natural accompaniment of such a
blesnd scene, would give place to awe and
amaimMBt.



Ver. 3.5.— And there came a voice ont of
the oloud, saying, This is my beloved Son:
hear him. The reading here of the older
authorities must be adopted. Instead of
the voice out of the cloud saying, " This is
my beloved Son," we must substitute, " This
is my Elect." As SS. Matthew and Mark
both read, " my beloved Son," we have here
another of the many proofs that each of the
three records of the Transfiguration is a
distinct and separate memory of itself. The
voice was evidently for the disciples — one
more help for them in their present and
future straggle against the cold and chilling
doubts which ever and again would be sug-
gested to them by the enemy of human
souls, with a view to marring their present
training, their future mighty missionaiy
work.

Ver. 36. — And they kept it close, and told
no man in those days any of those things
which they had seen. The reasons of this
silence for the present have been already
discussed. The scene, doubtless, had done
its work in the education of the three.
Without telling their companions what they
had seen and heard on the mount, we may
assume that the sight of the serene con-
fidence and renewed trust on the part of
Peter, James, and John did its efiectual
work in strengthening their brethren. No
doubt directly after the Besurrection, pos-
sibly daring tlie days of darkness and gloom
which followed the day of the cross, the
chosen three related at length their expe-
rience of the Transfiguration mystery. The
narrative of the Transfiguration and its
attendant circumstances, as might have been
expected, has been a favourite subject for
hostile criticism. It does not, however, lend
itself to any probable, or even possible,
explanation which refers the story to some
exaggerated report of a mistaken natural
phenomenon. The whole story, as we have
it thrice— with very slight variation in the
details — repeated in the sceptical Gospels,
must stand as we have it, or else must be
wholly rejected as a myth. But, if a myth,
whence did it spring? for nothing in the
Jewish expectation of Blessiah could possibly
have suggested the " legend." The strange
and even childish interruption of Peter could
never have been invented. No one friendly
to the apostle would have chronicled such
a saying had there been any doubt resting
on its authenticity ; and a writer hostile to
the apustle would scarcely have invented
a narrative which treated of the Divine
glory of the apostle's adored Master. If it
be an invention, whence comes it ? in whose
interest was it composed? and how did it
find its way into the very heart of the three
synoptical Gospels? for there we find it
woven into thMi mkrveUous tapestry of



ch.it. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



241



revelation and teaching whioh has at once )
ohaimed and influenced so many millions of
men and women now for more than eighteen
hnndred years. Something of the pnrpnse
whioh the Transfiguration was intended to
serve in the education of the twelve has
been already discussed in the foregoing
notes. Dr. Lange, who has made this diffi-
cult passage in the story of Jesus a subject
of deep and earnest study, has given us
some beautiful thoughts on the real signifi-
cation of the Lord's transfiguration.^ This
scholar and divine considers that, just at
this period of his public ministry, Jesus had
reached the zenith of his power. This is
indicated by the grandeur of his recent
miracles. There was nothing higher and
more sublime to be reached by him. From
this moment, therefore, earOily existence
beeame too narrow a sphere. There only
lemained death ; but death is, ai St. Paul
■ays, th« wage* of tin. For the sinless Man
the issue of life is not the sombre passage of
the lamb, rather is it the royal road of a
glorious transformation. Had the hour of
this glorification struck for Jesus 7 and wag
the Transfiguration the beginning of the
heavenly renewal 7 Gess, quoted by Godet
— from whose pr^bit of Lange's note these
observations are derived — gives expression
to Lange's thoughts in these words : ** This
event (the Transfiguration) indicates the
ripe preparation of Jesus for immediate
entrance upon eternity." "Had not Jesus
himself," goes on Godet to say, thus con-
cluding this very beautiful and suggestive,
if somewhat fanciful note, " voluntarily sus-
pended this change which was on the point
of being wrought in him, this moment, the
moment of his glorious transfiguration
would have become the moment of his
ascension."

Vers. 37 — 45. — The teene at the foot of the
hill of Transfiguration. The healirig of the
denumiae hoy.

Yer. 37. — On the next day, when they
were come down from the hill. The Trans-
figuration had talcen place in the late even-
ing or night. It probably lasted for a much
longer period than the brief account, pre-
served by the eye-witnesses, seems to speak
of. How long the three disciples slept is
not mentioned. Wearied and exhaustei),
deep slumber overtook them while the
Master was praying. When they awoke,
Jesus was Imthed in glory, and the two
heavenly spirits were conversing with him.
They only tell us generally that the subject
which occupied the blessed ones was their
Master's speedy departure from earth; no
mention is made of the time all this con-
sumed. It was morning when they rejoined
their company. Huh people met him.
8t. Mark, whose account here is more de-
LUKB.



tailed— evidently Peter preserved a very
vivid memory of these events —tells us that
the crowds, " when they beheld him, were
greatly amazed." Without concluding that
any lingering radiance of the last night's
glory was stiU playing about his Person, we
may well imagine that a holy joy just then lit
up that face over which for some time past
a cloud of deep sadness had brooded. Tbe
heavenly visitants; the words he hp'l been
listening to, which told him of his home of
grandeur and of peace, voluntarily left by
him that he might work his mighty earth-
work ; — had no doubt strengthened with a
strange strength the Man of sorrows; and
when the crowds gazed on his face they
marvelled, as St. Mark tells us, at what
they saw there.

Yer. 38. — ^A man of the oompany cried
oat, saying, Uaster, I beseech thee, look
upon my son: for h* is mine only child.
The tender sympathy of St. Luke is shown
in tills little detail. He is the only evange-
list who mentions that the poor tormented
boy was an only child.

Yer. 40. — And I besought thy disciples to
oast him out; and they eonld not This
appears to have been a case of the deadliest
kind of epileptic lunacy. Our Lord dis-
tinctly assumes here that the disease in this
case was occasioned by an unclean spirit
who had taken possession of the suffering
child. The whole question of demoniacal
possession, its extent, its cause, whether or
no it still survives in some of the many
mysterious phases of madness, is very diffi-
cmt. It has been discussed elsewhere (see
notes on ch. iv. 33 and following verses).

Yer. 41.— And Jesus answering said,
faithless and perverse generation, how long
shall I be with yon, and suffer yout This
grave and mournful expression of the loving
but just Master was addressed to the entire
crowd, in whose midst he now found him-
self. The people, swayed hither and thither,
now enthusiastic in his favour, when some
sweet promise, or noble sentiment, or mar-
vellous work touched their hearts, now
coldly indifferent or even hostile, when his
teaching seemed to exact some painful
sa'-rifice of self at their hands, — these were
looking on with quiet indifference at bis
disciples' failure in the case of the poor
possessed child, and listened to their scribes
as they wrangled with the Lord's dismayed
and perplexed followers. These followers,
trying to imitate their Master ia his wonder-
works, but failing because, after all, their
faith in him wavered. The father of the
child, confessing his unbelief, but utterly
wretched at the sight of the suffering of his
boy. The ghastly spectacle of the insane
boy writhing and foaming on the ground,
and then lying all bruised and dishevelled,



242



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix. 1— 6a



with the pallor of death on the poor, pain-
wrung face, and this sorely afflicted one
a ehiUi, one of those little ones whom Jesus
loved so well. Pooi- child-sufferer, on whose
comparatively innocent life the sin of mother
and father weighed so heavily I What a con-
trast for the Lord between the heavenly hours
he had just been spending on the mount,
and this sad sight of pain and suffering, of
jealousy and wrangling, of doubts and inde-
cision, in the midst of which he now stood I
"O faithless and perverse," cried the
pitiful Lord with a burst of intense sorrow,
" how long shall I be with yon, and suffer
yon?" One word, he knew, and for him
all thU might be exohanged for the scenes
of heaven, for the company of angels and of
blessed spirits, for the old home of grandeur
and of peace ; only it was just to heal this
bitter curse that be had left his heaven-home.
But the contrast between the glory of the
Tiansfig^oration mount and the memories
which they evoked, and the present scene
of pain and woe unutterable, of human
passions and weakness, called forth from the
Lord this bitter, sorrowful expression.

Yer. 42. — And Jesus rebuked the unclean
spirit, and healed the ohild, and delivered
him again to bis father. A word of the
great Master was sufficient, and the spirit
which had brought the cruel curse of disease
and madness into the boy was cast out, and
the strange cure was complete. St. Peter
supplied St. Mark with fuller details here,
and especially adds one priceless gem of
instruction in the Christian life. The Lord
told the father of the suffering child that
the gi'anting of the boon he craved for his
son depended on his own faith. Then the
poor father, won by the Divine goodness
manifest in every act and word of Jeens,
stammered out that pitiful, loving expression,
re-echoed since in so many thousand hearts,
" Lord, I believe ; help thou mine unbelief."
If he accepted and rewarded that trembling,
wavering faith in him, will he reject mine?

Ver. 43. — And they were all amazed at
the mighty power of Ood. But while they
wondered every one at all things which
Jesos did, he said unto his diioiples. Once
more were kindled the disciples' hopes of an
earthly royalty in the Person of that strange
Messiah. For was he not Messiah after all,
who with a word worked such stupendous
works as the miracle they had just witnessed?
But Jesus read their thoughts, and again
tells them (in ver. 41) of the terrible doom
which awaited him. They must remember
tbei« was no earthly crown or human sove-
reignty for him.

Ver. 46.— And they feared to ask him of
that saying. The " saying" was to them so
utterly distasteful, perhaps inconceivable.
It ia poiaible that they thought this betrayal



and death simply veiled for them some bit
of teaching to be explained hereafter ; it is
possible they at once dismissed it from their
minds, as men often do painful and mournful
forebodings. At all events, they dreaded
asking him any questions about this dark
future of suffering which he said lay before
him.

Vers. 46 — 48. — Bow the Lord antwered
the quettion which aroee among the ditciples
(M to which was the greateat.

Vers. 46, 47. — Then there arose a reason-
ing among them, which of them should be
greatest. And Jesus, perceiving the thonght
of their heart. Somewhere on their jonmey
back to the soutli, between the neighbour-
hood of Csesarea Philippi and the old scene
of his labours, Capernaum, this dispute
must have taken place. Shortly after their
arrival at Capernaum, the Master called
them together, and gave them the following
lesson on human ^eatness. Took a child,
and set him by him. St. Mark mentions
that this teaching was " in the house," and
commentators have suggested, with some pro-
bability, that the house was St. Peter's, and
the child one of his. Clement of Alexandria
(' Stromata,' iii. 448, B) especially mentions
that this apostle had children. St. Matthew
relates this incident at greater length, and,
still dwelling upon the text of "me little
one," gives us another and different sketch
of the Master's teaching on this occasion.
St. Mark tells us how Jesus folded his arms
round the little creature in loving fondness.
If the child, as above suggested, was Peter's
own, such an incident as that embrace would
never have been forgotten by the father, and
would, of course, find a place in the memoir
of his faithful disciple Mark. A (late) tra-
dition of the Eastern Church identifies this
child with him who afterwards became the
famous Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, a martyr,
Ignatius styled himself Theophoros; this,
understood in a pamive sense, would signify
" one who had been carried by God." But
in this Fatlier's own writings we find the
name used by himself in an active sense, as
"one who carries God within himself^" Artd
Jetut, perceiving the thought of tlwir heart,
took a child. The dispute " whioh of them
should be greatest," which no doubt had
taken place among themselves in their laat
journey from the north of the Holy Land to
Capernaum, was still a leading thought in
the hearts of the twelve, so little had they
really underatood their Master's teaching,
and especially his later solemn words which
pointed the way of the cross as the only way
to heaven and to real greatneis. The Lord
reads these poor sinful hearts ; then, calling
them together, he takes a ohild in his arms,
and sets him by him. By this action the
Lord answen the silent questioning thought



uu. IX. 1-62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



2il



of tbe worldly twelve. " The child stands as
the type of the hnmble and childlike disciple,
and (tiie dispute having been about the com-

Sarative greatness of the disciples) such a
isciple is tbe greatest; he is so honoured
by God that he stands on earth as the repre-
sentative of Christ, and of God himself (ver.
47), since "he that is [willingly] least among
you all, the same shall be [truly] great'
(ver. 48)" (Meyer).

Ver. 48. — WhosoeTer shall receive this
child in my Name reoeiveth me. The
general lesson here — and it is one that has
gone to the heart more or less of all profess-
ing Christians — is that all the followers of
Jesus should practise humility before, and
■how tenderness to, the weak. It is one of
Vhe great sayings of the Master which has
stirred that practical charity which has ever
been one of the great characteristic features
of Christianity. But while the general lesson
is clear, the particular reminder still claims
attention. Singular and touching was the
affection of Jesus for children. Several
marked instances of this are noted in the
Gospels. To this passage, however, and to
the sequel as reported in St. Mark (ix. 42),
may be especially referred the thought
which has founded the conntless child-
homes, schools, and hospitals in all lands in
different ages, and in our own time the
institution of the Sunday school, not the
least beautiful of Christian works done in
the Master's Name.

Vers. 49, 50. — A questUm pat by John.

Ver. 49. — And John answered and said,
Vaster, we saw one easting out devils in
thy Name ; and we forbad him, because he
followeth not with ns. The character of
John is a strangely interesting one. With
the exception of his forming one of the
chosen three who were in a peculiar manner
received into their Master's confidence, John
seldom appears, during the public ministry
of Christ, to have played a prominent part.
Many years had to elapse before he attained
that unique position of influence in the early
Church which no one seems to have disputed.
In the mean time, his character was slowly
forming. Fiery and impetuous, although
reserved and retiring, it seemed in these
first days scarcely probable that such a nature
would ever deepen or ripen into that John
who became the world-teacher of his Master's
love. St. Luke here records two circum-
stances which suggested some of the Master's
important teaching, in both of which John
plays the prominent part. The question of
John was evidently suggested by Jesus*
words spoken in connection with his teachiig
rebpeoting little ones. "Whosoever," said
the Master, " shall receive this child in my
Name." But John and others had just been
sternly rebuking some one not of tWr com-



pany, who had been using, to some effeoi
evidently, that same Master's Name, whioh
possessed, as John saw, wondrous power.
Had he and his friends been doing right
in rebuking the comparative stranger for
using a Name which Jesus, in his word*
just spoken, seemed to regard as the common
property of kindly devout men? Meyer
remarks here " that outside the company at
disciples of Jesus there were, even then,
men in whose hearts his teaching and act*
had evoked a higher and even a super-
natural power. Certain sparks whioh had
fallen here and there beyond the little circle
of his own, kindled flames occasionally away
from the central fire." Those who wer*
ever close to the Master seemed to die$ti
lest, if these were allowed unchecked to teach
and to work in the Name, grave error might
be disseminated. Some natural jealousy of
these outsiders no doubt influenced men like
John in their wish to confine tiie work in
the limits of their own circle.

Yer. 50. — And Jesus said nnto him, forbid
him not : for he that is not against ns is for
oi. The older authorities, manuscripts, and
the more venerable versions here read for
the last clause, " He that is not against yon
is for you." Exegetically as well as critically
this amended reading is to be preferred.
The offence of the stranger, if it were ma
offence, was not against Jesus, whose Name
had evidently been used reverently and with
faith, but against the disciples, whose rights
and privileges were presumably infringed
upon. The Master's reply contained a broad
and far-reaching truth. No earthly sooiety,
however holy, would be able exclusively to
claim the Divine powers inseparably co».
nected with a true and faithful use of his
Name. . This is the grand and massive
answer which stretches over a history of
eighteen centuries, and which will possibly
extend over many yet to come ; the answer
which gives an ample reason why noble
Christian work is done whether emanating
from Churches bearing the name of Protes-
tant, or Boman, or Greek.

Thi so-OAUiED Jovwsncrmos towabdi Ja-
BUBALEU. The great characteristic fealnn
in St. Luke's Gospel, distinguishing it espe-
cially from the other two synoptical Gospels
of SS. Matthew and Mark, are the evecta in
the public ministry of Jesus dwelt on in the
next ten chapters of this Gospel. Many
incidents in the succeeding chapters an
recorded by this evani;elist alone. Two
questions suggest themselves.

1. To what period of the Lord's
w»rk does this large and important i
of our Gospel refer?



244



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. a. 1—62.



2. (1) Wliy IB thiB period, comparatively
epeakiag, bo little dwelt on by the other two
eynoptists SS. Matthew and Mark? (2)
Where did St. Luke probably derive his
information here 7

1. Commentators frequently, and with
some accuracy, speak of this great section of
St. Luke's work as " the joumeyings to-
wards Jeru.salem." Tliree times does tliis
writer especially tell us that this was the
object and end of the journeys he was de-
scribing ; in oh. iz. 51, " He steadfastly set
his face to go to Jerusalem ;" in ch. xiii. 22,
•' He went through the cities and villages
. . . journeying Imeard Jerutalem;" in
ch. zvii. 11, " And it came to pass, at he
went to Jerutalem."

These joomeyingB to Jerusalem were
evidently just before the end. They were
the close of the public life. They imme-
diately preceded the last Passover Feast,
which all the four evangelists tell us the
Lord kept at Jerusalem, and in the course
of which he was crucified. They fill up,
then, the last six or seven months of his
earth-life — that period, roughly speaking,
from the Feast of Tabernacles (alluded to in
John vii.), which falls in October, until the
Pasiover Feast in the following spring.
These last months were occupied by the
Master in a slow progress from Capernaum,
through those parts of Galilee hitherto gene-
rally unvisited by him, gradually making
his way toward the capital, which we know
he reached in time for the Passover Feast,
during which be was crucified.

In the course of this period it seems, how-
ever, likely that, in St. Luke's account of
Mary and Martha (ch. z, 38 — 42), we have
an allusion to a short visit to Jerusalem of
the Lord, undertaken in the course of these
joumeyings, at the Dedication Feast (John
X. 22).

2. (1) In these last joumeyings it appears
that the Lord was in the habit of constantly
sending out by themselves small companies
of his disciples as missionaries in the neigh-
bouring districts, thus accuetoming his fol-
lowers, in view of his own approaching death,
to act alone and to think alone. It is,
therefore, extremely probable that SS.
Matthew and Peter (thu real author of St.
Mark'i Gospel) were, during this period of
' ur Loinfa work, oonstantly absent from



their Master's immediate neighbourhood.
These apostles would naturally choose, at
the special subjects of theii own teaching
and preaching, those events at which they
perBonaUy had been present. Much of what
was done and said by the Master during
these last six months was done during the
temporary absence, on special mission duty
of these two evangelists,

(2) When we consider the probable BOUTces
whence St. Luke derived bis detailed infor-
mation concerning this period, we are, of
course, landed In conjecture. We know,
however, that the whole of his narrative wai
composed after careful research into well-
sifted evidence, supplied generally by eye-
witnesses, of the events described.

Thus, in the earlier chapters, we have
already discussed the high probability of the
Virgin-mother herself having furnished the
information; so here there is little doubt
that SS. Paul and Luke, in their researches
during the composition of the Third Gospel,
met with men and women who had formed
part of that larger company which had
been with Jesus, we know, during those last
months of his ministry among us. Nor is
it, surely, an nnreasonable thought for us
to see, in connection with this important
portion of our Gospel, the hand of the Holy
Spirit, who, unseen, guided the pen of the
four evangelists, especially throwing Luke
and his master, Paul, into the society of men
who had watched the great Teacher closely
during tliat period of his work, when the
other two synoptists, SS. Matthew and Peter
(Mark), were frequently absent.

From the language employed in this por-
tion of the Gospel, there seems a high proba-
bility that many of the notes or documents
supplied to SS. Luke and Paul were written
or dictated iu Aramaic (Hebrew).

Vers. 51 — 50, — The Samaritan insult to
the Lord. Tlie Master's reception of it.

Ver. 51. — And it oame to pass, when the
time was come that he should be received
up, he steadfastly set his faee to go to Jem-
SEilem. This is a very solemn introduction
to this great section of St. Luke's writing.
It at once marks off all that now follows ai
a winding-up of the earthly ministry. The
expression, " that he should be received up,"
is simply the rendering of one Greek word,
which signifies " ascension." The Passion,
the cross, and the (pave are passed 0T«f



OH.IX. 1— 62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



24S



here, and the glorious goal alone is spoken
of. What a lesson of comfort is here sug-
gested I The words in the Greek original,
" he steadfastly set liis face," are evidi ntly
literally translated from a well-known Ara-
maic (Hebrew) expression.

Ver. 52. — And sent messengers before his
face. Probably, as the sequel shows, these
were John and James. This was necessary
at this period of the Lord's life. A numerous
company now usually followed the Lord ; it
is probable that many of those most devoted
to him, both men and women, scarcely ever
left him. now that the popular entbusia-m
was waning, and tlie number of his deadly
enemieB increasing;. And they went, and
entered into a village of the Samaritans, to
make ready for him. These Samaritans were
the descendants of a mixed race brought by
Esarhaddon (eighth century B.C.) from lialjy-
lon, Cuthah, Ava, Hamath. and Seplinrvaim,
to replace the ten tribes carried captive to
the East. These became worshippers of
Jehovah, and, on the return of Judah and
Benjamin from captivity, souglit to be
allowed to share in the rebuilding of the
temple, and then to be admitted as Jews to
share in the religious privileges of the chosen
race. Their wishes, however, were not com-
plied with. They subsequeutly erected a
rival temple on Mount Gerizim, and hence-
forward were known as a schismutical sect,
and continued in a state of deadly enmity
with the orthodox Jews. This bitter hatred
is noticed in the New Testament (see John
iv. 9), where it is stated that the Jews
"had no dealings with the Samaritans,"
whom they looked on as worse than heathen.
In the synagogues these Samaritans were
cursed. The Son of Sirach named them as
a people that they abhorred (Ecclus. i. 25,
26); and in the Talmud we read this ter-
rible passage, " Let not the Samaritans have
part in the resurrection ! " This hatred,
however, we know, was not shared in by our
Lord, and on more thau one occasion we
find him dealing gently and lovingly with
this race.

Ver. 53. — And they did not receive Mm,
because his faoe was as though he would go
to Jerusalem. Here the kindly overtures
were rejected by the inhabitants of the
Samaritan village in question. The reason
alleged by them was that this Teacher, who
wislied to come among them, was on Ijis
way up to worsnip at the rival temple at
Jerusalem.

Yer. 54. — And when his disciples James
and John saw this, they said, Lord, wilt
tbou that we command fire to come down
from heaven, and consume them, even as
£lias didt The natural fiery temper and
burning zeal of these highly favoured and
lo««d bgrethren — who, we Imow, received.



perhaps in half-playful rebuke from theii
Master, the epitlict lioanerges, eons of thun-
der — flamed forth at this insult offered ta
their adored Master in return for his tender,
loving ciinsi deration for this hated people.
Po.-sibly, what these two had lately witnessed
on the Transfiguration mount had deepened
their veueraiion for their Lord, and caused
them the more bitterly to resent an insult
levelled at him. So they prayed him — ^him
whom they had so lately seen radiant with
the awful firoot'heaven^pruyed him to call
that fire down, and so wither in a moment
those impious despisers of his gracious good-
ness. The words, " even a.s Klias did," form
a very appropriate historical instance, but
thoy are of doubtful authenticity — the older
authorities have them not.

Ver. 55. — But he turned, and rebuked
them. " Chiist wrought miracles in every
element except fire. Fire is reserved for
the consummation of the age" (Bengel).
And said, Te know not what manner of
spirit ye are of.

Ver. 5(j. — For the Son of man is not come
to destroy men's lives, but to save them.
This entire clause is absent in a large
majority of the older authorities. On every
principle of criticism it must be, if not struck
out, at least marked as of doubtful authen-
ticity. Commentators are, however, very
loth to part with the words, which breathe,
as bus been remarked, "a spirit far purer,
loftier, and rarer than is usually disoernible
in ecclesiastical interpolations." They are
certainly very old, as old almost as the
I apostolic age, being found in the Italia and
Pesliito, the most venerable of versions.
Many, therefore, of the contemporaries of
apostolic men must have read these words aa
a genuine utterance of our Lord. And they
went to another village. The Greek word
translated " another " suggests that our Lord,
after the insult offered by the Samaritan^
quietly turned his steps to a Jewish oom-
munity.

Vers. 57 — 62. — Three would-be ditetpUi.
The Lord, in plain termt, teUs them what ia
required of men who nek his teniae. The
first two of these incidents in the life of
Jesus are related by St. Matthew (vii. 19 —
22), but he places them iu an earlier period.
They evidently did not occur together, but
most probably they took place about this
time in the ministry. They are placed in
one group as examples of the way n which
the Master replied to numerous offers of ser-
vice made to him under different conditions.

Vers. 57, 58.— Lord, I will fallow thee
whithersoever thou gceat. And Jesus said
unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the
air have nests ; but the Son of man hatii not
where to lay his head. St. Matthew telb
OS that the " certain man " who nutde thi«



246



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. k. 1— o:s.



offer of eervloe was a Bcribe. This detail li
uneful, as showing that those wlio were
attracted by our Lord's teaching wireby no
means confined to the peasoiit and artisan
elass. If we loolt a little below the surface
of tlie gospel story, we find numberless indi-
cations of this. In the Master's reply it is
probable that the depression, naturally the
result of the churlish refusal of the Samari-
tan villagers to receive him (ver. 53), coloured
the sad but true reflection. The wise Master
distrusted the too-ready enthusiasm of his
would-be disciple. He saw it would never
stand the test of the severe privation or the
painful self-aacrifice which would be the
sure lot of any one, especially at that juncture,
really faithful to him.

^■ers. 59, 60. — And he said unto another,
Tollow me. But he said, Lord, suffer me
first to go and bury my father. Jesus said
unto him, Let the dead bnry their dead : but
go thou and preach the kingdom of God. In
this case the Master was the Summoner.
Something he read in this man's heart,
or words he had heard him speak, moved
the Redeemer's great love, so he gave him
a special call. This was a very different
character from the last. Whereas that seeker
for work from Jesus was impulsive, and eveu
thoughtless in his enthusiasm, one who
would begin to act without counting the
cost, this one was over-cautious, cold and
calculating to an ungenerous excess; yet
there was evidently sterling stuff in the
character, for Jesus argues ami remonstrates
with him ; there was, too, much gold mingled
with the eartli of that man's disposition, for
the Lord lightly to let it go. It is thus that
the Spirit pleads still with the selfishness
which disfigures mauy a noble and devoted
seriant of high God. He seems to say,
"My call is too imperative to yield to any
home duties, however orderly and respect-
able." During the official days of mourning
(in the case of a funeral, these were seven)
the impression now made by his summoning



words would have worn off. It ia noticeable
that the home duties, which Jesus suggested
should give place to other and more impera-
tive claims, were in connection with the
dead. It was not the living father who was
to be left to hirelings, only the inatiimatf
corpse. It was rather a eocieti/ call than a
}uyme or family duty which was to give place
to work for the Master. St. Chrysostom
makes some quaint, but strikingly practical,
remarks here. " He might need, if he went
to llie funeral, to proceed, after the burial,
to make inquiry about the will, and then
about the distribution of the inheritance,
and all the other things that followed there-
upon ; and thus waves after waves of things
coming in upon him in succession might
bear him very far away from the harbour of
truth. For this cause, doubtless, the Saviour
draws him, and fastens him to himself."

Vers. 61, 62 — And another also said, Lord,
I will follow thee ; but let me first go bid
them farewell, which are at home at my
house. And Jesus said unto him, No man,
having put his hand to the plough, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of Ood.
There is an implied reproach in our Lord's
reply to what, on first thouglits, would seem
a reasonable request. The offer iu this case
came from the man himself. It would appear
that this would-be disciple, on thinking the
matter over, considered it might be desirable
to hear what his family and friends thought
about his project. At all events, one thmg
is clear — Ms first ardour was cooled, his first
love left. The Master, in his pithy but
striking comment, shows when such is the
case, that there is little or no hope of any real
noble work being carried out. The simile
is drawn from agricultural imagery. Jesus
was evidently very familiar with all the
little details of rural life. We find a similar
saying in Hesiod, "He who would plough
straight furrows, must not look about him"
(' Works and Days,' ii. 60).



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 22. — (See afterwards in connection with ch. x.)

Ver. 24.— The life saved, and the life lost. The martyr, then, ig the type of the tme
Christian. Christ (ver. 22) predicts his own fate. And immediately afterwards (yer.
23) he announces to all that whosoever will come after him must, through the gate of
suffering, pass into glory ; must " deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow
him." This is the essence of martyrdom. The martyr is not necessarily one who is
burned at the stake, or slain by the sword, or left to rot in damp prison-cells ; he is
one who, in will, surrenders the life to God, and daily bears the cross of Jesus. Let not
the variations of the meaning attached to the words " save " and " lose " be overlooked
In the first clause, " Whosoever willt to nave shall lose ; " t.«. whosoever is bent on pre-
■erving_ the life may in a sense preserve it, but, in the nobler sense, he shall lose his
real being, or as iu the verse following, " he shall lose himself" In the second chrnse,



on. IX. 1-62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 241

" Whosoever w<K» to lose his life for Christ's sake" — to sabordinate all considerationi
merely personal to the command of a supreme affection — may incur shame, may suffer
many things, but, in the nobler sense, Ije shall realize the truth of his existence, he
shall receive the crown of his life. Ahl wonderfully suggestive are the sharp antitheses
of Jesus' saying. What, then, is the abiding reality of the Christian type of manhood ?
of the true martyr-life? Shall we say that the abiding reality is a capacity of tdf-
forgetfulness t Undoubtedly, there is this capacity. We recognize the man of genuine
goodness at once. With him there is no part-acting. He is not one who stands before
mirrors, studying attitudes and effects ; in what he does there is the absence of the
fueling of self. " Whither the spirit that is in him is to go, he goes straight forward."
A great enthusiasm always removes the action, if not from the shadow, at least from
" the corrosive power," of selfishness. Certainly, Christ looked forward to a love that
could hold the closest affections as only second to it ; that could sacrifice all in which
the self is most bounil up; that, as against the very pleadings of nature, would close
with a higher vision, " Here am I ; send me." And, more or less, this is always a
characteristic of the martyred soul. "If," says Thomas k Kempis, "a man should
give all his substance, yet is it nothing. And if he should practise great repentance,
still it is little. And if he should attain to all knowledge, he is still afar off. And
if he should be of great virtue, and of fervent devotion, yet there is much wanting ;
especially one thing which is most necessary for him. And what is that? That
leaving all, he forsake himself, and go wholly from himself, and retain nothing out of
self-love." But, when we speak of self-forgetfulness, we speak of only half the truth.
The question remains — Whence the inward pressure which causes this self-forgetting
spirit ? We cannot be self-denying by the mere resolution to be so. We may subject
ourselves to the most rigid of disciplines, and the result only be that we assert self in
one aspect to deny self in another aspect. There must be some force in the soul, soma
obligation which, once discerned, becomes an irresistible spiritual power. Take, e.g., one
of the purest forms of self-devotion. The mother's love is not an affair of reasoning.
There is no calculation of quantity in it. When the child is stricken with sicl^ness she
watches by the bed and ministers to the wants of the sufferer, denying herself by day and
night, and never stopping to ask what is the limit to be observed. The action is the
consequence of an obligation inlaid in the relation of mother to child. This relation
takes her out of selfl She " goes wholly from herself, and retains nothing out of self-
lov&" She loses her life in the child. And thus with self-sacrifice, through its
diversity of forms. Its root is, some relation into which one mind enters with another,
or with a higher and vaster issue whose vision has dawned on it. The relation supplies
at once the motive, and the food which nourishes the motive. It is in the mind an
on)nipotent *' I must." Kemember, self-sacrifice may be a power for evil as well as
good. The devil's martyrs far outnumber God's martyrs. For what is evil, or for ends
that are " not of the Father, but of the world," persons spend themselves with a zeal
and persistence which may well put Christians to shame. Self-consecration is not
necessarily a Christian virtue. It is the character of the alliance into which the soul
enters which makes the virtue. " He that loseth his life for my sake the same shall
save it." This was the new thing which came into the world through Jesus Christ.
Truthfulness as between man and man was no new thing. The sanctions of morality
were no new thing. Through the religions and philosophies of paganism there came
gleams of an ethic pure and spiritual. But an obligation to One unseen, yet ever-
present. One to whom the life was bound, and in whom the life was hidden ; an obliga-
tion that regulated all aims, that was sovereign over aU the action, to deny which, or
be false to which, was the soul's damnation ; — that was the new thing. And that new
thing was the secret of the Christian martyr-life. And it was this Christian martyr-
Ufe which lifted the individual man from his obscurity, as a mere unit in the mass
of humanity, and invested him, be he bond or be he free, with the inalienable glory
of the calling — " an heir of God, and a joint-heir with Christ." And from that day to
this there has echoed back, from a great multitude which no man can number, the
sweetly constraining " For my sake." The cross of Jc.u, has really gone before the
ages. Its spirit has entered into the conditions of hua.i>.. iiie, has influenced the miada
•nd hearts of men far more widely than we can estimate. We trace its witness far
outside the circle of his professing followers. But wli«c« the response to him is con-



248 THE GOSPEL ACCORDlKa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix. 1— 6a



scions, where there is a real personal relation to him, where the adoring cry of Thomas,
"My Lord and my Q-odl" la felt, — in this supreme spiritual affiance we recognize
the pressure which constrains to live not to self, in Jesus' love to lose the life for Jesus,
sake. It is this pressure which bestows a beauty quite unique on the career of a man
who has a place in the foremost rank of Christian heroes. Exploits brilliant anil daring
are associated with the name of Gordon. And whether we think of him in China, or in
Egypt, or in the quiet garrison town, or speeding on the swift dromedary across the desert,
or shut up in Khartoum, waiting for the succours that arrived too late, and facing deatli
a» one who had learned to regard it witl out quailing, — tl;ere is always an unmistakabla
and lofty individuality. But the crown of the glory is the spiritual elevation uf the
soul, the enthusiasm for God and good which filled the heart. How he believed in
God I — not to him a mere sign of some unknown quantity, but the Living One, the
Father in heaven. How he believed in Christ ! — not a mere " apotheosis of humanity,"
but Jesus Christ who is to-day what he was yesterday, and of whom he writes, " There
would be no one so unwelcome to come and reside in tliis world as our Saviour, while
the world is in the state it now is." How he believed in the government of the world
by a loving and righteous will 1 To reveal this will ; to work out its purpose with all
his might ; to raise the down man ; to strike the fetter from the slave ; to make God's
universe a little better, hapjiier, wholesomer ; — for this he lived, for this he died. Died ?
Nay, verily, " the immortal dead live again in minds made better by their presence."
He who loses his life for Jesus' sake, he only has saved it. Let this, then, be accepted
as the lesson of Jesus' saying : We find the true life, the great, wide, everlasting Christ-
life, only by losing, for his sake, the narrow, small, merely self-life. Shall it be said
by any that to speak thus is to speak in parables ? that heroics are not for ordinary
Christian people living in quiet, ordinary ways? There is no paiable. The words bear
on all iu all sorts and conditions. Every person is called to settle on what plan his life
■hall be built, what manner of person he shall be. He who has no ideal of conduct is
little better than a creature drifting through his days. The Christian ideal is sketched
in this word of the Lord. If any one will come after Christ, let him know this ; and
let him know further that it is not the circumstances that make the man — he makes
his place, works his ideal out in different kinds of circumstances. General Gordon, in
an obscurer lot, in a humbler sphere, might not have developed the same amoimt of
force ; but, given the grace of God with him, he would have developed the same kind
of force, he would have been the same type of man. And it is faithfulness to this type
in the place we occupy, there not elsewhere, that Christ demands. Are we confessing
him before men ? Day by day, do we take his cross and follow him ? Then, no matter
what the scene of the life-work may be, we are losinp; our life for his sake. This is the
obligation of that life " which martyred men have made more glorious for us who strive
to follow."

Vers. 28 — 36. — The Transfiguration, "When, In the desert, he was girding himself
for the work of life, angels of life came and ministered to him. Now, in the fair world,
when he is girding himself for the work of death, the ministrants come to him from
the grave, but from the grave conquered — one firom that tomb under Abarim which
his own hand had sealed long ago, the other from the rest into which he had entered
without seeing corruption. ' There sto^jd by him Moses and Elias, and spake of his
decease.' And when the prayer is ended, the task accepted, then first since the star
passed over him at Bethlehem the full glory falls on him from heaven, and the testi-
mony is borne to his everlasting Sonship and power — ' Hear him 1 ' " Thus beautifvdly
and truly writes Buskin of the solemn transaction In Jesus' history recorded by the
synoptical evangelists. It is a new anointing of Jesus as the Christ of God, his instal-
lation into the last part of his ministry on the earth. At the baptism, the Spirit
descended, and the voice came from heaven, " My beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased." This was the general Inauguration of the Messiahship. Now there comes
the special innuguration of Christ as " the End of the Law for righteousness to every
ene that believeth." " Moses and Elias appear to hold converse on that sublime event
which had been the great central subject of all their teaching, and solemnly to consign
into his hands, once and for all, in a symbolical and glorious representation, their
delegated and expiring power." Now the voice is, " Hear " not Moses and Elias, but " my



OH. IX. 1-62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 249

beloved Sonl" A wondrous, awe-striking hour I The hush over nature, the darkness
illumined by an inexpressible radiance, the face of the Man of sorrows then and there
shining as the sun, the raiment penetrated by the glory " white and glistering " as the
li$;ht, and the conversation of the three shining ones, — these, the features of the scene,
left an indelible impression on the chosen witnesses. Peter, ever ready, though not ever
vise, has some foolish speech about erecting three booths. But by-and-by they realize
the significance of that which they saw. " We were eye-witnesses of his majesty," cries
the same Peter. " This voice we heard, when we were with him in the holy mount."
Not, indeed, that such a momentary illumination of Christ is to be held aa a proof of
first authority. He proceeds, " We have also a more sure word of prophecy ; whereunto
ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place." But it was
a hint as to the " power and coming of the Lord Jesus," confirming the " more sure
word," and helping into the understanding of the truth that, with the decease at Jeru-
salem, the old was finished and the new began. " God had reconciled all things to
himself." Now, with regard to the vision, observe —

L It was on a mottntaik. The hill or upland scene occupies a prominent place in
the history of our Lord. It seems to have been a craving of his human heart to get
" where beyond the voices there is peace." There he could breathe more freely ; there
he found a nourishment and invigoration which were welcome. On the high ground
he preached his famous sermon. To the mountain he was wont to retire for prayer.
When all went to their own homes, he went to the Mount of Olives. On the hill of
Golgotha he died. The mountain in Galilee was the meeting-place with his apostles
after the Resurrection. From the slope of Olivet he ascended to heaven. Now, for
this brief moment of glory, the place chosen is " the high mountain apart." Do we not
need an upland scene in our life ? No hill, no transfiguration. The face never shines.
It is a dull, dreary toil. The holy mount, on whose top one can leave the carking care
and the weary plod, where the air is always pure — the hill that is commanded only by
the heights of God's presence — ah ! this is the secret worth possessing.

n. It is as he fbays that the fashion of the countenanoe is altebed. He
goes up to the mountain, not to meet Moses and Elias, nor to have a seance with spirits,
but to pray — ^to meet his Father, that, out of the Father's heart, he might fill the
fountains of his spirit. As he prays he passes into that blessed light of God which
" enwrapped him in such an aureole of glistering brilliance, his whole presence breathed
so Divine a radiance, that the light, the snow, the lightning, are the only things to
which the evangelist can compare that celestial lustre." Christian I the lesson thereby
suggested thou needst not that any teach thee. It is the same lesson, but in a higher
form, that was shadowed forth in Jacob's Peniel, in the wrestling by the brook Jabbok.
Through the wrestling of the angel the heart of the supplanter was plucked out of
him ; in his prayer which prevailed he found the new name — the Israel, the prince
with God and man. Hast thou never found it so? Hast thou never, in some great
sorrow, poured out thy heart before God, and realized that, when thou didst kneel,
thou wast only the worm, and no man— weak and spiritless; when thou didst rise
from thy knees, thou wast the man, and no worm — the fashion of thy countenance had
been altered? Let the sons of pride speak as they choose, the children of quietness
know that " more things are wrought by prayer than the world dreams of."

III. Thebe is confeebnce with the dbpaeted. The two shining presences are
spoken of as invested with the properties and functions of life. " Two men, which were
Moses and Elias." We know little about the world of the dead, about the possibilities
of intercommunion — they with us, and we with them. There is a feeling, widely
diffused, that some kind of intercourse there is. Even the negro, in his African
platoon, lays aside a little rice each day as the share of his departed kindred. Through
all times, everywhere, the human heart is found asking, speculating over the question,
" Is there no bridge between the dead and the living ? Is all speech, all fellowship, for
ever broken ? " Well, in this Scripture we read of two men, who for long generations
had been removed from this earthly scene, profoundly interested in events to be
transacted on this globe of ours on which depended the salvation of the world. May
not this be a glimpse into the hidden economy? May not that which we see in them
during tliis moment of sight into the unseen, be the picture of what is going on even
now ia the home of the blessed and holy dead? Is not the talk on Hermon an Uluo-



250 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix. 1- -C2.



tration of the commvinion of saints ; reminding us that heaven and earth we nearu
than we think of, that it i? given to us in prayer to

"... joinhandi
With those who went before.
And greet the blood-besprinkled banda
On the eternal shora " ?

"Te are come ... to the spirits of just men made perfect."

IV. The slobt is tbakbient. A brief moment, and then the vision fades into the
light of common day. Moses was forty days and forty nights on the mount. Jesus is
on the Mount for only a short hour. Even while the foolish apostle spoke, there came
a cloud that overshadowed them. The Lord cannot afford to luxuriate on the mountain-
top. There is a universe to be reclaimed ; ttiere are shapes of disease and sin and want
waiting for him below. More than ever is he straitened until his bloody baptism is done.
And so with the disciple. It is good to have the retreat, the mountain, ttie sabbatical
hour each day, the sabbatical day each week. But the purpose of the rest is to refit
for the labour. And, after all, the highest transfiguration is not that of the dazzling
outward light, but that of the beauty shining through the common ordinary things, and
investing them with a heavenly grace and truth. The teaching given the apostles next
after the transaction on the mountain is the taking of a little child, and saying, " Y?hoso-
ever shall receive this child in my Name receiveth me."

Vers. 46 — 60. — Humility and charity. Were these apostles sinnen above all
ecclesiastics because of this reasoning which arose among them? Were their con-
troversies about precedence one whit more foolish and imseemly than the controversies
with which the air of councils and courts is laden, and by which passions are often
enkindled to fever heat ? Alas I is it not the earthenness of the vessel in which the
heavenly treasure is deposited which is made manifest in the strife, " Who shall be
greatest"? Jesus' action is a symbol to be read, marked, learned, and inwardly
digested by alL "He took a little child, and set him by his side," as if to say,
" See, there is the greatness of the kingdom of heaven ; " nay, as may be gathered
from St. Matthew, as if to say more strongly still, "There is no other greatness
recognized in the heavenly kingdom than that of character. Except you are fashioned
according to the character delineated in childhood, you cannot even enter the king-
dom." Reflect on the import of this saying, this symbol. Dues it seem strange
that (Matt, xviii. 4) Ohrist should distinguish humility as the characteristic of the
child? But is not the essence of humility unconsciousness of self? And is not
this unconsciousness the trait conspicuous in a truly childlike child? The little one
has a will, a temper, but there is not much of the feeling of self. Watch the caresses
and endearments ; they are less love seeking to be loved, than love merely loving,
absorbed in loving. Observe the play ; the costly toy is seldom the most prized ; the
pleasure found in toy or romp is the outgoing of self. Nature is spontaneous, free.
Therein, says Jesus, we have a revelation of heaven, a sign of the real greatness. The
image likest God, the fact, in this universe, nearest God, with most in it of the stamp
of the high and holy One, is the little child whom Ohrist has called. The everlasting
love humbles itself as the little child. It loves, it is absorbed in loving. The Incar-
nation only makes us see what is hidden in the very being of God — self-emptying,
making self of no reputation. The King of kings is the Servant of servants. He is
among us the one that serveth. " Be ye therefore imitators of God as the children of
his love." For it is pride that stands between us and the true greatness. W& are great
only in the measure in which we lose ourselves, in which we find our life, in a cause or
truth which is higher than ourselves. The world has three chief patterns of greatness.
Culture — the development, through science and art, of a certain inward sweetness and
light. Pou;*)— the ability to use men as pawns on a chess-board, to project far and
near the image of self. Luxury — imbedding the years in the voluptuous comfort
which money commands. That which is common to all these forms, from the meet
gross to the most refined, is that the supreme reference of the mind is to having rather
than being, getting rather than giving, being served rather than serving. Christ's idea
ib in sharp antagonism to this. To be of use, to be free faua that i£f-l«ve which ia



OH. IX. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 251

always aUn to self-idolatry, to be men in understanding but children in heart and
spirit, — this is the mark which he presents when, in answer to the reasoning in the
heart, he says, pointing to the child, " He that is least among you all, the same shall
be great." A seatence ever to be pondered, implying (Matt, xviii. 3) that the soul
has been turned to the right law of its being, " He restoreth my soul." With this
lesson of humility there is joined at this time a lesson of eharUy and forbearance.
How this lesson was occasioned is explained in ver. 49. The expression used by the
Lord, " in my Name," seems to have suggested to John an incident, perhaps the circum-
stance which somehow gave rise to the reasoning, " Master, we saw one casting out
devils in thy Name, and we forbade him, because he foUoweth not with us." Interdict
honestly enough meant 1 But one wholly foreign to the law of the spirit of Christ's
life. His greatness is that he is not confined to any circle ; his gospel is " the presence
of a good diffused." There is a virtue in even the hem of his garment. The com-
munion of God with men is always wider than the communion of men with Qod. He
is in contact with minds which do not even consciously surrender to him. Beware of
identifying the bestowment of spiritual grace with the acknowledgments of belief
according to any set of words, or with adherence to any particular company of believers.
"The Spirit divideth to every man severally as he wills." It is not for any to forbid
another " because he followeth not with us." No ; in the next chapter we shall find
Christ protesting, " He that is not with me is against me." That is the one side of his
mind. But it is balanced by the other (ver. 50), " He that is not against us is for us."
The two sentences are not mutually contradictory. The one establishes that there is
no middle course between Christ and Satan ; that those who will not join Christ in hia
warfare against Satan must, directly or indirectly, aid Satan against Christ. In the
other it is shown that the man whom John and his brethren forbade was really with
Christ in his warfare, and had received from him the faith which was mighty against
the kingdom of darkness. The miracle in Christ's Name was the proof that he was
really on Christ's side, gathering with him. "Try the spirits," such is practictJly the
rejoinder of Jesus ; " do not forbid simply because one has not complied with what you
consider necessary or right ; look at the character of the deed, at the motive present to
him ; if that bear the mark of my Name, account him with me, although he follows not
with you." John would have been justified in going to the man who cast out devils,
and expoimding the way of Qod more perfectly to him ; he was not justilied in -mn.
hibiting. Most difficult of graces is the grace of charity ; charity as distinguished irom
the toleration which is the outcome of a mind that has no positive conviction of its
own, and regards all views as alike to it ; charity which has its hand firm in detinite
truth, but recognizes that Christ, not any man or any system, is the Truth ; " Thou,
O Lord, art more than they ; " and because of this reverence, this feeling of the infinite-
ness of truth, allows for many forms of apprehension, welcoming the Name of the Lord,
howsoever it is revealed in character and life, and, when there cannot be fellowship,
sorrowing rather than denouncing. Humility and charity Qod has joined together.
Th^ are the two inseparable features of the childlike character. Where humility
reigns, there is always the desire to be fair, to acknowledge the excellences oven of
doctrines and opinions to which the mind is opposed; most of all, of persons from
whom it may differ. " Lord, who hast taught us that all our doings without chanty
are nothing worth ; send thy Holy Ghost, and pour into our hearts that most excelknt
gift of charity, the very bond of peace and of all virtues, without which whosoevai
liveth is counted dead before thee.'

Vers. 51— 62.— 2%e/ace stead/attJi/ set. Very pathetic and sublime is the announco-
roent of the fifty-first verse. The bright, joyous spring-time has gone. The cwn-
flelds and gardens, the hill and dale, the "lake's still face sleeping sweetly in the
embrace of mountains terraced high with mossy stone " — all the scenery which the Son
of man so dearly loved, must now be left behind. No more for him the crowds of
simple fisher-folk hanging on his words ; no more for him the circuits from village to
Tiilage, returning to the quiet Capernaum home ; no more for him the happy work
which marked the earlier years of the Prophet of Nazareth. Now there are oaly the
deepening opposition of scribe and Pharisee, and the lengthening shadow of the croia.
He u the Man of men. Not without pam must he have left Nazareth in the distaa*^



253 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. ix. 1—62.

and taken his way through the Plain of Esdraelon, past Nain and Shunem, bound for
Jerusalem. But this is sublime : "He steadfastly set his face." It implies that there
were solicitations, temptations in another direction. The Christ of God needed to
gird up all his energies. Flesh and blood cried, "Stay a little longer at least." The
mind of the Son made answer, "Nay, how am I straitened until the baptism be
accomplished I" It is of an hour in this journey that Mark speaks, when he says that
"Jesus went before the disciples : and they were amazed ; and, as they followed, they
were afraid." Why they were afraid, we are not told ; but we may well conceive that
there was the print of a secret agony on his brow, that there was something in his
aspect, as he walked a little way ahead of them, which awed and silenced. His face
was ' ' steadfastly set. " And would that we better knew the secret of this steadfast face !
How we shrink from the duty which our Father lays on us ! How we withdraw our
gaze from the cups of suffering, from the cross-bearing, which our Father assigns us !
How we run away from what is irksome ! or, when we must do it, how often we meet it
with a countenance awry I Lord, we cannot penetrate the mystery of thy way. At
times even thy presence seems dreadful. But lead us in the truth of thy steadfastness,
and keep us following thee, even although amazed and afraid ! Two features of the
beginning of the journey are set before us in the passage under review.

I. The one, the rejection op the Lord by a village op the Samaritans. And
this for a reason which suggests to us many similar mistakes and misjudgments.
Bigotry dethrones reason, and stirs up what is worst against what is best in the heart.
To these rude villagers, the one condemning circumstance is that his face is towards
Jerusalem. If he had been only going in the other direction, they would have been
forward with welcomes, and in return would have received unspeakable blessings. Let
us not be too ready to cast the stone. We are all apt to be carried away by the
appearance of a person or thing, and, in advance of rational considerations, to judge,
sentence, or condemn. Thus many a time the messengers of the Lord, with blessings
in their hand, seeking to make ready for him a place in human charities and kindnesses,
are repelled. " What wonder," says an old Latin Father, " that the sons of thunder
wished to flash lightning ! " (ver. 54). There have been many such Boanerges since
the days of James and John. They are the exponents of a tendency too frequently
illustrated in the ecclesiastical world, to meet Samaritan disdain and rebake by the
terrors of the Lord, by the mere force of authority, in mistaken zeal to denounce and
excommunicate. Ah ! how often has the voice of the Gentlest repeated the rebuke in
the ears of his followers, "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of ; for the Son of
man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them."

II. The other peature (though it does not seem clear when it occurred) is, the word

BEARINd ON DISOIPLESHIP GIVEN IN REPLY TO THE THREE MEN WHO ARE INTRODUCED TO

US AT THE CLOSE OP THE CHAPTER. These three men are types of classes whose represen-
tatives we need not go far to seek. 1. There is the hasty disciple. (Ver. 57.) " Lord, I
will follow the whithersoever thou goest." There is no discernment of what is implied
in the "whithersoever." There is no counting of the cost. He is the man of impulse
and fresh warm feeling, who has "received some word of Jesus with joy, yet has no
root in himself." The "I will" stands forth in its own strength, which is but weak-
ness. Observe how the Lord deals with him. He does not reject the offer made ;
only he sends the man to prayer and self-review, giving him, in one far-reaching
sentence, to see what in his rashness he had been undertaking. "Follow me whither-
soever I go ? Knowest thou not that I am the poorest of all ; that, in my Father's
world, I am the One despised and rejected. No throne, no royalties, no kingdom as
thou conceivest of a kingdom ? The fox has its hole, the bird has its nest, the Son of
man hath not where to lay his head. Think, then, on that to which thou wouldst
pledge thyself." A word still called for ! The will which is eager to follow is sometimes
slow to receive the Law of the spirit of the life which is in Christ Jesus. 2. As the
hasty disciple passes out of sight, lo ! another appears, he who may be called the dilatory.
Notice the difference between the two. In the former, the initiative is taken by the
man ; in the latter, the initiative is taken by Jesus, with the short, peremptory, "Pol-
low me." The one has no misgivings ; the other desires to follow but has not courage
enough to express his convictions. And the mind is not decided. Secretly there is
the attraction to the Lord, but there is also the home, the aged father, the circle in the



CH. IX. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 253



quiet village. No ; he is nearly, but not quite, ready. It is on him that the Lord looks.
He sees him trembling at the word that is working in his soul, and forth comes the
calling, empowering, "Follow ! " Was it not so natural (ver. 59), "Lord, suffer me
first to go and bury my father " ? And will not he whose commandment is, " Honour
thy father and mother," at once consent ? No ; the Lord's need, the Lord's call,
sets the private and domestic claims aside. Hence the enigmatical reply of ver. 60.
"Thou hast neighbours, brethren, who have not received the life that is pulsing in
thee ; to them may be left such a charge as that which thou hast named. But thou,
with that life in thee, hast something else to do. Life must live ; go thou, the living,
and fulfil the living man's charge— preach the kingdom of God." .8. Finally, there
comes into view <Ae tender-hem-ted disciple. (Ver. 61.) "I will follow thee" — only
first let me say farewell at home ; a last look, a last adieu is all. Ah ! this may not
be. The rejoinder is somewhat stern (ver. 63). Now, what is the lesson ? It is this.
On the rocks and reef of the seashore we find creatures rooted to them. Scarcely can
we separate the anemone from its reef. How terrible it would be for a human being,
with a human soul, to be doomed, like that zoophyte, to cleave to that rock, with no
variety except what is caused by the ebb and flow of the sea 1 Yet, is the life actually
lived by many much better ? Day following day, and always the monotone of a mere
worldly life ; no higher end, no higher reference ; all of the earth, earthy ! piteous
sight— a soul cleaving to the dust ! Have we not seen a nobler truth f Looking into
the face of Christ, is there not a voice bidding us higher ? What but death and dark-
ness could be if this earth of ours moved only in its own little diameter, around its own
axis ? Is it not the recipient of life and light because of its higher orbit as a member
of the great solar system ? And have we not spiritual life and light because the centre
of our being is God ? Then, disciple of Jesus, as he who has put his hand to the
plough is intent on guiding it to the end of the furrow, ploughing on though the clod
be hard and the work severe, be thou steadfast, thy face set with thy Lord toward his
Jerusalem ; no looking back, precursor of going back ; this the prayerof all thy praying,
" Lord, unite my heart, that I may love and fear thy Name."



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 6. — Lessons from the first commission. We learn from this commission
and these instructions —

I. That Cheist has Divine resources for special necessities. He gave to the
twelve "power and authority over all devils," etc. If he had such resources at his
command then, when he was stooping so low and laying aside so much of heavenly
rank and authority, of what is he not possessed now — now that he is enthroned, now
that ' ' all power is given unto him in heaven and on earth " ? His Church may be
very bitterly assailed ; it may fall very low in consequence of the slackness and
unfaithfulness of its own members ; it has thus fallen more than once since he ascended :
but in his hand are great reserves ; his Divine resources are illimitable. He can equip
and send forth men endowed with wonderful power, with marvellous faculty of per-
suasion or of organization ; he can send forth those whose influence shall be felt even
"where Satan's seat is," in the depths of spiritual evil and moral wrong, and thus he
can establish or re-establish his kingdom.

II. That we may commit ourselves to works op usefulness though conscious of
much insufliciency. We may be surprised that our Lord should send out the twelve
to "preach the kingdom of God" (ver. 2) at a time when they had so very imperfect
an idea as they then had of the character of that kingdom. Their views of it were
very elementary ; they had yet to learn concerning it facts and truths which seem to
us of the flrst importance. But still he sent them ; there was something, and some-
thing of substantial value, they could teach ; and they were (all of them, at that time)
genuinely attached to their Divine Master. If we wait until we know everything it
would be well to know before we begin our ministry, we shall be postponing the time
until our chance is gone. We should begin the work of holy usefulness early, even
when there is very much to learn ; we shall acquire knowledge, tact, wisdom, power.



254 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. ix. 1—62.

as we go on our way of service. The one requisite thing is that we shall be thoroughly
sincere, and do all that we do out of a true and faithful heart.

III. That Christ mat call on us to cast ourselves entirely on his provtdinq
AND PROTECTiNO CARE. This he did with his apostles now (ver. 3). Usually it is our
duty to take every precaution for our bodily necessities ; not to expose ourselves to
needless perils or to injurious privations. But there are times when it becomes our
duty — especially that of the Christian minister, or evangelist, or missionary — to cast
aside all prudential considerations, to run all risks, to commit himself absolutely to the
care of the Divine Father.

IV. That there is a limit which even holy persistency may not pass. (Ver. 5.)
It is well to work patiently on under discouragement. It is our sacred duty to do this ;
we are quite unfitted for the nobler spheres of service if we are not prepared to do so.
We admire and applaud those who cannot tear themselves away from work which they
have set their hearts on accomplishing. Let patient persistency have abundant scope
for its exercise, but there i* a point where It must stop ; to exceed a certain measure i*
to be disregardful of those who would not reject the Word of life, on whom Christian
ser^ce would not be spent in vain.

V. That pbaoticaIi kindness to bodilt wakts goes well with earnest attention to
spiritual necessities (ver. 6). — C.

Vers. 7 — 9. — Z%e tetrareh and the Teacher, Our Lord had very little to do with the
" kings and rulers of the earth," but they did occasionally' cross his path. At such
times he bore himself as we should expect he would — ^he who was so far below and yet
so much further above them. His lelations with Herod, as suggested by the text, were
these —

L Ths Tkaohsb OAtrsiNa tbouble to the tktkabch, Herod " waa perplexed " by
•11 that he heard concerning Christ : his own wonderful works and those which he
oommissioned and enabled his apostles to perform (vers. 1 — 6) made an impression
which entered and disturbed the palace. We have reason to think that in Herod's
case the fame of Jesus brought not only mental pei-plexity, but moral perturbation also
(see Matt. xiy. 2 ; Mark vi. 14). He could not understand who this new, great prophet
oould be, and he consulted his court respecting him. But it was his own apprehension,
if not his c(HiTiction, that the man whom he had so guiltily slain " was risen from the
dead." His carefully trained judgment told him that he had nothing more to fear
from that faithful spokesman M the Lord. Bat his conscience, that struck deeper than
his judgment, compelled him to fear that he had not seen the last of that beheaded
prisoner. It is a very easy thing to take a human life, but it is a very difficult thing
t« escape from responsibility for a human death. 1. Christ's coming to us has caused
aad will cause a large amount of intellectual perplexity. The world has for eighteen
centuries been asking who he is, and what is the true and full account of him. hx this
mental perplexity there is nothing to be regretted ; there is no better subject on which
the human intelligence could be employed. 2. Christ's coming to man has occasioned
much trouble of soul. The truths he taught, the life he lived, the claims he makes
upon us, — these have stirred the human conscience to its depth ; they have awakened
a sense of sin and ill desert ; they have turned a strong light upon the guilty past and
the perilous future ; they haTe called forth much self-condemnation and self-rtproaoh.
It is well that they have done, it is right that they should do so.

II. The tbtraroh desiriko to bee the Teacher. " He desired to see him,"
perhaps to have his mental curiosity set at rest ; perhaps to have his conscientious
fears appeased ; perhaps for both these reasons. Certainly not in the hope of hearing
heavenly truth, of hearing that Divine wisdom which would enable him to be a better
nan and to live a nobler life. And his motive being low, it proved, as we might have
•xpected, that when he did see him, the interview gave him no gratification, but only
added to his guilt (ch. xxiii. 8—11). It is well, indeed, to wish to come into the
presence of Christ, but whether the fulfilment of our desire will end in good or evil
depends mainly upon our motive. 1. A selfish spirit is almost sure to be unblessed, is
moat likely to have its guilt increased thereby. 2. A spirit of mere curiosity will pro-
bably return unrewarded, thongh it may meet with a gracious benediction. 8. A spirit of
devotion and inquiry will certainly gain a blessing from his holy hand. We may hiok at



CH, IX. 1-62.] THE GwSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 256

in. The Teacheb and the tetbabch in their strong contrasts. 1. Of present
position. 2. Of moral character and the purpose of their lile. 3, Of their destiny. — C.

Ver. 11. — The healing hand of Clirist. " And healed them that had need of heal-
ing." And who are they to whom these words do not apply ? In a world as full of
sin as ours is, there is nothing of which we have greater need than a Divine Healer.
For sin means sickness, disease, derangement, pain — both spiritual and corporeal.
Every human ear wants to hear those gracious words, " I am the Lord that healeth
thee ; " every human heart has occasion to plead, " Heal me, Lord, and I shall be
healed ; " every soul is again and again in need of the great beneficent Physician.

I. As THOSE LIABLE TO DISEASE AND PAIN. Considering the extreme intricacy of our
bodily structure, and consideiing also the irregularities and evils of which we are
guilty, it is wonderful that there is as much health and as little sickness as we find.
But he is an exception to bis fellows who goes for many years without ailment and,
indeed, without il)zit;i>ii. And we have all of us reason to bless the Lord of our lives
that he heals us so readily and so often. He heals in two ways. 1. By conferring on
ua a nature which has recuperative powers, so that without any meilical aid the wound
is healed, the organ recovers its power and fulfils its functions. 2. By giving us medicinal
herbs which our science can discover and apply, the nature of which is to heal and to
restore. In both these cases it is the Lord of onr human body and of nature who
" works " (John v. 17) for our benefit. Our art, where it is exercised, only supplies
one condition out of many ; it alone would be utterly insufficient. Whenever we are
healed of any malady, slight or serious, we should join in the exclamation of the
psalmist (ciii. 3), and feel that we have one reason more for gratitude and devotion.
Let those who have been brought back from the gates of the grave by Christ's pitiful
and healing kindness consider whether they are paying him the vows which they made
in the hour of suffering and danger (Ps. Ixvi. 14).

IL As THE CEILDBEN OF BORROW. Possibly WO may know nothing of serious sick-
ness — there are those who escape it — but we all know what sorrow means. Trouble
is a visitor that knocks at every door, that finds its way to every human heart. It
may be some gradually approaching evil, which at length culminates in disaster ; or it
may be some sudden blow, which badly bruises if it does not break the heart. It may
be the heavy, entangling loss ; or the grave, oppressive anxiety ; or the lamentable
failure ; or the sore and sad bereavement. How precious, then, beyond aU price, the
healing of the Divine Healer 1 In these dark hours our Divine Lord comes to ua with
ministering hand. 1. He impels all those who are dear to us to grant us their tenderest
and most sustaining love ; and human kindness is a very healing thing. 2. He grants
us his own most gracious sympathy ; he is touched with a feeling of our infirmity ; we
know and feel that he is with us, watching over us, " afBicted in our affliction ; " and
the sympathy of our Saviour is a precious balm to our woimded spirit. 3. He comes
to us m the office and the Person of the Divine Comforter, directly soothing and heal-
ing our torn and troubled hearts. Thus he heals us according to the greatness of our
need.

III. As THOSE WHO SUFEBB FROM A WOUNDED OHABAOTEB. A WOUndcd Spirit is

worse than a bodily Infirmity (Prov. xviii. 14) ; but a wounded character is worse than
a wounded spirit, for that is a spirit that has injwred itself. There are those who
present to their friends and neighbours the spectacle of bodily health and material
prosperity ; but what their Master sees when he regards them is tpirituai infirmity.
They are weak, sickly, inwardly deranged. Their hearts are very far from being as he
would like to see them; instead of ardent love is lukewarmness ; instead of reverence
is flippancy of spirit ; instead of a holy scrupulousness and a wise restraint is laxity if
not positive disobedience; instead of zeal is coldness and indifference to his fiause and
kingdom. Of all men living, these are they who have most "need of healing." And
Christ both can and will heal them. To such as these he says, " I will heal thy back-
sliding ; " " Wilt thou be made whole ? " And if they will but go to him in a spirit of
humility, of faith, of reconsecration, they will receive power from his gracious touch,
they will rise renewed ; and as they rise from the couch of spiritual langour and indif-
ference to walk, to run in the way of his commandments, to climb the heights of close
and holy fellowship with Gbd, a deeper note of joy will sound from the depth of their



266 THE GOSPEL ACCORDTNa TO ST. LUKE. [en. ii. 1— «2

hearts tban ever comes from the lips of bodily convalescence, " I will extol thee,
Lord ; for thou hatt lifted me up, and hast not made my foes to rejoice over me." — C.

Vers. 12 — 17. — The Divine provision /or the world's need. This miracle of our Lord,
meeting as it did the present bodily necussities of the multitude about him, stands for
ever as a picture and parable of the far more wonderful and the gloriously bountiful
provision which the Saviour of mankind has made for the deeper necessities of our race.

I. Odb holt solicitudb fob the spibitdallt DESTiTnTB. There is a note of true
sympathy in the language of the disciples (ver. 12 ; see Mark vi. 35, 36). They were
concerned to think of that great number of people, among whom were " women and
children " (Matt. ziv. 21), having gone so long without food, and being " in a desert
place " where none could be obtained. How strong and keen should be our sympathy
with those who are spiritually destitute ; who have received from God a nature with
immeasurable capacities, with profound cravings for that which is eternally true and
divinely good, and who "have nothing to ett"! No solicitude for hungering human
hearts can be extravagant ; it is only too common to be guiltily and pitifully nncon-
cemed. And if the stage of spiritual hunger and thirst should have passed into that
of spiritual unconsciousness, that is one degree (and a large d^ree too) more deplorable,
for it is one stage nearer to spiritual death. We do well to pty the multitudes at
home and abroad who might be and who shoi Id be living on Divine and everlasting
truth, but who are pining and perishing on i iierable husks, — on errors, on supersti-
tions, on morbid fancies, on low ambitions, on unsatisfying and perhaps demoralising
pleasures.

II. Thk appakent inadequaot of the Di TNE raonsioN. Well may the disciples,
not yet enlightened as to their Master's purpose, regard " five loaves and two fishes "
as hopelessly inadequate to the occasion. So to human judgment they seemed. Not
less strikingly disproportioned must the Divine prevision for man's higher necessities
have seemed to those who lirst regarded it. What was it? It was, in the language
of our Lord recorded a few verses on in this chapter (ver. 22), " the Son of man suffering
many things, being rejected . . . and slain, and being raised the third day." A crucified
and restored Messiah was to be offered as the Bread of life to a hungering world I
Would this satisfy the needs of all mankind — of Jew and G-entile, of barbarian and
cultured, of bond and free, of man and woman ? Could One that seemed to fail, whose
cause was all but extinguished in obloquy and desertion, be the Redeemer of mankind ?
It was unlikely in the last degree ; speaking after the manner of men, it was impos-
sible I And the machinery, too, the instrumentality by which this strange provision
was to be conveyed to all human souls everywhere and through all generations, was
that not equally inadequate ? A few " unlearned and ignorant men," a few earnest
and true but obscure and uninfluential women, — could they establish and perpetuate
Chis new system? could they paf^s on these scanty pmvisions to the waiting and
perishing multitude ? How hopeless ! how impossible I Yet see —

IIL Its pboved suffioienct. As those five loaves and two fishes, under the multi-
plying hand of Christ, proved to be far more than enough for the thousands who
partook of them, so is the provision in the gospel of Christ for the needs of man found
to be all-sufficient. In a once-crucified and now exalted Saviour we have One in whom
is found : 1. Pardon for every sin and for every repentant sinner. 2. Admission,
instant and full, to the presence and favour of God. 3. A source of purity of heart,
and excellency, and even nobility, of life. 4. Comfort in all the sorrows and privations
of our earthly course. 5. Peace and hope in death. 6. A glorious immortality. Well
does this great Benefactor say, " I am ceme that ye might have life, and . . . have it more
abundanUj/." The provision is more than equal to the necessity ; there is a marvellous
overflow of truth and grace. — 0.

Vers. 23, 24. — L^t gained by losing if. These strong and sententious words may
teach us three truths which are of vital importance to ns.

I. That the voutntabt suKitENDSR of eim lifu to God is oun entbamok ufoh
MFK INDEED. What t« it for a man to livef We speak truly but superficially when
we say that any one is a living man from whom the breath of life has not yet deputed.
But there is deep truth in the objectia of our Riighsh poet, " As though to breathe



' H. IX, 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKE. 25T

were life." Human life, as its Divine Author regards it, means very much more than
:hi3. And, tauijht of Christ, we understand that we then attain to our true life when
we live unto God, in his holy service, and for the good of those whnm he has committed
to our care. The thoughts ol' sinful men concerning life are uttnrly false; they are the
exact contrary of the truth. Men imagine that just as they gain tliat which will
minister to their own enjoyment, and keep that which, if parted with, would benefit
other people, they make much of their life. This is not even a caricature of the truth;
it is its contradiction. The fact is that just as we lose ourselves in the love of God,
and just as we expend our powers and possessions in the cause of mankind, we enter
upon and enjoy that which is the " life indeed." For all that is best and highest lives,
uot to gain, but to give. As we pass fiom the lowest of the brute creation U|> an ascend-
ing line until we reach the Divine Father himself, we find that the nobler being exists,
not to appro])riate to himself, but to minister tu others ; when in our thought we reach
the Divine, we see that God himself is receiving the least and is giving the most. He
finds his heavenly life in giving freely and constantly of his resources to all beings in
his universe. This is the supreme point that we can attain ; we surrender ourselves
entirely to God, to be possessed and employed by him ; we enter upon and we realiza
the noble, the angelic, the true life. Whosoever will save his life by retaining his own
will and withholding his [lowers from his Kerieemer, by that very act loses it; but who-
soever will freely surrender his life to Gtod and man will, by that very act, find it. To
live is not to get and to keep; it is to love and to lose ourselves in loving service.

II. That the pull sebvioe of Christ means habitual self-denial. 1. It meani
<ne abandument of all that is vicious ; i.e. of all that is positively hurtful to ourselves
or others, Hud that, as such, is condemned of God as sinfid. 2. It means the avoidance
of that which is not unlawful in itself, but which would be a hindrance to usefulness
and the service of love (see Rom. xiv.). Of the rightness and desirableness of this,
every man must be a judge for himself, and no man may "judge his brother." That life
must be a narrow one which does not afford scope for the frequent forfeiture of good
which might lawfully be taken, but wliich, for Christ's sake, is declined. 3. It involves
struggle and sacrifice at the first, but the sense of personal loss is continually declining,
and the consciousness of Divine approval is a counterbalancing gain.

III. That to secure eternal blessedness it mat be necessary to lay down
OUR MORTAL LIFE. Many are they who have been called upon to put the most literal
nterpretation on the twenty-fourth verse; who have had to choose between parting
with everything human and earthly on the one hand, and sacrificing their fidelity to
Christ and their eternal hopes on the other hand. For that hour of solemn crisis the
Liord has granted abounding grace, and from every land and age a noble army of martyrs
have made the better choice, and now wear the crown of life in the better land. — C.

Ver. 25. — The priceless. Our Lord has taught us as no other teacher ever has —
L Thk transcendent worth op our human nature. When he came that was
held in very small esteem. Men showed what they thought of human nature by the
use they made of it, and of human life by the readiness with which they threw it away.
There was no thought of the inviolable sacredriess of a human spirit. Jesus Christ has
taught us to think of it as precious beyond all price. Man's body is only the vesture
iif his mind ; man, like God, is spirit, but he is spirit clothed in flesh. He is a spirit

(1) accountable tu God for all he thinks and feels, as well as for all he says and does ;

(2) capable of forming a beautiful and noble character resembling that of the Divine
Father himself; (3) capable of living a life which, in its sphere, is a reproduction of
the life God is living in heaven ; (4) coming into close contact and fellowship with
God ; (5) intenrled to share God's own immortality.

II. The temptation to lose bight of this great truth. There are two things
that often have such a deteriorating effect upon us that it is practically erased from
the tablet of our soul. 1. The love of pleasure; whether this be indulj;ence in unholy
pleasure, or the practical surrender of ourselves to mere enjoyment, to the neglect of all
that is best and highest. 2. The eager pursuit of gain. Not that there is any radical
inconsistency between profitable trading and holy living; not that a Christian man
may not exemplify his piety by the way in which he conducts his business; but that
there are often found to be terribly strong temptations to untruthfulness, or dishoneBty,
lukk. a



168 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. n. 1— «S

or hardness, or luijust withboldment, or a culpable and injurious absorption in businesi.
And under the destructive influence of one of these two forces the soul withers or dies.
III. The calamitocb uistaee that is sometimes made. It is not only a grieTOua
sin, but a disastrous error to gain worldly wealth, and, in the act of gaining it, to lose
the soul. That is the worst of all possible bargains. The man who makes many
thousands of pounds, and who loses conscientiousness, truthfulness, spirituality, all
care for what God thinks of him and feels about him, sensitiveness of spirit — in fact,
himnelf, is a man over whom Heaven weeps ; he has made a supreme mistake. Gold,
silver, precious stones, are of limited worth. There are many of the most important
services we want which they have no power to render ; and tiie hour is daily drawing
near when they will have no value to us whatever. But the soul is of immeaswrdbU
worth ; no sum of money that can be expressed in figures will indicate its value ; that
is something which absolutely transcends expression ; and time, instead of diminishing,
enhances its importance— it becomes of more and more account " as our days go by,"
as our life draws toward its close. Jesus Christ not only put this thought into word«,
— ^tbe words of the text — he put it into action. He let us see that, in his estimation,
the human soul was worth suffering and dying for — worth suffering for as he suffered
in Gethsemane, worth dying for as he died at Calvary. Then do we wisely enter into
his thought concerning it when we seek salvation at his cross, when, by knowing him
as our Divine Bedeemer, we enter into eternal life. — 0.

Yer. 28. — The Transfiguration. This incident is one that stands quite by itself; it
is wholly unlike everything else in our Lord's history. It was miraculous enough, yet
we do not count it amongst the miracles of Christ. It may be viewed in many lights ;
it may illustrate —

I. The close eelation between oub SFiBiTaAii aud oue bodilt hatubi. Thii
manifested glory was not altogether outward; it was more than a radiance thrown
around or imposed upon him, which might just as readily have occurred to any Jewish
rabbi. It does not correspond with the illumination of the wall of a building or the
face of a cathedral. It was the glory of his Divine nature, usually hidden, now shining
through and revealing itself in his form and counteoance. We are sure that the appear-
ance of our Lord at all times answered to his character and his spirit. We gather this
from the charm which he exerted over his disciples and over little children ; from the
confidence which he inspired in the social outcasts of his day ; in the occasional flash-
ings forth of his Divine sovereignty (John ii. 15 ; Mark i. 32; John xviii. 6). The
Transfiguration was by far the most striking instance of his bodily nature being lighted
up and irradiated by his indwelling glory ; there was as much of the spiritual as of the
material about it ; it could not have happened to any other than to our Lord. And
this opens the question how far our spiritual experiences may and should glorify our
personal appearance. The spirit does act powerfully upon and manifest itself through
the body which is its organ. We know how love gleams, how indignation flashes,
how scorn and hatred lower, how hope shines, how disappointment pales, how all the
passions that breathe and bum in the human breast come forth and make themselves
felt in the eye, the lip, the countenance of man. We may and should see a kind or a
pure heart in a kind or pure countenance, as we do see avarice or indulgence in a keen
or a bloated visage. We bear about in our body the marks of our association with
the Lord Jesus, and other marks also which are not derived from such fellowship as
that. Holiness has its transfiguring influence, as sin has its debasing effect, upon the
human form and flgure — the one refines and glorifies, as the other disfigures and degrades.
There are two thmgs to be heeded here. 1. We must not draw hasty and unjust
inferences ; there are those who, so far as appearance goes, are victims of misfortune or
are vioariovis sufferers. 2. We must endeavour to let a holy character be visible in
our bodily persons. Inward excellence is the source of outward beauty. No tailoring
or millinery, no cosmetics or perfumery, will make beautiful the face and form behind
which is an ugly heart; selfishness and pride and envy will never look anything but
unsightly and forbidding. The thoughts that breathe, the feelings that glow, the spirit
that animates, the character that shines through — it is this which beautifies, which
adorns, which makes attractive, which wins confidence and love. These are the tbingi
to care for, to cultivate, to cherish ; it is thence that our influence for good will spring.



8H.ix.l-^2.] THE GOSPEL ACCOHDINa TO ST. LDKB. 159

n. T^ OABE WHICH God takes of his own IK THGIB TIHB 09 BFEOIAL HBBD.

What was the purpose of this wonderful sceue ? It was to prepare the disciples (and
perhaps the Master) for the last scenes of all. Those two celestial visitants spake oi
" the decease which he should accomplish," etc. A terrible ordeal was that through
which he and they would pass. Therefore it seemed well to the Father to give to him
and to them the most imposing, the most impressive, the most convincing proof that
he was well pleased with his Son, and that he was, indeed, the Messiah of their hopes.
We know from Peter's Epistle (2 Pet. i. 16, 17) how strong a confirmation of their
faith it was and continued to be. Thus God cared for his own, and thus he still cares:.
Our lives glide on like peaceful rivers ; but most human lives prove to be rivers with
cataracts in their course. Times of grave trial and peril come, when there ia ■ great
strain on our faith and patience ; when we have to draw on our last resources ; critical
trial-hours they are, like those which came to the Master and to his faithful band.
How shall we be assured of calmness, fortitude, fidelity, when we pass through them ?
If we are loyal to our Lord in the days of sunshine and prosperity, if we " abide in
him " now, he will not fail us then. As our day his grace will be. He will prepare (U
for the trial-hour ; he will be with us in its darkest moments ; he will lead us out into
the sunshine on the other side. — C.

Ver. 86. — The taisdom of hearing Christ. Three things are clear to us, preliminarilj,
1. Jesits Ohriet is addressing vs. From his home and throne on high our Saviour
stoops to call us, to instruct us, to blens us. He is saying to us, " Come unto me ; "
" Abide in me ; " " Follow me." 2. We need not hear him if we choose not to do so.
As in a room where many groups of people are conversing, we only hear the voice of
that company to which we join ourselves and listen, so in the large room of this world
there are many voices speaking and it rests with each of us to determine which we will
regard. Shall it be the voice of ambition ? or that of appetite ? or that of human learn-
ing? or that of Christ? 3. Our heavenly Father urges us to give our best attention to
Jesus Christ. " This is my beloved Son : hear him." We shall see, if we consider, how
and why God presses on us this act of hearing.

L Bboausb op oub ukqent need of a voice that is DrvnjE. There are two things
we urgently require, but which, apart from Jesus Christ, we cannot have. 1. One is a
knowledge of what is true. We are " strangers on the earth," and know but very little.
Like the little bird (of the ancient story) that fiew from the darkness into the dimly
lighted room and out into the darkness on the other side, so firom the darkness of the
past we enter and stay for a brief time in the dimly lighted present, and forth we pass
into the darkness of the future. 2. The other is the power to do what we know to b$
right. Truly pathetic is the Roman's confession, " I see the better course, and approve;
I follow the worse." What men everywhere have wanted is the inspiration and the
power to be and to do that which they perceive to be good ami right. Whence shall
we gain this ? Only from a Divine Saviour, from One who has lived and died for us,
to whom we offer our hearts and our lives, the love of whom will constrain us toward
all that is good and pure, and restrain us from all that is bad and wrong.

II. Because of his intimate relation to his Divine Fatheb. "This is mjr
beloved Son," therefore should we "hear liim." For one of the deepest and most prac-
tical questions we can ask is— What is God's thought, feeling, purpoge, toward ua ? If
there were any human being who sustained toward us a relation which at all approached
in intimacy and importance that which God sustains to us, we should be eager indeed
to know what was his feeling and intention concerning us. How eagerly, then, should
we inquire of him " in whom we live, and move, and have our being," " with whom we
have everything to do," on whose will we are absolutely dependent for our futxire hera
and hereafter I What does God think about us? On what conditions will he reoeiva
and bless us ? Christ, " the beloved Son," who came forth from God, and who knowa
his mind as none other can (Matt. xi. 27), can answer this supreme question for us.

III. Because of his close and mtimatb bblation to oubselves. We want
some one to speak to us who knows us well, who understands us altogether; one about
» horn we can feel that this is true. To whom, then, should we listen, if not to tha Bon
of God, our Maker ; to the Son of man, our Brother ? " He knew what was in man,"
•a tha avangeliat testified, and again and again ha showed that ha knew his disciplus



260 TH3 GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix. 1S2.

far better than they knew themselves. Such is his knowledge of us. We may think
that we know ourselves and what is best for ourselves. But we may be utterly mis-
taken. We find that our neighbours display lamentable and ruinous ignorance on these
great matters. Who are we that we should be full of wisdom where others err? Let
us distrust ouiselves : " There is a way which seemeth right unto a man, but the end
thereof are the ways of death." Ignorant presumption is a foe that " hath slain its ten
thousands." The truly wise will seek the great Teacher's feet, and say, " Lord, what
wilt tJiou have me to do ? " — 0.

Vers. 37 — 42. — The healing of the lunatia child. From this most interesting story
we may gather the truths —

L That feom the very fangs of defeat a sebat victory mat be sbcurbd.
More than once in the history of war there has occurred such an incident as that which
is related conceruing the great struggle in the United States (1860 — 1864). A severe
and successful attack is made by one army on the other ; the enemy is driven back,
his guns and his camp captured. As his regiments are in full retreat, the general of
tne defeated force, who has been unfortunately absent, arrives on the scene ; he arrests
ilje tide of retreat, gathers his soldiers about him, stops the pursuing host in their
career, leads a triumphant attack upon them, drives them beyond his own camp,
recaptures his guns, and chases the oiice-conquering but now defeated army for miles
to the rear of its first position. Such a victory snatched from the jaws of humbling
defeat took place on this occasion. The returning Saviour found his liisciples driven
before the hostile attack of his enemies, but his presence soon availed "to restore the
day," and before long transformed humiliatiog failure into joyous triumph. In the
Master's actual, ^ritual absence the cause of the Church may be brought very low
indeed, and a complete and crushing disaster may impend ; but let the Lord return, let
his presence and his power be felt, and from the very teeth of threatened calamity
there shall be secured a glorious victory. Let no heart despond so loiig as there is a
present Captain ; failure is never irretrievable when he is " on the field ; " under his
leadership even " death is swallowed up in victory."

II. 'I'hat human affection is meant to lead to spirituai, attachments. It
was his son's sickness that led this man to seek Jesus; but for that he would not have
sought and found him. It was his strong parental love that would not be denied, that
led him to urge his plea, that enabled him to overcome his fears and to gain that valu-
able victory. God employs many instrumentalities to lead his children into his king-
dom. We ought to be influenced by our sense of what is right and of what is wise in
the matter; but, if not won by these, let the consideration of the deep and tender interests
of those who are dear to us convince and determine us. For the sake of those children
of ours, whom we love so profoundly, and who have such a vital interest in Christian
truth, let us sit at the feet of Christ, and be subject to his sway.

III. That the very worst case will yield to the touch of thk Divinb
HAND. There could not well be a worse case of possession than this (see vers. 39, 42).
If the malignant forces could have tritmiphed over the benevolent Spirit, they would
have triumphed here. But everything was accomplished when " Jesus took him by the
hand " (Mark ix. 27). So is it with the worst spiritual maladies. They may seem so
bad as to be incurable ; it may be the general opinion that the case is utterly hopeless.
But there is a power in reserve against which the most virulent and the most violent
evils are not able to stand. For

** . . . many of whom aU men said,

' They've fallen, never more to stand,'

Have risen, though they seemed as dead

When Jesus took them by the hand."

The most stiioken souls will be healed, the most sorrowing ones comforted, the most
despondent filled with a new and blessed hope, the most fallen and sunk in sin lifted
up to purity and even to beauty and nobility of spirit and of life, when the Divine
voiee is heard bidding to be comforted, when the Divine hand is laid on the broken
heart or the defiled and guilty soul.
nr. That thb eabhbst soul nbbd not i<bt anythuio ^sut am baok. fbom



OH. IX. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 2C1

Ghbist and hib balvation. This father had much to overcome — the natural reluct-
ance ho would have to bring the poor demoniac into such publicity ; the failure of thi
disciples to effect a cure, well calculated as that was to discourage and dishearten him ,
his own im[)erfect faith (Mark ix. 22, 24). But he overcame all these, and gained hii
plea. Many may be the obstacles in the way of our salvation; they may be circum-
stantial, or they may be inward and spiritual ; but if there be a thoroughly earnest
spirit, they will not prevail over us ; we shall triumph over them, and go on our way
with our cause gained and our hearts gladdened. — C.

Vers. 46 — 48. — The Church and the child. The scene is well worthy the genius of
the artist : the disciples together, but still at variance with one another, with cold or
averted look ; the Master with a little child in his arms (Mark ix. 36), either turning a
reproachful glance on his disciples, or a look of tenderness upon that little one ; the child
himself with a trustful but wondering expression in his countenance. The scene is
suggestive of the thought — What is the child to the Church 1 (For homily on the con-
tention between the apostles, see ch. xxii. 24.) We may consider —

I. What the child was to the disciples. The answer to this question is — not
much. They were devout and worthy men ; but they were Jews, and they shared the
mental habits of their countrymen. To them the little child was of small account — one
to be kept carefully out of sight; one to be taken charge of by parent or teacher, but
superfluous in society ; one too many when a great man was present, when a great pro-
phet was speaking, or a great healer was healing. This we know from their conduct on
a memorable occasion (ch. xviii. 15).

II. What the child is to the Chuboh. The poor, our Lord said, we have
" always with us." So is it with the children. Whoever are absent, they are present ;
whoever fail, they abound. The child is in the midst of us, and we have to decide what
he shall be to us. Taught by our Lord's teaching, led by his example, imbued with
his Spirit, we have to take up a very different attitude from that of the disciples. The
Christian Church no longer regards the child as one that has to be carefully kept out
of the way lest he should be troublesome. It welcomes him cordially ; like its Master,
it takes him into the embrace of its affection and its care. 1. It regards the children
as the Church of the future. It remembers that " death and change are busy ever,"
that the fathers and mothers are passing on and awas-, and that others will soon be
needed to take their place. When a few more years have come, the place which knows
us now will know us no more ; who then, but the children about our feet, will bear the
flag we bear, will speak the truth we speak, will do the work we do? 2. It regards the
children as a present valuable heritage. For the little child (1) can be a recipient of
Divine truth, nnd not only can he be this, but his natural open-mindedness and trust-
fulness make him a peculiarly apt learner in Christ's great school ; (2) can be a true
follower of the Divine Master— to him also Jesus says, " Follow me," and not only can
he " rise and follow " him, but his disposition to trust and love and obey makes him
to be a close and a very acceptable follower of his Lord ; (3) can illustrate in his own
way the excellences of the Christian life, by the exhibition of those virtues and graces
which most become childhood and youth. The Church of Christ should find in the
little child its most interesting and its most valuable disciple. And this a great deal
the more because of — x . j j

III. What the child is to the Savioub himself. This is very much indeed.
For Christ knows, as we do not, all the possibilities of the little child— the height to
which he may rise, or the depth to which he may sink ; the good he may live to do, or
the evil he may live to work ; the blessetlness to which he may attain, or the shame
and woe which may be his end. He is more deeply interested in the young than we
are, and however earnest and eloquent our voice of invitation or of warning may be,
more earnest far is the voice of the Lord himself, as he says, " Come unto me, take my
yoke upon you, ... my yoke is easy, my burden is light." — C.

Vers. 49, 50. Exclusiveness and neutrality — the forbidden and the impossihle thing

We do well to take together this passage and that of ch. xi. 23. For one is the com-
plement of the other. " He that is not against us is for us ; " " He that is not with
me is against me ; and he that gathereth not with me soattereth." There is not tk«



262 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. ix. 1—62

■lightest inconsistency between these two declarations of our Lord. One states one
truth, and the other a different one. They teach successively —

L That we abb in danoeb of counting among oub offonenvb those whom
WE should reckon as allies. It did not seem to be a service of any particular
account that a man should use the name of Jesus to exorcise Hemons, even though he
may have had a measure of success in his attempts. But Christ said he was not to be
" forbidden " as an outsider, but rather hailed as a friend and as an ally. What, then,
would he not say now of those who go so far towards the fullest declaration of his truth
as many thousands do, but who remain outside the particular Cliurch with which we
may be connected ? Would he have us blame and brand these because they " follow
not with us " ? The spirit of persecution is cruel, foolish, and emphatically unchristian.
Bather let us rejoice that there are found so many who, while not feeling it right to
connect themselves with our organization, are yet loving the same Lord and serving
the same cause. These are not our enemies ; they are our allies.

II. That we cannot withhold oub earnest thought and delibebate ohoick
FBOM Cebist without being counted by him as his enemies. " He that is not with me
is against me," etc. There is no neutrality in the great campaign now being fought out
between sin and righteousness. In great European wars it is customary for generals
and correspondents from other countries, not involved in the strife, to attend the move-
ments and watch the operations of the armies ; they, of course, are strictly neutral.
But in this great spiritual campaign we cannot be mere spectators ; we must he soldiert
fighting on one side or on the other. For we are all deeply involved ; we are implicated
in what is past ; we are interested in the issue; we have great responsibilities resting on
us ; we have great things at stake. God is addressing himself to every one of us, and
it is not open to any of us to refuse to take up a decisive attitude in regard to the sub-
jects of his address. 1. He speaks to us of himself. He makes himself known to us as
our Creator, our Preserver, our generous Benefactor ; he makes his appeal to us as our
Divine Father, who earnestly desires our return to his home that he may bless us with
his parental love. Can we possibly remain unaffected by this ? Is not our very silence
a most grievous offence and injury ? Not to respond to him is to sin grievously against
him. 2. He comes to us in the Person of his Son Jesus Christ. And he offers himself
to us as the Et-deemer who at the greatest possible price has wrought out our redemp-
tion, as the Divine Friend in the shelter of whose love and power we may spend our
days, as the Source of our eternal life. Can we possibly take up a position toward him
in which we are neither one thing nor another — neither enemy nor subject? Can we do
other than either accept him or reject him ? 3. He summons us to his service, and to
the service of our kind. We are to be "living epistles," malsing known his truth,
revealing to men the goodness of God, the grace of Christ, tlie excellency of his service.
We are to bear witness unto him. Either our life is witnessing fur him and for his
truth, or our influence is thrown into the other scale. Those who know us are either
being attracted toward Christ through all they see and know about us, or they are
being repelled. We cannot be cyphers, try how we may. Our lives are tellins on one
side or on the other. Either we gather with Christ or we scatter abroad. We must
make our choice. — C.

Vers. 61 — 55. — Wisdom, duty, danger. Among the various difficulties in this
passage that have been the subject of exegetioal debate, we may clearly discern three
important lessons.

I. Oub wisdom in front of apparent evil. At this time our Lord had before
him the dark days which would bring his ministry to a close. The contemplation of
them had evidently gone down deep into his own mind, but he found none to share
the thought or to sympathize with him in the prospect. He asked his disciples to let
these things " sink down into their ears " (ver. 44), but they understood him not.
He was the sole possessor of the great secret of his coming sorrow, struggle, and death.
How did he face it ? With an immovable resoluteness of soul. "He steadfastly set his
fwe to go np to Jerusalem." What reason have we to be thankful for that holy and
noble tenacity of spirit! Could anything less strong than that have carried him,
unscathed, through all that followed? And if there had been any, even the slightest
failure, what would have been the consequences to our race ? When we have to face



Otncl— 62.J THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 26»

a future of pai/a, or of aeparation and attendant loneliness and single-handedness of
struggle, or of strong and sustained temptation, in what spirit shall we face that ? In
the temper of calm aud devout resoluteness; with a full and fixed determination to go
bravely and unfalteringly through, shrinking from no suffering, enduring the worst
that man can inflict, yielding nothing to the enemy of our soul. An unflinching reso-
luteness will do great things for us. 1. It will eave us from much mffering ; for
cowardice and apprehension do not simply add to human wretchedness ; they multiply
it. 2. It will save us from the chief peril and go far to secure us the victory. The
greatest of all perils before us ' is that of recreancy, unfaithfulness to our own convio-
tions. An unstable mind is only too likely to be guilty of it. A resolute spirit is
almost certain to escape it. 3. It will place us hy the side of our Divine Leader and
qf the noblest of his followers. We shall be treading in the footsteps of him who " stead-
fastly set his face," etc., and who went up to that city of martyrs and gloriously
triumphed there.

II. OuE DUTT IN THE PRESBNOK OF A PEOFESSBD PROPHET. "They did not receiv*
him;" "They went to another village." How much is contained, in these simple
words, of human folly and privation 1 These villagers were profoundly prejudiced against
Christ, and declined absolutely to see what he could do, to hear what he would say.
They would not "judge for themselves " on the evidence ready to be furnished. And
consequently they suffered a great privation. The great Healer and Teacher of man-
kind went another way ; their sick went unhealed, their souls went unenlightened,
while Divine tenderness aud truth found other hearts and homes. Often since then
has Christ gone, in the person of some one of his prophets or spokesmen, to the city, to
the village, to the home, to the individual heart, aud offered his truth, his grace, his
salvatiou. But deep-seated prejudice, or strong material interests, or keen love o(
pleasure, has barred the way. He has not been received. And as he does not force an
entrance anywhere, he has gone elsewhere ; he has passed by, and all the treasure of hit
truth has been unpossessed, all the blessedness of his salvation unknown. Of what
unimaginable good, of what highest heritage, does human folly deprive itself!

III. Odr danger of mistaking the lower fob the higher FEELiNft. The apostles,
James and John, gave vent to a burst of strong resentment, and proposed to have a
severe punishment inflicted. They supposed themselves to be actuated by an honour-
able and acceptable indignation. But Jesus " turned, and rebuked them ; " they were
entirely mistaken ; their feeling was not that of pure indignation, it was tainted by an
unholy irritation against men who would not receive them and their Master ; moreover,
the desire for immediate punishment was to give place, under Christian teaching, to
a determination to win to a better way. l\ot extinction but reformation, not the
infliction of the dtath which is due but the conferring of the life which is undeserved,
not rigorous exaction but patient pity, not the folded fist of law but the open and
extended hand of helpfulness, is the Christian thing. When we find ourselves giving
way to wrath and proposing punishment, we do well to ask ourselves whether we are
sure we know the " spirit we are ot," and whether there is not a " more excellent way "
for Christian feet to tread. — 0.

Ver. 61, — Decision and indecision. "Lord, I will follow thee; but," etc. Two
trains may leave the same platform and travel for a while along the same lines, and
they may look as if they would reach the s.ime terminus; but one of them diverges
slightly to the right and the other to the left, and then the further theygo the greater
is the distance that separates them. Two children born under the same roof, brought
up under the tame religious conditions, are baptized into the same taith, receive tlie
same doctrines, are affected by the same influences; — they should reach the same home.
But they do not. One makes a resolution to serve God outright, unconditional, without
reserve ; he says simply, deliberately, " I will follow thee ; " but the other makes a
resolution under reserve, with conditions attached — ^he says, "Lord, I will follow thee;
but," etc. The oue of these two goes on, goes up, in the diiection of piety, zeal,
devotedness, sacred joy, holy usefulness ; the other goes down in that of hesitation,
oscillation between wisdom and folly, and fin.itly of impenitence and spiritual failure.
We will look at —

L The man of ihoecisioh along thb link commoh to himself and the man of



264 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. m. 1— «2

BELioious EARNESTNESS. 1. Tliey both receive instruction in the common faith; they
learn ivnd admit the great fundamental truths of the gospel — the life, death, resurrec-
tion, teaching of Jesus Christ. 2. They are hoth impressed by the surpassing
excellence of Christ; for there is in him now, as there was when he lived among men,
that which constrains admiration, reverence, attraction. 3. They both feel the
desirableness of availing themselves of the blessings of ihe gospel of grace — of the
pardon, peace, joy, worth, hope, immortality, which it ofTers to the faithful. And when
Christ's voice is heard, as it is in many ways, each of these men is prepared to say,
" Never man spake, Lord, as thou speakest to me ; no one else will give me what thou
art offering ; evermore give me this living bread, this living water. Lord, I will follow
thee."

II. The man op indecision at the point op diveegenob. He says not, simply
and absolutely, " I will ; " he says, " I will follow thee ; but," etc. One word more, but
how much less in fact and in truth ? What is in that qualifying word ? 1. But 1
am young, and there is plenty of time. I am a long way off the " three score and ten
years ; " and all along the road of life there are paths leading into the kingdom ; let
me go on unburdened by such serious claims as these of thine. "I will," etc., but not
yet. 2. But 1 have a bodily as well as a spiritual nature, and I must satisfy its claims.
These hungerings and thiratings of the sense are very strong and imperious ; let me
drink of this cup, let me lay by those treasures first. 3. lam waiting/or some decisive
intimation from Heaven that my time has come. I do not wish to act precipitately
or presumptuously ; I am looking for the prompting of the Divine Spirit, the direction
of the Divine hand ; when the Master says distinctly, " Follow thou me," I will
arise at once. 4. I am in emharrassed circumstances, and am waiting until they clear
away. The claims of the business or the home are so urgent, so near, so practical, that
they consume my time, and I have none to spare for thee ; there are bonds I have
formed which I do not know how to break, but which must be broken if thy friendship
is to be made and kept. 5. But I am old and unable. I have heard thy voice in my
ear in earlier days; but I am old and spiritually blind ; old and deaf; old and insensi-
tive. I do not expect thee to come this way again ; I would follow thee if I felt uac«
more the touch of thy hand upon me.

III. The greatness and badness of his mistake. A grievous thing it ia for k
man to buoy himself up with such false imaginations, to build his house of hope on
such shifting sands, to rest the weight of his destiny on such a sapless, strengthless
reed. 1. Does death never lay his cold and hard hand on youth? and does not Christ
command our strength and our beauty as well as our feebleness and our imsightUness ?
2. Does Christ ask us to give up one rightful pleasure? and had we not better sacrifice
all torongful ones ? And has he not promised all we need if we do but take the one
true step into his kingdom (Matt. vi. 33) ? 3. No man is waiting for God ; but God is
waiting for many halting and hesitating human souls. Behold, he stands at the door
and knocks I 4. We are not more embarrassed than thousands have been, or more
than we shall continue to be. If it is hard to find time, then for a purpose so suprem*
as this time must be made ; if evil friendships are in the way, they must be made to
stand out of the way. The voice that speaks from heaven is commanding ; the case of
our eternal destiny is critical in the very last degree, 5. It is true that long disuse is
dangerously disabling, and spiritual capacity wanes with neglect ; but men are not too
deaf to hear the sovereign voice of Christ, not too blind to &[id their way to his cross,
his table, his kingdom. — C.

Vers. 61, 62. — The workman's qualification. What more natural, we are inclined
to say, than that, before setting out on an unknown future, a man should wish to say
farewell at home? How do we account for this strictness, this disallowance of our
Lord ? First, however, let us remark —

I. What oonscioussess of poweb and op ultimate bcccess the Saviour shows)
How eager we are to secure followers, how pleased and proud to add to our ranks I
Especially when a cause is yet young are we desirous of mining converts and counting
new disciples. At this time the cause of Christianity was very far from being an
as.sured success ; yet Jesus did not hurry to be successful, to crowd his Church. He
•aid to the scribe— noi an ordinary disciple — "Foxes have holes," etc. (Matt, yiii 19.



OH. a. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL AOCORDINa TO SI'. LUKE. 265

20; yer. 58). He risked the attacliment of another (ver. 60) ; and again of this man
(text). How was this? It was that he had such absolute confidence in the rectitude
of his cause, in the support of his Divine Father, anH therefore in the triumph of his
truth and grace. It is never well to hurry even good issues ; we should only work
with right instruments, content to wait for the result. " He that believeth will not
make haste." To the too-anxious workman there needs to come the remembrance oi
his Master's holy confidecce; it says to such a one, "Be still, and know that I am
God." We shall better understand our Lord's reply if we consider —

II. What superhuman knowlkdge of individual hearts the Saviour shows I He
did not commit himself to men ; " for he knew what was in, man." This is the key
which unlocks the difficulty in many instances. It is this which explains how it was
that he encouraged or accepted, how it was that he tested or declined, the services
of men. And it is this which explains the differences in his treatment of us now :
how it is that to one man he sends so many more trials and sufferings than to another ;
how it is that he withholds from one man so many bounties or privileges which he
gives to another. He knows both perfectly ; he knows their nature and their need,
and he treats them accordingly.

III. The fact that Christ requires special qualifications for sfeoial work.
There is a faith that " removes mountains " of difficulty ; but there is also a faith, much
more common, which will do good work, though it will not accomplish such great things.
Christ had work for the contemplative John which that man of speech and action,
Peter, could not have done ; work for the many-sided and devoted Paul which John
could not have done. To " follow Christ " as this scribe (of our text) proposed to do
was work which meant ujany and great things — the severance of old and strong ties,
the endurance ol privation, exposure to hatred and violence, readiness to look death in
the face, self-imniolatiun on the altar of a sacred cause. Jesus piobably knew that
this man had not the spiritual qualifications tor such a sacrificial post as this. Even
the common labourer must have concentration of mind; he must not have his hand on
the plough while his eye is off the field. And the workman in his field of holy service
must be a man of unflinching steadfastness, of unwavering resoluteness of soul. No
other would be fit for such work as he had on hand. Surely it is far kinder of the
Master to keep back, even by strong and apparently hard words, the unfit servant from
the sphere in which he would fail miserably, than to let him go on and reap all the
bitter fruits of failure ; and surely it is wiser far, on our part, to reckon well before-
hand, and see whether our mental and spiritual resources wUl carry us through a
proposed service and to retire if we find ourselves unequal to it, than to go blindly
forward and to have to come back with something else upon our brows than the crown
of honour and success. We ma.v also learn —

IV. What abb the present, constant requirements which Jesus Christ makes
of those who work for him. He is saying to us, " Follow me into the vineyard of holy
usefulness." It is in our hearts to say, " Lord, I will follow thee." What must we
have in order that he will readily engage us in his active service ? We must have
that spirit of self-surrender which will make us willing to give up to our Lord all that
he asks us to part with ; we must be whole-heai ted, single-eyed. We must be work-
men that have the hand on the plough and the eye on the field. We must be thorough
in all that we do for him, contributing all our strength and energy in his cause. And
there is every reason why we should be. 1. Our Master is worthy of the very best we
can bring to him. 2. The sinful, suffering world around us is crying for our pity and
our help. 3. It is well worth our while to do our utmost. In full-hearted service is
the present recompense of sacred joy as we warm to our work and spend ourselves in it,
while in the future there await us those " many cities," that enlarged sphere of influence,
which will reward the faithful followers of their Lord. — 0.

Vers. 1 17. The mission of the twelve. After the group of miracles, we have

our Lord next conferring the power of working miracles upon the twelve. This was
miraculous power in its liighest form. It is important to work well one's self; but it is
a still greater feat to get all about oni's self into working order too. Jesus was training
his disciples to be workers like liimself. Let us, ihen, cousiiler—

L The conditions of the mission of the twelve. (Vers. 1 — 6.) And ker* wa



266 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oH. n. 1— «2.

have to notice : 1. The power delegated was hading and exorcising power. That is to
lay, their miraculous power was to change the sick and the iusaue into able-hodied
members of society. The aim of our Lord's philanthropy and of theirs was to enable
men to become useful worhers. When men can help themselves, then are they in the
happiest of all conditions. This is infinitely better than spoon-feeding and pauperizing
peuple. 2. The disciples were not to use miracle to make themselves independent of the
hospitality of the people. Christ never used miracle to make life easier for himself; nor
did he allow his delegates to do so. It would seem to some a wiser arrangement to
make them independent of random hospitalities. But it was better for all parties that
hospitality should be looked for. Rabbis were hospitably entertained, and so should
these disciples be. They were also to accept of hospitality as it came, and not to be
choosers of the grand and pretentious houses which might be opened to them. There
may be as much magnanimity in accepting hospitality as in extendfng it.^ 3. In
case of rejection, they were simply to symbolize their separation by shaking off the
dust of their leet against them. This was the symbol of hostility and war ; but there
was no further outward act to be undertaken. The war was spiritual, and the judg-
ment of the rejectors must be left with God. Toleration was thus made consistent
with faithlulness to their convictions ; and was freed from all laxity. 4. Their career
of preaching and of accompanying philanthropy was continued throughout the towns
of Galilee. The gospel they brought to men was one of trust in the Saviour who had
come and of devotion to him. It was a gospel of work inspired by that faith which
operates through love. Hence it carried philanthropy with it, and this philanthropy
was of the most useful and stimulating character.

II. Hebod's fears and oubiositt. (Vers. 7 — 9.) The mission of the twelve had
proved sufficiently influential to attract the notice of Herod. It led him to consider
his sin and danger in murdering the Baptist. The miracles of which he heard,
however, were merciful, and not wrathful ; and so, though he was perplexed about the
Saviour, he was curious to see him. Most likely he thought he would get Jesus into
his power, as he had got John. But John's ideas about the kingdom and its coming
were essentially different from those of Jesus. Hence Herod is left in isolation ; hia
curiosity and desire to see Jesus are alike unsatisfied.

III. The eetikembnt into which jestts takes the disoiples after theib
CABEER OF SUCCESS. (Ver. 10.) The disciples, as we learn from the other Gospels,
returned with joy, highly elated with their success. It was on this account doubtless
that our Lord deemed retiremeut so needful for them. There is nothing so wholesome
for us when dangerously elated as solitude and prayer. In this way the true character
of success is appreciated, and all undue elation about it overcome.

rV. The inconveniences of populaeity. (Ver. 14.) The seasons of retirement
so salutary for public men are apt to be invaded, and more work forced upon them
than they would themselves desire. The disciples and Jesns had most likely secured
some fellowship with God before the popular invasion ; for our Lord anticipated both
friends and foes, and wrought out his beautiful plan in spite of interruption. So when
the people came crowding around him, he was able to receive them with unrufSed spirit,
and to give them the counsel and the healing they needed. It was the same policy
which the disciples had pursued by his directions which he here pursues. Miracle is
used to heal and render useful, but not to minister to self-indulgence or render life
easier to men. He made the multitude hopeful through his preaching, and healthy
through his miraculous power.

V. The feeding and dismissal of the pboplk. (Vers. 12 — 17.) This miiacle is
narrated by all the evangelists. The sending of the multitude away is urged by the
disciples. They have got the healing, and should expect no more. As for hospitality,
the five thousand should have entertained Jesus and the disoiples, rather than be enter-
tained by them. But our Lord would go beyond his previous limitations, and become
the Host instead of the Guest of men. For after all, he is really men's Host, and we all
sit at his board, though he condescends to be our Guest and to take of what we provide.
Hemce he shows by this miracle how all men really depend upon his bounty and are
fed from his hand. The multiplication of the five loaves and two fishes, that is, ol
vokei food, cannot be assigned tn any natural law, and could only have been mL'acuioiui
' Of. Bmerion'g ' JSssays,' vol. ii., No. v., on ' Gift*.'



0H.1X. 1— 62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKK. ^67



It was not quantitatively so great a miracle as the feeding of the Israelites with the
manna for forty years; yet it was a suBBoient miracle to show that the Sustainer of the
world was among them. Upon him they should depend, and, if tliey fed by faith on
him, they would always be strengthened. It was at the same time sufflcieutly mode-
rate in its size and duration to show that he was not goins; to keep lazy men in idle-
ness by spreadmg a gratuitous feast for them every day. They are dismissed by him
that very evening, that they might not be able to go through the selfish cerentony o£
making him a king. He did not want to be a king over idlers, over mea who would
like to eat without the trouble of working ; and so he defeated their worldly plans. His
lesson oi frugality also was most significant. He wanted no waste in his kingdom.
He would not prostitute miraculous power to minister either to idleness or to waste-
fulness. Very clear light is thus cast upon the economy of Jesus. He kept miracle
in its place. It ministered to usefulness ; it was not allowed to minister to idleness
or waste. It would be well if all learned the wholesome lesson which Christ thus
conveys. — R. M. E.

Vers. 18 — 36. — The Saviov/i's secret revelations. After the miracle of the loaves
Jesus resumes his season of devotion, and in the course of it he asks the disciples who
had just returned from their mission-tour what reports are being circulated about him.
They tell him that some say he is John Baptist, some Elias, some one of the prophets
risen again. This shows that they regarded his present life as prdirninary only. The
idea of his being the real Messiah, "the Christ of God," was not eutertained by any of
the outsiders at all. It is then he asks them what their idea is, when Peter answers
unhesitatingly, '"i'he Christ of God." And nu,. .ve must inquire —

I. The kbason fob this sbobbot about the Messiahship. (Vers. 18 — 22.)
Though the disciples believed in his Messiahship, they are directed not to make it
known. Now, we must remember how different the Jewish ideas of the Messiahship
were from the reality presented by Christ. Even such a noble-minded man as John
Baptist h«d doubted the propriety of the course Jesus took. How much more liable
to mistake would the common people be, if it had been blazed abroad that he was
Messiah I It was needful, therefore, to wait till the picture was nearer completion
before people were asked to look upon it. In fact, it was only his intimates who could
at such a stage realize his magnificence at aU.^ To give the people time to form a
proper opinion, to prevent them from rising into premature opposition, to allow them
no valid excuse if they rejected him at last, was the purpose of his secrecy and patience.
He saw clearly that he "must suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders and
chief priests and scribes, and be slain," but he would not provoke the crisis by publish-
ing his Messianic claims. His modesty and secrecy in this matter are in striking con-
trast to the manners and methods of the world.

II. Pkbsonai, salvation through self-sacrificb. (Vers. 23 — 27.) While pre-
dicting his death, he also predicts his resurrection. This is salvation through self-
Sacrifice. He immediately indicates that we are under the same law. The man alone
saves himself who dedicates himself even unto death to Jesus. There are two policies
pursued. 1. The selfish policy. People think they are so very valuable that they must
save themselves at every turn. Hence they give the strength of their time and atten-
tion to self-preservation. This is their first law of nature. In doing so, they think
that if they can only gain as much of the world and worldly things as possible, the
better. They think it wise to win the world. But now Jesus shows that such a
course only ends in utter loss of self. What does the self-centred, self-preserving soul
become? What is the fate of the grasping, worldly mind? Such a sovd shrivels up,
becomes a nonentity, a mere derelict or castaway on the sea of existence. Such a
life is " not worth living." 2. Notice the self-sacrificing policy. This is the policy
pursued by the soul which is devoted to Jesus as supreme. It is no trial to carry the
cross ; such a soul is ready to die any rlay for Jesus. He cannot be ashamed of Jesus,
•r of his words, but prizes him aud them as beyond all price. And what is such a soul's
experience ? He feels that he is self-possessed and the subject of a grand development
He really has gained himself. His powers of mind and of heart grow into luxuriance,
and he feels enriched in all the elements of being as he goes onward. Aud if perchance

• Of. Kahnis' ' Der Gang der Kirohe,' g. 23.



268 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [oh- ix. 1— Bi

he becomes a martyr for the faith and lays down, as these disciples did, his life foi
Jesus, he finds in an immortal future of further dedication all his best bein^ carried
forward. Death may cripple him in working powers here, but promotion awaits him
beyond the shadows, and be flnds that " he is himself again" after the death-experience
is over. Jesus thus jtresents the case in the proper light — self-sacrifice is real salvation
of self if our self-sacrifice is for the sake of Jesus.

III. 'I"hb pbivatb glimpse op oloby. (Vers. 28 — 36.) Eight days after the noble
confession of Christ by the disciples, Jesus takes Peter, James, and John up to a moun-
tain-top, that he might have another season of prayer. Though so busy, he never
became prayerless. A most useful lesson! And here we have to note: 1. That trans-
figuration came thr<iugh prayer. (Ver. 29.) There is notiiing changes people's appear-
ance so suddenly and su satisfactorily as being on the mountain-top of prayer. Jesui
in transfiguration-glory is but a type of his people who come radiant from the secret
places too. If there were more prayer on the part of God's people, there would he more
transfiguration and less scepticism about its efBcacy. 2. Transfigv/red ones a/re
attractive to the heavenly world. (Vers. 30, 31.) Moses and Elias from their abodes
of bliss are but indications of a perpetual interest in transfigured men. A new star ii
not more attractive to the astronomer than is a transfigured and radiant soul to the
inhabitants of heaven. And further, the decease to be accomplished at Jerusalem is
the supreme topic with the men from the heavenly city. For to this did the Law and
the prophets puiut, and in the al>odes of bliss other interests have not superseded this.
If the cherubim were represented as gazing rapturously upon the mercy-seat and its
baptism witli blood, so may we believe the whole society out of which Mll^es and Eliaa
came concentrnte their interest upon the salvation which comes through the dtath of
Jesus. 3. Transflgur' d ones attract attention from the inhabitants of earth. (Ver. 32.)
The disciples had fallen asleep, but the glory awoke them, as a candle will when
brought bsf re a sleeper. They saw the Master's glory, and Moses and Elias at his side,
and they regarded the Mi ssianic kingdom as having in this triple glory dawned. 4.
There is a natural desire to retain the raj)turous vision. (Ver. 33.) As soon as the
disciples became watchful witnesses, Muses and Elias appear to have moved away.
Their converse has now been inierrupted by unspiritual auditors, and so they prepare
for their depaiture. It is in these circumstances thnt Peter proposes to retain the
visitors by making " tabernacles " in the mount. With such a reinforcement, he
thinks, as Motes and Elias, iu radiancisAright, the victory of Messiah will be assured.
It is thu^ we dreiim. We read the history of the heroes who are gone, and we imagine
that if we weie only reinforced from the past we should be triumphant all along the
line. Their spirit and their history may will insjiiie us, but they cannot take our
burden. 5. The rapture may pass away in cloud, but Jesus abides with us for ever.
(Vers. 34 — 36.) There can be little doubt about this bright cloud being the Shechinah.'
It came to inuicate the true manifestation of God in the incarnate Son, and to with-
draw the possible competitors. The disciples feared as they entered the cloud. But
a gracious paternal voice assured them, " This is my beloved Son : hear him." And
when the cloud chared away, they saw no mau, but Jesus only. To the teaching of
Jesus, consequently, they would yield intenser attention. Besides, they kept it secret
what tiiey had seen. It was one of those glorious visions which could not wisely be
yet revealed. Let us enjoy Jesus, no matter how rapturous associations may fade
away. — R. M. E.

Vera. 37— 62. — TXe secret of successful worJs. We saw that the Transfiguration was
the result of prayer ; but it was not the end of the prayer. This was preparation for
further service. The glory is not the end, but only an incidental accompaniment, of
devoteduess of spirit. It is work for God, further service in his kingdom, which is the
aim of all njeans of gace. And now these verses bring out in different aspects the
secret of successful work. Let us notice

L Successful WORK MnsT BE PRAYERFUL. (Vers. 37 — 42.) We have here a case o(
failure on the part of ihe nine disciples, and of success on the part of the descended Christ.
The difference between the two cases whs that Christ had been prayiug on the moun-
tain while they had been prayerless in the valley. Prayerlessn. ss and powerlessnesi
' Cf. Arndt'a ' Lobon Jesu.' vierter theil, b. 112.



CH. IX. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINQ TO ST. LUKE. 26>

go hand-in- hand. Work done in a prayerless spirit cannot succeed as it ought to do
The transfigured ones alone can meet the emergencies of Christian work, and succeed
where others fail. Some cases are doubtless more difficult thaa olliurs, and some
demons make a harder fight of it than otliers ; but there are none of them who can
stand a prayerful Christian who faithfully follows Jesus in his line of attack.

II. SOCCESSFUL WORK MUST BE IS SPITE OF MALIGNANT OPPOSITION. (VerS. 43 —

45.) Our Lord, as the crowd are wondering at his success, tells the disciples plainly
that he is destined to be delivered into the hands of men. This is a sufTicient set-ofi
10 his success. Men will take and kill him, notwithstanding all his philanthropy and
exorcising power. This crucifixion of Jesus is but the type of the world's recognition
of the best work done by human hands. A long line of noble workers have followed
Jesus along the path of martyrdom. Let no worker, then, be surprised at the world's
malignity.

in. Successful wobk must be divested of base ambitions. (Vers. 46—48.)
Notwithstanding recent failure through want of prayer, the disciples are soon selfishly
contending about the first places, and who is to be greatest. It is wonderful bow
soon we forget our failures and betake ourselves to our ambitions. Now, one charac-
teristic of base ambition is pride about work. Certain lines of work are thought to be
beneath our dignity and worth. To correct this in the disciples, our Lord sets a little
child before them, and shows that such a dhild might be received in such a spirit as
would be recognized by Grod himself. The nursing of a Uttle child may be done for
the sake of Jesus Christ, and in such a case it is such a work as he will regard, and
the Father who sent him also. It is not a great work, therefore, that is needed, but
a greatjieart carried into the smallest work. We think of quantity ; Christ thinks
of quality. We will not " take our coats off," so to speak, unless it is some work
enunently creditable ; Christ could throw his great spirit into the fondling of a little
child, and do the little one everlasting good. Hence we must do any work clearly lud
to our hand with large-heartedness, and we shall find it successful in the best sense.
It is the meek ones who are ready to put their hand to anything who are great in the
kingdom of God.

IV. Successful wobe demands, besides, a tolebant spieit. (Vers. 49 — 66.)
John and James, after the Transfiguration privileges, seem to have got very excited and
ardent in Christ's service. Two cases in particular show how heated and hasty they
were. The first was a case of exorcism, through Christ's Name. Some Jew had
witnessed the exorcisms of Christ, and, abandoning the Jewish methods and traditions,
had tried the new plan, and proved the power of " the Name which is above every
name." But because he did not join the disciples, and so preserve their monopoly of
delegated power, he is forbidden by them to do such work. This was intolerance mis-
placed. The worker, though not uniting with the disciples, was promoting the Master's
glory by showing the power of his Name. He was an ally, though not a disciple of the
same set. Hence Jesus instructs them always to act on the tolerant principle that
" he that is not against us is for us." ^ The second case in which the sons of Zebedee
exhibited unholy zeal was in a certain Samaritan village, during Jesus' journeys to
Jerusalem. The last journey has begun (ver. 51), and nothing will keep him from
accomplishing it. The Samaritans would have liked him to linger with them, and
avoid his enemies and theirs. But he would not listen to their syren voice, but insisted
on going up to Jerusalem. Taking umbrage at this, one Samaritan village denied him
the usual hospitalities when bis forerunners sought it. Incensed at this, John and
James inquire if they should not call down fire from heaven to consume the inhospitable
Samaritans, as Elijah had done. Samaria was the scene of that fiery ministry. But
Ellijah's spirit would not suit the Saviour's times. Had the propiiet descended from
the Mount of Transfiguration, he would not have insisted on any such policy as this.
He had doubtless got less fiery in the peaceful abodes above 1 As a destructive force, he
had served his generation, but the disciples were to remember that saving men, not
destroying them, was to be their mission. From both these cases we learn that the
true evangelical spirit must reject all intolerance if it is to secure the highest success.

■ Of. Yinetton* La Tolerance d<> I'Svangile,' in ' Disoounior quelques Snjeti Beligienx,'
^225.



270



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. x. 1— 4^



V. SuCCEBSPtTL WORK BEQinBES PAITHFCIi DEALINO WITH INDIVIDUAL OASES.

(Vers. 67 — 62.) As Jesus was moving upwards to the capital, the people perceived
that a crisis was at hand. Hence the desire of some on insufficient grounds to cait in
their lot with him who is to be the conquering King. Here is a case in point. A man
comes and professes bis willingness to be a follower of Jesus wheresoever he goeth.
But Jesus undeceives him by indicating that he is not going to be sure of any lodging
in this world. Perhaps the man was hoping to reach a palace by fulluwing him ; but
Jesus shows that the birds and beasts have more certain lodgings than be. He thus laid
bare the man's danger, and prevented a rash decision. The second case is an invitation
to the individual by Jesus himself^ It is a case of bereavement, and Jesus seizes on it
to secure a disciple. He knew that the best thing this broken-heart could do would be
to become a herald of his kingdom. The bereaved one naturally enough asks leave to go
and bury his father, but Jesus assures him that there are sufficient dead hearts at home
to pay due respect to his father's remains, and the formalities of the funeral may only
change his promptitude into delay and neglect; and so he urges him to become a
preacher at once. A third case is that of one who is ready to follow Christ, but wishes
to bid those at home farewell. Our Lord tells him the danger of looking hack. The
farewells at home might have resulted in a farewell for ever to Jesus. It is thus Jesug
shows the Importance of dealing faithfully with individual souls. We have the secret
of lucceuful work laid clearly before us. — B. M. £!.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER X.



Veri. 1 — 24. — The mistum of the leventy.
The Lord^t toords to them of instruction and
direction and loaming.

Ver. 1. — After these things the Lord ap-
pointed other seventy also. That is to say,
after the events just related which had taken
place in the north of the Holy Land. " After
these things" formally began the solemn
marches in the direction of Jerusalem, which
ended, as we have stated, in the last Pass-
over. Boughly speaking, the seventy were
first sent out about the October of the last
year of the publio ministry. The manu-
scripts vary between seventy and seventy-
two. The preponderance of authority is in
favour of seventy. The Sanhedrin num-
bered seventy-one. The elders appointed
by Moses were seventy. There was a Jewish
saying also that the number of peoples on
earth were seventy or seventy-two. Four-
teen descended from Japhet, thirty from Ham,
twenty-six from Shem. In the ' Clementine
Eecognitions,' a writing of the first half of
the third century, the number of peoples is
given as seventy-two. The Fathers dwell on
the sacred symbolism of the desert-wander-
ings especially mentioned at Elim — " twelve
wells and seventy palm trees," alluding to
the two groups of Christ-sent missionaries,
the twelve apostles and the " seventy " here
mentioned. Two and two. As in the case
of his apostles sent forth previously, for
aiutual help and comfort. Before his face
into every oity and plaoe, whither he him-
self would come. By their means, as the
time left him was now so short, all the need-



fnl pieparaUont should be made before ha
personally visited the place. VUlages and
towns, too, where his presence was found, ai
in the case of the Samaritan village, un-
welcome, would be thus carefully noted, and
no time would needlessly be lost

Ver. 2. — Therefore said he unto theai, Tht
harvest truly is great, but the labourers are
few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the
harvest, that he would send forth labourers
into his harvest. This and many of the
sayings reported on this occasion had been
said apparently before, when the twelve had
been sent out on a similar mission. It
seems almost certain that, on several occa-
sions, the Lord repeated the same expressions
containing great truths, with scarcely any
variation in language. The harvest simile
was evidently a favourite one of the Master.
"The field is the world" he told them in
the parable of the sower, tt is reproduced
by St. John (Rev. xiv. 14—19).

Ver. 3.— Go your ways; behold, I send
you forth as lambs among wolves. These
first missionaries were to go forth unarmed
and unprovided. They were to be a type
of the strange, leemingly weak Christian
preachers of the nest two hundred years,
before whose simple words and unarmed
presence the great system of paganism was
to go down. One of the rare but beautiful
traditional sayings of the Ijord is referred
to the first occasion of his speaking the
words of this third verse. Peter is said
to have asked him, " But how, then, if the
wolves tear the lambs?" And the T,ord
said, "Let not the lambs fear the wolves,
when the lambs are onoc'deud;" and iLcu



OH. X. 1—42.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE.



271



added again tbo words of Matt. x. 28, " Fear
not them which kill the body," etc.

Ver. 4. — Carry neither purse, nor Borip,
nor Bhoes. They were to burden themselvea
with no nselesa baggage, nor were they to be
careful for ways and means of liyelihood.
Dean Plumptre very beautifully writes, ou
the similar words reported in Matt. x. 10,
" Experience (and, we may add, the spirit
that teaches by experience) has led the
Christian Church at large to look ou these
oonuuands as binding only during the
mission on which the twelve were actually
sent. It is impossible not to admire the
noble enthusiasm of poverty which showed
itself in the literal adoption of such rules by
tiie followers of Francis of Assisi, and, to
some extent, by those of Wickliffe ; but the
history of the mendicant orders and other
like fraternities forms part of that teaching
of history which has led men to feel that in
the long-run the beggar's life will bring the
beggar's vices. Yet here, as in the case of
tiie precepts of the sermon on the mount,
the spirit is binding still, though the letter
has passed away. The mission work of the
Church has ever prospered in proportion as
that spirit has pervaded it." And salute no
man by the way. This especially refers to
the length and tediousness of Eaatern saluta-
tions, often very unreal, and which would
consume much valuable time. Men were to
see that one absorbing interest possessed
them, ami tha*. to them was no time given
for the ordine -y useless amenities of life.

Ver. 5. — Peace be to this house. The
orij;inal of the words used in the Cliuroh of
England Office for the Visitation of the Sick.
Ver. 6. — The son of peace. An Aramaic
(Hebrew) expression. Although the lan-
guage here is pure and fairly cliisdiual Greek,
yet the presence of such expressions as this
shows that tl.e basis of this part of St.
Luke's narrative was probably an Aramaic
document.

Ver. 7. — ^And in the same house remain.
... Go not from house to house. Similar
instructions were given in the case of the
sending out the twelve as missionaries. One
house and family were to be selected as the
centre of their work (seu note on ch. ix. 4).
Eating and drinking such things as they
give : for the labourer is worthy of his hire.
Ver. 8. — Eat such things as are set before
yon. Most commentators liave simply seen
in this cliarge (1) an instruction to be con-
tent with whatever their host should set
before them, avoiding even the appearance
of caring or wishing for dainties ; (2) that
his serrants should look upon such main-
tenance in the light of a fairly earned wage,
rather than as an alms bestovved upon a
beggar. In other words, his servants, while
perfectly content with the must frugal lare,



at the same time should preserve their manly
independence. The bare austere sustenance,
the simple lodging, — these things they had
surely earned. But in addition to this
meaning, true and appropriate though it be,
there seems a quiet recommendation not to
be rigid in inquiring as to the cleanness or
nncleanness of the viands. One very able
commentator (Godet) remarks that of this
there is no question, for we are yet in a
Jewish world. But remembering only in
the last chapter a mission was specially sen!
to a Samaritan village, such an assertion can
scarcely be maintained. It seems probable
that extreme rigidness in this particular,
now that mission work on a broad scale had
commenced, here began to be relaxed ; and
that in this charge of Jesus we have, at
least, the basis of that yet broader command-
ment set out by St. Paul in 1 Cor. x. 27.

Ver. 9. — And heal the sick that are therein.
These were strangely gteat powers to confer
upon poor weak men — men, too, only in the
very dawn of faith — and their naive surprise
and joy (see ver. 17) show how little they
believed in their possession of such powers,
even after their Master's words announcing
to them the gift. But this prudigality of
miraculous energy was needfnl then. The
first beginning of so stupendous a work as
laying securely the ground stories of Chris-
tianity — what Benan, with all his enmity to
revealed religion, calls " I'even^ment capital
de I'histoire du raonde " — required this
special aid from another sphere.

Ver. 12. — But I say unto you, that it shall
be more tolerable in that day for Sodom,
than for that oity. Such a rejection im-
plied that they would have nothing to do
with tlie Master of these preachers, uie piti-
ful, loving, Galilffian Teacher. These were
days of tjossible mighty blessings, of pro-
portional terrible punishments. The woe
of Sodom, that weli-kuown swift destruc-
tion, most probably through sudden volcanic
agency, was tolerable in comparison witli
the far more awful doom reserved in the
immediate future, at the hands of Eome,
for these guilty cities of Palestine (see a
further note on this on ver. 15).

Ver. IS.^Woe unto thee, Chorazin ! woe
unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the mighty
works had been done in Tyre and Sidon,
which have been done in you, they had a
great while ago repented, sitting in sack-
cloth and ashes. In St. Matthew's Gospel
(xi. 20), where the woe of the fair lake-
cities is announced in similar language, the
" woe " is introduced with the words, " Then
began he to upbraid the cities wherein most
of his mighty works were done." Now, we
have no record of any miracles having been
worked at Chorazin, the first mentioned.
But these cities were in the immediate



272



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINt TO ST. LUKE. [oh. x. 1—42.



rioinlty of Oapemaam, where for a length-
ened period our Lord principally rrsided.
He was, no donbt, during the Galilsenn
miniBtry, constantly in one or other of those
bright, busy cities built on the shores of
the Lake of Genneearet. This bears out
8t John's statement (xx. 30) conceruing
the many unrecorded miracles of Christ, and
gives us some notion of the numerous events
in the life left without mention ; much mubt
have happened in Ghorazin to have called
forth this stem saying. Late research thinks
it probable that the site of Chorazin hns
been discovered near Capernaum ; the ruins,
however, at a little distance, look but a
mere rough heap of atones. A great theo-
logical truth is urged in tbii saying of the
I^ter. Men will be judged not only for
what they have done or foiled to do, but
their opportunities, their oircum8tan''es,
their chances in life, will be, before they
are judged, strictly taken into account.

Ver. 14. — Bat It shall he more tolerable
for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment, than
for yon. Tyre and Sidon, those represen-
tative examples of the luxury and vileness
of the great cities of the old pagan world,
will, when the dreadful awards are made,
be beaten with few stripes, while the cities
of the lake will be beaten with many, because
these last listened unrepentant to the sweet
and tender words, and gazed unmoved at
the mighty works of mercy, of the pitiful
Jesus of Nazareth. This is one of the
passages in the New Testament where the
doctrine of degrees in punishment is plainly
set forth, and in words which fell from the
lips of the Bedeemer himself I

Ver. 15. — And thou, Capernaum, which
art exalted to heaven, shaJt be thrust down
tohelL When the Lord came to speak of the
woe of Capernaum, his own chosen city, his
favourite earthly home, his words grew even
more solemn. The simile he uses, " hell,"
better rendered Hade*, is chosen to paint
the contrast between the glorious destiny
this beautiful lake-city might have chosen,
and the tremendous woe which she had
voluntarily brought on herself. The present
state of the Plain of Gennesaret is indeed so
desolate and miserable that we can scarcely
picture to ourselves that it was once a
populous, crowded district, the blue lake
covered with fishing and truding vessels,
its shores and the plain inland highly culti-
vated, a very garden in that part of Asia.
Rich towns and thriving villages in that
favoured neighbourhood are discribed by
contemporary writers iu such glowing terms
that we, who are ipectators of the dreary
and melancholy shores of the frennoeiret
lake, are puzzled as we read, and hIiuuIiI
suspect an exaggeration, only nu pxafij^e-
ration would have been puriJoaeKsa (see



Joseph ns, ' Bell. Jud.,' iii. 3. 2). Some thirty
years after the woe had been uttered, in the
tiTr ble wnrg in which Rome avenged herself
on the Jewish hatreil and scorn, the garden
of Gennesaret was changed into a ruin-
covered snlitude. Josephiis, who had been
dwelling on tlie loveliness of the place,
des ribes the stute of the shore strewn with
wrecks and putrefying bodies, " insomuch
tha the misery was not only an object of
commiseration to the Jews, but even to
the e that hated them and had been the
autnors of that misery " (' Bell. Jud.,' iii.
10. 8; and see Dr. Farrar's ' Life of Christ,'
ii. 101)

Ver. 17. — And the seventy returned again
with joy, saying. Lord, even the devils are
subj ot unto ns through thy Name. How
wav ring and hesitating the faith of the
cho n followers of Jesus was, even at this
late period of his public ministry, is clear
from this frank ronfebsion of surprise at
the" powers. They were contrasting the
present with what had lately happened at the
foot of the Mount of Transfiguration, where
the disciples were utterly unable to heal the
possessed boy. What a contrast do these true
writers of the gospel story paint between
themselves and their Master I They never
seem to tire in their self-depreciatory de-
scriptions. They describe with the same
canful, truthful pen their slowuess to
understand what afterwards became so clear
to tliem— their mutual jealousies, their cove-
tous hopes of a brilliant future, their shrink-
ing from pain and suffering, their utter
failure when they try to imitate their
Master ; and now we find them marvelling
at their own — to them— unexpected success
in their imitation of him.

Vei. 18. — And he said nnto them, I beheld
Satan as lightning fall from heaven. T^e
Lord's words here were proplietio rather
than descriptive of what had taken, or was
then taking place. The seventy were telling
him their feelings of joy at finding that his
Name in tlieir mouths enabled them to cast
out evil spirits from the possessed. Their
Master replied in an exalted and exultant
strain — strano;e and rare sounds on the lips
of the Man of sorrows — telling them how he
had been looking — not on a few spirits of
evil driven out of unhappy men, bnt on the
king and chief of all evil falling from his sad
eminence and throne of power like a flash
of lightning. Jesus Christ saw, in the first
success of these poor servants of his, an
earnest of that wonderful anil mighty victory
which his followers, simply armed with the
power of his Name, would shortly win over
paganism, lie saw, too, in the dim far
future, many a contest with and Tiotory
over evil in its many forms. He looked on,
we may well believe, to the final defeat



OH. X. 1—42.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDI^ . jO ST. LUKE.



278



vUch at lan^h hii leiraiiti, when they
■honid have leaped the tme use and the
lesietless povet'of that glorions Xame of
hin, shonld win OTer the xestless enemy of
the souls of men.

Ver. 19. — Behold, I give unto you power
to tread on serpents and soorpions, and oyer
iM the power of the enemy. The older
authorities read here, "I have given." The
only recorded instance of a literal fulfilment
of this promise was in the oase of Paul at
Melita, after the shipwreck (Acts xsiv. 3 — 5).
A similar promise was made dnring the
" forty days^ (Mark xvi. 17, 18). It seems,
however, best, in the oase of this peculiar
promise, to interpret the Lord's words as
referring to spiritual povrers pf evil, taking
the seriient and scorpion as symbols of these.
It should be remembered that the subjeot of
eonversation between the Master and his
servants was the conflict with and victory
over these awful powers restlessly hostile to
the human race (see Ps. xci. 13).

Ver. 20.— But rather rejoiee, beoanseyour
names are written in heaven. " After all,"
weat on the wise and loving Master, " though
yon have made the glad discovery of the
power yon possess, if, as my servants, yon
nse aright my Name, after all, your real
reason for joy is, not the possession of a,
new, mighty power, but the fact of yoni
name having f>een written in the book of
life as one of my servants commissioned to
do my work." Many commentators here
cautiously point out that even this legitimate

toy should be tempered with fear and trem-
iling, for even this true title to honour might
be blotted out of that golden book of heaven
(see Exod. zxxii. 33 ; Jer. xvii. 18 : Ps. Ixix.
28; Rev. xxii. 19). In (Audeep legitimate
joy men and women of all calliogB, who
try to follow the Master, in every age, may
•hare.

Ver. 21. — In that honr Jesns rejoiced in
spirit More thun "rejoiced;" the Greek
word rather signifies "exulted." Very
rarely in the holy story of the life of lives
is a faint given us of any gleam of gladness
or of joy irradiating the spirit of the Man
of sorrows. The exultation of the Blessed
here was based upon his conviction that this
first success of his own was but the eom-
metieemenl of a long and weary, but yet, in
the end, of a triumphant campaign against
the spirits of sin and evil. What the*e, in
their mortal weakness by the aid of their
poor imperfect faith in hi* Name, had been
•ble to accomplish, was an eamesi^ a pledge,
of the mighty work which his followers
would, in the power of the same Name, be
enabled to effect in the coming ages. In
that solemn hour did Messiah see, in the far
future, of " the travail of his soul," and was
satisfied. The absence of all sign of joy in

LUKS.



the life of onr Lord is well brought out in
that touching legend which we find in the
spurious letter of P. Lentulus to the senate,
that he wept often, but that no one bad ever
seen him smile. That then hast hid thesa
things from the wise and prndent, and hast
revealed them unto babes. Looking upon
his servants after their return from their
successful mission, • group made up cer-
tainly for the most part of poor nntntored
men — fishers, artisans, aod the like, children
of the people, without rank or position —
Jesus thanks the Father that, in the persons
of tiie men chosen to be the instruments of
his work, he has looked away from all the
ordinary machinery of human influence.
As he gazes upon the band of successful
missionaries, Jesns thanks the Father that
henceforth his servants, if they would be
successful, must owe the powers which gave
them success entirely to his training, aod
not to the world's. Sven so, Father; for so
it seemed good in thy sight. This is " the
only record, outside St. John's Oospel, of
a prayer like that which we find in John
xvii. For the most part, we may believe,
those prayers were offered apart, on the
lonely hillside, in the darkness of night;
or, it may be, the disciples shrank in their
reverence, or perhaps in the consciousness
of their want of capacity, from attempting
to record what was so unspeakably sacreol
But it is noteworthy that in this excep-
tional instance we find, both in the prayer
and the teaching that follows it in St.
Matthew and St. Luke, turns of thought
and phrase almost absolutely identical with
what is most characteristic of St. John. It
is as though this isolated fragment of >
higher teaching had been preserved by
them as a witness that there was a region
open which they scarcely dared to enter,
but into which men were to be led after-
wards by the beloved disciple, to whom the
Spirit gave power to recall what had been
above the reach of the other reporters of his
Master's teaching" (Dean Plumptre).

Ver. 22. — ^AIl things are delivered to me
of my Father. These words, spoken late
in the pnblio ministry, evidently refer to
the Almighty power possessed and fre-
quently teercised by the incarnate Son of
God. During the days of his humiliation,
Jesns Christ exercised the power of Creator,
Lord of the elements, Lord of the secrete
of health and disease, Lord of life and
death. Dean Mansel, comparing this
statement, recorded both by 8S. Matthew
and Lnke, with the language of St John,
remarks " that there is no substantial dif-
ference between the different evangelisfa in
their views of oar Lord's Person and natnre,
and tliat the Gospel of St John, far from
being the representative of a later tlieology,

T



274



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. x. 1—42..



does but mora MIy expound what 1* im-
plicitly contained in the earliest of the
Gospels." St. Matthew (xi. 28—30) here
gives us that sublime invitation of the
Master's to the weary and heavy-laden. In
the consciousness ot' his possession of all
power, Jesus, with infinite compassion,
offers to the great army of sufferers that
rest which he alone can give.

Vers. 23, 24. — And he turned him unto his
disciples, and said privately, Blessed are
the eyes which see the things that ye see ;
for I tell you, that many prophets and kings
have desired to see those things which ye
see. Alluding, especially, to such prophets
and their words as Balaam (in Numb,
xxiv. 17) and Jacob (in Gen. xlix. 18).
Keble has a quaint verse here, striMng, as
is usual with him, the central truth —

" Save that each little voice in turn
Some glorious truth proclaims ;
Wliat mge> would have died to learn.
Now taught by cottage dames."

Then last words, the evangelist expressly
says, were spoken privately. In fact, such
a statement could only have been addressed
to the inner circle — to those men (not ex-
clusively the twelve) who had been much
under the immediate influence of the Lord's
teaching about himself. Gradually their
sense as to who and what he was was
becoming more acute. Glimpses of his
Divinity ever and anon flashed before their
eyes. But, to the last, their faith was very
weak and wavering. Such words as these,
after what had gone before, must have sunk
deep into many of the listeners' hearts.

Vers. 25 — 37. — The question of the lawyer.
The Lord answers with the paraiile of the
good Samaritan.

Ver. 25. — And, behold, a certain lawyer.
It seems (as has already been noticed)
probable that in St. Luke's general account
of our Lord's teaching during the six months
which immediately preceded the last Pass-
over, certain events which took place at a
short visit which Jesus paid to Jerusalem
at the Feast of the Dedication are noticed.
This question of the lawyer was probably
asked on the occasion of this visit, and the
little episode connected with the! Bethany
family of Lazarus took place at the same
period. The " lawyer " is sometimes termed
" scribe." There is little difference between
these appellations. They were professional
teachers and expounders of the Mosaic Law
and of the vast complement of traditioual
sayings which had gathered round it As
the whole life of the people at this period
was ruled and guided by the Law, written
and traditional, this profession of scribe and
lawyer was an important and influential
a**. Stood up. The Master was evidently-



teaching In • house or a oonrtyard of a
house. Many were sitting round him. To
attract his attention, this fawyer stood up
before putting liis question to Jesus. This
scene, as we have said, took place most
likely in or near Jerusalem, not improbably,
as the Bethany episode follows, in that
suburb of the city, and perhaps in the house
of Lazarus. And tempted him; that is to
say, tested him and his skill in answering
questions out of that Law which then was
the rule and guide of daily life in Israel.
It is not nnlikely that the lawyer hoped to
convict the broad and generous Babbi of
some unorthodox statement which would
injure his reputation as a Teacher. It was
a hard and comprehensive question, this
query how eternal life was to be won,
and possibly one carefully prepared by the
enemies of Jesus,

Ver. 26. — He said unto him, What <•
written in the Latr? The Lord replied,
perhaps pointing to one of the phylac-
teries which the lawyer wore on his fore-
head and wrist. These phylacteries were
little leather boxes (the dimensions of these
varied from the size of an ordinary hazel-
nut, to that of a large walnut, and even in
gome cases much larger). In these leather
boxes were little parchment rolls containing
certain texts from the Pentateuch. Certainly
the flrst of the two gieat rules, that con-
cerning Ood, was one of these texts (Deut.
Ti. 5); possibly, but not certainly, the
second oonceming the neighbour formed
another text

Ver. 28. — This do, and thon shalt live.
The learned Jew was evidently confounded
at the Galileean Babbi's first answer re-
ferring him to the saoied Mosaic Law. His
perplexity is increased by the Lord's quiet
repartee when he bad rehearsed the two
duties, to his God and his neighbour, " This
do, and thou shalt live." It seems as though
the clever, unfriendly critic of Jesus of
Nazareth now forgot the hostile purpose
with which he stood up to question, and,
really conscience-stricken, willing to justify
himself, in real good faith put the query
which called out the famous parable.

Ver. 29. — And who is my neighlonrt
The self-righteous, but probably rigidly
oonsoientious, Jewish scholar, looking into
the clear, truthful eyes of the Galilraan
Master he had been taught to bate as the
enemy of his own narrow, liglitless creed,
was struck, perhaps for the first time, with
the moral beauty of the words of his own
Law. Of the flrst part, hit duty iowardt
Ood, as far as his poor distorted mind could
grasp the idea, he was at ease in his con-
science. The tithe, down to the anise and
cummin, had been scrupulously paid ; bis
fasts had been rigidly observed, his feasts



CH. X. 1-42.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



37.5



carefully kept, his prayer-formulas never
neglected. Yes; as regards Ood, the
Pharisee-lawyer's conscience was at easel
But his neighbour? He thought of his
conduct towards that simple, truthful-look-
ing Galileean Rabbi, Jesus, that very day;
trying to trip him up in his words, longing
to do him injury — injury to that worn-look-
ing, loving Man who had never done him
any harm, and who, report said, was only
hving to do others good. Was /i«, perchance,
his neighbour? So, vexed and uneasy —
but it seems in perfect honesty now, and
in good faith — he asks this further question,
" Master, tell me, who do you teach should
be included in the term ' neighbour ' ? "

Ver. 80. — And Jesus answering said. For
reply the Master told him and tlie listening
by-standen the parable-story we know so
well as the "good Samaritan" — the pa-
nble, which has been " the consolation of the
wanderer and the sufferer, of the outcast
and the heretic, iu every age and country "
(Stanley). The story was one of tbose
parables especially loved by Luke (and
Paul), in which instruction is conveyed, not
by types, but by example. It was very
probably a simple recital of a fact which
had happened, and at some period in the
Lord's life had come under his own observa-
tion. The local scenery, the oharacters of
the story, would all lead to the supposition
that the parable was spoken in or near
Jerusalem. A certain man went down from
Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves,
which stripped him of his raiment, and
wounded him, and departed, leaving him
half dead. We are not told who the traveller
was, Jew or Gentile ; not a word about his
rank, descent, or religion ; simply that he was
a man, a human being. It seems, however,
from the whole tone of the story, most
probable that the wounded traveller was
% Jew. The way he was travelling was the
road leading down from Jerusalem to Jacicho,
a distance of twenty-one miles — not the only
way, but the most direct. It was a rugged,
rocky pass, well adapted for the purposes
of thieves and desperadoes, and was known,
owing to the many dark deeds of which it
had been the scene, as " The Way of Blood."
The Lord's words tell the story. The
traveller, likely enough a Jew pedlar, had
fallen among thieves, who had robbed him,
and then had left their victim — dying or
dead, what cared they ? — lying in the pass.

Ver. 31.— There «une down a certain
priest that way : and when he saw him, he
passed by on the other side. Both the priest
and Levite were frequent travellers along
this road between the capital and Jericlio.
Jericho was especially a city of priests, and
when the allotted service or residence time
•t the tempi* was over, these would return



naturally to their own homes. It has been
remarked that the grave censure which
this story levels at the everyday want
of charity on the part of priests and
Lovites, fills up what would otherwise have
been a blank in the Master's many-sided
teaching. Nowhere else in the gospel
narrative do wo find our Lord taking up
the attitude of censor of the priestly and
Levitical orders. We have little difficulty
iu discovering reasons for this apparently
strange reticence. They were still the
official guardians and ministers of his
Father's house. In his public teaching, as
a rule, he would refrain from touching these
or their hollow, pretentious lives. Once,
and onoe only, in this one parable did he
dwell — ^but even here with no severe denun-
ciations, as in the case of scribes and
Pharisees — on the shortcomings of the
priestly caste. The bitter woe was fast
coming on these degenerate children of
Aaron. In less than half a century, that
house, the glory and the joy of Israel, would
be utterly destroyed, not to be raised again.
No woe that the Ohrist could pronounce
could be as crushing in its pitiless con-
demnation. TAe very reason for the exiitenet
of priett and Levite as priett and Levitt
would exist no longer. The selfish life of
the doomed order, in which holiuess seemed
effi;otually to have been divorced ftom
charity, is portrayed in the lifelike picture
of the parable of the good Samaritan.

Ver. 32. — And likewise a Levite, when he
was at the place, came and looked on him,
and passed by on the other side. They both,
priest and Levite, shrank from the trouble
and expense of meddling with the poor
victim of the robbers; perhaps a cowardly
fear of being identified with the robbers was
mixed with these feelings. The whole of
their conduct was inhuman, but not un-
natural ; alas I how faithfully is it copied by
multitudes of men and women professing
Christianity now! The Levite's conduct
was better and worse than his ofilcial su-
perior's — better, in that he did feel a little
pity, and stopped to look, no doubt eompas-
■ionately, on the sufferer ; and worse, because
he Belfl:.hly strangled the noble impulse in
its birth, and passed on to his own place
without so much as throwing a cloth over
the poor maimed body to shelter it from the
scorcliing sun, or the cold night dew.

Ver. 33. — But a certain Samaritan, as he
journeyed, came where he was: and when
he saw him, he had compassion on him. Now,
for the sake of strong contrast, Jesus paints
on his canvas the figure of one who, as a
Samaritan, was as far removed as possible
from being a neighbour to the sufferer (who,
most probably, was a Jew) in the sense in
which the austere Jewish lawyer would of



276



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. x, 1—4 a



bimielf understand the term " neighbour."
The Samaritan, hated of the Jews, and most
probably, in common with the rest of his
nation, hating them — he, in his turn, was
journeying along the ill omened "Way of
Bl(K)d ; " he too sees, like the priest, the form
of the man, wounded perhaps to death, lying
by the way, and, like the Levite, draws near
to look on the helpless sufferer; but, unlik'e
priest and Levite, stays by the wounJed
man, and, regardless of peril, trouble, or ex-
pense, does his best to help the helpless.

Vers. 34, 35. — ^And went to him, and bound
up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and
set him on his own beast, and brought him
to an inn, and took oare of him. And on the
marrow when he departed, he took out two
penoe, and gave them to the host, and said
unto him. Take care of him ; and whatsoever
then spendest more, when I come again, I
will repay thee. AH these little tender
details of the Samaritan's pitiful love are
sketched in by a master-hand. There is
flrst a noble, generous impulse, at once crys-
tallized into a kindly brotherly act. Not
satisfied with merely carrying out the first
impulse, the Samaritan puts himself to in-
convenience, perhaps to peril, and, after
dressing the wounds, takes tlie wounded one
along with him, provides lodging for him,
and even takes care of the sick and friend-
less man's future. The wounded man was
no rich and powerful merchant or noble —
that is clear from the necessity of the little
provision which the Samaritan made for
him at the inn when he weut on his journey ;
probably just an itinerant Jew pedlar.
There were many of these always travelling
about the East, we know. The piled-up
acts of kindness were all clearly done to a
poor stranger, without hope of recompense or
reward. The life of that kindly man was
evidently one which finds its high but secret
guerdon in the blessedness of its own deeds.
The Master liad been called by his bitter
foes, in their blind rage, a " Samaritan."
Was he in any way picturing himsalf ? To
an inn. The Greek word is not the same
as the " inn " of ch. ii. 7. It reminds us
that, besides the open khan or caravanserai
S|ioken of at Bethlehem, and which was
crowded with travellers, in Palestine at this
pnriod was to be found the Greek type of
inn,"where a host or landlord entertained the
guests. The khan was simply a group of
empty buildings kept up for the use of
travellers, who provided furniture and food
for themselves. Throughout the Levant,
Greek customs were gradually being intro-
duced.

Vers. 36, 37. — Which now of these three,
thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him that
fell among the thieves 1 And he said, He that
showed meny on him. The deep pathos of



the little story, the meaning of which tha
trained-scholar mind of the lawyer at once
grasped, went right home to the heart. The
Jewish scribe, in spite of prejudice and
jealousy, was too noble not to confess that
the GiililBBan Master's estimateof aneighbour
was the true one, and the estimate of the
Jerusalem schools the wrong one ; so at once
he replies, " He that showed meroy on him."
Even then, in that hour of the noblest con-
fession his lips had ever made, the lawyer
trained in those strange and mistaken
schools, the outcome of which is the Talmud,
could not force himself to name the hated
Samaritan name, but paraphrases it in this
form. The scene closes with the Lord's
charge, " Then imitate that act." Go, and
do thon likewise. The parable thus an-
swers the question — Who is my neighbour?
Any one, it replies, who needs help, and
whom I have power and opportunity tn help,
no matter what his rank, race, or religion
may be. Neighbourhood is miide coexten-
sive with humanity ; any human being is my
neighbour who needs aid, or to whom I can
render aid. But it answers the other and
the still larger and deeper question with
which the scene which called the parable
out began. " Master," asked the lawyer
(ver. 25), "what shall I do to inherit
eternal liife ? " Or in other words, " What is
the virtue which saves ? " The Scriptures
teach that without holiness no one shall see
the Lord, that is, shall inherit eternal life ;
and in this parable two kinds of hoUness are
set before us — the one spurious, the other
genuine. Tlie spurious holiness is that of the
priest and Levite, two officially holy per-
sons ; — spurious holiness is sanctity divorced
from charity. In the person of the Samari-
tan tlie nature of true sanctity is exhibited ;
— we are taught that the way to please God,
the way to genuine holiness, is the practice
of charity. Another and a very different
exposition of this great and loving parable
treats it as a Divine allegory. It commends
itself to the present generation less than
the plain matter-of-fact exegesis adopted in
the foregoing notes. In the allegory, the
wounded traveller repr^seus mankbid at
large, stripped by the devil and his angels;
he is left by them grievously wounded, yet
not dead outright. Priest and Levite were
alike powerless to help. " Many passed us
by," once wrote a devout mediaeval writer,
" and there was none to save." Moses and
his Law, Aaron and liis sacriticea, patriarch,
prophet, and priest, — these were powerless.
Only the true Saniarilan (Christ), behold-
ing, was moved with compassion and poured
oil into the wounds. Among the ancients,
Chrysostom and Clement of Alexandria and
Augustine might be cited as guod examplen
of these allegorical expositors. Anon;



OH. X. 1—42.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. LUKE.



27'}



mediteval Churohraen, Bernard and his
deTout school. Although this method of
exposition has not been adopted here, still
fln exegesis which has onmmeMded itnelf so
heartily to leirned and devout Chuiehmin
in all the Christian a2;e8 deserves at least a
more respectful mention than the scornful
allusion or the contemptuous silence with
which it is nowadays too ofttn dismissed.
Godet, for iustance, describes this allegorical
interpretation adopted by the Fathers «8
rivalling that of the Gnostios.

Vers. 38—42. — The tieter$ of Bethany.
The following points are noticeable. A
close intimacy evidently existed between the
brother and his two sisters and Jesus. They
evidently were prominent friends of Ihe
Master, and during the years of the public
ministry were on many occasions a.-sociated
with Jesus of Nazareth, and yet a singular
reticence evidently existed on the part of the
writers of the first three Gospels in respect
of the brother and sisters. His name is
never mentioned by them. Here, for in-
stance, Bethany is simply alluiled to as "a
certain village."

There was some reason, no doubt, why the
three synoptical evangelists exercised this
reticence. We have before explained that
these Gospels more or less represent the
" texts," so to speak, upon which the first
preachers of the religion of Jesus based their
sermons and instructions.

The long recital of John xi. gives m
the due. For the disciples of Jesus pub-
licly to call attention in their sermons and
adiesses to Lazarus, on whom the Master's
greatest miracle had beeu worked, would
have no doubt called down a ceaseless, rest-
less hostility on the Bethany household ; for
It must be remembered that for years after
the Eeaurrection the deadly enemies of Jesus
and his followers were supreme in Jerusalem
and the neighbourhood.

There were reasons, no doubt, now nn-
known to us, which rendered it important to
the welfare of the early Ohnreh that the
Bethany family should remain undisturbed
and in comparative privacy. The peculiar
and unique position of Lazarus. During
those four days what had he seen and heard f
Much curiosity, no doubt, existed to question
the risen one : what fierce hostility, what
morbid useless speculation, might not have
been easily aioiisedr



St. John's Gospel was not written for 'ong
years after the event. It probably repre-
sents no public preaching, rather a private
and esoteric teaching. The homo of St.
John, too, for years prior to putting forth
his (iospel, was far distant from Jerusalem.
Probably Jerusalem had ceased to exist as a
city and the Jews as a nation well-nigh a
quarter of a century before St. John's writ-
ing was given to the Church. There were
no reasons then for any silence. Jerusalem
and Bethany were a heap of ruins. Lazarus
and his sisters and well-nigh all their friends
had probably then been long in the presence
of the loved or hated Master.

Yer. 38.— Now it oame to pass, as they
went, that he entered into a certain village.
The scene here related took place, no doubt,
at Bethany, and, most probably, during that
short visit to Jerusalem, at the Feaat of
Dedication, in the month of that December
which preceded the Passover " of the Oraci-
fixion." This visit to Jerusalem, as has
been suggested above, was made in the
course of that solemn progress the account
of which fills np the long section of St.
Luke's Gospel, beginning at oh. ix. 51.
The characters of the sisters here mentioned
exactly correspond, as do their names, with
the well-known Bethany family of that
Lazarus for whom the great miracle, related
at length by St. John, was worked. There
are several mentions of this family in the
synoptical G<)spels, besides the long and
important notice in St. John. A certain
woman named Hartha. The name is rather
Aramaic than pure Hebrew. It is equiva-
lent to the Greek Kyria, and signifies "lady."
It has been suggested that the Second
Epistle of St. John was addressed to this
Martha. It was written, we know, to the
elect kyria, or " lady " (2 John 1). Various
identifications, more or less probable, have
been attempted in the persons of the Bethany
family. Martha has been supposed to be
identical with the wife of Simon the leper
(Matt. xxvi. 6; Mark xiv. 3). One hypo-
thesis identifies Lazams with the " young
ruler " whom Jesus loved (see Dean Plump-
tre, in Bishop EUioott's Commentary) ;
another, with the saintly Eabbi Eliezer (or
Lazarus) of the Talmud. These are, how-
ever, little more than ingenious, though
perhaps not quite baseless, fancies.

Ver. 40. — Came to him. Dr. Farrar very
happily seizes the tone and temper of
Martha. He renders the Greek words here,
" but suddenly coming up." We see in thii
Inimitable touch the little petulant outbunt
of jealonay in the loving, bnay matron, ai



278



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKB. {ch. x.1— 42



ehe hnrried In with the words, "Why is
Mary sitting there doing nothing?" Bid
her therefore that she help me. "We
almost seem to hear the umlertnne of ' It
is no use for me to tell her.' Doubtless, had
Bhe been lees * fretted,' she would have Mt
that to leave her (Martha) alone and with-
draw into the background while this eager
hospitality wan going on, was the kindest and
most unselfish thing which Mary could do."

Ver. 41. — And Jesus answered and said
unto her, Martha, Uartha. Tliere are
several notable instances of this repetition
of the name by the Master in the New
Testament story, and in each case ap-
parently in pitying love. So " Simon,
Simun," in ch. xsii. 31, and " Saul, Saul,"
in Acts ix. i.

Ver. 42. — But one thing is needful. Jesus
had been saying to this kindly but over-
fussy friend, "Are you not too anxious
about these household cans of yours?"
and then he adds, " See, only one thing is
really needful." Now, what is the exact
meaning of these last words? Some ex-
positors have taken the expression to mean
"a single dish is sufficient" for my enter-
tainment ; BO much careful, anxions thought
is thrown away. A curious variation in the
leading occurs here in some, though not
in all the oldest, authorities. It seems as
though some of the early copyists of the
text of the Gospel were wishful to make
the words, which they possibly understood
as a lesson of the Master's on simplicity of
food, clearer and more emphatic. This other



Ta»ding is, " There is need of few things,
or of one only." In other words, "Few
things are enough for me and my friends
to sit down to, or even one dish only." The
teaching contained in ver. 7 gives s little
colour to this quaint interpretation of the
Master's words here, which sees in them a
general warning against taking thouglit for
the pleasures of the table. But, on the
whole, the old reading contained in the
received text is preferable, and the old inter-
pretation, too, viz. that the true life of man
needd but OTie thing, or, if the other reading
be adopted, needs but few things. If we
must specify the one, we would call it " love,"
or "charity." So John, we know, in his
old days, summed up all man's duties in
this " love." If, on the other band, we are
asked to name thi- few, then we would add
to love, faith and hope. The parable of the
"good Samaritan," that practical lesson of
the love or charity the Master was alluding
to, had just been spoken; it was still, we
may reverently assume, fresh in the Divine
Teacher's mind. And Mary hath chosen
that good part, which shall not be taken
away from her. And Mary, his dear
Bethany friend, had made her happy choice
of the one thing, that love or charity which
never fails; or, perchance, had made her
choice of the few things needful (if we prefer
the longer reading of those old manuscripts
we have spoken of) — the few things would
then mean that faith, hope, and charity
which abide both note and in the a(^B of
•ges yet to come I



HOMILETICS.

Ch. 5x. 1 — 6 and ch. x. 1 — 11. — The mission of the twelve, and the mission of the
seventy. The differences between the two missions can be easily distinguished. The
esene of the missiun related in the ninth chapter is Northern Galilee ; the scene of the
mission related in the tenth chapter is Southern Galilee. The one speaks of a powei
delegated to the twelve apostles; the other, of an oiBce and of gifts delegated to
seventy — "other seventy also" — the two numbers of completeness, seven and ten
multiplied. And these seventy are sent before the Lord's face, while the twelve are
kept near to his Person. The one, although actually exercised for only a short time,
is the sign of a work which, in its design and consequences, is coextensive with the
world and its ages; the other refers to a merely temporary work — to objects local and
immediate. But, different as the two missions are, they are connected in this homily
because they set before us the great principles and features of Christian work in every
time. The instructions in the niuth and tenth chapters are similar ; and this, as we
may conclude, because the instructions contain hints and Buggestions to b« embodied
tn ministries and services for Christ. No portion of the eyangelical narrative mora
deserves to be attentively considered in connection with all that the hand of love finds
to do. Let ns regard some of its more salient features.

I. Observe, first, the bveb-abiding charaotbb of tbue Chbistiam wobk. Ch.
tx. 2 and x. 9 give us the word " heal," And the meaning of this word " heal " may be
learned from the life and sacrifice of CJhrist himself. In both the sendins; of the twelve
•nd the sending of the seventy, the spring of the action is the perception of a harvest
waiting to be reaped (cf. Matt. ix. 36 — 38). He sees the multitude around him tired



OH. x.1-42.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 279

and worn ou% like sheep exhausted and scattered over a plain, with no shepherd.
"The harvest truly is plenteous." It is the emotion thus expressed which always
heats within his hreast. " I am come," he cries, " that they might have life, and have
it more ahundantly." His presence is that of the Healer in a charnel-house of cor-
ruption. Before him evil spirits exclaim, " What have I to do with thee ? " Foul
sliapes of sin and want are expelled by his touch. His worlss are more than wonders ;
they are signs of redemption, of healing — the overflow of that fountain of life which
was enclosed in his Person. Now, it is in this, the sphere of the Lord's love and power,
that the servant is to labour. He is sent to save. He is to calm the troubled. He
is to exorcise the demons which prey on the life of man. He is to be a channel of the
love which is neighbour to man in all man's need.

"The world's a room of sickness, where each hearl
Knows its own anguish and unrest ;
The truest wisdom there and noblest art
Is his who skills of comfort best,"

Notice what this healing includes. The apostles (ver. 1) were endowed with antlioilty
over all devils, and power to cure diseases. " Go and preach," commands Jesiis; but
also, " Go and heal the sick." The clergyman and the medical man represent the two
halves of the Christian ministry. We shall never rise to the height of the Church'a
calling until we realize more systematically the conjunction of these aspects. To some
extent we do. In our medical missions we do. In the increased care of Christian com*
mnnities as to sanitary regulations, nursing, and so forth, we do. But much remains
to be developed. And what we need, as the sustaining spirit of all work, is the con-
viction that Christ has given his Church power to heal, to cure diseases. Those who
magnify "faith-healing" have hold of a truth, though they press it unduly, and
indeed often give it a twist which makes it practically an untruth. They are right in
the contention that it is Jesus Christ who makes whole, that the power of the care is
with him, and that, in respect of the cure, as of all else, the way of blessing is the way
of prayer. He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think.
On this, undoubtedly, faith should build. But why oppose this to the use of means?
Or why suppose that there is a higher faith in trusting him and dispensing with ordi-
nary means, than in trustitig him and availing ourselves of the medicinal properties
with which he has endowed things in nature, or of the knowledge and skill which also
are gifts of God ? God answeis prayer as really in making the means eflfectual, as in
restoration without the application of surgeon's or physician's art. The essential point
is that the power over body and soul is his, and delegated by him to men. Let the
Church's devotion be, not less theological, but less polemical ; more emphatic, first in
the requirement of personal righteousness, and next in such work as "shall deliver the
poor and him that crieth, the fatherless, and him that hath none to help him."

II. Now, this general position assumed, observe, secondly, the conditions which
Christ lays down as beg0lativb op all tece Christian work. Putting ourselves
alongside of the twelve and the seventy, let us listen to our marching orders, our coda
of instructions. Condition the first : " Begin at the point next you." The twelve
(ch. ix. 6) are sent through the towns preaching the gospel. The seventy (ch. x. 1)
are sent "into every city and place, whither the Lord himself would come." Let ua
not mistake. These are special embassies. By-and-by the word is, " Witness in Jeru-
salem, and Judaea, and Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth." The prin-
ciple is this — there are times when attention should be concentrated on the field that
is at our own door. And generally, the beginning, though not the end, of all work, is
with our own. We are to work outwards from the circle that is next us ; thence are to
be extended, outwards, ever outwards, the golden pipes through which the healing oil
empties itself. Condition the second : " Proclaim, The kingdom of heaven is at hand."
The twelve (cf. Matt. x. 6, 7) are to speak this to the lost sheep of the house of Israel
The seventy (ch. x. 9) are to stand by the sick, and, while they heal, preach the
advent of the kingdom. They are to raise a supreme expectation. Not halting to
give elaborate courtesies. As men hastening, full of a great word, they are to sound
in the ear, now in trumpet-tones, now in gentle whispers, " God's kingdom is eoma
close to you." To t«ll poor weary men and women of the Christ who is behind tham,



280 THE (SOStEL AOCOSDlNG TO ST. LUKE. [oh- ^t. 1-44

of the love that is seeking tbem ; to hold before their gaze the reality of a kingdom
which is, not a name in a book, not a Utopia of priest or poet, but a liviDg fact, a
kingdom which "is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
Holy Ghost," — this is the burden of the preaching — the free giving of that which they
have freely received. Condition the third : " Willingly, wholly, give yourselves to the
work, trusting in the Lord whuse it is." The pith of the Master's charge is, Be not
anxious as to worldly provision — 'purse, scrip, shoes.' Confer not with flesh and
blood. Lo ! I have sent you." Let us distinguish between the letter and the spirit.
To act on the mere letter, in the conditions of nineteenth-century civilization, would
be fanaticism. "The sterility of missionary labour," writes Dr. Farrar, "is a constant
subject of regret and discouragement among us. Would it be so if all our missioni
were rarried out in this wise and conciliatory, in this simple and self-abandoning, in
this faithful and dauntless spirit? Was a missionary ever unsuccessful who, being
enabled by the grace of God to live in the light of such precepts as these, worked as
St. Paul worked, or Francis Xavier, or Henry Martyn, or Adoniram Judson, or John
Eliot, or David Schwartz ? " Undoubtedly not ; yet, are Christian people to demand of
missionaries what they are not, in some measure, practising themselves ? Are they to
insist that the missionary shall have all the self-denial whilst they take all the ease ?
Is it not better for each person to aim at levelling up to the mark required of the mis-
sionary ? to ask what his or her Christianity amounts to ? what is given for it? what
living, working force is in it ? what of self-sacrifice is really prompted by it? Oh for
a more heroic trust in the King, and devotion to the kin°;dom ! " Lord, here am L"
And condition the last : " Your whole conduct in the discharge of your mission is to
be marked by courtesy." " Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
house" (ch. x. 5). First — before the character of its inmates is declared. The house
is the home of men and women. No matter what it may prove to be, it is to be
treated with respect. Christ's disciples are to be pre-eminent for the kindly courtesies
which are the beauty of Eastern life. Contrast the sketch in the Book of Butb, of
Boaz coming to the reapers, "The Lord be with you," and the reapers answering,
" The Lord be with thee ; " with the picture of our worlds of capital and labour, each
too often addressing the other in tones suspicious, if not defiant. All that is rude and
bitter in speech and thought should be alien to the followers of the meek and lowly
Jesus. There is a time to be firm. " The wisdom which cometh from aViove is first
pure, then peaceable." He who commands the gracious politeness tells the seventy
that against the city which will not receive them, they are to testify, " The very dust
of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you." But first, and always,
let the Christian see that the name of gentleman is not, in service for Christ, soiled by
any " ignoble use."

So much for the nature and conditions of Christian ministry. Note, in conclusion :
1. 2%« twelve and the seventy go in the strength of the Lord Ood. They are solemnly
appointed to the work. God is a God of order; and ordinance is always honoured.
But, with the ordination, they receive the power j and the power is in Christ for them,
and from Christ into tbem. Let us recollect that Christ is risen. He has received of
the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost. The Church is his body — " the fulness of
him who filleth all in all." The strength which ini^pircd apostle and evangelist in the
first days is waiting lor all who will to serve the Lord. 2. The seventy are sent, tujo
and two, be/ore his/ace. Kconomy and helpfulness in ministry are thus secured. The
order of the " two and two " in the ranks of the apostles is given by St. Matthew —
Simon and Andrew, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew,
James and Jude, Simon and. the son of Carioth. By some law of affinity these com-
panionships were formed. In the Church there are alliances also. For two are better
than one, and mutual sympathy and tenderness are Christ's rule.

Ch. ix. 10—23 and ch. x. 17— 24.— Utterances on the return of the twelve, and o/ih»
uventy. These passages are separated by an interval of time. But as the missions of
I h« apostles and of the seventy were considered together, tracing in them the great
nwi and principles of Christian ministry, so let us connect the utterances called forth
> the reports of the two companies, tracing in them the expression of all that is to he
IV at vividly realized by those who yield to the cummand, "Go work to-day in my



0H.il— 42.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDIXQ TO ST. LUKE. 281

vineyard." A threefold lesson seems to be conveyed. 1. A lesson as to the spirit of
mind proper to the servant of Christ, 2. A lesson as to the ministry appointed to tha
servant 6f Christ. 3. A lesson as to the confession of him demanded from the servant
of Christ.

I. The spirit of mind proper to the true servant or Christ. Turn, for
guidance as to this, to the vrords contained between the seventeenth and twenty-fourth
verses of the tenth chapter. The seventy have returned triumphant. They have
succeeded far beyond their expectation. Healing of the sick? " Even the devils are
subject to UB through thy Name." What a strange new sensation I Men, hitherto
utterly obscure, the custodiars of a power so marvellous, beholding, at the word which
Mtsses from them, the most marvellous results in the lives and characters of men I
There is no such jubilation in the tone of the twelve when they return ; perhaps the issue
had fallen below their expectations. But the seventy, the special and temporary execu-
tive of Jesus, are filled with the supreme joy of the conqueror — ^" the devils are subject
to us." Now, there is no rebuke of this spirit. On the contrary (ver. 19), they are
told that, in Christ's strength, they shall tread on all sorts of evil spirits— on the
■erpent and the scorpion, opposing them in serpent and scorpion-like natures — on " all
the power of the enemy." And the Lord shares their elation. In their tidings (ver. 18)
he sees the presage of the complete victory of the good over the evil. He pours forth
(ver. 21) a fervent stream of praise that, at length, and through these poor babe-like
souls, his holy love has been declared as victorious over the kingdom of darkness.
Was not the message bronght (ver. 22) a new sign of the Father's acceptance of the
Man Christ Jesus, and of the universal sovereignty which had been assigned to him ?
But mark the "notwithstanding** of ver. 20. It is the interposition of a great
check. Undoubtedly, nothing is more thrilling than the sense of strei^th. It may be
tyrannous to use, but it is great to have, a giant's strength. But there is nothing
more hurtful than a complacent resting on the evidences and results of power. Many
a good man is spoiled by the overweening consciousness of force ; he becomes inflated
with pride ; and, as he does so, he loses rank before God ; he is not far from the loss of
power even with men. Therefore the importance of Christ's "Notwithstanding, rejoice
not that the spirits are subject to you, but rather rejoice because your names are
written in heaven." " Not, i.e. in the tokens of command, but in the capacity of service ;
not that you rule, but that you are ruled ; that God in his grace has called you to
work with him, has written your name in the register of the citizenship of heaven, has
allowed you a part in the heavenly life and ministry." Both in what he thus said, and
in the glimpse into his own mind (vers. 21, 22), he indicates that the true disciple finds
his joy, not in what he does, but in what God does by him ; not in trophies of power,
but in signs of Divine acceptance and anointing ; not in the subjection of spirits to
him, but in the subjection of his own life to, and his sympathy with, the eternal Father
and the purpose of his love.

II This being the spirit of the mind, look back to the narrative from vers. 10—17 of
dn. IX., and recognize in it a symbol op the true dibciplb-work — the work in
which Master and scholar are at one. This work is set forth in its essential character,
and its Divine order, or method. 1. Its essential character is giving. (Ver. 13.) " Give
ye them to eat." The most typical pictures ol' the Divine love are those which most
purely bring out the relation of the Giver — man wanting, God supplying ; man's argu-
ment, " I need," God's argumen t, " I have." The babe cries, settles at once to the kindly
bosom — the argument ^ing the need. The mother has, and her abundance is the
life of the child. This is a reflection of God and man. So, on that grassy plain near
Bethsaida, we are introduced to a scene and work most significant of the love of God in
Christ. All the evangelists relate it. It is the occasion of one of the most memorable
of Jesus' discourses — that concerning the Bread of life. Altogether, it is a notably
royal act, the picture of the ministry of the kingdom of God. How it came about we
are told (vers, 10 — 12). The compassionate heart of Jesus is moved with pity by the
sight of the great multitude which has followed him. " Send them away, Master," is
the whisper. " We are here in a lonely place. They are hungry ; they may become
furious ; let them go into the towns and villages, and lodge, and gel victuals." Th«
answer is, " Give ye them to eat." This is the manifestation of God in the flesh — God
In his power, no less than his wilL " What I Master," exclaims Fhilip, "all our store



284 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. x. 1— iZi

oonsists of five loaves and two fishes : shall we go and buy meat for all th« people?"
Oh, it is the unbelief, the slow-heartedness of man, which thus speaks out. " Can God
ftirnish a table in the wilderness ? " Does not faith need to be reminded that the little
brought to Christ is multiplied a hundredfold? " Not by might, nor by power, but by
my Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts," 2. Notice the order or method of the work. Christ
is always orderly. He sent the twelve, and the seventy, two by two, giving them their
rules of procedure. Here, again (ver. 14), " Make the men sit down in companies of
fifties." Dr. Farrar reminds us of the expression of Mark, " reclined in parterres, like
• multitude of flower-beds in some well-cultivated garden." Organization is thus
implied. And yet the life, the strength, is not in the organization. It is " the blessing
of the Lord that maketh rich " (ver. 16). The outstretched arm, the food held up to
heaven, the look, the blessing, the breaking, the giving to the Church, and, through
the Church, to the world, — every part of the action is sacramental, every part ii
expressive of some aspect of the truth as to the dispensation of the Bread of life.
And then note, in ver. 17, the care as to the fragments — ^the teaching of thrift even in
the midst of abundance. The transaction, from beginning to end, is inlaid with sug-
gestions which admit of endless applications to the changing circumstances and th«
Tarying conditions of the world and the Chureh.

in. Finally (in vers. 18 — 22) we have the becobd of a pbivatb instbuottoh—
one given " as he was alone, praying, his disciples with him " — to those whom thb
LoBD HAD CAXLCD INTO HIS MINISTRY. It is the instruction which gives the third of
our lessons — that as to the confession of Christ which is demanded of the disciple.
Observe : 1. There is the confession (vers. 18 — 21) which is a secret between the soul
•nd the Lord himself— that which is apart from all that men say, which is the ezpree-
■ion of the personal loyalty and devotion. "Whom say f%e people that I am 9'
"Whom say ye that I am?" Parent, teacher, worker, pastor, is thy labour, is thy
Hfe, built on Peter's noble testimony, " The Christ of God " ? 2. There is the Uving out
^ that inward life — the bold and fearless testimony for that preference as dominating
all the action (vers. 22, 23). The Master lays a cross on the back of his disciple, and
bids him carry that cross daily, in token of his being grafted into a suffering, sacrificed
Son of man. Solemn and searching are the words about the willing to come after him,
and all which this Involves. May our hearts answer, " Amen I " — " amen " to the daily
following, " amen " to the losing of life for Christ's sake, " amen " to the sturdy witnessing
for him in the midst of the crooked and perverse nation ; our " amen," rising upwards
to receive his when he shall come " in his own glory, and in the Father's, and of ttw
holy angels."

Vers. 26 — 37. — TTie parable of the good Samaritan, The second of the parable*
peculiar to St. Luke, and one of the loveliest and most suggestive of the matchless
pictures of him who " spake as never man spake." Notice —

L Its oooabioh. Our Lord is in Judsea, not, as we infer from what follows, at k
great distance £rom Bethany. He and his ^ciples, we may suppose, are resting, when
a lawyer — i.e. a person who made the Law both oral and written his study — ^proposes a
question with which, or its likeness, we meet at six different times in the ministry of
Jesus. "Tempting him" is the phrase descriptive of the motive for the question;
probably the phrase means nothing more than putting the Babbi to the proof, submit-
ting a question, the answer to which would, in the lawyer's view, settle his right to be
heard as a Teacher from God. Jesus meets his interviewer as one not far from the
kingdom of God, yet in a way which proved that, in regard to the issue presented, mere
dialectics were of little avail. "What shall I do to inherit eternal life ?" The mind
is at once referred to the underlying reality of the Law. " What is written therein ?
thou who dost profess to know, how readest thou ? That which thou hast read, that
which thou dost find there — the love, in its two great aspects, upward and outward —
that is the eternal life." Ah I this is not quite according to the jurist's expeotation.
" He came to catechize Christ that he might know him, but Christ will catechize Urn,
and make him know himself." Seeking to parry the thrust, there comes forth the
next question (ret. 29), " Who is my neighbour?" This question is the eccasioB of
Aa parable. Note, before paesins, the clause, " willing to jnstify himsell" The true
heart casts itself on the Lord, "Lord, save, help! lighten my darkness I" The proud



0H.T.1— i2.] THE GOSPEL ACOORDINQ TO ST. LUKE. 283

heart wills some self-justification, and, thus willing, produces some excuse, Bome word by
which to turn aside the arrow of conviction.

II. The boene and the febsonb of the dbaha. 1. The Kxne. The wild road,
proverbial for deeds of blood, which Jesus and the disciples had just traversed. 2. Tht
'persons. The traveller, who had been attacked by the Bedouins, had fallen among
them, and been spoiled, mutilated, left half dead. The priest, coming that way by
chance, or rather " by a coincidence ; " it was natural that he should be there, since
Jericho was a station of the priests. When the priest saw the half-dead man, afraid of
any defilement, " he passed by on the other side." Next, the Levite. Observe, " he
came and looked on him," with the life ebbiug away, and he too moved to the other
side. And then, finally, the Samaritan. (1) Look at him in contrast with the other
two. . Of them the kindness might have been expected. The traveller, we may suppose,
is their co-religionist. They, at least, are fresh from the sanctuary — from the reading
of Moses and the prophets. They hide themselves from their own flesh. The desire is
to get home, and they pass by. The one not expected is " he who shows mercy." Is it
not often so ? Becall the word used concerning the Roman centurion, " I have not found
so great faith, no, not in Israel." (2) Who is the Samaritan ? Priest and Levite denied
him a share in the kingdom. He was a heretic, a descendant of the half-heathen stock,
" the men from Babylon and Cuthah, whom the King of Assyria placed in the cities of
Samaria instead of the children of Israel." Cursed in the synagogues, the people were
taught that to entertain a Samaritan was to lay up judgments for a house. This is the
man. If it had been a Jew approaching a Samaritan, the Jew would have left him in
bis blood. The Samaritan stops, compassionates, binds the wounds, pours in the oil and
the wine, puts him on inis own beast, tends him, pays for him, provides for him. Brave,
tender-hearted Cuthite that he is I Thus the Lord answers the inquiry, " Who is my
neighbour?" Keishbourhood is dissociated from the range marked out by co-religion-
ism ; it is constituted by the fact of need. " Where you can be helpful, to whom you
can he helpful, there, in him, is the neighbour." There are circles within circles. To
love them that love us is not wrong ; but, if that is all, what do we more than others ?
Humanity is neighbourhood. Do not ask what the man is. Enough that he is there,
and in want. Sad, and worse than sad, when the representative of religion is not also
the representative of humanity 1 After all, who is man's neighbour ? Like the traveller
in the parable, man has left the heavenly city, and has fallen among thieves. To man
the sinner the love of God in Christ is the neighbour. He has showed mercy ; he is
our Example: "Go, and do likewise." "Be imitators of God, as dear children; and
walk in love as Christ also loved us."

Ver. 27. — The love of the neighbour. Fixing, then, on Christ's definition of the sphere
of neighbourhood, we are called to give a length and a breadth to his rule, which make
it equivalent to the assertion, " Your neighbour is, not your blood-relation only, not
the circle of your acquaintance only, not your countryman or co-religionist only ; but
he or she whom you can help in any way whatsoever — the wretched tatterdemalion
from the slightest contact with whom you shrink; the besotted and degraded; even
your enemy, who hates you and despitefnlly uses you ; him, her, mankind, you are to
love." " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." A very searching word indeed.
God help us I bow far are we from realizinij it ? Here some may will to justify them-
selves, and assume the defensive in some such manner as this : " It is impossible. We
may cherish a feeling of benevolence towards all men in virtue of their common humanity ;
but bow can we love them ? Love requires the perception of what is lovable ; it
requires, too, that there shall be some link connecting one personally with another.
But to summon us to love the neighbour, in Christ's sense of the phrase, is to insist on
love iiefore the discovery of any such link, or notwithstanding; the discovery that such
a link is wholly wanting." Or, again, " This is a commandment to love. Now, we
cannot love by commandment ; we cannot go beyond the prompting of our own natures.
Some we can embrace with affection, but from others we turn away. We have tried
the law that is announced on a limited scale, and the result of the trial was this — 8o
long as we thought of the world in a general, ideal way, we felt, in a measure, ardent ;
but as regards the persons actually crossing our path as neighbours, before the aalfish-
oess and greediness and ugliness which confronted us, we were forced to retreat, and t'



284 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINO TO ST. LUKE. [oh. x. 1—42,

confess that we cannot love because we are told to love otir neighbour as ourselves."
Mow, let it be acknowledged that these and similar difiSculties are real difficulties.
But, in the mean time, see whether Christ, in commanding, has not indicated the way
of assistance ; whether a more spiritual exposition of his teaching may not lead us into
a region of thought in which the solution of the difficulties lies. Such a region seems
to be opened up in the sentence reported by St. Matthew, " The second commandment
is like to the first." To the first, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind," we must look for the full truth of
the love enjoined in the second, and for the significance of the measure which the second
proposes, " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself."

L For, to show that the love enjoined in the two commandments is really one fstafx,
WHAT DO WE MEAN WHEN WE SPEAK OF LOVING GoD? Surely WO mean a delight in
God for what he is ; for his righteousness, his goodness, his holy and loving wiU ; we
Hiean that surrender of ourselves to him in which our spirits respond to the Father of
spirits. Now, in the first moment of such self-surrender, is it not the longing of the
mind that he be glorified? Such a longing necessarily takes beyond self. It embraces
the desire that the Eternal Name be hallowed, the eternal will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, and the eternal kingdom of the Father come ; that God be honoured in all, and
all find their true life in God. The pulse of this longing beats in friendship like that
of Mr. Grskine of Linlatben. To his friend, the cold, astute lawyer, Butherford, Mr.
Erskine writes, " I love you. I could die for you to bring you to your true Centre,
God." In the love of God, his love for his friend had been quickened and intensified.
Yes ; when Christ revealed God as our Father, he gave us men as our brethren ; when
the Spirit of the Son is sent into the heart, the spirit of the brother is formed in the
heart. However we may distinguish in speech, in the working of the eternal life, there
is no distinction between the love of God and the love of man. Each is implied in the
other. They are the two sides of the one grace, the one life — love. And in this we
have the solution of the difficulty already referred to. If there is no higher prospect
than the neighbour, it is not to be wondered at that persons cry out, " Impossible 1
where the special links fail, there love must stop." But, observe, when we have gained
the second commandment through the first; whun the 1ov;b of the neighbour proceeds
out of the love whose first and greatest is God ; such links are always at hand ; there
are interests and bympathies which serve as points of approach to all, to any one. Our
love is God's love extending through us. All sorts and conditions of men are within
the reach, before the vision, of God's love. Even beneath the hateful we can discern
that which, to the Creator who is also the Bedeemer, is immeasurably precioui.

" . . . . who loves the Lord aright.
No soul of man can worthless find;
All will be precious in his sight.
Since Christ on all hath shiued."

We are, then, partners in the Divine interest In man. We clothe the neighbour
with this interest. " Thy Father is my Father ; my Saviour is thy Saviour too, and
thou art precious in his sight. As he loves, so would I love thee — 'as myself.' "

II. But what of the mkasurb, " as thyself "? Let it be answered, " Thyself^
after the first and great commandment has been fulfilled in thee — thyself loving the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and soul, and strength, and mind." There is a true
self-love, and what the true self-love is is thus defined. EecoUect, Christ's phrase is,
" as thyself." In his teaching there is no place found for the pretentious altruism
which strive*

**.... to wind itself too high
For mortal man beneath the sky,"

which insists that the love of man shall swallow up, shall annihilate, all self-feeling ; that
it shall involve the renunciation of all that is individunl for the sake of a universal good,
of humanity. The teaching of Jesus is too practical, has too keen a sight of " what is in
man," for this humanitarianism. He recognizes a love of self as right and natural;
but it is the self when truly consecrated to God. " There is no need," says one, "of a
heart of supernatural textuie in order to the love of our brother. What is needed is only
the heart ol flesh instead of the heart of stona." Yes; but this heart of flesh is a nen



OH. X 1—42.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 286

heart. It is described in the Scriptures as the gift of God. It is " a heart of super-
natural texture " — part of that new ordering of the life which is realized when the
wayward will is offered to the consuming fire uf God, and the inner man is born from
above. See, then, what this pure self-love, which is the measure of love to the neigh-
bour, represents. It represents a power of sacrifice. " Hereby perceive we the love of
God, because he laid down his life for us : and we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren." Not only so; the principle whicii illustrates the direction of the love of
our neighbour exhibits that which ia to be sought for in it. He who prays that his
self shall be in harmony with God's thoughts and ways, lovin>; his bruther with the
same love, will discriminate between that which only serves the flesh, and that which
tends to promote the righteousness which God reckons the permanent well-being ; he
will strive against the things in internal life and external condition which hinder this
well-being; he will study the ways through which the greatest good may be realized
for the neighbour. Thus, given the love of G(h1 poured out in the heart, the love of
self, instead of separating, unites the man to his world. It is the dynamic of s holy
and enlightened philanthropy.

Let the two commandments, then, be kept in the order which our Lord has marked
— the first, as the first and greatest ; and tlie second, as the second which is like to the
first. Let them, in this order, abide in us ; and, though the keeping of them may be
to the flesh a cross, possible only through the slaying of that in the flesh which objects,
the external nature of the commandments will i^radually disappear ; from laws outside
us they will be changed into states of life, each finding its congenial nourishment in
the other. The love of God will be fed by the love of the neighbour; the love of the
neighbour will be fed by the love uf God. So thought, so wrote St. John, in his own
profound yet simple manner, " Beloved, let us love one another : for love is of God;
and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God." " If a man say, I love
Gk)d, and hatetb his brother, he is a liar ; for he that loveth not his brother whom he
hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen ? And this commandment
have we from him, that he who loveth God love his brother also."

Vers. 38 — 42. — C^rist't itrmon in the hottse of Martha. A very short sermon, its
substance being given us in the two last verses, but it is a sermon whose teaching
goes far down into the truth of our hope and faith. Let us trace it, first, in the reve-
Ution made in Christ's word of the differences which the heavenly life comprehends ;
and, secondly, in the counsel with regard to this life which Christ's word conveys.

I. How OJTERESTINO 18 THK SKETCH OF THE TWO SISTERS AT BbTHAHT I TheV are

80 lifelike that we feel as il we had seen and known them. And, indeed, we have,
because they portray familiar types of character and temper. No person of candour
will regard the elder sister as only the embodiment of worldly mindedness in contrast
with the younger as the embodiment of spiritual-mi udedness. When we look more
closely into the narrative, we see the injustice of this view. It is Martha who receives
Jesus ; il is she who provides for his comfort. If she is bustling and busy, this is
only the sign of her devotion. Nor dues Jesus say that, in her anxiety about many
things, she had lost the one thing needful, and that she had no share in the good part
which could not \>e taken away. He is defending Mary against the temporary petu-
lance of Martha, and, in so doing, he cautions her against the temptations incident to
he! activity. " Jesus," says St. John, " loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus."
Assume, then, that tach of the two has a place in the communion of saints, and see
what this place is and wherein each is fulfilled in the other. 1. The usefulness of the
Martha character is at once suggested. It bears the impression of the liberal soul
who deviseth liberal things, who will take any amount of pains to oblige, who is eager
to serve. Honour to those who have the readiness to do, and the knack of business I In
such persons there is generally a vast amount of self-denial. You will find them toiling
when there might be many excuses for resting. Prompt, energetic, siirewd, they go
straight on, their activity being in a high state of development. All honour to the
"housekeepers I They enable the quiet and thoughtiul to think and write. Erasmus
and Melancthon can study when Luther and Farel are up and doing , the Leighton^
oux preach for eternity because the Melvilles and Hendersons preach to the time
Your Marys could not sit at Jesus' feet unless the Marthaa were going about the house



288 THE GOSPEL ACXX)RDINO TO ST. LUKH. [ch. x. 1—42.

But the Marys, too, have their pkce. Busy business pei^ple are apt to nndemte
them. They exhibit something of the elder sister's impatience : " We.are left to do
all ; these dreamers do not help." Not help ? It is Mary who sees into the truth of
Jesus' sacrifice. It is she who, sitting and listening, divines the joy and the iorrow
which meet in the heart of the Lord. By-and-by, when Martha makes a feast, ihe
feels that the hour has come, and she brings the alabaster box of ointment which
she has been keeping for the hour. " Aaainst the day of my burying," says Christ,
" has she kept this box . . . this that she hath done shall be spoken of for a memorial
of her." The prophetic spirit belongs to the meditative. Martha is the worker, but
Mary is the seer. 2. The conclusion, therefore, is, " Let the Marthas and the Marys
abide together ia peace and mutual self-respect. Let the world of action and the
world of letters recognize, each in the other, the balancing, completing half. Ood has
created minds male and female — ^the active and the contemplative, the communicative
and the receptive, the objective and the subjective. The Church of Christ, the progresa
of humanity, demands both; if the one is the guide, the other is the inspirer, oi
movement ; and, for permanent effect, as well as for the discovery of truth, the Johns
outrun the Peters. Let each person ascertain which of the two sides is predominant
in him, and seek the balance supplied by the other. Whoso is Martha-like should
cultivate the Mary temper. Unless he sit at Jesus' feet, he will be cumbered about
the serving. It is not enough to get all right for the Lord ; the first thing is to be
right with and in the Lord. Whoso is Mary-like should recollect that gymnastic is
needful to health ; that he must work as well as enjoy quietly. He must not eat all
the fat and drink all the sweet. The sitting at Jesus' feet must be with a view to
the following in Jesus' steps. The real moral strength is found when this balance
is fonnd. So, from the Martha side it was found by St. Paul, who laboured more
abundantly than all the apostles, yet all the while sat at Jesus' feet. From the Mary
side it was found by St. John, who, although the one who leant on Jesus' bosom, was
the one named Boanerge — Son of thunder. To serve much, without being cumbered
about it, " inquiring in the temple ; " to be the thinker, with the liberty of the seat at
the Master's feet, and yet the doer of the Word ; — this is the beautiful proportion of
the heavenly life. This life is love ; and love must first see as did Mary ; then, but
in a sweeter and wholesomer spirit, it can work as did Martha.

n. Consider now the tbuth or thb heavenly life which is didicatbd in the
ooiTNBEL arvEN BT Chbist. It is a counsel administered under the twofold form of a
caution and a commendation. 1. I%e finger of caution is pointed to Martha. (Ver. 41.)
Observe the antithesis — the " many things," the " one thing." The good, kind soul is
distracted by a multitude of concerns. Who does not know the worry which comes
through the pressure of many littles? May it not be added that there is nothing
which more wears the energy out than attention to the details of home-management ?
The whole sentence of Jesus is most expressive. First, the " careful, or anxious,"—
this is the inward fault ; and then the " troubled," — this includes the external, the
" restless turning and bustling hither and thither." Is it not eminently characteristic
of what we notice in others and sometimes feel in ourselves ? And ' the mistake.
It is not the serving ; it is the being " oumbered " about the serving — ^the serving imped-
ing the movement heavenward, as a heavy garment impedes the one who runs a race.
The " many things " run away with both the peace and the strength of the mind. We
may not absolutely forget ; in a kind of way we recollect ; but we cannot really con-
centrate our attention on the one thing which is needful. " Martha, the feast over
which thou art exercised is good in its way. The intention is kind. But this day salva-
tion has come into thy house. There is no need of all these dishes, all this cooking and
preparing. But there is need of thine acceptance of the gift of God. If thou knewest
that gift, and who it is that speaks to thee, thou wouldst feel that the one thing need-
ful is to ask life of him, tu learn what the life is from him, to receive the gift of the
life eternal Martha-like souls, of every typo and shade, 'why do •/• spend
money on that which ia not bread, and your labour on that which latisfieth not ' f
The heart hearkening for Christ is the oi>e thing, and you cannot have thtt wiihout an
inward coUectioA and repcse of spirit, without peace and liberty in God. Why be so
greedy of the unr+edful? , Why pursue it witn such impetuous eagerneKa that there
ve only odd times, fragmonts of thought, for that which is needful to health of mind.



."H. X. 1—42.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 287

to the wants and desires of an immortal nature?" 2. The finger of comimsndation, i$
fainted to Mary. (Ver. 42.) ** She hath chosen that good part, which shall not be
taken away fiom her." The good part is a place, a nourishment, and a choice. The
place — Jesus' feet. Oh the blessedness of sitting there I When the Gadarenes went
out to see what had been done in their country, they saw the man who had devils
long time — the devils now departed — " sitting at Jesus' feet, clothed, and in his right
mind." To find that place is the sign that the strong one who binds with chains and
fetters has been bound by the Stronger One, who has come into the heart. The
nourishment — " She heard his word." That is the meat which endures to life ever-
iMting. What cares she for the feast about which Martha is so busy, whose care i»—

" Oh, take away wbate'er has stood
Between me and the highest good I
I ask no better boon than this—
To find in thee my only bliss "f

The choice — "She has cho?en.'' Behold the way of deliverance from the Martha car»-
fulcess and trouble. Choose your portion. Have within you, as the centre of your
life, a fixed, supreme determination. In this there is force. It keeps a united heart
among the competitions of the " many things." The part is good, because it interprets
the voice of reason ; it expresses the wedding of the actual life to the truth and call-
ing of God. It is good, because it confers a real spiritual independence, so that a man
is not mastered by things, but can be the master of things. It is good, because it
never can be taken away. Your banquets last for only a short time. The most satis-
fying food, apart from God, must one day fail and forsake you. Whatever is your*
will be taken away. This part alone is you. It is you hidden with Christ in God-
hidden where death can obtain no entrance. " He asked life of thee, and thou gavest
it him, even length of days for ever and ever . . . Thou hast made him most blessed
forever: thou hast made him exceedingly glad with thy countenance." It is good,
to sum np all, because it is not, as was the part of Martha, a moving about and around
Christ, but " a seeking, laying hold of, and enjoying Christ himselt Thus one of the
poets of the German fatherland has sung —

** As Maty once devoutly sought
The eternal truth, the better part,
▲nd sat, enwrapt in holy thought.
At Jesue-' feet with burning heart,
For naught else craving, yearning for the word
That should be spoken by her Friend, her Lord,
Losing her all in him, his word believing,
And tiirough the Cue all things again leceiving;

** Even BO is all my heart's desire
Fix'd, dearest Lord, on thee alone.
Oh, make me true and draw me higher,
And make thyself, O Christ, my own I
Though many tnm aside to join the crowd,
To follow thee in love my heart is vowed.
Thy Word is life and spirit. Whither go ?
What joy is there in thee we oannot knowf *

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Ter. 2. — Bpirltual husbandry. L The laboeness of the field. " The hsrrest tmly
is great." It is not a few human families, or a few small populations ; it is not one
large nation ; it is not even one great continent ; it is the entire human race, which
Jesus Christ proposed and which he still purposes to redeem — this great human race,
with all its nationalities, with all its creeds and all its doubts and denials, with all its
pride and all its degradation, with all its profoKud estrangement from Divine truth
and the living God. The harvest is great indeed; the task is tremendous; the
victory, if it be gained, will make all other victories sink into utter insignificance ;



288 THE GOSPEL ACCORDISa TO ST. LUKE. [oh, t. 1—42.

they will be but the small dust in the balanc*, There ia encouragement in the
thought of —

II. The ohabactbb or thb seed which is sows. That seed was in course of pre-
paration as Jesus Oh rlst was speaking and working and suffering. It was his whole
life; it was, indeed, him«el/'m all his relations with men, in all the aspects in which
he could be regarded, whether as Teacher, or Friend, or Exemplar, or Divine Sufferer.
This was the seed which should be sown, the fruits of which would be the great harvest
of God. ** I, if I be lifted up," etc. But, on the other hand, there has to ba taken into
■ccoiint—

III. The oharaotbb op the agents at work in the broad field of the world.
1, Their infirmity. Ttiey are men; good men, but " the best of men are but men at
the best;" all (they should be) renewed by the Spirit of God and fired with the lova
of Christ and of human souls ; but all (they are) " compassed about with infirmity,"
all bound with limitations of understanding, of character, of wisdom. 2. 'i'tieir paucity,
" 'i'be labourers are few " — few in comparison with the agents of evil and the sources
of error ; few, regarded in their proportion to the multitude on whom they are to act.
In this light they are lamentably insufficient. There are great breadths of the field
eiaroely worked and other vasi districts positively untouched. What, then, is —

IV. The hope of the faithful? When we survey the greatness of the b'rvesi
and the fewness of the labourers in the field, where does our hope lie ? In the provid-
ing power of the great Lord of the harvest. He who moves the stars in their sphcr-s
can create human souls, can endow them with noble faculties, can inspire them with
generous aims, can send them furth ou glorious and triumphant missions. We canuut
tell the possibilities which are hidden in one great human soul whose heart God has
tuu;;hed, whose liand God has strengthened. One such man may be instrumental in
tiuming a whole tract of barrenness into fertility : what, then, may not a number of
such souls accomplish ? When the Lord of the harvest speaks the word, great will be
the company of the preachers, the number of the labourers. Wherefore let us pray
the Father of spirits to put forth his creative power aud send mighty workers into hia
waiting fields. — C.

Ver. 7. — Our due. "The labourer ia worthy of hia hire." What b It that w«
deserve? The answer depends entirely on the light in which we regard the question.
We may look at it in three aspects.

L OuB UNWOETHiNEsa OF ANTTHiNO. If God Were to give to us exactly what wa
deserve, everything of every kind being taken into account, we should receive nothing
more. For, weighing in one scale all that we owe to him for everything he has been
to us and wrought for us and bestowed upon us, and in the other scale what response
we have made to him in gratitude, love, service, we should " be found wanting, and
could claim nothing. We are not worthy the least of dl his merciea. AU that ha
gives us is so much beyond our desert.

n. Gob obligations to one anotheb. It ia well that we do not make these a
" matter of account," as tradesmen do with the articles they supply to one another,
only paying the balance now and then. For who would decide on which side that
balance lay? And of how much beauty and excellence would our daily life be
divested 1 The true and wise course is to make acknowledgment of every kindness
received, the warmer gratitude for the greater favour, but some thanks for the least
indebtedness, not waiting to consider who ia the greater debtor of the two. We are to
" owe no man anything " only in the sense that we are to be ever paying and there-
fore ever cancelling our debts. But we are to be constantly indebted to one another.
Poor and small indeed would that hum&n life be which did not owe much to the servica
of others. What we are to seek after is not a life without obligation, but a life in
which we are very freely placing our neighbours in our debt by the kindness we show
them, and in which we are making very free acknowledgment of all that wa owe to
the love and the service we receive. Every labourer should receive his hire, his due
reward, and among others the Christian workman should be rightly recompensed.
1. It u a matter of righleousiiebs, as between man and man; faithful service ahould
have its, meet reward j aad tliia reward should be in (1) affectionate honour, and (2) suV
.-fantial, material aupporu i. When rightly rendered, the reward received will b»



OT.x.3-42.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDIN(J TO ST. LUKE. 289

an incentive to fuller labour and more energetic service. 8. The payment of the reward
-will react beneficially on him that pays it — he will appreciate more highly the ministry
he receives.

III. God's obaoiocs and generous offer. Though (as said) we can claim nothing
from God as our right, yet he is pleased to offer us much. Our Lord has told us (1)
that the humblest service, done in a true and loyal spirit, shall certainly be rewarded
(Matt. X. 41, 42); and (2) that the reward we shall hereafter receive will be in pro-
portion to the fidelity of our service here (ch. xix. 16 — 19). Our tone md spirit will
he that of men who are not conscious of deserving anything (Matt. xxv. 37). But hii
spirit and action will be that of a magnanimous Master, and he will make the most of
•U that we have done (Matt. xxv. 40), and count us worthy of a large reward. — 0.

Vers. 12 — 15. — Ouilt and p^mishment. These very solemn words of our Lord demand
our attention the more, because his thought is so fully illustrated. They suggest or
convev to US i m. b tr-ijii s.

L That obeat inkjdity mat look fob signal punishment at the hand op Q«d.
Jesus uues not mtimate that lyre ami Sidon suffered any more than they deserved,
that Sodom had a retribution which was in the smallest degree out of proportion to it*
guilt. These cities deserved their doom ; they sowed the wind, and reaped the whirl-
wind. That which happened to them was exactly what they might have expectea ;
and it is just what such cities as ihev were may always look for. It does not require a
desolating army or a miraculous storm to bring disastrous evil upon the head of shame-
ful wrong. Without such particular instruments as these, the blow which slays and
buries will certainly descend. If destruction comes not on the wings of one wind, it
will come on those of another ; whether we think of the vicious city or the profligate
man, we may be sure that great guilt will, sooner or later, work out the downfall and
extinction of the evil-doer. By human history and the record of the lives of men, as
well as by the sacred page, " the wrath of God is revealed against all unrighteousneiui
of men ; " they cannot and will not " escape the judgment of God."

II. That neither swiftness nor apparent severity in punishment is a buu
OBITERION OF THE MAGNITUDE OF THE CRIME. Destruction had come down suddenly and
terribly on Sodom; Capernaum, Chorazin, and Bethsaida were still existing, and were
still rejoicing in outward prosperity. Was the ancient city so much guiltier in God's
sight than the (then) modem towns of Galilee ? No, replied the great Teacher. Had
these ruined cities of a former age enjoyed such privileges as the citizens of his own
time were possessing but neglecting, they would have repented and would have been
spared. We must take care how we argue from sudden and severe evils to the relativ*
guiltiness of the sufferers. These evils may clearly indicate wrong ; they may (though
in some cases they do not) indicate very great wrong-doing; but they do not prove
that those on whom they descend are more guilty than others who are spared. 1.
God may think well, in one case, to manifest his holiness by severe visitation, and in
another case to illustrate his patience by delaying long the stroke of justice. 2. Qod
may punish one city (or man) by physical and visible inflictions ; he may shaetise
wother by letting his moral laws do their appointed work, and bring down the man
themselves to that low spiritual estate which is the saddest and direst consequence
of sin.

III. That pbivileob is very precious, but it is also vbby pbbiloub. Capernaum
was "exalted to heaven," raised very high indeed in privilege. There the Son of God
abode ; there he wrought his mightiest works ; there he lived his holy, patient, loving
life ; there he spake iiis deep, broad, ever-living truths ; there God was manifested in
power and grace. It was favoured above all cities in the height of its spiritual privi-
leges. But it knew not the day of its visitation ; it drew not nigh in reverence to its
Lord ; it rejected his doctrine ; it remained afar off firom God and heavenly wisdom.
And it incurred thereby the Saviour's strong condemnation ; it accumulated guilt, and
laid up for itself wrath against the day of wrath ; it was " thrust down to hell " in
reproach and retribution. We learn, more particularly : 1. That humility of spirit,
rather than reproachfulness of tone, becomes us. 2. That the children of special
privilege have great reason for devout heart-searching, lest they should find themselves
the heirs of Divine condemnation. — 01

LCKB. V



290 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. x. 1— 42.

Ver. 16. — The largeness of our life. Jesas Christ is sending his disciples, two and
two, to prepare liis way ; it is certain tliat by some towns and villages they will be
well received, and equally certain that by others they will be repelled. He tells them
that those who received them would be doing more and better than barely receiving
them, — they would be entertaining him ; but those who rejected them would do more
and worse than repulsing them, — they would be despising him, nay, eren the Father
himself. That there is more in our acts, and so in our lives, thian appears on the
surface was a fn quent doctrine of our Lord. In his first sermon be intimated that
those who cherisued a causeless anger or spoke a contemptuous word against their
brethren were guilty of a very serious offence in the sight of God ; and so also they
who imagined themselves chargeable with nothing more than a hasty word (see Matt.
V. 22, 34—36). He told his disciples that that " poor widow " was making a very
much larger offering than the rest — a much greater one, we may be sure, than she her-
self suspected (cb. xxi. 1 — 4 ; see also ch. xziii. 34). Christ saw more in men's actions,
both for good and evil, than they saw themselves at the time. It is the wisdom of the
wise to recognize much in words and deeds, in decisions and in actions, which seem
small to those that do them. Our human life is larger than we think as we live it;
its several actions lia^e more seriousness in the sight of God, and from our life greater
issues will proceed than any we can estimate. This main underlying priucipie will
apply to —

I. The ME8SENQBE8 AND THB MESSAGES THAT COMB TO US FKOM JbSTTS ChKIST.

There may come to speak to us concerning the habits or the purpose of our life, or the
character we are forming, or the good we are doing or leaving undone, or the prospects
that are before us, some messenger that appears in very humble form, not delegated
by any high authority, not sustained by auy learning, not armed with any eloquence;
there may be nothing more about the outward spokesman than a plain or even a blunt
man, nothing better about the form of the message than a periodical which has no
worth in the market at all ; and yet the message which comes through that very
common, through that vulgar medium, may come from above, may come from Christ
himself, to warn or to arrest us, to lead us out of the dark shadows we were entering,
into the path of life. Aud in repelling that message we should be rejecting the very
truth of God ; in accepting and heeding it we should be welcoming our Lord himself,
and taking his Divine influences into our soul. This principle of the greater value and
seriousness of our life finds au illustration in —

II. The studies of xouNasB days. They who have to go through the daily task
in the school or home see nothing more in their work than the laborious gratification
of their teacher. But there is much more in it than that. There is obedience to
parents; there is the consequent pleasing of God, and the reward of filial behaviour;
there is the serving and honouring of Jesus Christ by diligence and dutifulness, by
doing the right thing as in his presence and as unto him; there is the mental and
moral growth which prepares for an honourable and useful manhood. Life at home or
at school, in our earlier days, is really a larger thing, with larger and greater issues, than
it seems to be at the time. The same is true of —

III. Struggles fob honourable maintenance. The Christian man who thinks
he is doing nothing more than " paj ing his way," is or may be doing a very great
deal more than that. He is illustrating in his sphere the very principles which the
Lord himself taught and lived when he was here ; he is trauslatiug godliness, Christli-
ness, into busy human life ; he is preparing for some broader sphere in that higher
kingdom where, if not before, he that has been found faithful in that which is least
will be proved to be faithful in much. We not only speak in the spirit and strain of
our Lord's words, but we pursue the same subject when we refer to —

rV. Endeavours to sekve oub fellow-mbn; and this, whether in the way of
eomtnon philanthropy, or of distinctively religious service. Do we ask of those whom wa
find in the school, or the mission-room, or the church, " What are you doing here ? "
And do they reply, " We are only teaching some children, only feeding some poor
people, only trying to gather some wanderers into the fold"? Then shall we reply to
them, and say, " Nay, but you are domg much more than that : you are serving them;
and you are rendering the very highest service you can to yourselves, for you are
sowing seed of which you shall one day reap a glorious harvest of joy and power ; and



■H.j;.l— 42.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 291

you are also serving your Saviour, and that In a way in which he most delights to be
served. He is saying to you, ' If you had eyes to see, yon would recognize mt in those
pinched faces and ill-clad forms; if you had ears to hear, you would recognize ny voice
in those plaintive tones ; it is my need that you are supplying, it is my heart that you
ore gladdenin>; ; inasmuch as you are carrying succour, strength, hope, life, to on« of
the least of these, you are doing it unto ?»«.'"— 0.

Ver. 20. — Better things. When Jesus said, " Eejoice not, . . . but rather rejoice,"
he did not mean to condemn the satisfaction which the seventy were expressing in
their triumph ovtr the evil spirits. There was nothing wrong in such gratification.
To exercise power, especially a newly acquired power, and more e!<pecially a power
that is possessed by few, — this is simply natural ; and to rejoice in the exercise of
beneficent power is not only not wrong, but is distinctly and positively right and
worthy. But there are other sources of joy that are more excellent ; it is a question
of the relatively rather than the absolutely good. We conclude from our Master'*
words —

L That it is better to build on character than on oircumstanoe. This wm
a very pleasing incident in the life of the seventy; they would alway.s look back to it
with pleasure, and speak of it with interest to themselves and others. Bat it was only
an incident. It was decisive of nothing. It did not determine their future course,
their final destiny. They might have done what they did and yet have gone down-
ward and reached an evil end. To have "their names written in heaven" meant to be
right at heart, to be reconciled to God, to be loyal citizens of the spiritual and heavenly
kingdom, to be sound and true within. It is this which is to be desired and to be
sought and to be built upon. Life may have a large number of interesting episodes,
of gratifying circumstances, and may yet be a miserable failure, may have to be looked
back upon with pain and shame. To be right with God, to have "truth in the inward
parts," to be such a one on earth as that those who live in heaven will recognize us
as their kindred, — that is the thing to be concerned about, that is the goal to be gained
at all costs, the true source of human joy.

II. That it is better to enjoy the abidinq favour op God than the short-
lived thanks of man. Doubtless one part of the satisfaction which the seventy
enjoyed was the gratitude they received from those whom they relieved ; but better
than human gratitude is the favour of the living God. The thankfulness of a sensitive
and responsive human soul is by no means to be despised or disregarded, but it is a
very precarious basis of human happiness. It is sometimes denied where it is most
due; it is sometimes very slight and transient when it should be deep and lasting.
But God's favour abides. " Havins loved his own, he loves them to the end ; " " In
his favour is life." If we are upheld in our integrity, and God sets us before his face
for ever (Ps. xli. 12), we can afford to part with other things.

• Better to walk the realm unseen
Than to watch the hour's event
Better the tmile of God alway
Than the voice of man's conBent,"

HL That it is better to bxebt a lasting influence foe good upon the soOl
THAN TO CONFER A TEMPORARY GOOD UPON THE BODY. The bodily servioc rendered by
the seventy was great as far as it went and so long as it lasted. But the eyes then and
by their means opened, and the ears then unstopped, were soon closed again in death ;
and the feet then made to walk were soon motionless in the grave. But to have theii
names written in heaven, and to be thus prepared to enlighten the minds and to quicken
the souls of men, was to be in a position to render lasting, even everlasting good ; that
was to confer immeasurable benefit on those whom they sought to bless. 1. Are our
names written in that book of life? 2. Are we appreciating its inestimable value?
3. Are we making use of the qualifications it implies to serve our felloir-men in the
highest ways ? — C.

Ver. 21. — The gladness of gratitude, etc. Our thought is directed to —

L The gladness of oratitudk. "Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thani; n oe.



292 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. x. 1— 4a



Father." Joy and thankfulness are here united, as indeed they are everywhere. It
is gratitude that holds the key to happiness of heart and life. Who are the mis rable '
Not the poor; they are often the most contented. Not the afflicted; they are of tea
Tery cheerful under great privation. Not the lonely ; they are found happy in their
solitude, conversing with the departed great or communing with the Highest. It is the
ungrateful who are the unhappy ; it is they who take every liindness shown them by
their fellow-men in a spirit of surliness, as if they deserved more than they have
received ; it is they who accept innumerable mercies and the " unspeakable Gift ~ at
the hand of God without response, unmindful of the one, unappreciative of and
ungrateful for the other. Who are the happy? Not the rich because they are rich ;
not the strong because they are strong; not those who have many friends because they
have them. These may be burdened, wearied, wretched, and their life be darkly
shadowed. It is the giateful who are the happy souls ; it is they who receive with
appreciation and thankfulness whatever man may give them, whether of love, of con-
fidence, of sympathy, of practical help ; it is they who have a deep sense of the kind-
ness of the heavenly Father, and of the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. The heart
that is full of gratitude is the heart that is full of joy ; and such joy is both pure and
lasting.

II. The heeitaqe or the humblb-heakted. " Thou hast hid the«e things from
the wise, . . . and revealed them unto babes." 1. In our Lord's time the scribeB and
lawyers " rejected the counsel of God ; " they refused the wisdom of the Wisest ; and
the supercilious Sadducees stood aloof from the kingdom of Divine truth, from the
kingdom of God. The " wise and prudent " were too haughty of heart to part with
their beloved prejudices and to welcome the new truth which the great Teacher
brought them. But the " common people heard him gladly ; " all " the people " were
" very attentive to hear him." The fishermen of Galilee left their nets and their ships
to follow him. 2. In the time of the apostles the same results were found (see 1 Cor.
L 26 — 28). 3. In cur own time we find that they who have gathered together a little
human learning are apt to think that they are competent to solve, unaided, all the
great problems of their being and their destiny, and they close the gates of their mind
against the great verities of the Christian faith. But they who know how little they
have grasped of all that is to be acquired, and who stand as " babes," as very little
children, before the Divine Father, are ready to welcome to their souls all that be is
ready to reveal to them, and theirs is the blessed heritage of spiritual truth, of heavenly
wisdom, of eternal life.

III. The befuoe of the pebflexed. " Even so, Father ; for so it seemed good in
thy sight." We have our perplexities now, and they may weigh upon our spirit with
crushing power. We cannot understand God's doings or his inaction in the wide human
world, or in the Church of Christ, or In the more limited sphere where our own
interests and efforts lie. The more we think the more we are assured that we are
baffled and beaten. The various solutions proposed do not reach the heart of the
difficulty. What, then, can we do? Just retreat to that safe refuge — the strong,
immovable assurance that all things are in the hands, and are subject to the guidance,
of a holy, wise, loving Father. — C.

Vers. 23, 24. — Apostolic advantage and disadvcmtage. Our Lord compares the
position of his apostles with that of the great and enviable of past times. We may
follow his thought and may also pursue the same line of comparison in our own times.
We look at their position —

I. As BBIiATED TO DIBTINQUISHBD MEN BErOEE THE ADVENT. 1. It WaS One of SOme

disadvantage I they were men in a very much humbler position than many of the
great in past days. Great kings had lived in a social state and with pleasant
surroundings to which they could lay no claim; in society they were nowhere; of
this world's luxuries and trappings they had nothing. Moreover, they were in a much
U»t powerful position than some of the gnat men that had gone. Prophets had made
or unmade kings ; or they had delivered laws or changed customs, materi^y affecting
the civil, social, moral, and religious life of the nation ; witness Moses, Samuel, Elijah,
Klisha, Nehemiah, John. The apostles of our Lord were not doing anything of thii
kind when he spoke to them ; they had done very little of a public character ^ui



•H. X. 1—42.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDLNO TO ST. LUKK 291

far; their influence had not been felt in the life of their countrymen. 2. It was one
of glorious advantage in one respect. They had the most disUnguisbed honour of being
the personal attendants upon the Messiah himself. They not only taw his face and
heard his words, but they ministered to his wants ; they rendered him service ; and, by
rendering him service, they contributed largely and importantly to the well-being of all
later generations. 3. It was one of greater honour than they themselves supposed ;
for he at whose feet they sat and of whose truth they drank was One very much higher
than they imagined even their Messiah would be ; and he wrought a greater good for
• larger world than they conceived it possible even for the Anointed of God to work.

II. As BELATED TO OURSELVES. 1. Their position was one of supreme privilege in
one great particular — they attended upon and they served Jesus Christ himself, in hU
own Person. That was an honour which stands by itself; it is unique ; of its kind
it is utiapproachable. Let any disciple of the later time reach any imaginable position;
he must I'eel that in actually ministering to our Lord, supplying his necessities, being
•ympathetically as well as bodily present " with him in bis trials," helping him in hia
supreme and critical work, the apostles of our Lord stand pre-eminent. 2. And in
being the first to publish the gospel after our Lord's ascension they also stand in the
very front rank. 3. It was also a very distinct advantage to receive Christian truth
direct, without intervfuing media, with nothing to subtract from it or to add to it;
they had truth at the fountain source, uncorrupted by the channels through which
it passed. 4. But they were subject to some disadvantage also. (1) Jesus Christ was
not, in bis Divine Person, so fully revealed to them as he has been to us ; that would
have made free and full fellowship utterly impossible. (2) His doctrine was not as
complete at the time of our text as it afterwards became ; for his death, resurrection,
and ascension constitute a very large part of Christian truth. (3) They had not the
advantage of Christian experience we possess. All the thoughts of wbe Christian
thinkers during many centuries ; all the recorded experience of multitudes of Christian
lives ; all the moral and spiritual workings and triumphs of Christian truth and
principle under many skies and through many ages ; — these are ours as they were not
theirs. Our privilege, even as compared with theirs, is very great indeed. Perchance
our Lord would tell us, if he spake to us to-day, that it is as great as theirs, and that
our responsibility answers to our privilege. — C.

Vers. 25 — 27. — Our love of God. It is the glory of the gospel that it has made
common to the multitude of mankind that which was once dimly seen by a few
solitary men ; that it has put into the mouth of the little child that which once wa«
stammeringly spoken by a few philosophers ; that the truths which once were only
found upon the summit by a few hardy climbers are the fruits which are now gathered
by thousands as they walk the King's highway. Here is one of these — the duty,
binding on us all, of loving God. 1. If to those Greeks who came to see Jesus (John
xii. 20), he had said that the greatest obligation, or, as thoy would have put it, the
most fitting thing, was for man to love God, they would have been amazed. They
would have been prepared to render services and sacrifices to their deities, but to love
God with all the heart was beyond their most active imagination. 2. If Christ had
uttered this truth to the Roman procurator before whom he appeared, he would have
been equally astonished. 3. This truth was far in advance of the Jew, as well as of
the Greek and the Roman. It is true that it was to be tbund in his Law (s&a Deut.
vi. 4, 5 ; X. 12 ; XXX. 20). But it was not in his mind, in his heart, in his cherished
convictions, in his life. He " tithed mint and rue and all manner of herbs, but passed
over ... the love of God" (ch. xi. 42). Even the worthies of Old Testament timei
were men who were more constantly and profoundly affected by the sentiment of holy
fear than fervent love. " I fear God," rather than "I love God," was the summary of
their religious character. How do we account for this ?

I. The Jew had kevbrenck enough fob God to be able to lovk HDf. The
Roman, the Greek, had not. We must respect those whom we love, and the beings
they worshipped could not be respected; they were unworthy of regard. Not so he
whom the Jew worshipped. He was the Just, the Righteous, the Faithful, the Holy
One. The Jew honoured, he revered, God enough to be able to love him.

II. He had a vest oonsidebablk knowledok of the obace and mbbot of Goa



294 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. x. 1—42.

For we find in Old Testament Scripture passages afflrming the kinHness, the pity, the
patience, the mercy, of Qoi, well worthy to be placed by the side of any we find in the
New (Exod. zzxiv. 6, 7 ; Ps. ciii. 8 — 14 ; cxlv. 8, 9 ; Micah vii. 18, etc.). It was gurely
possible for him to let reverence ascend to love.

III. To SOME EXTENT THE Jbw DID LOVE GoD. Abraham was " his friend." David
could exclaim, " Oh, love the Lord, all ye his saints 1 " " I love the Lord, because," etc.
Yet it was not love but fear that was the central, commanding, regulating element of
hii inner life. This need not surprise us when we consider —

IV. The Jew did not know God as kevbalbd in Jbs08 Oheist. 1. He had not
heard Jesus speaking of the Divine Father hating sin but pitying and yearning over
the sinner, determining at his own gieat cost to redeem him, as we have done. 2. He
had not witnessed the Saviour's life as we have followed it ; had not seen the Father's
character and spirit reflected in that of the Son, with his tender affection, his inex-
haustible patience, his matchless condescension, his generous forgiveness. 3. He did
not know the story and the meaning of his death ; had not had, lU^e us, a vision of the
love of God paying that great price for our redemption, bearing that burden on our
behalf, pouring itself out in pain and shame and sorrow for our sake. It is at Calvary,
far more than elsewhere, that we learn the blessed secret of the love of God — his love
for us, our love for him. We learn : (1) I%at to love God is the highest heritage of our
manhood. "As m man thinketh in his heart, so is he ; " as we think, we are ; a man ig
great or small, noble or ignoble, according as he thinks and feels ; the height of our
k>ve is the stature of our soul, is the measure of ourselves. God invites us to love him,
the Highest One, and by so doing he immeasurably enriches and ennobles us. If he
filled our house with gold he would only give us something pleasant to have; but in
inviting us to love him he confers on us that which is blessed and noble to he. (2) That
not to have loved God is the most condemning /act of ov/r lives. Do we say," All these
[prohibitions] have we kept from our youth up: what commandment have we broken?"
We reply, " The first and great commandment. Have you loved God with all your
heart?" We may well bow our head in shame as we realize the poor and pitiful
response we have made to the Fatherly love of God. (3) That the faet that we can at
once return to God, in filial devotion, is the best of all glad tidings. Our return to him
begins in humility, goes on in faith, is completed and perfected in love. (4) That the
face that we shall continue to love God is the hrightest of all good prospects. Other
things will fail us sooner or later, but " the love of God which is in Jesus Christ" in
•ur hearts will take us everywhere, will be our refuge and defence in all emergencies,
will sanctify our joy and our prosperity, will be with us at the last scenes, will croes
the river with us and will be with us and in us on the other side, will be our pass-
port to and our qualification for the brightest and broadest spheres in the heavenly
kingdom. — 0.

Ver. 29. — Whois owr neigKbowl This was a very pertinent question, by whatso-
ever motive prompted. None better could possibly have been asked, for it drew forth
Christ's own interpretation of his own Law. And, like the Jews of his time, we are in
no little danger of limiting the Divine thought, "Who is our neiiihbour?" — ^in our
thought, in our leeliug and practice? Who are those we feel bound to love and help?
Our kindred, those of our fellow-citizens from whom we want the interchange of
civilities, our countrymen, — do we draw the line there? If so, we " have not the faith
of our Lord Jesus CJhrist" in this maiter; we are falling out of rank as his disciples.
There is nothing especially Christian about the affection we feel or the kindness we
show to these. Going thus far, we go no further than pagans have gone before us.
We must transcend this if we are to be worthy of the name we bear. In order to be
that, we must find our neiihbour everywhere and in every one, but more especially in
the man who has need of us. The Christian conception of " our neighbour " —

I. Oversteps the limit op hacb. It is painful to think that men have been
taught to look upon those who inhabit other lands willi positive enmity, so much so
that even Cicero could say that the natural relation of neighbouring nations was that of
enmity; that whole peoples (like the Greeks and the Chinese) should treat the outer
world as " barbarianS" to be despised and avoided. It is foolish and illogical enough,
but it has been all too common. Nothing but the prevalence of Christian principle aud



OH. X. 1—42.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING- TO ST. LUKE. 291

the permeating force of the Christian spirit will avail to lead us to love those heyond
our borders, without the pale of our owu civilization.

II. Bemotes the umit of space. The simple and common notion of a neighhour
is that of one locally near to us. But that idea, under Christ, has heen very greatly
enlarged. 1. It is true that, since he spoke, we have seemed to be further off, in space,
from one another. For those to whom he spoke bad no notion of the width of tha
world, no idea that there were fellow-men living twelve thousand miles away from
them. 2. But it is also true that, since he spoke, we have been brought near to one
another. (1) Christian civilization has given us an intimate knowledge of one another,
so that we know more of what is happening in India than the " dwellers in Jerusalem *
knew then of the events occiu'ring in Nazareth ; and (2) Christian zeal has made po»-
■ible to us a genuine sympathy and a practical kindness. We can, by putting a coin
in a plate, help to send the light of Divine truth to men of every colour, in every lati-
tude and longitude of the habitable globe. Who is our neighbour? All men beneath
all skies, and it is open to us all to do something to help the wounded pilgrim on life'i
highway, even in remotest lands, to health and joy and life.

III. Tbanscends the limit of oharaoteb. If that lawyer had answered his own
question, it is certain that he would have given a reply which would have excluded
the ungodly and the immoral. But in Christ's view the neighbour we should com-
miserate and rescue is not only the poor traveller who has fallen among thieves, but
the erring soul who has lost his way in the search of truth, and that pitiable one who
has fallen into the mire of guile and shame; those who have been smitten by the worst
of all strokes, and have descended into the darkest of all shadows. Our neighbour, in
the view of our Lord, is not the man who is up and who can assist us on our way, but
he that is dovra and whom we can help to rise ; he is the man who is most in need of
our sympathy and our succour ; be is the man who baa a bruised and bleeding heart
that patient, sacrificial love alone can heal. If we will go to him and help and bleM
him, and make ourselves "neiglibour unto" him, we shall thus " fulfil the 'law of
Christ ; " and we shall thus be not only " keeping his commandment," but Uving his
life.— a

Vers. 38 — 42. — Christ at Bethany. There are few places at which we so much like
to think of our Lord's presence as Bethany. We like to think that there the Son of
man, who had not where to lay his head, did find a home ; that there, away from the
conspiracies of those who hated him, he found a refuge with those who loved him.
We like to think that there he found a diligent disciple in one sister, and an assiduoui
•nd eager miuistrant in the other. We must carefully consuler —

I. Tub compaeison which our Lobd was making. (Ver. 42.) For it wa* a
comparison, not a contrast — a comparison between the choice that was good but was
not the best, and the choice that was the good one. It was not a connast between the
absolutely bad and the positively good; it was a comparison between the good that was
insufficient and the good that sufficed. There are thuse who choose the positively bad
— ^pleasures which are unlawful, profits which are dishonest, a life that is ungodly.
Christ condemns this elsewhere ; but here (in the text) he is condemning another thing.
He condemns the too-absorbing pursuit of that which is nut supreme, which is good
only up to a certain point, and beyond that is powerless. Christ was comparing the
woman who was absorbed in doing a right but an inferior tiling with her sister who
was intent on the highest and best of all.

II. The infkbence'he was drawing. That many ^ood things, however many they
may be, do not constitute the good thing, and that they will disappear and disappoint.
Health, home comforts, worldly position, hierary delights, art,— these are good iu their
measure; but they will not together make up our human requirement; they are not
•• the bread of life " and " the water of life ; " they do not satisly, and they will not last ;
sooner or later they break down and leave us portionless and hopeless.

III. The poikt which he was pressing. There is one thing which is so surpassingly
excellent that it may be considered the one good thing—" that good p«rt which sliall
not be taken away." To Mary this was Divine truth as it came to her in the Person
and in the words of Jesus Christ. And to us it is also heavenly wisdom, as we gam it
direct from our Divine Lord. She diank in that immortal truth as she " sat a- liis



296 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. x. 1—42

feet, and heard his word." We also receive it into our hearts as we " go unto him"
and " learn of him," as we follow him, and as we abide in him. Of him we learn the
way to God, the way to the light and the peace and the life which are in him. From
him we gain forgiveness, friendship, purity, usefulness, a hope that does not make
ashamed. This is the " good part," the intrinsically precious, the invaluable thing,
of which no figures can indicate the worth ; it is the good part which can never he lost.
For there is no power on earth that can touch it to harm it. Disease wUl not waste it,
fire will not consume it, force will not crush it, fraud will not steal it, time will not
enfeeble it, death will not destroy it, the grave will not hold it. It lives ever and out-
lives everything which the eyes can see, on which the hand can rest. This is the one
thing which is above high-water mark ; all other, all earthly good things will he
washed away by the incoming tide ; but this portion, this heritage, no wave will reach
in the mightiest storm. This is the " part " to choose. 1. We all can choose it. God
is opening his hand to offer it ; we can open ours to take it if we will ; our destiny is in
our choice. 2. We must choose it. If we fail to do so, we shall not only shut ourselvai
out from all that is most worth having and being, but we shall shut ourselves in to
loss, to shame, to death. — 0.

Vers. 1 — 24. — 2%e mission offhe seventy. Jesus, as we have seen, is now going ap
on his last journey to Jerusalem, and he is anxious that the places he is to visit for
the last time, and some possibly for the first as well as last, should be ready to receive
Idm. On this account he organizes the mission of the seventy in addition to that of
the twelve already noticed. They are to be forerunners, going to announce his advent
in the different cities and villages. Let us study the mission as here presented to us.
And—

I. ThET ABE TO OO FOBTH TS A SPIBIT OF PBATEB FOB ADDITIONAIi LABOmiBBB,

(Ver. 2.) The desire in the world to limit and regulate the number of labourers, to
keep up wages, is to have no counterpart in the Church of Christ. The needs of men
are so great, the harvest of souls is so enormous, that as many reapers as can possibly
be equipped are needed and should be prayed for. Narrow-mindedness and jealousy
are, therefore, out of place in Christian work. Those already labouring for God are to
be the chief intercessors for more workers, and it is the inspiration of God which can
alone fit men for such work.

II. ThET abb to go FOBTH PSEFABED FOB OPPOSITION EVEN tTNTO DEATH. (Ver. 3.)

It seems at first a foolish policy to send lambs among wolves. Will they not be torn to
pieces instantly ? Is it not to court defeat and failure ? But it so happens that it is
the manifestation of a meek and lamblike spirit among ravenous and wolfish men
which wins the battle for Christ and conquers the world. Were it nut for such exhi-
bitions of meekness the world would never be won. Hence the martyr-spirit is the
safety of the Church.

III. Thbt abb to depend upon the people fob suppoet. (Vers. 4 — 8.) Some
of the seventy, like some of the twelve, might have taken some provision or money
with them. They were not all absolutely poor. The Lord himself might have brought
from heaven or furnished miraculously all that he needed during his ministry on earth,
but he preferred to depend up(in his Father in heaven, and to accept of the loving
ministrations of his friends on earth. The same rule he prescribes for his servants.
They are to receive their support from those among whom they labour. And in the
reception of support, they are to be content with whatever hospitality comes first.
Peacefully are they to dwell in the house of their host, and they are not to be choosing
some better hospitality aud showing a mean and worldly spirit.

IV. 'I'HET are to orvB themselves dnbbskbvedlt to the King's business.
(Ver. 4.) The instruction, " Salute no man by the way," does not advise any dis-
courtesy, but as the Eastern salaams are protracted pieces of etiquette, they are to show
so clearly that their "King's business requireth haste," that such cumbrous formalities
must be dispensed with. It is a great thing gained if the Lord's servants are so con-
centrated upon their work that nutliing is allowed in the least degree to interfere with
it. God's work must be paramount.

V. They are to heal the sick and ankounoe the kingdom. (Ver. 9,) It is
the advent of salvation to these cities and villages of Palestine ; hence the healing of



OH. X. 1—42.] THE GOSPKL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 297

the sick is performed as a sign of the higher salvation which is included in the coming
of the kingdom. Physical miracles are spiritual signs. The health of the soul is to
follow that of the body, if the peojile will only trust the King. The delegated miracu-
lous power is the sign and announcement of coming spiritual power and salvation.

VI. The penalties attached to the bejection of these ambassadobs. (Vers.
10 — 16.) The Lord directs them, as in the case of the twelve, to simply shake off the
dust of. their feet a£;Hin3C them. This was the sign of separation complete and final.
But he indicates that in the judgment it shall be more tolerable for such cities as
Sodom, Tyre, and Sidon, than for the cities which reject them. Now, the doom of
Sodom and of Tyre was terrible. In the one case God destroyed the cities of the plain
by fire ; in the other case by siege and bombardment. But for Sodom and for Tyre —
meaning, of course, for their inhabitants — there yet remains a judgment in the great day.
Yet their sin, though heinous, was not so great as that of rejecting Jesus and his
ambassadors. Chorazin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum will experience a deeper doom than
even Tyre and Sodom, because they repented not. The solemn position of an ambas-
sador of Christ cannot be over-estimated. To speak for Christ, in his Name, in soma
way worthy of him, is surely a great commission. What an altitude in ministration
should we reach before we can conscientiously adopt the attitude of the apostles ! ^

VIL The jot of the seventy at tbeib sdcobss. (Ver. 17.) They delighted
in the thought that the devils had become subject unto them through the Name of
Jesus. How natural it is to rejoice in the success the Lord grants 1 But as Jesus bera
shows, it is dangerous. While assuring them of triumph over Satan and all the power
of the enemy, he also would have them to rejoice rather in this, that their names are
written in heaven. The meaning of this seems to be that they should rejoice in what
the Lord has done for them rather than what they have done for the Lord. In the one
case, they are liable to be puffed up and to think highly of themselves ; in the other
case, they are kept in wholesome humility. Let the Lord's work and the Lord's part
of the work, rather than ours, be the source of our spiritual joy.

Vlil. The jot or Jesus about the -abbangembnts op his kinodom. (Vers. 21 —
24.) While Jesus advised them to rejoice in God's salvation of them, he himself pro-
ceeds to rejoice in their successful work. His reason for this was : 1. That it put to
tonfusion the wise and prudent, throitgh the revelation being made to hahei. Those wh*
are proud and self-confident miss the meaning of the gospel and the kingdom, while
those who are babelike in their docility get an apprehension of both. 2. It is in virtu*
of his mediatorial commission. The Father has committed all things to Jesus, and he
proceeds, as Son, to reveal the Father to whomsoever he will. Without such a revela-
tion we should never know the Father. 3. Christ's joy is also because of the distin-
guished privileges enjoyed hy the disciples. Many prophets and kings desired to sea
such things as they saw, but the prophets and kings had been passed hy, and these
weak ones selectetL Hence it is that Jesus rejoices in such God-glorifying arrange-
ments. The more humble we are in heart, the fuller shall be the revelation which
God will make to us through Jesus Christ.'— B. M. E.

Vers. 25 — 42. — 2%e good Samaritan, and the good part. Prom the success .of the
seventy we now pass to the temptation of the Master. The tempter is a lawyer, one
who, therefore, proiessed special acquaintance with the letter and spirit of the Divine
Law. He thinks he may find accusation against Jesus by inquiring from him the
way of life. His question implies the belief on the lawyer's part that he can win his
own way to heaven. But Jesus, when he asks, " Master, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life?" puts it to himself to answer, eliciting from the lawyer the reply, "Thou
Shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart," etc. Jesus men drives home the
arrow of conviction by saying, " Thou hast answered right : this do, and thou shalt
live." The lawyer, if he will only analyze his life fairly, must admit that he has
failed to fulfil the Law. This suggests — t j -j

I. The expebiencb of Chbist in fulfillino the Law. When our Lord said to

the lawyer, " This do, and thou shalt live," he was giving forth his own experience.

He was himself loving God wi;h all his heart, and all his soul, and all his strength, and

> Of. Bruce's ' Training of the Twelve,' pp. 113, 114.

• Cf. Martiueau's ' Hours of Thought,' vol. i. p. 114.



298 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINQ TO ST. LUKE. [ch. x. 1— 42,

•U his mind ; he was also loving his neighhour as himself; and he found and felt that
this was life, and life everlasting too. Doubtless he might have to die, but beyond
death there was the compensation of resurrection. He was entitled to life on the
ground of law, since he had kept it in every particular. What the lawyer imagined
be could do, Jesus had actually done. He had acquired the right, not on his own behalf
merely, but also on behalf of all who trust in him, to the life everlasting. The
obedience of Jesus to Law was the perfect obedience required.

II. The attempt at self-justification on the lawyer's part. He seems to
have thought that his attitude to God was unimpeachable ; but he was not so clear
about having fulfilled his duty by his neighbour. Uence he' asked Jesus to define
" neighbourhood." The Jew had the notion that, because he belonged to the chosen
people, he had to show neighbourliness only to those of his own nation ; all the rest
were " dogs." And this lawyer had been as proud and as contemptuous as any of his
tribe. Hence he wants from Jesus some definition of who his neighbour is, that he
may estimate his own duty and the patriotism of Christ. The excuses in which
selfish men indulge are marvellous. They are ready on any pretext to defend their
lelfishness.

in. JbSOS defines " NEIGHBOURHOOD " BT THE PRECIOUS PARABLE OF THE OOOD

Samaritan. And here we havK four characters brought before us. Let us look at
them in order. 1. The half-murdered traveller. The road from Jerusalem to Jericho
has been from time immemorial infested by robbers. It is so still. This poor traveller
has met the cruel fate of many before and since Christ's time. The highwaymen have
toblied him of all he had, and almost of his lil'e too. It is a case of unmistakable need.
There is no possibility of deception in the circumstauces. 2. Z7/e heartiest priest.
Coming down from the holy services at the temple, he so far forgets himself as to
ignore the half-murdered man's wants, and pass by on the other side. The aristocratism
of office has steeled his hiart against those charitable impulses which the caae should
have evoked. 3. The heartless Leoite. The sole difference between these two officials
was that the Levite seems to have crossed the road, to have looked npon him, and then,
judging it a hopeless case, or one in which he could reuder no help, passed by, like the
priest, on the other side. 4. The good Sama/ritun. This man might have said, " This
poor fellow is one of those Jews, who will have no dealings with us Samaritans ; he has
often, most likely, called ut dogs ; he deserves no care." But instead of looking for
excuses for neglecting the sufferer, he gives his heart free play, and owns the poor man
as a brother in distress. The result is he dismounts, and pours into his wounds oil and
wine — the best remedies, the one to keep down inflammation, and the other to heal ;
and, having carefully bound up his wounds, he sets him on his own beast and brings
him to the nearest inn and has him comfortably lodged. The next day he pays the bill,
and becomes the innkeeper's seciirity for anything more the patient may require until be
is sound and well. Here is neighbourliness. Our neighbour is whoever is laid in our
path by Providence and really reeds our help. If we look carefully into the case, as
the Samaiifan here did, and conclude that it is a case of real need, then we should
recognize in the needy one our neighbour, and have mercy on him. As Jesus dismisses
the lawyer with this ideal neighbourliness before him, the self-justificaiion must have
passed completely away.' JJow, we have here the cosmopolitan spirit which Chris-
tianity fosters, and which is above and beyond the fellow -citizenship and patriotism
which alone earlier civilizations fostered. Ciirist taught his ])eople to be "citizens of
the world," and to recognize in every needy human being a " man and a brother." It
was in this spirit our Loid iiimself livea.and so he was able to inculcate it powerfully
upon his people.

IV. The good part as defined at Bethany. (Vers. 38—42.) And here we
have to notice the two types of character presented to the Lord. 1. Martha, to whom
life is a perpetual worry and weariness. She was a Christian in the real sense, for
•he loved her Lord; but she was a Christian who had not escaped from the fuss and
weariness which make up the life of so many. Besides, all her bvistle was really under
a false impression, that the greatest compliment she could pay her Master was to give

' Of. Trench on the Parables, p. 296 ; Amdt's ' Gleiohniss-Eeden Jegu Christi,' zweitei
theil, B. 112 ; Gerok's ' Aub Eruster Zeit,' s. 529.



OH. XI. 1—64.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



299



him a good physical feast. She never fancied that a good listener like Mary compli-
mented the Master mure than any repast could. Hence Martha's fret and weariness.
2. Ma/ry, to vthom life is a calm fulfilment of her Master's ivUl. The good part Mary
chose was that of a scholar at Christ's feet, whose word is deemed Mary's law. This
one idea made life simple and supremely blessed. Let us make sure of it, and the
fret and worry of life shal I ciase, and an orderly and blessed procession of duties will
make us experience a loretaste of heaven. The following poem expresses as beauti-
fully as possible the thought of this passage ; it is entitled " Cumbered about much
BerTing : " —

•• Christ never asks of us such busy labour
As leaves no time for resting at his feets
The waiting attitude of expectation
He ofttimes counts a service most complete.

" He sometimes wants our ear — our rapt attention,
That he some sweetest secret may impart;
Tis always in the time of deepest silence

That heart finds deepest fellowship with heart.

■We sometimes wonder why our Lord doth place ua
Witliin a sphere so narrow, so obscure.
That nothing we call work can find an entrance
There's only room to suffer — to endure I

"Well, God loves patience I Souls that dwell in stillnea^
Doing the little things, or resting quite.
May just as peifectly fulfil their mission,
Be just as useful in the Father's sight,

• As they who grapple with some giant evil.

Clearing a path that every eye may see!
Our Saviour cares for cheerful acquiescence
Rather than for a busy ministry.

• And yet he does love service, where 'tis given

By grateful love that clothes itself in deed ;
But work that's done beneath the scourge of duty.
Be sure to such he gives but little heed.

<* Then seek to please him, whatsoe'er ho bids thee I
Whether to do — to suffer — to lie still I
"Twill matter little by what path he led u«.
If in it all we sought to do his will."

(From Raudolph'g 'At the Beautiful Gate.*)

B.M.E.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XL
Vera. 1 — 13. — The Lord's teaching on the
$ub}eet of prayer. Again the scene is far
away firom Jerusalem ; no special note of
Hme or place enables us to fix the scene or
date with any exactness. Somewhere in
the course of the last joumeyings towards
Jerusalem, related especially in this Gospel,
did this scene and its teaching take place.

Ver. 1. — lord, teach us to pray, as John
also taught his disciples. It seems as
though some of his disciples — we know at
this period many were with him besides the
twelve — heard their Master praying. It



appeared to them — no doubt, as they caught
liere and there a word and expression as he
prayed, perhaps partly alone, partly to him-
self — as though a friend was speaking to a
friend ; they would pray like that : would
not the Master teach them his beautiful
secret? In reply, Jesus repeats to them, in
rather an abbreviated form, what, at an earlier
period of his ministry, he had taught to the
multitudes and the twelve. It was very
likely one of the seventy who made this
request, who had not been present on the
first occasion, when the Lord gave his
prayer of prayers to the people We have
already remarked that at this time the
twelve, who had heard it, were probably
otten absent on mission work. It wae •



800



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xi. 1—64.



OBual practice among the more famous
rabbis to give prayer-formulas to their
pupils. We have no tradition extant of
John the Baptist's prayer here alluded to.

Ver. 2. — And he said unto them, When ye
pray, say. The older authorities leave out
the clauses er.ised. The prayer, as originally
Teported by St. Luke, no doubt stood as
followii. The erased clauses were filled in
by early scribes from the longer formula
•upplied by St. Matthew, and spoken at an
earlier period by the Ma^ter : —

* Ow Father which art in hcaTon ,
Hallowed be thy Name.
Thy kingdom come.

earth,
dive u8 day by day our daily breads
And forgive us our sins ;
for we also forgive every one
that is indebted to ns.
And lead us not into temptation}

put (JQllVOr TlH fr o no pyjl

It has been said that our Lord has derived
from the Talmud the thoughts embodied in
this prayer. If this could be shown to be
the case, it would in no way detract from its
admitted value and beauty. Indeed, the
earthly training of Jesus would naturally
lead him to make use of whatever was true
and practical in the teaching of the schools
of his people. There is no doubt that
in the New Testament many a gem of ex-
quisite beauty could be found, drawn from
that strange, weird Talmud, where the
highest wisddm is mingled with the wildest
errors and conceits. But in the matter of
the ** Lord's Prayer," it must be borne in
mind that only a comparatively small por-
tion of its thouglits can be traced to Tal-
muilical sources, and there can be no positive
certainty as to their priority, since the
Miahiia was not committed to writing before
the second century of tlie Christian era,
and the Gemara later still. The Lord'»
Prayer, in the report of St. Luke, con-
tains five petitions. Two have reference
to the love of God, and three to human
needs. Our Father which art in heaven.
It was not now uncommon in Jewish litur-
pries and prayers to invoke the Eternal of
Israel under the dear name of " Futlier."
" Thou, O Lord, art our Father." Hallowed
he thy Name. Not only do we pray that
the Name of God may be to us a sacred
precious thing, not lightly used in trivial
epfcch, still less in bitterness and anger,
only in holy reverent prayer ; but we include
In tliese words a prayer, too, that all our
thmightt of God may be pure, lofty, holy.
Thy kingdom come. No Messianic kingdom,
i'l the old Jewish meaning of the word, is
-i<riiifled here. It is ■> far onlook to the



close of this dispensation, which close, we
believe, is hindered by human sin and
perversity. It is the prayer tor the end,
when there will be no more tears and part-
ings, no more sorrow and sin. It tells of
the same feeling which John, at the close
of the Revelation, expressed in " Even so,
come, Lord Jesus." Instead of these words,
Gregory of Nyssa, in his manuscript ot
St. Luke, appears to have read, " Thy Holy
Spirit come upon ns, and purify us."

Ver. 3. — Give us day by day our daily
bread. There would need no comment upon
this — at first sight — quite simple prayer,
but for the word emoiaios, rendered " daily."
This word, in all Greek literature, ocoun
only in these two evangelists, in ijS. Matthew
and Luke's report of the Lord's Prayer.
Now, does this strange word mean " daily,"
as our translation gives it ; or is it the rough
Greek rendering of some Aramaic word of
a loftier signification ? Most probably out
Lord was speaking Aramaic in this place,
far away from tlie ca|)ital, in the heart of
Palestine. Jerome attempts to Latinize
literally the Greek compound word with
eupersithstantialis; hence the Rheima Version
renders it "supersubstantial," and Wickliffe
"over other substance." Generally speak-
ing, the patristic expositors interpret thii
famous word in such a way that the petition
prays, not for the common hread of every-
day life, but for a spiritual food, even the
Bread from heaven, which giveth life unto
the world. So, with unimportant differences,
interpret Origen. TertuUian, Cyril of Jeru-
salem, Athanasius, Ambrose, and Augustinei
Among the moderns wlio adopt the same
view may be cited OLhausen, Stier, and
Dean Plumptre. The last-named scholar's
words are an admirahle answer to any who
would abandon this higher and nobler mean-
ing, for the sake of preserving the reference
to the commonplace of everyday life. " So
taken, the petition . . raises us to the
region of thought in which we leave all that
concerns our earthly life in the hands of our
Father, without asking him even for the
supply of its simplest wants, seeking only
that he would sustain and perfect the higher
life of our spirit." If, however, the inter-
pretation (on tho whole unlikely) of common,
everyday tread, be accepted, and the simple
reference of ch. x. 42 to the necessity for
only one dish at table be adopted, then,
with the charge to the seventy contained
in ch. X. 7, to eat and drink " such things as
they give," and the further instruction to
" take no thought . . . what ye shall eat "
(ch. xii. 22), we have, in this last period of
our Lord's public life, clear expressions on
the part of the Master of his wish that hie
followers should ever content themselves
with the simplest human food, avoiding not



OH. XI.1— 54,J THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. LUKE.



301



only all excess, but all extravagance, and
even oonsideratinn and thought, in providing
for anything beyond the simplest daily
austenance.

Ver. 4. — And forgive ns our sins ; for we
also forgive every one that is indebted to
us. Unforgiving is unforgiven. Nothing
apparently more easy to frame with the lips,
and to desire intensely with thu heurt, than
this petition that the FHther would forgive
us our sins, only, in praying the prayer, how
many forget, or at least slur over, tlie con-
dition of tliat forgiveness — a conditinn they
impose themselves 1 We forget the ten
thousauil talents as we exact the hundred
pence, and, in the act of exacting, we bring
back again the weight of the great debt on
ourselves. And lead us not into temptation.
The simple meaning of this concluding
petition in St. Luke's report of the prayer
IS, " Thou kuowest. Father, how weak I am ;
let me not be tempted above that I am able."

Vers. 5 — 13. — Prayer continued. The wis-
dom of perseverance in prayer is pressed.
The Lord introduces his argument by the
short paral'le of the selfish neighbour.

Yer. 5. — And he said unto them, Whloh of
yon shall have a friend, and shall go unto
him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend,
lend me three loaves. This whole passage
follows naturally the Lord's own formula of
prayer. The teaching contained in vers. 1 —
13 may be well summarized as the Master's
Uison on prayer. The disciples, when they
heard Jesus pray, asked him to instruct
them in the holy art. The Lord then sug-
gested to them a series of short subjects for
constant prayer, and furtlier gave them
words in which they could embody these
subjects, and then proceeded to press upon
thenj that this constant seeking help from
God should never be interrupted; no dis-
couragements were ever to prevent their
praying. " See," said the Master, " this "
(telUng them the little parable) "is what
God appears to be when prayer receives no
answer." Of course, be is not what he appears
to be (see ver. 9). The truth concerning God
does not really come out before the words of
ver. 9 ; but the parable, grotesque and quaint,
and picturing a common scene of everyday
life, arrested the attention then as it has done
in many a million cases since, and told men
out of heart and despairing of receiving any
answer to their prayers, to think. Well,
here is a case in point ; but is God like this ?
The Lord replies shortly to this mute heart-
query. At midnight. The whole picture is
drawn from a poor man's house — children
and parents sleeping in one room. " With
me in bed " probably suggests what is com-
mon in an Ejastem house, where a divan or
laised platform (rendered here " bed "} often
filled well-nigh half the room. The hour



midnight has nothing strained in it — it wa<
frequently the practice in the East to travel
by night, and so to escape the great heat of
the day.

Ver. 8. — Because of his importunity, he
will rise. The one idea left upon the minds
of the hearers of this little quaint homely
parable is — importunity is completely success-
ful. The borrower had only need to keep
on knocking to get all he wanted.

Vers. 9, 10. — And I say unto you. Ask, and
it shall be given you ; seek, and ye shall find j
knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For
every one that asketh receiveth ; and he that
seeketh flndeth; and to him that knocketh
it shall be opened. Then the Lord — taking
advantage of the state of mind into which
his strange words had brought bis hearers —
made, as Professor Bruce well points out,
the solemn declaration on which, and not
on the parable, he desired the tried soul to
lay the stress of its faith : " And I say unto
you, Ask, and it shall be given you," etc
Jesus here pledges that those who act in
accordance with this counsel shall find the
event justify it. This statement, that those
who pray to God shall surely be heard, rests
absolutely on Christ's authority. It is not
given as a fact which is self-evident, but as
a fact which he, the Speaker, knows to be
true. The man in bed is pictured in the
parable as utterly seltisb, regardless of his
poorer neighbour's wants and sufferings.
So God seems to us often, as we pray to him
day after day, month after month, and our
prayer receives no ans w er ; he merely appears
to us then as a passionless Spectator of the
tragedies and comedies of time. " Children,"
said the Saviour, " the selfish man of my story
yields to constant importunity. Think ye
God, who only seems to be deaf to man's
pleading voice that he may deepen his faith
and educate his soul — think ye God is not
listening all the while, and will not in the
end, in all his glorious generosity, grant the
prayer? Only pray on."

Ver. 11. — If a son shall ask bread of any
of yon that is a father, will he give him a
stone ? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish
give him a serpent t The Master keeps on
adducing instances of the loving Fatherhood
of God. All the while men were thinking
hard things of him and bis sovereignty.
"Children," urged the Saviour, "such things,
such a cruel part as yon would in your dark
sad thoughts ascribe to the loving heavenly
Father, is simply unthinkable in the case of
earthly parents. They never really turn a
deaf ear to their children's pleading ; think
you that your Father which is in heaven
will refuse to listen to you when yon indeed
call on him 7 "

Ver. 13. — How mnoh more shall yenr
heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to thea



802



THE OOSPBL ACOORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xi. 1—54.



that Bsk himl In St. Matthew we find the
last portion of this teaching related as having
taken place at a much earlier period of the
l.oi'd's ministry. It is more than probable
that much of Jesus Christ's general instruo-
tion was repeated on more than one occasion.
There is an important difference between
the words reported by the two evangelists.
St. Matthew, instead of the " Holy Spirit,"
has the more general expression, "good
things." In both aocoimts, however. Is the
Master's assurance that prayer, if persisted
in, would ever be heard and granted, and
there is the all-important limitation that the
thing prayed for must be something " good "
in the eyes of the heavenly Father. How
many requests are made by us, poor, short-
sighted, often selfish men, which, if granted,
would be hcirmful rather than a blessing to
the askerl Here the Lord, the Reader of
hearts, having taken notice of some of the
deep earnest longings, perhaps scarcely crys-
tallized into prayer, of his own disciples,
of a John or a James, pictures the case of
one who deserves a special deepening of the
spiritual life, and prays some prayer for the
presence of the Holy Spirit. Such a prayer,
says Christ, mutt be granted.

Vers. 14—36. — Tfte bitter attack of the
Pharisees. Their acciitation of the Lord that
he was in league tcith the evil one. His
reply. The grave and terrible charge which
was formally made by persons evidently of
rank and position sent down from the capital
to watch, and if possible to entrap, the hated
Oalilesan Teacher, was a charge no doubt
brought against the Lord on more than one
occasion. Of this we have clear evidence in
the Gospel narratives. Puzzled end dis-
mayed by the marvellous acta of power
worked by Jesus, it was only too easy to say
that he had friends and helpers among
those spirits of evil which the Jew knew
well were working unseen on earth.

This circumstances under which the accu-
■ation was made, and the reply of the Lord
■poken, were as follows : The scene is still
in the provinces, the time somewhere in the
period between October and the spring of
the last Passover — the period which the
Master spent in that slow solemn progress,
through 88 yet nnvisited places, towards
Jerusalem. Learned and experienced mem-
bers of the Pharisee party, scribes and doc-
tors of the Law, had been told off to watch
the dangerous and popular Galilsean Teacher,
and, whenever it was possible, to lessen hia
influenoe among the people.



Jesua (ver. 14) had been occupied in one
of his (probably) daily works of healing.
He had expelled an evil spirit from a sufferer
whose malady had assumed the grave form
of insanity which refused to speak. The
people around were wondering at this gra-
cious act of power ; then broke in voices of
accusation, voices to challenge him to show
them some sign from heaven, saying that
his power was only derived &om evil sources.
To this the Master replies with consummate
skill, knowing the trained minds with whom
just then he had to do. He is interrupted
by murmurs of approval from the crowd
(vers. 27, 28). He notices these for a mo-
ment, and then proceeds in detail to reply to
that subtle request that he would prove his
claims by showing them some sign from
heaven.

Ver. 14. — And he was casting ont a devil,
and it was dumb. Some very terrible and
apparently helpless form of possession which
njanifested itself in a mute, possibly in a
motionless, melancholy insanity. And the
people wonde.'ed. Not improbably the pro-
fessional exorcists had tried here and signally
failed; hence the special wonder of the
people.

Ver. 15. — Bat some of them said, He
casteth out devils through Beelzebub the
chief of the devils The accusation seems to
have been whispered among the people by
the Phnrisee emissaries from the capital ; the
words of the charge were evidently not ad-
dressed to Jesus. These men could not
deny the reality of the work of healing, so
they tried to suggest that the great Healer
had dealings with some great evil angel,
whom they call, from some old Jewish tradi-
tion, Beelzebub. In 2 Kings i. 3 we read that
tills idul-deity was the god of Ekron. The
name signifies " lord of flies." He was very
likely worshipped in the low-lying cities of
the sea-coast of Philistia as. a god who would
be likely to avert the plague of flies and in-
sects which infested that locality. So Zeus
was adored as Apomuios (the averter of
flies), and Apollo as IpUktouos (the slayer
of vermin).

Ver. 16. — ^And others, tempting him,
sought of him a sign from heaven. As in
the case of Manoah or Elijah. Some such
sign as the pillar of fire these cavilling
Jews probably referred to. No doubt, in the
oourse of the public teaching, in the presence
of his mighty acts, Jesus was asked for such
a sign on several occasions. His questioner!
would argue after this fashion : " We sui-
peot that these great works of yours, espe-
cially your strange power over spirits of evil.



OH. XI. 1—54.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



303



•re derived from the realm of darkness ; now,
show us that our suspicion is baseless by
some splendid sign of tlie visible approv^
of Heaven."

Vor. 18. — If Satan also be divided against
himself, how shall his kingdom stand 1 be-
oanse ye say that I cast out devils through
Beelzebub. Throughout this argument Jesus
assumes the existence of a kingdom of evil,
all armed and thoroughly organized to carry
out its dread purposes. He concedes, too, in
language which admits of no questioning,
the existence of a chief of this evil con-
federacy. Throughout his reply, the Master,
while carefully bearing in miud the ability
and skill of his enemies who had suggested
this questioning to the people, addresses
himself to the common sense of the mixed
multitude who were present on this occasion.
The argument is perfectly simple. It is not
thinkable that the prince of evil would fight
against hin)self, which he would be rtoing
if he put such mighty weapons into Jesus'
hands.

Ver. 19. — By whom do your sons cast
them out ? therefore shall they be your
judges. But he goes further in liis skilful
line of argument. " I am not the only one,"
s;iid Jesus, " who claims to oast out devils.
Thai e are those in the midst of you, your
sons, who make a similar assertion. Have
they too entered into a league with this evil
angcd?" A question has been raised re-
specting these professed exorcists of evil
spirits whom Jesus here styles " your sons."
Who were they ? Some, notably the older
patristic expositors, have supposed that our
Lord here alluded to his own apostles, to
whom a measuie of this puwer over unclean
spirits was certain'y given. Others, that
they are identical with the »' pupils of the
wise," disciples of the great rabbinical
schools, such as were presided over by the
famous doctors of the Tulmud. This is quite
possible ; but we have no proof that profes-
sional exorcists were pupils in any of the
known rabbinical schools. It is more likely
that by this general term Jesus alluded to
the exorcists. These were, ot this period of
Jewish history, numerous. They are all udtd
to in Acts xix. 13 ; by Josephus (' Ant.,' viii.
2, 5) ; mention of them is also specially
made in the Talmud, which even describes
something of their mode of procedure. Our
Lord Stems to affirm in some cases, to a
certain extent, the efficacy of the power of
these exorcists. " These, Jews like your-
selves," argued Jesus, " some of them, you
know, belonging to your own Pharisee
sect, — these have in certain cases apparently
driven out the evil spirit of insanity: you
do not accuse them, do you, of working
with an evil angel?" Godet, in the next
ieven verses, has suggested a new line



of interpretation, which, while generally
preserving the traditional exposition of the
various details, supplies the connecting
thought between ver. 23 (" He that is not
with me is against me," etc.) and the verses
which precede and follow. This, apparently,
has never been done satisfactorily by any
commentator. Indeed, some, e.g. De Wette
and Bleek, are frank enough to confess that
they abandon the attempt. In these seven
verses Jesus draws two pictures, in which ho
contrasts one of those expulsions of evil
spirits which he works with that of a cure
worked by an exorcist.

Ver. 20.— But if I with the finger of God
cast ont devils, no doubt the kingdom of Ood
is come upon you. Here Jesus points to a
fact well known and thoroughly established.
There was no question here ; the moat obsti-
nate cases of possession had yielded to that
" finger " be spoke of here ; the fiercest of
the, alas I (then) great company of the insane,
at the bidding of that quiet, humble Kabbi,
for ever shook off the spirit of madness, in
whatever form of terrible possession it had
been dwelling in his body. There was no
question here ; the only point raisec] by hia
enemies — how had that quiet Rabbi done
these strange, mighty works — Jesus had
answered ; and now draws a picture of one
of these acts of his. The " finger of God "
in St. Matthew, where the same or a
similar discourse is related, is called the
" Spirit of God." The expression is stTange,
but is one not unusual in ancient Hebrew
phraseology. So the Kgyptian magicians
said to Pharaoh, "This is the finger of
God" (Exod. viii. 19). The ten command-
ments are described as written on the two
tables of stone with the "finger of God."
" You have seen by what power the devils
obey m«; yea, the kingdom of God, for
which you are waiting and looking, lo, it is
coiue upon you."

Vers. 21, 22. — When a strong man armed
keepeth his palace, his goods are in peace :
but when a stronger, than he shall come
upon him, and overcome him, he taketh from
>"Tn all his armour wherein he trusted, and
divideth his spoils. The exegesis is easy
here, The strong man is the devil ; his palace
is thie world ; his goods espeiially here the
poor possessed ; the stronger than he is Jesus
himself, who, as he paints this ieature in
the picture, is thinking of the scenes of the
temptation, when in good earnest he over-
came his ghostly adversary, then he took
from him all his armour wherein he trusted,
and now he, the Conqueror, divideth his
spoils, among which are these unhappy
possessed ones now being rescued from the
power of their tormentor.

Ver. 23. — He that is not with me is against
me; and he that gathereth not with me



304



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xi. 1—54.



wattereth, Out Lord here is referring to
the exorcists, and contrasting their imperfect
work with his, showing liow hopeless a task
it was to attempt to combat the evil one and
his satellites apart from him — Christ. It is
particularly to be noticed that Jesus neither
here nor elsewhere oliarges these with im-
posture. Pretence and ridiculous spells and
ineantatioiis were doubtless constantly mixed
up with their attempts to exorcise ; indeed,
the term used to describe them in Acts
xix. 13 is one of contempt; but Jesus as-
Bumes in his argumi-nt here, what was no
doubt the fact, tliat in these cases there was
often, in the perbon of the phyeioian-exorcist,
earnestness and prayer mingled with the
deepest pity foi' the unhappy sufferer, and
before these tlieru is no doubt that, in the
less severe cases of possession, the evil in-
fluence or spirit yielded, and for a time at
least let go his victim. "See," said the
Master, " he that is not with me is against me
in tliis dire conflict against evil ; " for these
would-be exorcists were utterly unable, even
in tliose instances where tbey expelled the
devil, to render him powerless to do mischief
for the future. " My power sent these dread
beings to the abyss, there to wait. The
would-be exorcists were unable to replace
the hellish tenant which they expelled by
another and a holier influence. I bring
back the once-tormented soul to its old re-
lations with its Goil-Friend, and replace
the unclean spirit by the Holy Spirit." He
goes on to say —

Vers. 24, 25. — ^When the unclean spirit is
gone out of a man, he walketb through dry
places, seeking rest; and finding none, he
saith, I will return unto my house whenoe I
oame out. And when he cometh, he findeth
it swept and garnished. The devil, expelled
for a season, watches his opportunity and
quickly returns ; the exorcist-physician was
powerless without the aid of Ohrist to ac-
complish anything more than a half-cure;
the relapse, as we shall see, was worse than
the original malady. The imagery of the
"dry place" through which the devil walked
during his temporary absence from the
aiBiotfd soul, was derived from the popular
tradition that spirits of evil frequented ruins
and desert places (see the Talmud, ' Treatise
Berachoth,' fol. 3, a ; and Tobit viii. 3).

Ver. 26. — Then goeth he, and taketh to
him seven other spirits more wicked than
himself; and they enter in, and dwell there :
and the last state of that man is worse than
the first. As instances of such a terrible
possession, not improbably the result of a
relapse such as is above portrayed, might
be oited the cases of Mary Magdalene, out
of whom we are told went seven devils, and
of the Gtergesene demoniac, who was pos-
sessed by a swarm or legion of these unclean



spirits. There is another well-known his-
torioiil reference contained in these words of
Jesus, which speak of the triumphant return
of the temporarily banished devil. In this,
the chosen people repi-esent the one pos-
sessed ; the expelled devil was the one beset-
ting sin which from the time of the Exodus
to the Captivity — that fearsome idolatry
with its attendant mischief — exercised
over Israel a strange and horrible fascina-
tion. After the return from exile, idolatry
seemed driven out for ever. But the hnus»
was only empty; there was no indwelling
Presence there of the Holy Spirit of the
Loid, only an outward show of ceremonies
and of rites, only a religion of the lips, not
of the heart ; and so the old state of posses-
sion returned under the form of hypocrisy,
envy, narrowness, jealousy, covetousness.
The Jewish historian, Josephua, has dared
to paint the picture of national degradation
which closed in the sack and burninpf of the
city and temple (a.d. 70). But this striking
application belongs to St. Matthew, who
represents our Lord closing his sad sketch
of the return of the devils with the words,
" Even so shall it be also unto this wicked
generation." It may have been that Jesus
prolonged on this occasion the terrible
sermon, and drew out lesson upon lesson
suggested by his words ; but it is more likely
that St. Matthew is writing of another occa-
sion, when, taunted with working with the
aid of the devil, the Master spoke similar
words, drawing from them other lessons.
The general lesson to be learned — ^if the
above exegesis be in the main followed — is
the utter hopelessness of attempting any
work which has as its object the amelioration
of the human race without the aid of Ckriit.
Earnestness and imposture will alike in the
end fail here. The ease of the one of whom
the disciples complained to their Master as
casting out devils, but who followed not
with them, was very different. Bere the Lord
said, " Forbid him not: he that is not against
us is for us." The good work in this case
was done, we read, in the Name of Chriiti
hence the Divine approval.

Ver. 27. — ^And it oame to pass, as he spake
these things, a certain woman of the com-
pany lifted up her voice, and said unto him.
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the
paps which thou hast sucked ! This woman
seems to have expressed the popular feeling.
The crowds who had seen the great miracle,
had listened to the cavilling suspicions, and
then heard the Master's wise and skilful
reply, were evidently impressed with the
wisdom as with the power of the famous but
bated Teacher, for they no doubt echoed thr
lofty and sublime blessing of the woman
here. She, perhaps, had in her ovm person
experience of the two kinds of healing jnst



*H. XL 1—64.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



805



eontrasted by the Master; at all events,
■be had rightly comprehended his words.
" How many women have blessed the holy
Virgin, and desired to be such a mother as she
was! What binders them? Christ has made
for UB a wide way to this happiness, and not
only women, but men may tread it — the way
of obedience ; this it is which makes such a
mother, and not the throes of parturition "
(St. Chrysostom). It has been ingeniously
noticed that this is the first direct fultilment
of the " Magnificat"— "all generations shall
call me blessed."

Yer. 28. — But he said, Tea rather, blessed
ate they that hear the Word of 6od, axi keep
it. As was invariably his practice, lie de-
clines to enter into any dlscussiion respecting
the peculiar blessedness which earthly rela-
tionship to him might bring. It was not for
public discussion. The Lord, in his reply,
tells her, however, that there was something
even more blessed than that earthly relation-
ship to which she was alluding, and to that
lomething all, if they pleased, might attain.

Vers 29, 30. — And when the people were
gathered ' thick together, he began to say,
This is an evU generation : they seek a sign ;
and there shall no sign be given it, but the
dgn of Jonas the prophet. Tor as Jonas was
a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the
Son of man be to this generation. Jesus
now proceeds — the crowd was, we read,
become denser— to reply to the unbelieving
suggestion that he should show by a sign
from heaven that it was not by the help of
Satin and the powers of hell that he was
enabled to exercise so mighty a power over
the spirits of evil. No sign of the startling
nature demanded would be given to the
Jews of his day. Evidence in support of his
high claims and lofty assertions was then in
process of being supplied. What were their
•yes beliolding day by day, and their ears
hearing? Evidence still more complete
would yet be given them, but it would avail
nothing I Lo, the solemn sign of the Prophet
Jonas, who preached to wicked Nineveh
after his strange resurrection — that would
be given them. It is clear that St. Luke's
account of our liOrd's words is abbreviated.
To make the symbolism of the resurrection-
sigu complete, we must compare St. Matthew's
report (xii. 39, 40), where in plain terms the
Lord's death, and the resting in the tomb,
and subsequent resurrection is foretold, and
compared to the well-known story of the
entombment of Jonah at sea for three days.
This fcimile of the Master's was no doubt
one repeated on several occasions. It is
likely enough that it was so well-known a
comparison when St. Luke wrote his memoir
of the life that the evangelist felt it was not
needful to go into all the d( tails of the com-
parison : to men lion the simile was enough;

LUKE.



no Christian individual, household, or con-
gregation but could at once flU up the detaili
originally spoken by the Lord here. In the
catacombs the Jonah-story is, owing to its
use by our Lord, an oft-repeated and Tory
favourite representation on those long gal-
leries of tombs of Christian men and women
of the first three centuries.
_ Ver. 31.— The queen of the south shall
rise np in the judgment with the men of
this generation, and condemn them : for she
came from the utmost parts of the earth to
hear the wisdom of Solomon ; and, behold, a
greater than Solomon is here, The Queen
of Sheba, her visit to King Solomon, and its
subsequent results made a lasting impres-
sion throughout the East; probably the
immediate consequence was that a great
commerce was opened up between Yemen,
of which she was queen, and other parts of
Arabia and the tar East. The Talmud and
Koran, for instance, have various legends
respecting this Eastern queen who was so
dazzled and impressed by the magnificent
Israelitic sovereign. Such a simile would
be singularly attractive to the common folk
who were then, we know (from ver. 29),
crowding round Jesus. King Solomon's
wisdom charmed and attracted from far
countries the famous queen. Lol One
wiser than Solomon was in their midst : can
we not hear from the honest, plain fulk
around him a murmur of assent here?
Hadn't they been just listening to his wise
words when the Pharisees tried to prejudice
them against him ? Hadn't they burst out,
in the person of the woman of vers. 27, 28,
with an irrepressible sign of admiration?
Lo I the great Arabian queen, when at the
day of judgment she arose, would condemn
Israel for tbeii blind folly.

Ver. 32. — The men of Nineve ejhall rise np
in the judgment with this generation, and
shall condemn it: for they repented at the
preaching of Jonas ; and, behold, a greater
than Jonas is here. And these poor sinners
of the wicked city of Nineveh, they, too,
will join in approval of the sad condemna-
tion of the chosen people. In Nineveh,
when Jonah appeared among them and bade
them repent, they obeyed the solemn warn-
ing voice. Lo I a greater Preacher far than
Jonah was in their midst ; but, alas I Israel
was deaf.

Ver. 83. — No man, when he hath lighted
a candle, putteth it in a secret place, neither
under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that
they which come in may see the light. The
Lord continues his reply to those who asked
him to support his claims by a visible sign
from heaven, "Do not think for a mumeut
that the sign I speak about, and which wu*
prefigured in tbe story of the Pro|>het
Jonah, will be an obscure or secret thing



806



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xi. 1—64.



No man lighta a lamp to hide : bo will it be
with that sign which will be given to you."
Jeans was speaking all the while of the
mighty sign of his lesuTrectlon.

Vers. 31, 35.— The light of the body is the
eye : therefore when thine eye is single, thy
whole body alao is full of light; but when
thine eye is evil, thy body also is full of
darkness, Take heed therefore that the
light which is in thee be not darkness. He
goes on, though, with his solemo warning
words. Plainly visible though the lign
would be — shining bright as a lighted lamp
set on high — still it, too, was possible to
miss seeing it. If the eye, the organ of the
body which perceives the light, be sound
and healthy, then the illumination given by
the lamp is seen, and the whole body, so to
speak, is full of light ; but if the eye was
diaeased, purblind, no bright shining light
would be seen— the body then would be full
of darkness. The word rendered " single "
denotes the eye in its natural healthy state;
that trauskted " evil " speaks of the eye as
diseased, as incapable of perceiving the rays
of light. The imagery to those Orientals,
accustomed to parable and allegory in the
stories and poems they had listened to from
their childhood, was easily translated into
the language of everyday life. If they
gave way to passion, jealousy, prejudice,
impurity, lawlessness In its hundred forms,
then for theiu the spiritual eye of the soul
would become diseased, and therefore in-
capable of rightly discerning any heavenly
sign. It ^^as this danger that the Master
was pointins; out to the crowd. " Ah 1 " he
seems to say, "you ask a heavenly sign
which will substantiate my lofty claims;
that sign, in a grauiler and more stately
form than ever you have dreamed of, shall,
indeed, be given you. Have no fear on
(hat score ; rather dread that blindness, the
punishment of a hard and evil heart, will
come upon you, and renJer you incapable of
seeing the sign you ask for, and which I
mean to give you." He wan ipeaking still of
hif resurrection. Alas, for them I the blind-
ness of which he warned them was the un-
happy lot, we know, of very many of those
listening then.

Ver. 36. — If thy whole body therefore be
fall of light, havmg no part dark, the whole
ihaU be full of light, as when the bright
■tuning of a candle doth give thee light.
The Lord here coniplc tes his allegory, still
preserving the same images, with a ski tch
of the condition of a holy and humble man
of heart, who with a " single eye," that is,
honestly, trustfully, lovingly, hns looked
upon the sign and believed. Godot's com-
ment on this hard and mystic saying of the
Blessed is very beautiful : " When, through
the fact of the olearuess of thine eye, thy



whole body shall be penetrated with light,
withont there being in thee the least trace
of darkness, then the phenomenon which
will be wrought in thee will resemble what
takes place on thy body when it is placed
in the rays of a luminous focus. Jesus
means that from the inward part of a per-
fectly sanctified man there rays forth a
splendour which glorifies the external man,
as when he is shone upon from without. It
is glory as the result of holiness. The phe-
nomenon described here by Jesus is no other
than that which was realized in himself
on the occasion of his transfiguration, and
which he now applies to all believers."
There is little doubt that this teaching
had been spoken by the Master on one, if
not on more than one, previous occasion.
In St. Matthew's report, in almost identical
language (v. 15 and vi. 22), the immediate
application was different, and the reference
of the lamp put in a prominent place was
not to the Besurrection.

Vers. 37— 54.— Jn tht PhariaeeU houu.
The Lord's stem denunciation of tht Pha-
risee teaching and life. The day was not
far advanced, and the Master was probably
weary and faint after the long and exciting
discussion just related; taking advantage,
probably, of this evident weariness, some
of the Pharisee emissaries from the capital,
to whose presence we have before alluded,
suggested to one of their friends, who had
a residence in the town where the events
just related had taken place, that he should
invite the Master to come in ami rest awhile
and partake of a repast. They wished, no
doubt, to get him away from the fast in-
creasing crowd, and, when alone with him,
they hoped to entangle him in a fresh dis-
cussion, and entrap him into some statement
which they would be enabled subsequently
to make use of, when they formally accused
him of heretical, blasphemous teaching.
There is no doubt that at this period
of his ministry a deep-laid plot had been
formed to compass in some way or other
the death of this Teacher,'whose words and
acts were beginning so deeply to compro-
mise their position and influence in the
nation.

Ver. 38. — He marvelled that he had not
first washed before dinner. An elaborate
system of utter meaningl( ss ablutions, each
carried out with particular gestures, had
been instituted by the rabbinical schooia.
All these senseless forms and ceremonies
had been developed out of the original



oH.xi. 1— 64.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



307



limple (Hrectiona to eecnre cleanllnpHs in
the Leviticftl Law. It is probable that our
Lord, intending to bring about this discus-
sion, pointedly abstained from even the
ordinary ablution on this occasion. The
language of ver. 37 seems to point to his
entering the house and at once sitting down
at the table. The Talmud has many re-
ferences to these practices. R. Akhibha,
it proudly relates, died of thirst rather than
pass over these preliminary washings. In
the same compilation we read that it was
currently supposed that a demon sat on
hands unwashed.

Vers. 39, 40. — And the lord said unto
him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the
outside of the cup and the platter ; but your
inward part is full of ravening and wicked-
ness. Ye fools, did not he that made that
which is without make that which is within
alsof Many of the words spoken on this
occasion had been uttered by the Mister
previously. The variations in them, slii^ht
though they be, npoessitate often quite a
ditferent interpretation. This helps us to
come to the conclusion that in these cases
the Lord must have spoken such sayings
on different occasions. In this place, lor
instance, in the report of a similar accusa-
tion levelled ugainst the Pharisees reported
by St. Matthew (xxiii. 25), the second
clause of the verse, which treats of the out-
side of the cup and the platter, reads thus :
"but within tlieyare full of extortion and
excess." The meaning of this is — while
every care had been taken to purify the cup
and the dish, no pains whatever had been
paid to the source whence came the contents
o/ thete. They were too often the proceeds
of extortion, they were too frequently con-
sumed with self-induJgence. But here, in
St. Luke, the second clause reads, " your
inward part is full of ravening and wicked-
ness." The meaning of these words is, " In
spite of your extreme care for the vessels of
your table, your whole moral life is unclean
and defiled. Are you not," argues the Master,
" fools to lay down such strict rules to avoid
outward defilement, while within, in the
soul, you allow all manner of wickedness?
Surely God, who created the things we see
and touch, created the soul also I "

Yer. 41. — But rather give alms of such
things as ye have ; and, behold, all things
ire clean unto you. Tlie translation here
should run, iiU rather give the things that
are in them o« alms, etc. The thought of
the contents of these cups and dishes — a
thought which came out, as we have seen,
so prominently in St. Matthew — heie is evi-
dently in the Lord's mind. " Ah I " he seems
to say, "what you Pharisees and your
schools of formalism indeed want is tha
knowledge of that great law of love" (the



law Jesus was ever teaching in snoh pa>
rabies, for instance, as that of the good
Samaritan). « I will tell you how really t«
purify, in the eyes of God, these cups and
dishes of yours. Share their contents mth
your poorer neighbours." " Let them do one
single loving, unselfish act, not for the sake
of the action itself, not for any merit in-
herent in it; but out of pure good will
towards others, and their whole inward con-
dition would be different" (Bishop Basil
Jones, in the ' Speaker's Commentary *).

Ver. 42. — But woe nnto yon, Pharisees'
for ye tithe mint and rue and aU manner
of herbs, and pass over judgment and ths
love of God : these ought ye to have done,
and not to leave the other undone. Probably
the primitive Law of Moses, which directed
that a tenth of every income in Israel should
be given up to the service of the invisible
King alone, referred to such important pro-
ducts as corn, and wine, and oil, and the
like ; but the present elaboration of the Law
and the Pharisee schools had extended the
primitive obligation to the smallest garden
herbs, such as mint and rue. The Talmud
even condescends to discuss whether, in
tithing the seeds of these garden herbs, the
very stalk too ought not to be tithed 1 The
Master, ever tender and considerate, does
not blame this exaggerated scrupulosity, if
it were done to satisfy even a warped and
distorted conscience; what he does find
fault with, though, and in the bitterest term»
language can formulate, is the substitution
of and the clear preference for these in-
finitely lower duties for the higher.

Ver. 43. — Ye love the uppermost seats in
the synagogues. These seats were iu a
semicircle round the pulpit or lectern of
the reader ; they faced the congi'egation.
And greetings in the markets. The love of
these Jews in the time of our Lord for
exaggerated titles of respect and honour is
well known.

Ver. 44. — Ye are as graves which appear
not, and the men that walk over them are not
aware of them. Here and in St. Matthew
the same imagery was present in the great
Teacher's mind — the whitewashed tombs of
a cemetery. But in the report of St. M atthew
the Master's picture drew a sharp contrast
between the fair outward appearance of the
clean white tomb, and the ilecaying, loath-
some mass of what represented poor hu-
manity within I Wlien Jesus spoke the
saying related by St. Luke here, the imagery
was still drawn from the graves in a ceme-
tery; but now he compared his hosts and
their school of thought to graves, from tba
wood and stones of which the whitewaab
was worn off, and passers-by would walk
over theti, thus touching them and con-
tracting ceremonial defilement, wit1> ■■ :



308



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xi. 1 -54.



beilig conscious what they were -walkins;
over and touoliing. All contact with
Bepulolirea involved ceremonial defilement ;
hence the fact uf their being constantly
whitewashed in order to warn passers-by
of their pre.ienoe. This siL nt warning of
the graves has been compared to the leper's
cry, " Unclean, unclean 1 " with which he
warned passers-by of his sad defiling
presence. These tombs were whitewashed
neually yearly on the fifteenth day of the
month Adar (about the beginning of March).
Tiberias on the lake was built partly on the
site of an old unsuspected cemetery ; no
true Jew would reside there ia consequence.

Ver. 45. — Then answered one of the
lawyers, , . . Master, thus saying thou re-
proachest us also. It did not follow that all
these professed jurists were of the Pharisee
sect ; some, doubtless, were Sadducees. It
seems, however, probahle that the greater
proportion of these professional teachers and
expounders of the Law did belong tn the
Pharisees. The oral and written Law,
based upon the comparatively simple Mosaic
code, had now become the absolute guide
and director of the whole life of the people
in all its smaller details. The various
copyists, lecturers, teachers, and casuists,
who debated the many doubtful points con-
stantly arising in the perplexing and
elaborate system, were all known under
ttie general term " scribes." The lawyer was
the scribe who had especially devoti d his
attention to the unravelment of the difficult
and disputed questions which arose in the
daily life of the people. This lawyer was
certainly, considering the company he was
associated with, of the strictest sect of
Pharisees. This person could not lielieve
that this able Rabbi from Galilee — for that
they must all, after the morning's discussion,
have allowed Jesus to be— could include
him and his holy order in his terrible
denuneiations, the truth of which tire
learned scribe not improbably dimly dis-
cerned.

Ver. 46. — Ye lade men with burdens
grieTons to be borne, and ye yourselves
touch not the burdens with one of your
fingers. Then the Lurd turned to the
accomplished Jcrunalem scholar, and with
withering emphasis pronounced upon his
famous and influential order those scathing
reproaches which for eighti en centuries
have hern the woeful inheritance of all
hypocritical self-deceivers. How true was
the expression, " burdens grievous to be
bnme," a very superficial study of the
Talmnd will amply show j foraltliongheven
the earliest parts of that stupendous com-
pilation were not committed to writing until
some time after, yet very much of what
we now peruse in those strange, weary



treatises existed then in the oral trnrlitioa,
which it was tlie lile-work of scholars and
pedants, like the lawyer to whom Jesus
was then si>eaking, to learn, to expound
and to amplify; and these vexatious and
frivolous ordinances which the lawyers and
scribes pressed home upon the people with
such urj^eney were often shirked and avoided
by the learned and cultured scribu-olass as a
body.

Vers. 47, 48. — ^Te build the sepulchres
of the prophets, and your fathers killed
them. Truly ye bear witness that ye allow
the deeds of your fathers : for they indeed
killed them, and ye build their sepulchres.
There are still existing four singular tombs
at the foot of Olivet, in the Valley of Jeho-
shaphat. Remarkable objects now to the
modern traveller at Jerusalem, in all their
fresh beauty they would be still more
striking in the days of our Lord. The
peculiar composite nature of the architec-
ture of these great tombs has decided anti-
quaries to ascribe the building of these to
the days of the later Herods. It is, there-
fore, not improbable that these conspicuom
objects in the landscape, seen from tha
temple platform, and possibly others like
them, which have since perished, were the
tombs and sepulchres especially in our
Lord's mind when he was speaking to the
lawyer, and later at Jerusalem, when ha
repeated, with some slight variations, the
same awful woe (Matt, xxiii. 29). It was,
indeed; a speech of awful and cutting irony,
these words of Jesus. " Your fathers," he
said, "killed the prophets; you complete
their evil work by building tombs for these
slain men of God In other words, you
pretend to make amends for the crimes of
past generations by this show of o^teiitatious
piety ; but if you really differed from your
wicked fathers in spirit, if you indeed
honoured, as you profess to do by this
gorgeous tomb-building, the holy men of
God whom they slew, would you be acting
as you now are doing — trying, as you know
you are, to take my life ? Is not my life
like the lives of those old murdered prophets?
are not my words resembling theirs?"

Ver. 49. — Therefore also said the wisdom
of Ood, I will send them prophets. " ' There-
fore ' — in other words, ' Because of the ileter-
miuod, irreconcilable hatred of you Pharisees,
and the people whom you guide, to all that
is noble and true and real ; bt cause, in spite
of your seeming piety, you are fast rooted
in impiety ' — ' Therefore said the wisdom o*
God, I will send.' " The expression, "wisdom
of God," has been a difficulty to commen-
tators. The words have been referred (1)
to a quotation of the Lord's from u lost
apocryphal book of that name; but we have
no instance of Jesus ever quoting from an



CH. XI. 1—54.] TEE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE.



809



•pociypbal book, known or nnknown. (2)
Bt. Luko is here quoting from the similar
passage in St. Matthew's Gospel, which,
when he was compiling his Gospel, lay
before him, and alludes to the earlier memoir
as "The Wisdom of God." Against this
we have no proof that St. Luke ever saw
St. Matthew's Gospel, but a strong proba-
bility exists to the contrary ; besides which,
the expression is never used by an apostolic
writer in such a sense. (3) A reference is
here intended to the Book of Proverbs, which
in the early Church was known by the title
of " The Wisdom of God," and the passage
referred to is ch. i. 20 and 31. Putting
aside all these, it seems best to consider the
expression simply as a solemn utterance of
the Lord, in which he identifies himself
with the "Wisdom of God." And this
certainly is borne out by a comparison with
the report of St. Matthew of a similar an-
nouncement made by Jesus on another
occasion (Matt, xxiii. 31). There we read
that the Master said, " Behold, / send unto
you prophets," etc. The I is emphatic,
and betrays the Divine self-consciousness
of Jesus. For a moment the poor Babbi
of Galilee is forgotten, and in his lofty
indignation, in his profound sorrow over
the stubborn heart of Israel, on both the
occasions in which he is reported to have
spoken these words of awful prophecy, the
Redeemer identifies Himself with God. St.
Matthew, " Wherefore, behold, 1 send unto
you prophets," etc. ; St. Luke, " Therefore
also said the Wisdom of God, I will send
them prophets," etc. The form of the pre-
diction and the original thought were both,
no doubt, derived by Jesus from the solemn
passage in 2 Ohron. xxiv. 19, "Yet he
sent prophrts to them, to bring them again
anto the Lord; . . . but they would not
give ear," eto. This was followed imme-
diately by the account of the preaching of
Zecharidh (the instance chosen here by the
Lord, ver. 51), and how the faithful witness
was stoned by the people in the court of
the house of the Lord (2 Chron. xxiv.
20, 21). And apostles, and some of them
they shall slay and persecute. The title
"apostle" is joined here with the well-
known title of "prophet." The earthly
reward that these hia servants, the apostles,
will meet witli at the hands of the people
of Israel will be the same as that meted
out to those old martyr-prophets, viz. per-
•ecution and death.

Ver. 50. — That the blood of all the pro-
phets, which was shed from the foundation
of the world, may be required of this gene-
ration. He looked on to his own bloody
death; to the day of the last witness of
Stephen and of James ; to the long series of
persecutions which his servants would cease-



lessly suffer at the hands of the Jews : — ha
looked on to the state of Israel growing
worse and worse, till the day when the storm
of Divine anger at last burst over Jerusalem,
and overwhelmed the city and the templa
and the nation. That terrible day came in
less than forty years.

Ver. 51. — From the blood of Abel unto
the blood of Zacharias, which perished
between the altar and the temple. The
reason, probably, why these two are selected
out of the long red list of the noble army,
must be sought for in the special position
which the recital of these two deaths occu-
pies in the Jewish canon of Scripture; the
death of Abel being related in Genesis, the
first book of the canon, that of Zacharias in
the Second Book of Chronicles, which occu-
pies the last place in the sacred volume (in
the Jewish canon). They were simply two
martyrdoms of illustrious men at the begin-
ning and at the close of the long many-
coloured story of the chosen race. There is
no doubt that the Zacharias here alluded
to was Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada the
high priest — a prophet and preacher of
righteousness, who at the commandment of
the king was stoned in the court of the
house of the Lord. This is related in
2 Cliron. xxiv. 20 — 22, in the same passage
which was evidently in the Lord's mind
when he pronounced the awful woe upon
the generation then living. This martyr-
dom of Zacharias was to his Jewish listeners
a very familiar and painful memory. It
evidently ranked among the most terrible
crimes committed by their fathers, and was
the subject of some wild strange legends in
the Talinnd. The martyr's blood would not
dry up; it was still bubbling when Neba-
cbadnezzar and the Chaldeans took the
temple. No sacrifices availed to stop the
awful flow. Tradition assigns one of ths
four great sepulchral monuments at the foot
of Olivet, alluded to above, to the murdered
Zacharias.

Ver. 52. — Woe unto yon, lawyers ! for ye
have taken away the key of knowledge : ye
entered not in yourselves, and them that were
entering in ye hindered. The Talmud gives
us the clue to the Master's words of bitter
reproach here. There were very many, in
that restless age of inquiry, waiting for the
consolation of Israel, who longed to enter
into the real meaning of psalm and pro-
phecy ; but the scribe, the lawyer, and the
doctiir, with their strange and unreal inter-
pretations, their wild and fantastic legends,
their own often meaningless additions, effeo-
tually hindered all real study of the Divine
oracles. The Talmud — in the form we now
possess it — well represents the teaching of
these schools so bitterly censured by iha
Lord.



310



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xi. 1—54.



Ter. 53. — And as lie said these things unto
fhem. The older authorities here, instead
of these words, read, and when he was gone
out frtym thence. Thus, after ntterin;; tlie
last " woe," Jesns appears abruptly to have
risen aud left the house of his Pharisee
entertainers A crowd of angry men, com-
posed of scrihes and lawyers and friends of
the Pharisee party, appear to have followed



the Galilsean Teacher, whose words just
spoken had publicly shown the estimation
in which he held the great schools of reli-
gious thought which then in great measure
guided public Jewish opinion. From hence-
forth there could be only one end to tlie
unequal combat. The bold outspoken
Teacher must, at all hazards, be put out
of the way.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — ^13. — Christ teaching his disciples to pray. " He was praying in a certain
place." Might not he have dispensed with the special season and act of prayer? Was
not his whole life one coniiauous act of prayer? Did he not always realize that
communion with the Father to which praying is the means? Yes; but even he
needed the time and the place of pra\ er. " Made in all things like to his brethren," he,
too, required to recruit the energy ; he, too, for power with God and men, must lift up
his eyes to heaven. Those who say that they can dispense with the particular form
and the definite act ; that all places are their oratories, and all words and deeds the form
of their conference with the Unseen ; hare realized a spirituality sublimated beyond
Christ's, and, it may safely be said, beyond the truth and limits of our human nature.
Is it private or is it social prayer of which the evangelist informs us ? It would seem
that the disciples heard the "strong crying" of their Master ; it may be that he and
they were united in prayer — he speaking with them and for them, as the Father of the
family, as the Head of the household. Be this as it may, one of his followers, impressed
with the action, expresses the desire that such instruction should be given them as the
Baptist had given to his proselytes. And the request, by whomsoever proffered, occa-
sions an answer which is full of meaning. Notice its two points — what to pray for,
and how to pray.

I. What to peat fok. This is set forth in the words which are so familiar to the
Christian ear. Tne same words, slightly modified, are found in the sermon from the
mount. There they are presented in opposition to the repetitions and much speaking
of the Pharisees' prayers ; here they are presented as the brief but comprehensive sum-
mary of the desires of a true disciple of Christ. " When ye pray, say," etc. Notice two
points. 1. A good deal has been made of supposed parallels between the Lord's Prayer
and some devotional utterances in Jewish and even in heathen scriptures. Supposing,
for the sake of argument, that our Lord appropriated sentt-nces in use by his countrymen :
what matters it? Did he not express his innermost feeling on the cross in the words
of the Psalter? The affectation of novelty is one of the poorest kinds of affectation.
What could have been more worthy of the Divine Teacher than the selection of that
which was fitted to nurture the soul-life from the devotional literature which his followers
already had, or which had moulded the sweetest elements of the religious consciousness
of his nation ? And for the rest, if he is the Truth, I should expect to find traces of
his thought, rays of the light by which he has lightened all men, in every quarter and
age of his world. Truth is always Catholic. The finder of truth unites scattered
fragments, and, as he unites, he creates a new thing, a new unity. The thoughts
of many generations might be gathered into the prayer which Christ taught his
disciples; but not the less on that account would it he a new and blessed fact. 2.
Observe, further, there are slight differences in the form of the fourth and the fifth
petitions in the prayer as rendered in Luke, and the prayer as rendered in Matthew.
May we not infer from this that, whilst the prayer is to be used, whilst it is more than
a mere outline, whilst it is indeed the Breviary of the Christian Church, it is not
pressed on us as a hard-and-fast rule. For the same reason that rendered it fitting
that Christ should teach words, it may well be argued that it is expedient, so far, to
prescribe words when the wants of many are to be interpreted, sometimes even when
the wants of individual worshippers are to be expressed. But there is an elasticity, a
freedom, which is an essential element of spiritual worship. Christ's prayer is not tt



CH. XL 1—54.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINQ TO ST. LUKE. 311

be glavisHy used. His own deviations in the second from the first giving of it are
sugfiesiive of flexibleness. And so also his commands. In the Third (jos|ieI we read,
"say ye;" but in the first, " After this manner pray ye." Have these sentences ia
the heart ; let the mind realize the fulness that is in them ; at times speak thum forth ;
yet take your liberty. As those who have confidence as to their entering into the
holiest in the blood of Jesus, let the cry of the Spirit of adoption freely ascend, " pray-
ing always with all prayer and snpplioation in the Spirit."

IL For in teaching to piay, we need instruction, not so much in what to say as in
HOW TO SAT IT. " It is the Spirit that quickeneth ; the fiesh profiteth nothing." There-
fore, no sooner has Christ expounded the rule, or form, than he proceeds to exhibit the
spirit of prayer, the right mental attitude, the faith without which the most pt-rfeot
words are no prayer at alL And this he do( 3, according to his wont, first in the shape
of a simple parable, and next through an appeal to and from the heart of Fatherhood.
The parable (vers. 5 — 8) is very short, referring to things of commonplace life. A
great mauy meanings have bien fastened on every point in this little story. Take it,
however, as it is wiser to do, as bringing out the one feature — that if, as between friend
and friend, importunity OTercoines reluctance; if it triumphs even over surliness; much
more effectual will it be when reluctance to give is only setming — wlien, indeed, that of
which it takcshold is the willingm ssof eternal level Therefore ought we to pray, and
not to faint. Augustine (quoted by Trench) has some good sayings on this. " When
God sometimes gives tardily, be commends his gifts ; he does not deny them. Thing!
long desired are more sweet in their attainment . . . God for a time withholds his gifts,
that thou mayest learn to desire great things greatly." It is this great desiring of
great tilings that is the moral of the story. Prayer is not a mere isolated act ; it is, ai
typified in the story of Jacob with whom the angel wrestled, as proved in the history
of the Lord himself, an energetic, prolonged dealing with God : " I will not let thee go^
except thou bless me." An old Greek writer calls it " the silence of the soul ; " and there
ta in it the silence of the soul that ceases from the will of self, and worships only the
gweet will of God. But there is another view taken in the word of Jesus. In this word
it is desc-iibed (vers. 9, 10) as an asking; beyond this, as a seeking; beyond this even,
as a knocking — " an ascending scale of earnestness." To this earnestness the promise
is given. Mark how full and unqualified the promise is. The relation of friend to fiiend
can teach much ; but there is the relation more intimate still of child to parent, and
this can teach more. For here we come into the inner circle of the thoughts which
are connected with prayer. Therefore the Lord proceeds to illustrate what it is in
his heart to teach by a reference to this analogy. What is it in his heart to teach?
Surely, that the Father's good things are open to all his children, and, as the Crown
of all, as the Gift of gifts, his own Holy Spiiit. This is the climax of all childlike
desire. Even in what is lower, the child stretches forth to this as his highest. " Father,
give me the Holy Spirit." Is it possible to conceive a refusal ? Would a parent who
has bread meet the cry of a hungry child with the offer of a stone? Would he torment
him by giving a serpent when he asked a fish ? or by giving him a scorpion when he
asked an egg ? If it is so with us imperfect men, if we wish to share our good things
with our children, how much more (ver. 13) shall our heavenly Father give his Holy
Spirit to them who ask him? His Fatherhood must be the fountain-light of his
children's day. " Fear not," says Christ, " to apfieal to it." " Blessed is the man that
maketb the Lord his trust." Thus the Lord answers the request of the disciples. Is
it not a request as pertinent to us in the nineteenth as to them in the first century?
There is a secret in prayer which only the Lord can teach. We may recall a remarkable
passage in the life of Coleridge which suggests this : " Shortly before his death he wa»
conversing, solemnly, although familiarly, on his own history and thoughts. ' I have no
difiBculty,' he said, • as to forgiveness. Indeed, I know not how to say with sincerity
the clause in the Lord's Prayer which asks forgiveness as we forgive. I feel nothing
answering to it in my heart. Neither do I find or reckon the most solemn faith in Qoi
M a real object the most ardnous act of the reason and wilL Oh no, my dear, it ia to

prgy to pray as God would have us: this is what at times makes me turn cold to my

toul. Believe me, to pray with all your heart and strength, with the reason and will,
to believe vividly that God will listen to your voice through Christ, and verily do the
titing he pleases thereupoit — ^this is the last, the greatest, achievement of the Christian's



312 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xi. 1—54

warfare on earth. Teach us to pray, Lord ! ' And then,'' adds his biographer, " h«
burst into a flood of tears, aud begged me to pray for him. Oh, what a sight was there! "

Vers. 14 — 26. — Christ and his adversaries. Observe —

1. The contrast. " He was casting out a devil, and it was dumb." This was his
work. As the Bedeemer, be was ever intent on setting the human nature free from its
manifold evil by acting on the hidden cause of the evil. It is to be noted that the
dumbness is traced to a demon — to the possession of the inner nature by a spirit whose
fettering of the man was evidenced in the fettering of the organ of speech. " To cure
sorrow by curing siii " is the special service of Christ's Church. In this deeper reference
— the reference to sin and the evil one — it is distinguished from mere philanthropy.
Philanthropy contemplates the evil, and seeks to remove its occasions in social life or in
the personal history. Christianity reaches to the springs of the evil. It contemplates
sin ; and it sees in sin an enslavement from which the soul is to be delivered by the
One stronger than Satan. But see the attitude of the world. There is wonder (ver. 14)
on the part of sums when the long silence is broken, and the dumb speaks. There is
(ver. 15) the tempting or provocation of the Holy One by the demand for some flaming
portent. And there is the devilish opposition of the Pharisees, who always hung on
liis rear, and who, unable to deny facts, insinuated that there was a league between the
Lord and Beelzebub. So it is still. The darkness which will not receive the light has
degrees of guilt. The blackest form of the guilt is that which cannot but admit the
force that is active amongst men, which sees the results of that force, and yet refuses
to acknowledge it to be light, closes the soul against it.

•* The deaf may hear the Saviour's voice.

The fettered tongue its chain may break ;
But the deaf heart, the dumb by choice^

The laggard soul, that will not wake,
The guilt that Bcorns to be forgiven, —
These bafQe e'en the spells of Heaven.
In thought cf these, his brows benign
Not e'en in healing, cloudless sUiue."

n. Tmi LoBD'b DISCOtTKSE IN REPLY TO THE THOUGHTS WHICH HE BEADS. The thiM

" ^« " in vers. 18, 19, 20, may well be studied. The first exposes the absurdity of the
supposition that he is possessed by Beelzebub. Beelzebub in him divided against Beel-
zebub without him! the one destroying the works of the other! How could such a
power stand ? The second takes another ground. Before him there are heads of the state ;
now, their sons claimed to exorcise spirits by repeating formulas of incantation : would
they allow that such exorcism was by Beelzebub? They pointed to it as an evirlence of
Divine favour ; how inconsistent and absurd to see the hand of the devil in his work,
and the finger of God ia theirs ? The third drives the argument home. If the same
finger as that which they recoa;nized in their so-called exorcisms is being really put
forth, as they themselves can discern, is it not clear that the kingdom of God is come on
them, and that to resist this kingdom is their condemnation ? The parable and the
words which follow (vers. 21 — 26) relate to this. A strong man, fully armed, guards
his own court, and all his goods are secure ; he and his will stand or fall together.
How can the goods be taken? Only by overcoming the strong man, by proving that
there is Another stronger than he. It is only through this personal conflict that the
possessions can be abstracted. So in the Lord's holy wars, a symbol of which had
been given that day. Satan had been holding the afflicted person in his grasp ; and the
wasted life could be restored only by the mightier power of love — the love incarnated
in Christ — "coming upon him, and overcoming him, and taking from him his whole
»rmour wherein he trusted." This he had done ; the departure of the malignant spirit,
and the restoration of the man, were the sign of his victory to be fulfilled through all
the ages.

IIL And then follow two words constantly to be pondered, 1. In respectof this,
Christ's holy war, there can be no neutrality. The eye, perhaps, is directed to the
groups of the people " wondering," and of those tempting him. They had not actually
taken port with the scorners ; they are now reminded, as all in all times are reminded,



OH. XI. 1—54.] THE GOSPKL ACCORDING TO ST. liUKE. 313

that a negative attitude is virtually an attitude of hostility. It is, by so much, a sub*
traction of the strength to he utilized against the enemy. It is an occasion of stumbling
to others. More than this, it withdraws from the attraction of his presence and love,
and lays the heart open to alienating influences. Ever to be insisted oil is the sentence,
" He that is not with me is against me." There is another saying of Christ, one uttered
a short time before (ch. ix. 50), which may seem to be at variance with the tone of this
saying, " He that is not against us is for us." But a glance at the context shows
the difference between the circumstances in which the words are spoken, and the
refer'^nces which they bear. The case brought before us in the ninth chapter is this :
John mentions that he and his brethren had seen a man casting out demons in Christ's
Name, and that they had forbidden him, because he was not one of their company.
This was the 6nly offence. The man acknowledged the authority of Jesus, was really
receivina; the power from Jesus. He wanted only in knowledge of the Lord ; the affec-
tion and will were right. And the charge of the Master is, " Do not forbid such a one;
no one cau do a miracle in my Name who will lightly speak evil of me ; he that is not
opposing me is, in such a ministry, on our part." In the case introduced in the eleventh
chapter Christ is alluding to the attitude of the affections and will. The one sentence
is a reproof of exclusiveness of spirit ; it is virtually — and truly the lesson is most
necessary to-day — " Do not ban one who is seeking the same ends as yourself, who is
acknowledging me as yuu do, because his methods are not yours, or his orders seem of
doubtful validity, or he stands apart from your fellowship." The other sentence is a
reproof of indecision, of colourlessness in the religious life, of the absence of vital sympathy
with the Lord. Virtually it is, " Let every one take his side, and stand by it ; be out and
out with nie ; have his share in my war with the devil : for all purposes, the unsym-
pathetic or faint-hearted is my enemy ; he whose life by its influence, whose action
by its tone and aims, is not gathering with me, is practically scattering." We hear
the old cry, sounding ever on, " Who is on the Lord's side ? " 2. The picture of moral
deterioration in vers. 24 — 26 is must graphic. Those around Christ had been witnesses
to the exodus of an unclean spirit. Let them suppose that such a spirit is impelled by
a ceaseless activity ; " it passes through waterless places, seeking rest, but finding none."
It must have some embodiment. It resolves to return to the old home — " the house
whence he came out." " How can a devil find rest which the creature can find only
in God ? He has lost it for ever ; he seeks it in vai a in all waste places, which otherwise
please him ; he seeks it especially in vain there where G-od, the Lord of creation, will
have his rest, and where, therefore, the devil, if he can force an entrance, finds himself
relatively best — namely, in man. Therefore the desire soon returns upon him to look
after his own more peculiar house " (Stier). He finds the old home " swept and gar-
nished." "Empty" is a word added — and an expressive word it is — by Matthew.
Good the sweeping would have been, if the house had not been empty. God is not
there ; it is open to the evil one. There is his opportunity. He comes to it, lesumes
possession, but with reinforcements. "Seven other spirits more evil than himself.
And the last estate is worse than \he first." Verily, a sketch awfully true 1 It was
applied by the Lord to the generation whom he addressed. Israel had indeed been
swept from the corruption of idolatry ; it had been garnished by the traditions of the
elders, by the scrupulosities of the Pharisees ; but it was empty— a living faith in
CM had been crushed out. And the attitude of its wise men towards the Truth was
the token of an occupation by a spirit of darkness, sevenfold mire virulent than in the
earlier days. But its applications reach to all. " He that hatn an ear, let him hear."

Vers. 27, 28. — The voice out of the crowd. The preacher never knows how far Ms
words reach, what responses they elicit, or what chords they cause to vibrate. Here
is one "out of the crowd," a witness for the emotion of many hearts which had felt
the mighty power of the Prophet. That she had any real insight into the mission of
Jesus, or that she was really attracted to the truth uttered by him, cannot be affirmed.
It was, perhaps, only a passing excitement, "a most artlessly unintelligent outcry pf
mere womanly feeling." But the soul had been stirred ; " while it had rnnsed, the
fire burned, then spake she with her tongue." A woman's word! -the idea with which
It is charjred being the honour which had been put on her whose relation to the Pro-
phet was that of mother. She was the echo of the angel in his salutation, the pioneer



814 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xt 1—54,

of the generations who should call Mary hlessed. The answer of Christ is very striking
in respect of —

I. That whkh it implicitly condemns. We see, in this incident, the germ of
Mariolatry. A natural interest in the one who had been so highly favoured grew, and
corrupted as it grew, into a veneration for her peisoD,and the supposed influence of her
motherhood. Instead of rerognizing the sacredness which had been put on mother-
hood, and dwelling on the very and real humanity of the Lord, the reverence of the
mind was gradually transferred to the image of the woman, as that rose before the
imagination of the nameless one of the crowd, nursing the babe. And the mother and
her motherhood became, like Gideon's epbod, a snare to the Israel of Gid. Observe
how constantly and expressively Christ bids away from the region of such veneiation.
His silence as to his mother implicitly condemns it. He recognizes her, 'not as mother,
but in the title "Woman." His last earthly care was for her, but the sentence which
conveyed it was, " Woman, behold thy Son ! " and to John, " Behold thy mother 1 " And
his declinature to allow the praise to pass utichallenEred, his call to consider something
else as the only legitimate blessednpss, confirms the reproof (see the parallels, Matt

xii. 46 50; Mark iii. 31 — 35). "What is the preaching of the Reformation more

than the word which the Lord here speaks ? In the Council of Trent they heard not
that voice, but repelled it with anathema— for a maranatha to themselves " (Stier).

II. That which it opposes to the obt out op the cbowd. Mark the "ye»
rather." The woman's saying is not denied, but thought is directed to the only legiti-
mate cause of blessedness. The mother herself was blessed because she had given
herself entirely to the Word of God. She had felt herself the Lord's handmaiden
when the salutation came at which she was troubled ; and when the Divine Son, even
as a Child, spoke, she kept his sayings in her heart. This, then, is singled out as th«
"yea rather, blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it." It is a word
both of encouragement and of tearching. There is a tinge almost of jealousy in her who
tccosts him. One had been selected for the honour which she might have coveted.
" Nay," is tiie encouragement, " this is the honour which thoa canst share with her. If
the had it not, whilst thou hadst it, she would have no lasting honour, whilst thou
wouldst have praise evermore. If thou hast this honour, thou art near me as she is."
The vital question is — What is the relation of the life to the Word of God ? To have
heard it is well, but there must be both the hearing and the keeping. " He that hath
my words, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me." The only relationships which
Christ recognizes are spiritual relationships. They are me blood-relationships in th«
family of heaven. " He stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said. Behold
my mother and my brethren ! "

Vers. 29 — 36. — Truth ; tfie eonditione of its reception, and our respontibility vrith
regard to it. We are on trial, placed in a scene of conflict between good and evil, and
called to make our election. Our whole life is such an election ; every day, every
action, goes to complete that solemn probation on which depend issues of unspeakable
moment. Such has always been the contention of Christian teachers. There is a
higher aspect of life than that. To say that life is a Divine education is to give the
fuller and nobler conception of God's purpose concerning us. He is not merely testing
us; he is training us,disci23linirgour character, seeking to perfect our moral being. Thi»
world is his school, and the influences of which we are conscious, the events which
mark our days, the varieties in befalling and condition, are the schoolmasters through
which he is stimulating or correcting, guiding or controlling, the natures with which wa
•n endowed. But it is wrong to set this higher, as against the other aspect referred
to. The two— that which regards probation and that which regards education — are not
opposed. Our part is to refuse the evil and to choose the good, and to stand by our
choice. In respect of this we are on trial. We are called to work out our own salva*'
tion with fear and trembling. Yet, in all, God is working in us to will and to do;
educating the response of our will to his, that as his dear children we may walk before
him in love. In this passage the Lord reminds all to whom he speaks of the relation
of the human mind to the truth that looks down from heaven. His discourse bears on
the test of inward state supplied by the attitude of the mind to the truth. Let us listen
(o it as reminding us (1) of the proper and characteristic force of truth ; (2) of thf



CH.XI. 1— 54.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. 315

ipiritual condition in which this force is realized ; (3) of the responsih 'iity with regard
to it which rests on us individually.

1, The pkopbr and chaeaciebistio poroe or truth. Christ is grieved with th»
generation whose re|iresentatives are with him. He had wrought in their presetfoe the
works of God ; he had spoken to them the words of God. And what did they aver ?
That he was secretly leagued with Beelzebub; in the ministry of love they saw the
malignities of hell, the finger, not of God, but of Satan. Those who shrank from such
wilful misconstruction clamoured for a si^n — some portent in the skies, some miracle
BO striking as to prove the Divine S mrce of his mission. And, feeling the pain of this
contradiction of sinners, he says (vers. 29 — 32), " Sign, more than the preacliing itself?
What Jonah was to the Ninevites — the testimony against them — that the Son of man
shall be. Sign, more than the preacliing itself? The heathen Queen of Ethiopia shall
condemn them ; for her the prtachlug of Solomon was enough, and the Greater than
Solomon is here. The people of heathen Nineveh sha 1 condemn them, for they
repented when the prophet preached; and yet this generation repents not, though the
Sen of God is himself speaking to it. Sign V The ti-uth is its own sign. It is open ;
it may be known and read of all men. It is light (ver. 34), not covered by a bushel,
but set as a candle on a candlestick, that all who come into the house may see it."
This is the abiding characteristic of truth. It is light. Puarisees with cabbalistic lore,
so-called philosophers, with their doctrine for the initialed, their pretentious knowledge,
are not the light-givers. " Whatsoever doth make manifest is light." When the soul
is interpreted or helped ; when God in nature, in providence, or in thought, is declared ;
when the relations and proportions of fauts are discerned ; when the order of the uni-
verse is apprehended and felt ; when, if puzzle and problem are not seen through, the
light pierces into what is beyond, and the heart is enabled to say, " I cannot under-
stand, I love;" — when thus the truth is known, the truth that is known makes free.
Tt is the freedom of light before which the darkness passes. Let us realize the self-
evidencing nature of truth. Signs outward and carnal it does not need. What speaks
of Christ in miracle is not the mere wonder. That only called attention to the real
sign, the object and the manner ol the work. The claim of truth consists, not in what
adheres to it, but in what it is. We do not need a sign to tell us that the sun shines ;
the shining is the sign. We do not need a sign to tell us that a candle is lit ; the candle-
stick shows that. And so with regard to Christianity. As it has eloquently been said.
" The central unquestionable miracle is Jesus himselt^ — One firom the ciadle to the grave,
walking in spotless purity, through all temptation wearing a conscience without a soar,
treading the great deep of human life and never wetting his feet with the spray ;
equally at home with saints in the. glory of the mount, and with men writhing in
misery at its base ; elect to wipe away the tear of humanity, to bear it undwarfed and
undimmed to the heavenly places, yet to whom we can go when the shame burns in
the cheek, and the sweat stands on the brow." Ah! yes; and this miracle is still
writing its mark on the conscience and life of man. Persons speak dolefully about the
decadence of the evangelical faith, and indeed the signs are mixed ; but the evangel of
the living Christ is stifl the power of God — never more than now

" The presence of a good diffused.
And in diffusion ever more intense."

Not less, but all the more, as the world waxes old, and the needs of men become more
urgent and complicated, is this evangel " the light shining in the darkness, and the
darkness will never overtake it."

II. But now observe the conditions on which the force op the truth la
BEALIZED. These conditions, as stated by the Lord, are two. 1. There is the quality
of the receptive organ. " The light of the body is the eye " (ver. 34). Whatever
affects the eye affects the impression of the object beheld. For example, the very com-
mon defect known as colour-blindness necessarily vitiates the discernment. Any injtoy
to the eye, any disttirbance of the wondrously delicate mechanism, mars the vision.
All this has its moral counterpart. " As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." The
truth presented to the soul may yet not be apprehended as truth by the soul, and the fault
lies in the soul itself. The moral necessarily acts on the intellectual. The intellectual
life that springs out of or develops in harmony with a developing spiritual life is the



316 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST LUKE. [en. xi. 1—54.

light of the EouL All is then beheld in its real force and its right proportions. But
oot otherwise. And therefore the great Teacher emphasizes the need of "the singlt
aye" the mind purely intentioned to know God and his will and truth, and this
intention undisturbed by appetite of sense, or by prejudice closing against the evidence
of the light. Ah, the single eye I The tiniest mote may confuse and becloud. One
cunning bosom sin, one aberration from the right, so small as scarcely to be thought
of, may yet impair the organ. And once let the eye become evU, " thy body also
is full of darkness." 2. There is, as the second condition, a complete enlightenment
of mind (ver. 36). See to it that every part of the thinking, willing, activity is
fiubmitted to the light. The whole being must be yielded to it. "Search me,
O God, and know my heart : try me, and know my thoughts : and see if there be
any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting." It is the partial illumi-
oation which we have so often to deplore. The prophet describes Ephraim as "»
cake not turned"— oae part of it under the influence of the fire, burned; the other part
uniafluenced and doughy. So there is often to be noticed an imperfect sanctifying
of character, an imperfect acquaintance with the way of the Lord. Men are always
apt to measure what is due to God, what is to be kept for themselves. The apostle
says, " The God of peace sanctify you wholly." We are often pained by a narrow-
ness of view in Christians, by their failure in learning the lesson suggested by the
evangelist, when he speaks of Christ " looking round about on all things." We are
often pained, again, by a so-called breadth of view — no height in it, no mountain, forget-
ful that in the city which lieth foursquare, the length and the breadth and the height
of it are equal. Oh, how needful is the prayer to increase in the knowledge of his will
in all wisdom and spiritual v/nderstanding 1 Ofier all, conscience, intellect, emotions,
affections, will, all to the light ; make an unreserved surrender. " If the whole be full of
light, having no part dark, that whole is lull of light." Not like a candle burning
dunly, flickering and feeble, but as " when by its bright shining it giveth light."

III. Here, then, is the responsibility with bbgaed to the truth. Men discuss
whether we are responsible for our laith. We are responsible for ourselves, and what
we are individually will greatly determine what, individually, we believe. This seems
most obvious. " Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not darkness "
(ler. 35). There is a light, a capacity of receiving and verifying the light, in every
man — vmless, indeed, in rare cases, or in those who are described as " past feeling," Ll
speaking to men, in preaching the gospel to every creature, we assume this. And it
is this which defines the responsibility resting on all. For the state of this receptive
faculty, for its exercise, we must answer. " Take heed," says the Master. How solemn
and expressive his sentence 1 Not merely " that the light shine," or " lest the light be
extinguished," but more strongly still, " that this inner light be not darkness itself"—
that what should lead to God does not take from God and become an angel, a power,
of darkness. This was the catastrophe already fulfilling in the Pharisees, the catastrophe
which he had declared (see parallel passage, Matt, xii.) to be the sin against the Holy
Ghost. And the word of warning still confronts us. Take care of all that savours of
sophisticating the conscience. Take care of all that cuts off from the light. Take care
lest your prayers lose tone, your desires lose fervour, your soul loses interest in Divine
things. Take care lest any way of thought, through companions, or literature, or
otherwise, blight what is best and holiest in yourselves. The life of God in a soul
is very sensitive. It needs to be guarded ; it needs to be kept open to all Heavenward
influence ; it needs to be ever filled anew out of the fulness of God. A very little may
destroy the organ, may separate from the vision. " The little rift within the lute by-
and-by wiU make the music mute." Walk in the light. As the Light of God is ever
seeking you, so let the light in you be ever seeking him. " Feed daily on Christ in
your heart by faith, with thanksgiving." Do God's will with all the strength. Then
the life is a beauteous order. Apart from the Light, the life is a chaos, a darkness
how great I

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Ver. 1. — The infiuence of devout example, etc. The fact which is stated in the hrsl
verse of this chapter suggests —



CH. XI. 1—54.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST LUKE. 31T

I. The eifluencb of a devout EXAMpr.E. " As he was praying . . . one of his
disciples said tmto liim, Lord, teaoli us to pray." It was the sight of his Master in the
act of prayer which prompted this disciple to make his request. Thus devotion in him
begat devotion in them. All actions, good and bad, are contagious. Bad actions entice
the evil, and good ones attract and inspire the holy and the pure. An oath is an
encouragement to the profane, a prayer is an incentive to the devout. Only infinite '
wisdom can tell whether we produce the greater effect by the unconscious influence of
our life, or by the result of direct, verbal persuasion. But we can all see that they go
well together ; that persuasion to piety with the drawback of a prayerless life would be
of very small account. But to be a man of prayer, to be (without ostentation) known
to be such, to be evidently " at home " with God, to be felt to be one that continually
seeks Divine guidance in the daily conduct of life, — this is to be influential for good. It
is to be saying in the most effective way, " It is good for me to draw near to God," and
indeed to be saying most forcibly also, " It is good for you to draw near to God." The
man of sustained piety, of devout habits which he never lays down, who compels men
to feel that in his view God is not to be forgotten or his service relegated to the second
place, is a power for good ; he is living a truth of vital consequence, he is a blessing to
the society in which he moves.

II. The highest FUNOTiotr or a religious teacher. " Lord, teach us to pray."
1. Not to instruct in sacred truth, high as that is, enlightening the mind on the
greatest of all subjects. 2. Not even to cause disciples to meditate on their spiritual
condition, and to consider how they are themselves affected by ihe truth they have
learned. 3. But to lead to God in direct and immediate devotion : the teacher or reli-
gious friend who helps another to unburden his heart in prayer to God, to pour out his
spirit in submission or in dedication to the Divine Saviour, is rendering the highest
possible service one human being can render to another.

III. The OFricE of the Divine Teacher. This is not only or chiefly to instruct
or to cause us to inquire, but rather to lead us to God in direct, spiritual communion.
This Jesus does by : 1. Opening the way to God; becoming the one and only Mediator
between God and man, through whom we have constant and perfect access to the
Holiest One. 2. Showing us the efficacy of prayer ; and this he does (1) by his own
most strong and satisfying assertion (vers. 9—13) ; and (2) by revealing God to us as a
Father who distinguishes each one of his children from all others, earnestly desires the
return of each abisent child, and purposes to renew and transform every son and daughter
into his own likeness. Such a Father could not but listen and respond when his chil-
dren cry to him. 3. Giving to us a deep sense of the need of prayer ; and this he does
by his own example, and also by his teaching. In this he so impresses us with the value
of each human soul, with the sinfulness of sin, with the possibilities of spiritual worth
and sacred useiulness, and with the grand opening for the faithful soiU in the higher
spheres beyond, that we are impelled to comu to God for his redeeming, sanctifying,,
strengthening grace. — G.

Vers. 2—4. — The true service of the LorcFs Prayer. It is a very painful and pitiful
thing that words which came from the lips of the great Master of the spiritual and the
living should have been allowed to degenerate into an unspiritual and lifeless form.
That this has been the case to a large extent with the " Pater-noster " is a lamentable
fact. It is very doubtful whether Jesus Christ ever intended these words which he
gave to his disciples to be a permanent formula for the Christian Church. It is clear
that the true obedience to his Word is not found in a number of correct and regular
repetitions of the phrases, but in the devotion which is rendered in the strain and spirit
of the " prayer." The true service to be gained from " the Lord's Prayer " is to gather
from it the way in which to draw nigh to God, not only in the worship of the
sanctuary, but in the quiet, unse^ fellowship of the chamber. What Christ would
say to us is this, that in our prayer to God—

I. Wb SHOUIiD give a PROMINENT PLACE TO THE PB0QRE8B OF HIS SPIRITUAL

KINGDOM. Out of six petitions the first three are devoted to the growth of the glory
and the kingdom of God. This is surely a very significant fact. It rebukes all
selhiaiiutss and short-sightedness in the presence of God. It invites us, and indeed it
summons ua, to make the object of our first and deepest solicitude the cause of Jesu»



«18 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xl 1—54.

Christ, the exaltation of our Divine Father in the minds and in the Uvea of men. It
«uggesta to us the consideration whether we are as much concerned as our Master would
have us be for this great issue. How much do we care that God's Name is profaaed
•8 it is, his will left undone and violated as it is, his claims disre^^arded as they are, by
the irreverent, by the disloyal, by the disobedient children of men 7 In prayer our
mind should turn readily and treqiiently to this theme.

IL That we should ask fob God's help in the conduct or our temporal
AFFAIRS. " Give us day by day our daily bread " is a petition that not only warrants,
but requires, that we make our bodily necessities and all matters pertaining to our
world-life the subject of prayer. It is right to ask for strength and skill, for wisdom
and guidance, that we may discharge our daily duties and earn our livelihood honestly
in the sight of all men. It is wrong to leave this out of our daily devotion. Jesus
-Christ would have us look to God for the supply of temporal needs, and ask his
blessing and aid in securing it. We shall work all the more worthily, honourably,
uprightly, through the day for asking God's guidance at its commencement ; we shall
make a better use of what we earn if we continually seek strength of God to earn it.

III. That we should seek earnestly foe the Divine favour. " Forgive ua
our sins," etc. It should be a matter of vital interest to us that we are walking in the
light of God's loving favour, our sins forgiven, and ourselves regarded as his beloved
children, reconciled to him in Jesus Christ. God's abiding favour should be the very
■unshine of our soul, the presence of which makes all things bright, the absence of
which throws every thing into dark shadow.

IV. That we should prat for Divine help m our spiritual steuoolk.
"Lead us not," etc. We should be dally recognizing the fact that our condition here
is that of men that are fighting a hard battle agaiust powerful enemies ; that we need
continual deliverance from evils which beset us ; that the worst foes that assail us are
those which would le«d us into sin and dowu to shame and death. In this supreme
struggle we need the arm of the Almighty on our side. If he be on our side, we shall
-conquer; if not, we shall be defeated. Therefore let us seek daily help from our
heavenly Father for the daily conflict through which we pass on our way homeward.

V. That theke are two spiritual conditions under which alone we can expect
to find favour with God. 1. That we breathe a forgiving spirit in our relations with our
■fellow-men (ver. 4). 2. That we shun the path where perilous temptation lurks; for
how can we ask God to " lead us not " thither, when we deliberately walk into it ? — C.

Ver. 2. — The will of Ood. " Thy will be done, as in heaven, so in earth," A few
very short words with a very large meaning. We may ask what doing God's will
here on earth as in heaven —

I. Would mean to our race. It would mean very much more than the triumph
of the Strong One. 1. It would mean the rule of the absolutely Holy One— of that One
who only wills that which is pure, just, good, in every possible relation. It would
mean, therefore, the abolition of all wrungs of every kind, and the establishment of the
right and the true in every scene and sphere. 2. Also the guidance of the perfectly
Wise One— of that One who chooses the very best means to secure the right ends.
It would bring about the adoption of the wisest course in the pursuit of every worthy
aim. 3. Also the supremacy of the altogether Benevolent One — of him who desires the
perfect welfare of all his creatures, of all his children — their temporal prosperity, their
•spiritual well-being.

II. Would mean to ourselves. The light in which it would present itself to our
minds would, perhaps, be this — that our Divine Father was exalted to the throne of
humanity ; that he whom we worship and whom we love and obey had become the
object of the revereuce, the affection, the obedience, of all manldnd ; that he who,
in our heart's deepest convictions, is alone worthy to receive the homage oi the race,
was receiving it ; and in that crowning triumph we should find our victory and our joy.

III. Demands of us that it may be realized. 1. And the first demand is that
we ourselves become subject to his holy will. And to do this we must (1) accept hit
Son as our Divine Teacher, Redeemer, Lord (John vii. 29 ; 1 John iii. 23) ; (2) live
in daily obedience to his will as revealed in bis Word ; (3) bow in meekness of spirit
to his will, whatever he may ordain for us. 2. And the second is that we seek, in prayer



«H. XI. 1—54.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. Sit

for his transforming influence, that the will of evil men may he overthrown, and his
holy will be done ; that he would send forth nohle workers into the great harvest-Geld
(ch. X. 2) ; that be would greatly blesi the labours of those who are sowing the seed
of the kingdom, and cause it to multiply a hundredfold. 3. And that by our lives and
by our lips we commend the truth of his Word, the gospel of his grace, to the under*
standing and the conscience of all whom we can affect. — C

Vers. 5 — 10. — Continnanee in prayer. These words of our Lord are not Intended
to present God to us as one that is reluctant to respond to our prayer, and that, conse-
quently, has to be besought and entreated with growing energy and ardour, as Baal's
prophets imagined to be the case with the deity they worshipped (1 Kings zviii.).
Bather should we think of him as of a Divine Father who, for our take, delays his
answer to our prayer, in order that we may be disciplined in devotion, and in order
that he may give us what we ask, with a fuller blessing in the bestowaL

I. Thb fact of unanswered fbateb. It is a fact attested by the common, if not
the universal, experience of the devout, that prayer is often presented to God without
any answer' being presently and consciously received. And this is not only true of
prayer that is not worth'y of the name — of mere sacred formalities which proceed only
firom the sense and not from the soul ; it is true of genuine, spiritual devotion. Men
honestly and earnestly pray God to give them bleffeings, and he withholds them. Th«
sickness is not removed, the life not spared, the burden not lightened, the son not
reclaimed, the friend not reconciled, the cause not blessed, the wrong not stayed, the
faithful not delivered ; and the hearts of the people of God are filled with sorrow and
dismay; the question that rises to their lips is, "How long, Lord, bow long dost
thou not respond ? "

IL The meaniko of God's silenob. 1. It may mean that we ask for the wrong
thing — for that which we think will help us, but which God knows will harm us;
which (he knows) will do us much more of lasting, spiritual harm than confer on us
present bodily or temporal relief, 2. It may mean that we are expecting the answer
in the wrong way. Like Kaaman, we may have laid down, in our own thought, ths
precise way in which God is to help or heal us, and it may be with us, as it was with
him, that God is purposing to respond in another way altogether — perhaps by soma
simple means (as in his case), which we are disposed' to consider unworthy of the
occasion; perhaps by some way in which we shall be taught a lesson in humility or in
some other grace. 3. It may mean that we are expecting the answer at the wrong
time, much sooner than it would be wise for God to give it, or well for us to receive it.

III. The reward op coNiiNnANCB in pbateb. We find, as our Lord teaches us
In the parable, that while our friend will not always give us our request at once, yet
he will grant it if we do but persevere (ver. 8). And so with our Divine Friend ;
he may not answer our prayer at once ; he may delay long to respond to us. He may
know that if we received immediately everything we desired of him, we should hecoms
unduly confident or be otherwise injuriously afi'ected. He may know and may wish
«s to learn by disciplinary experience that

" His help is always sure.
His methoiJs seldom guessed ;
Delay will make our pleasure purs^
Surprise will give it zest."

But sooner or later. In one way or in another, in his own good time, God will reward
our persevering prayer with his effectual blessing. We must ask, and go on asking,
and we shall certainly receive ; must knock, and go on knocking, at the door of his
mercy and his power, and it will assuredly be opened to us. This will be found in our
seeking : 1. Conscious and joyous acceptance with God through faith in Jesus Christ.
2. Our spiritual growth. 8. Oar usefulness in that especial sphere in which we are
engaged lor him.-— C.

Vers. 11 IS. — Th« argument from the huma* fatherhood to the Divine. Jesus

Cluio., revealed the Father to men, and he revealed him as the Father of men. Ha
taucht us to address him as such (ver. 2), and to feel toward him as such. He would



320 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xi. 1—54.

hare us realize that G-od sustains to us a r lationship very closely indeed corresponding
to that which a human father sustains to his child. In tlie text be teaches us that this
analogy is so close and so real that we may draw practical inferences from the lower to
the higher one. The particular conclusion which our Lord draws is —

I. Prom our giving to his. No human father would give his son a stone when
appeal was made to him for bread, etc. ; would put him oflF with a response which would
only be a bitter disappointment. Such a one would be not only an exception to his kind,
but would be guilty of an act that would be simply monstrous in general regard. If,
then, we, " being evil," cannot withhold " good gifts" from our children, how much less
will the heavenly Father deny his blessings to us, his sons and daughters 1 What we,
with our finite and limited love, could not refuse, it is certain that he, in his in6nite
goodness and bountlless pity, will readily bes ow. There are two blessings which we
particularly want of God our heavenly Father — provision for our temporal well-being,
and succour for our soul. We cannot live without these. Our bodily nature craves
the one, our spiritual nature needs the other. Bread we must have, and all that " bread "
stands for, that we may live happily and serviceably as those that tread the path of
mortal life. But " man cannot live on bread alone; " he needs those higher and holier
gifts which nourish the soul, which feed the flame of piety and zeal, which strengthen
him for spiritual conflict, and give lijm tlie victory over his worst enemies. For these
two great blessings we may confidently ask God, and he will assuredly grant them. It
is much more certain that God our Father will provide for our real necessities, and
will strengthen our souls with all needful Diiiine influences, than it is certain that the
kindest human father will not mock his beloved children when they appeal for hia
bounty. With holy boldness, then, may we go to the throne of grace, and pray lor all
those things that are requisite alike for the body as for tlie soul. But we may carry
this argument with which our Lord has supplied us into other spheres, and may thus
" assure our hearts " concerning him.

II. From our foegivino to his. We may have a difBculty in realizing the grett
truth that God is willing to forgive us all our sin and to reinstate us fully in his favour.
But if as sons we have heeii forgiven by our parents, or if as parents we have forgiven
our children and taken them baik into the fulness of our favour, we may argue safely
from the human fatherhood to the Divine. If we, "being evil," with such small and
scanty magnanimity as we possess, can forgive freely, how much more can he — ho
whose ways of mercy are as much higher than ours as the heaven is higher than the
earth I

III. From cub ouidancb to his. How impossible it is for any of us that is a father
to refuse guidance to one of our children when he comes to ask it of us I Only the most
heartless, the most unfatherly, could think of declining it. And since that is so with
us, in all our human imperfection, how positive it is that the Divine Father will guide
us by the shaping of his providence, or by the prompting of his Spirit, when we see not
otir way, but tnake known our request unto him fo " lead us all our journey through"!

IV. From cub soLiaTUDB to his. One of the veiy greatest questions we pro-
pose to ourselves is this — Does God care enough for each one of us to renew our life in
another realm when we leave this world ? Jesus Christ's declaration is ihe answer to this
question (John v. 24 — 29). But we flnd strong, reassuring help here. How much do
we care for the continuance of the life of our children ? How much do we not care ?
What words will express our parental solicitude that death should not strike them down,
that they should live, and that their life should be large, free, blessed? If that is our
concern for them, what will not God our Father desire for us? What will he not cart
that we do not perish in the arms of death, but have everlasting life in the embrace of
his own heavenly love ? — 0.

Ver. 20. — Christianity the lenignant power. Lasting power shows solid worth.
The corrupt empire falls; the false system is exploded; the demoralizing custom is
discarded. That which, under all changes, shows itself strong and enduring, is proved
to be sound and good. But add the element of benignity. Jesus Christ adduces hia
beneficent power in the expulsion of evil spirits from the bodies of men as a convincing
evidence of the Divine presence ; that bein^ done, " no doubt the kingdom of GKid is
come." Power for good, for healing, for restoilng, for tranifurming, such power von-



OH. XI. 1—54.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 321

tinuing for many generations and acting under all skies, — "no doubt" that is from
above ; it is of God. If we find that Christianity has proved itself to be the one
great benignant power in the world, exerting a gracious, redeeming, elevating; influence
on humanity, then " no doubt the kingdom of God is come " upon us. We shall see
that thiS' is so if we consiHer —

L The state of booiett when Jesus came. And we have to take into our account
the parental tyranny ; the position of woman in her state of inferiority and even
degradation ; the universal sentiment toward the stranger or the foreigner, spoken of and
treated as a " barbarian " and an enemy ; the prevalence of war, and its conduct with
every imaginable cruelty and the most shocking recklessness of life ; the prevalence of
slavery under a system in which the slaves were regarded and treated as absolutely
without any rights or claims whatsoever ; the existence of gladiatorial shows, in which
the lives of hundreds of strong men in the midst of life were sacrificed for sport to men
and even to women ; the common usage of infanticide ; the abundance of pauperism,
existing to such an extent that in the time of Ccesar " nearly three-fourths of the whole
population of the city of Rome were on the roll of public succour; " the institution of
torture ; the practice of licentious shows, and of unnatural and unnameable vices. We
have here no more than a bare outline of the evils which existed in the world when
" Jesus was born at Bethlehem."

II. What amelioration Cheistiakitt has wrouoht and is wokkino. Three
things have to be mentioned— one to be admitted, and the other two to be maintained.
1. That there have been one or two auxiliary forces in the field, which have contri-
buted towards the elevation of mankind ; but theirs has been very much indeed the
smaller share. 2. That Christianity was prevented from doing all it would have done
by being bitterly opposed. 3. That its action has been most pitifully weakened by
its truth having been so greatly corrupted. But what, notwithstanding, has it accom-
plished ? (1) It has cast out the demon of parental tyranny, and made the child to be
the object of respect and kindness. (2) It has raised woman, and made her the help-
meet, in every way, of her husband, causing her to be treated with deference and con-
sideration. (3) It has mitigated the terrible severities of war, carrying its red cross of
succour into the^very midst of the battle-field, and, to a large extent, removing its
hideous savagery. (4) It has gone far towards exorcising the demon of slavery. (5) It
has abolished the shameful scenes of the old Boman arena. (6) It has extinguished
infanticide and torture wherever it has authority to legislate. (7) It is carrying on a
stem and victorious ampaign against impurity and intemperance. (8) It has built
hospitals, lunatic asylums, reformatories, orphanages, almshouses, by the hundred, by
the thousand. (9) It has opened the school-door in which youth everywhere is pre-
pared for the duties, the joys, and the conflicts of life. (10) It has sent forth its many
hundreds of heralds to carry light, peace, love, purity, wisdom, into the hatmts of super-
Btiiion, violence, and vice. (11) It is penetrating the worst slums of our great cities,
seeking out the profaM, the abandoned, the criminal ; and with its touch of holy pity,
which surely proceeds from " the flnger of God," it is casting out the demons of sin
and shame. At the present rate of progress, another half-century will see a most
wonderful and glorious change in the aspect of the human world.

III. The conclusion that we draw. If Christianity has done, is doing, will do,
all this, then " no doubt " in its advent we have the coming of the " kingdom of God."
No doubt Christ has that to say to us which it is infinitely worth our while to know ;
that to do/or us it is our hia;hest privilege to have done on our behalf; that to he to us
which it is immeasurably desirable he .should be. Let us learn of him; be led by
him into paths of sacred serTioe ; and invite him to become our personal Lord and
Saviour. — 0.

Vers. 24 — 2(>.— Spiritual failure. These words apply to —

I. The Jewish Church. Delivered of the demon of idolatry, and having a house
'swept and garnished," perfected with all external religious proprieties, it became
possessed of the worse demon of hypocrisy— worse in that it was more hopeless. _ For
the idolater may be and often is convicted of his folly and is led into wisdom and piety j
but the formalist and hypocrite is scarcely ever, if ever, won from his unreality and
spiritual pride.

UTKB. '



822 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xi, 1— 54>

II. Mant a Chrtstiah Chubch. Delivered from worldliness, from vanity, from
rice, ID the first instance, many a Cliurch has cherished the cruel demon of persecution,
or tlie evil demon of pride, or the dangerous demon of formality. And it proves to be
harder to awaken the sinful Church, living under its Lord's condemnation, to a new
repentance and a revival of religious earnestness, than it was at first to conduct it into
bis kingdom. Its last state is less hopeful than the first.

III. Mant a human soul, 1. Men go a very long way in the direction of heavenly
wisdom. They listen, they understand, they feel, they purpose, they pray, they profess,
they preach or teach ]3ivine truth to others, they conform their conduct to the require-
ments of the Word of God. 2. In this good course they are arrested, and they retuiii
on their way. Their devotedness slackens; their habits of worship become less regular;
their habits of life become less scrupulous ; the " spirit of their mind " grows secular,
and indeed profane ; they fall out of the ranks of the earnest, and, at last, even of the
reverent; perhaps they descend to the unworthy, and even to the criminaL Not
literally, but metaphorically speaking, there are "evil spirits" in them. They "are
gone away backward." 3. Thus returning, they have almost hopelessly separated them-
selves from Christ ; the " last state of that man is worse than the first " (see Heb. vi.
i — 6). Not that renewal is absolutely " impossible," but it is so spiritually difficult and
■0 exceedingly rare that it may be said to be morally impossible. You cannot restore
elasticity to the spring that has been overbent. You cannot make pungent again the
gait that has lost its savour. You cannot infuse new force into truths which an
emasculating familiarity has deprived of their virtue and their interest. Far more
hopeless is the condition of the human soul that has drifted away from Christ than the
one that has never heard of his Name or never been impressed with his claims. There-
fore what ? (1) Let the Christian teacher see that his work is deep as well as broad ;
that the roots of saored conviction are well planted in the soil ; let him not be satisfied
with his "converts" when they only manifest feeling; let him be assiduous in his
attention, earnest in his prayer, until he is well assured that the soul for whom he is
watching (Heb. xiii. 17) has yielded himself, fully and whole-heartedly, to the Lord
his Saviour. (2) Let the Christian disciple be on his guard ; let him " watch and pray"
lest he come under the power of some insidious temptation, lest he " lose that which
he has wrought," lest the powers and principles that are from God and that have
entered and touched his soul should depart from him, lest evil influences that are from
beneath should take possession of him ; for in that sad event he will be in a far worsa
spiritual state, more hopeless and pitiable, than if he bad never heard the voice of Christ,
and never risen at his call. — C.

Vers. 31, 32. — Christ and Solomon, It is one of the strong arguments in favour of
our Lord's Divinity that, while there was that about him which made him free to
claim for himself the attribute of meekness (Matt. xi. 29), and which saved him from
the charge of immodesty, yet was there in him a wonderful and wholly exceptional
consciousness of greatness. On appealing to his own consciousness, he found himself
anterior in existence to Abraham (John viii. 58) ; greater (of more consequence to the
nation) than the very temple itself, that object of boundless veneration (Matt. xii. 6);
living in heaven even while dwelling on the earth (John iii, 13) ; associated in the
most intimate way possible and (to us) inconceivable with the Divine Father (John
V. 19; vi. 46; x, 30); wiser and worthier than the "wise man" himself (text). It
may not be surprising that One claiming to be a Prophet should btlieve himself to
be superior in worth and work to Jonah ; for there was nothing remarkably great either
in the moral character or in the professional course of that erratic prophet. But
in respect to Solomon ? It may be said that only One who could claim to be highest
aniong the highest was entitled to say, " I am greater than he." But the actual
superiority of Christ to Solomon is apparent enough if we consider —

I. The dionitt op his Person. The Son of David was great, as such ; but nothing
in comparison with the Son of God. The King of Israel was great, as such; but
nothing when compared with the Prince of peace, with him " who sitteth on the
throne " of heaven.

II. The ohabactbb op his wisdom. Solomon was very learned in the knowledge
of his age (1 Kings iv. 29 — 34); he was also ver^i skilled in the intellecuial conflicii



OH, XI. 1—54.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 829

of Wb time (1 Kings x.) ; he had, moreover, a very keen discernment of the ways and
wants and weaknesses of human nature (Proverbs). And he had (what Jesus Christ
had not) an acquaintance, gained by his own experience, of the hollowness of earthly
greatness, of the pitiful consequences of human folly. But the wisdom of Christ was
the wisdom of God. For such he had, and such indeed he was. He was " the Truth "
(John xiv. 6) ; he tuas " the Wisdom of God " (1 Cor. i. 24, 30). He knew and taught
mankind, as Solomon coulil not do, the nature and the will of God (ch. x. 22) ; the
capacities and the possibilities of man (John ii. 25) ; the way home to God (John xiv.
6); the secret of spiritual triumph (Matt. x. 39); the glory and the shame awaiting
the faithful and the unfaithful in the future (Matt. xxv.).

III. The beauty and excellenot op his life. Beginning admirably (1 Kings
lii. 5), and continuing well for a season-, Solomon gave way to danserous luxury, to
selfish and exacting legislation, and at last to moral corruption (1 Kings xi. 1 — 10).
The surpassing beauty of the character of Jesus Christ became more manifest as his
life continued, and it culminated in a supreme act of self-sacrifice which is the crowning
glory of his life.

IV. The glort of his career. Solomon's career began in brilliance, it remained
bright for many years ; but its light waned as his character declined, and it was con-
eluded in sombre shadows. The career of Jesus Christ began in lowliest obscurity, it
continued in struggle and in sorrow for a while ; but it has risen into the light, it becomes
over more blessed as his influence grows ever wider and deeper ; it will not be complete
nntil all the kingdoms of the earth are in subjection to his holy will. 1. Are we wise
in the wisdom of Christ ? 2. Are we the subjects of his benignant rule ? — 0.

Ver. 32. — Comparative guUt. The main truth of the text, that the weight of our
guilt depends on the measure of our privilege, rests on the solid foundation o^

I. Man's mobai. rnEEDOM. However much character may be affected by circumt
stance, it remains true that man is afree agent. When we condemn ourselves or others,
as we continually do; when we distinguish between misfortune and sin, between
calamity and crime ; whenever we apply the word " ought " to our own or to another's
behaviour ; — we practically assent to the doctrine that man is spiritually firee ; otherwise
such action on our part is unjust or illogical, such language improper. But, in truth, a
sense of our moral freedom is inwrought in our deepest convictions ; we cannot extri-
cate it from our nature, however much we try.

II. Oqb accountableness to God fob odb ohabaoteb and life. 1. God is requir-
ing great things of us — thought, reverence, affection, submission, obedience. 2. Ha is
marking at every moment the life we are living, the character we are forming ; he is
looking upon us and into us. 3. He is recording all our actions, including among
these the thoughts of our mind, the feelings of our heart, the purposes of our will.
1. He will one day call us to give an account of " all the things done in the fiesh."

Iir. A eevkaled peinoiplb of Divine judgment. The men of Nineveh, tho
great Teacher tells us, will be a source of condemnation to those of Judaea, for with
slighter privilege they repented, while the contemporaries of our Lord remained
impenitent at the preaching of Christ himself. 1. There is to be punishment in the
future. 2. This will be comparative — some guilty servants will be " beaten with icw
stripes," others with " many." 3. This, again, will depend on the degree of condemnatii m,
whether it will be less or more seveie. 4. And on .what, then, will God's condemnation
hang? Surely on two things. (1) On the guiltiness of the characttr and life ; for of
the condemned there will be those in whom there was the "some good thing," or even
many good things ; and there will be those in whom there was no good thing toward
God, but in whom were shameful things of many kinds. (2) On the character of
God's requirement; for God will require much less of some men than he will of others.
What he will require of us depends on the measure of spiritual capacity he has con-
ferred upon us, and also (and very largely) on the measure of the privileue he has
granted to us. From those to whom Christ had preached he would require far more
than from those to whom Jonah had delivered his brief warning message. And if we
reject the gospel of the grace of God, how guilty shall toe be in comparison with the
men of our Master's own time! Surely we shall be at least as guilty as they. For
though, indeed, we do not actually behold the countenance of the Son of man, nor hear



824 THE GOSPEL ACCORDIXG TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xi. 1— 5i



the tones of his voice, yet we do " sit at his feet ; " we are L's disciples ; we know the
thoughts of his mind ; we understand his will ; we are familiar with his overtures of
love. Indeed, we have certain great advantages which those to whom our Lord was
speaking did not possess, (a) We have the light that shines not only from the whole
of his completed life, but also from his death and resurrection. (6) We have Christ's
own commentary, through the writings of his inspired ai:ostles, upon his life and
death, (c) We have freedom from the national prepossessions which misguided those,
hia hearers, (d) We have the accumulated experience of the Christian Church through
eighteen centuries. If we heed not his Word, and range not ourselves on his side, if,
"gathering not" with him the sheaves of righteousness, we scatter abroad the seeds
of sin and death, who will there not be " to rise up in the judgment " and condemn
usi— C.

Vers. 34 — 36. — Spiritual sight, " The light of the body is the eye ; " i.e. the eye is
the organ through which light enters so that the mind perceives ; and if our eye is
" single," if it is sound, and does not give a double or distorted or coloured impression,
then the " whole body is full of light," then the man knc.ws exactly what is about
him and how to use his hands and direct his feet; but if the eye be diseased, if it be
" evil," giving false impressions, then all is confusion in the minH, and it is as if "the
whole body were full of darkness," no member of the body can take its proper part —
the hands do not know how to handle, nor the feet to walk. Here we have a parable,
rery easily understood. " The spirit of man is the candle [lamp] of the Lord." God
has given truth to the mind as he has prepared light for the body; he has also given
us a spiritual eye, an organ through which Divine truth enters the mind. We may
call it mind, conscience, reason, the soul; it is of no consequence what we call it;
it is that in us which distinguishes between right and wrong, righteousness and
unrighteousness, truth and falsehood, nobility and baseness ; it is that which gives us
the place we occupy in God's creation. If the light we receive into us is sound, pure,
, healthy, then our whole soul is full of light, then we " see light in God's light." But
if this inward light be confused, disordered, discoloured, our whole spirit is " full of
darkness ; " that is to say, if our understanding be darkened, if we are habitually
judging unrii;hteous judgment, if our conscience be condemning what is good and be
approving what is evil, if our reason be misconceiving and misinterpreting, how hopeless
is our condition I When that which should lead is misleading, when that which should
be guiding us into wisdom is betraying us into deadly error, when the light that is in us
is darkness, " how great is that darkness" (Matt. vi. 23) ! But if, on the other hand,
our reason is directing us to right conclusions, and our conscience is "approving things
that are excellent," then our whole soul is walking and rejoicing in the light of the
Lord, our spirit is full of light, it is a house wherein the bright shining of the lamp
of truth does give us light. What, then, brings about bad spiritual sight'? What are
the diseases of the inward eye?

I. Pbbjudiob. How that warps the judgment and blinds the eyes of men I Deter-
mined to recognize one object only, men can see no other, however it may stand before
them in bold relief. It was prejudice that made the men of Christ's time fail to perceive
that the kingdom of God had come among them. His wisdom. Ids worth, his power,
everything was distorted and misconceived by them ; their inward eye was diseased,
and how gnat was the darkness that resulted 1

II. Pridb. How many men there are walking, strutting, across the stage of life,
confident, complacent, contemptuous, that have been too pritid to learn 1 Pride has bent
their judgment, has affected lor evil the inward eye ; the trjth has become distorted;
thM-e is darkness in the soul. Well does the apostle say, "If a man think himself to
be wise, let him become a fool [in his own opinion], that he may be wise." Pride blocks
the path, while humility opens the gates of the kingdom of truth. " The meek will he
guide in judgment, the meek will he teach his way/'

IIL Selfishness. The worst of all diseases spoiling the spiritual sight. The man who
lires under its evil domiuiou " sees double," is mentally confused, wanders in bewilder-
iag error. The slave-owner could not see the iniquity of slavery when his temporal
interests covered the eyes of his mind with a thick film of falsity. Present prospects,
worldly advantages, fleshly indulgences, — do these not form thick scales whicb. covjj



t;H. XI. 1—54.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 325



the ey«< of the children of nieti, leaving them in the rlarkriess of error and of sin? Who
can understand his ernirs ? Who of us can be sure that he is n.it allowing some folly
some unworthy habit of tho body or the mind, to intervene between the pure truth of
Christ and his own spiritual understanding? The thought of Jesus Christ calls upon
U8 to be humble, vigilant, prayerful, that " the thoughts of our hearts may be cleansed
by the ins|.iration of his Spirit," so that instead of great darkness, or even an imperfect
and ineffectual light within us, the whole house of the soul may be illnmined with
purest heavenly wisdom, "as when the bright shining of a candle does give us
light." — C.

Vers. S7— 42.— Piety out of perspective. We have seen pictures in which no regard
whatever has been paid to the laws of perspective, and in whicli, as the consequence, the
mountain b as appeared as small as the men, the men as large as the mountain. These
have been objects of amusement, but not of admiration. Unfortunately, there was
nothing either amusing or admirable in these practical pictures of |iiety which the
Pharisees were drawing, wholly out of [lerspective, in the (ime of our Lord. In them
were —

I. Objects or oross bxagoebation. Our Lord pointed out the exagscerated import-
ance which they attached to the outward, to the bodily, to the minute. They made
everything of religious observances and customs. To wash the hands after coming
from market, before eating bread, was to them quite a serious obligation, which they
would on no account neglect ; to tithe the small herbs that grew in their garden was
to them a sacred duty, which they took pains to ob^orve ; to make the outside of their
culinary vessels clean was a rule by no means to be forgotten ; to carry no smallest
stick on the sabbath day was a very sacred law, etc. These things, and such things
as these, were made the staple of their religion ; their piety was composed of snjall
observances, of conformity to prescriptions and proscriptions which only touched the
outside and not the inner sanctuary, which only affected the body and not the soul ;
they made everything of that which was only of very slight importance ; they exag-
gerated the minute until these became misleading and practically false.

IL Other objects fatally overlooked oh slighted. These were: 1. Inward
ptiritff. What did it matter if some cups were not quite clean ? Something certainly,
but very little comparatively ; it was a matter of infinitesimal consequence. But it
mattered much that their " inward part," their soul, was " full of ravening and wicked-
ness." If they were themselves corrupt, no ceremonial cleanness woidd avail them.
It is of infinite consequence to any man that he should be "all glorious within ; " that
there should be truth and purity " in the inward parts," in the deep recesses of the
soul. It is the pure in heart alone that can see God and th^t can enter hi;; kingdom.
2. Charity ; a kind heart showing itself in a generous hand. Whoso has this disposition
to pity, to heal, to help ; whoso spends himself in endeavours to do good, t» lighten
the burdens of the afflicted, to brighten the path that lies in shadow ; — this man is one
to whom " all things are clean." He who is earnestly concerned to mitigate the sorrow
of some bleeding heart, or to extricate some fallen spirit from the cruel toils of vice, or
to lead some weary wanderer from the desert of doulit into the bright and happy home
of faith and love, — he is not the man to be " greatly moved " because he carries a speck
of dust upon his hands, or because a utensil has not been washed the proper number
of times in a day. 3. Rectitude. The Pharisees passed over "judgment ; " but they
should have given to this a front place. To recognize the righteous claims of men on
our regard, on our considerateness, on our fidelity, on oiu- truthfulness, — is not this a
very large part of any piety that is of God, commended by him and commending us to
him? 4. The love of Ood. This also the Pharisees slighted. But it was of the very
first importance. Their Law laid stress upon it (Dent. vi. 4, 5). It is the heritage
and glory of manhood (see homily on ch. x. 27). To njake little of this was so to
misrepresent as to lead into ruinous error. Purity, charily, rectitude, the love of
God, — these are the precious things which make man great, worthy, dear to God hU
Father.— 0.

Vers, ] — 13. — Lessons on prayer. Luke takes us from "the one thing needful,"
irhieh Mary'a loving waiting on her Lord illustrates, to a kindred subject, viz. th«



326 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xi. 1— 54.

legsons on prayer which Jesus gave his disciples. He had been enjoying what we
should now call a " retreat " with them, and had himself led the devotions of the little
band. Struck by the beauty of his petitions, one of his disciples asked him to teach
tlieni to pray, as John had taught his disciples. To this appeal Jesus responds at once,
and in doing so gives them first a form, which was also meant to be a model ; and
secondly, a theory of prayer, in which we shall have little difficulty in tiniiing its true
philosophy. Let us look at these two matters in their order.

L The foum and model of pbatbe commonly called the Lord's Pbateb. (Vers.
2 — 4.) Jesus is represented here as saying to the disciples, "When ye pray, say,"
while in Matt. vi. 9 it is " After this manner therefore pray ye." It is evident from
tliis that he meant the words to answer the double purpose — to be a form in constant
use, and to be a model constantly imitated. It is consequently most important to look
carefully into its contents. And here we have to notice that it sets intercession before
petition for personal benefits. Prayer thus becomes a great instrument for rendering
us disinterested and unselfish. When modelled on this peerless prayer of Christ, it
carries us at once into the wide interests of God's kingdom before we devote any
consideration to petty personal interests. The genius of prayer is thus seen to be the
subordination of self to the universal interest. The hallowing of the Fatljer's precious
Name comes first, then the coming of his kingdom, and then the doing of his will on
earth as in heaven. What a statesmanlike view we are thus led to take of the general
problem before we even think of the particular and personal problem I The moment
we have in our closet entered intelligently and heartily into these three petitions, we
have got out of the narrowness of petty cares and troubles into the broad expanse of
the Divine love. We are taken to mountain-tops at once, and from the sublime heights
of Divine compassion we are led to intercede for the world below us, that it may be as
speedily as possible transmuted into something like what heaven happily is. Then as
lor the minor personal petitions, these refer to daily bread, and daily pardon, and daily
deliverance from evil — the personal blessings, in fact, which fit the individual for aidmg
the wicier interest and subserving the universal blessing. We are thus warranted in
asking for bread to sustain the body, for pardon to relieve the heavy-laden soul, for
deliveiance amid the further temptations to which we may be. exposed. Aud in the
petition ibr pardon, it is clearly implied that forgiveness can only be realized by a for-
giving spirit. The soul which will not forgive a brother who asks for forgiveness shows
that forgiveness has not been and cannot be realized. In fact, the unforgiving spirit is,
as far as we can judge, the unpardonable sin (cf. Matt, xviii. 21 — 35).

II. OuB Lokd's theoby of pbatee. (Vers. 5 — 13.) When we analyze our Lord's
argument here, we find it to be analogical ; and the truth is that we are shut up in this
matter to analogical reasoning. It can be shown that it is to analogy we owe our
knowledge of human beings, of the lower animals, and finally of God above us. lo
order to any other than analogical knowledge, we should require to become incarnated,
so to speak, in the other being whose condition we desire to know. Seeing that this
is impossible, we are shut up to the argument from analogy upon such a subject.' Our
Lord, theu, looked around him, aud saw that efficacious prayer was embedded as a fact
in the very constitution of society. Petition is the form which conscious nee<l assumes
in social intercourse; and a response comes forth with more or less promptitude and
grace, and demonstia'es that the prayer has proved efficacious. It is ftirther to be
ijuticed that our Lord, in pointing out efficacious prayer as existing in the society of
his time, gives us first an example of efficacious intercession, and then an example of
efficacious personal petition. ?lis illustrations consequently follow the lines laid down
in his prescribed form of prayer. To encourage intercession, he presents the picture of
the importunate friend begging successfully a supper for an unexpected and hungry
guest ; to encourage personal petition, he presents the picture of hungry children crying
to their father for food; and he would have us to reason from the efficacious prayer
among men to the certainty of prayer being efficacious when presented unto God. Let
us look at the illustrations in the order given. A kindly, hospitable man is about to
retire to rest with his household, having in the last meal consumed the small stock ci

' We have discussed this subject in the Christian Monthly for July, 1882; also in tlie
'Theulogioal Handbook' upon tlie subject of prayer, published by Hodder and Stougliton.



OH. XI. 1-64.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 821

food which hia humble house contains ; when, lo I to his surprise, a friend arrives after
a long journey, hungry as well as weary — a most fitting object, therefore, of hospitality.
What is to be done? He quickly decides. Having most probably arranged for the
washing of the guest's feet, he passes out into the darkness, and seeks the door o{ a
friend who can, he believes, lend him as many loaves as he needs. It is not a personal
want he is about to urge, but the need of a hungry and weary friend. He stands
befiire the door, consequently, in the simple majesty of disinterestedness. He begins
to knock, but at first receives no encouragement. " Trouble me not," says his friend
within : " the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed ; I cannot rise and
give thee." Nothing daunted, however, and pocketing all his pride, for he knows well
it is no selfish plea he is urging, he resolves to knock on till his beleaguered friend
capitulates. At length importunity triumphs ; the friend in bed sees plainly that the
only chance of rest that night for himself and his children is to give in as soon as
possible, and let the importunate petitioner have his way ; and so he rises and gives
him as many loaves as he needs. Here, then, according to our Lord, is a case of
efficacious intercessory prayer as between men. It may not receive an immediate
answer, but importunity secures an ultimate answer. We are warranted, therefore, in
rising from efBcacious intercessory prayer among men to the assurance that intercessory
prayer will prove efBoaoious with God. God may keep us waiting, not certainly from
any selfish consideration, but for our own good, but ultimately he will respond to every
unselfish intercession. Hence our Lord reaches the assurance, '• And I say unto y«u,
Ask, and it shall be given you ; seek, and ye shall find ; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you," etc. The second case brought before us by Christ is efficacious prayer in
the family circle. Hungry children present prayers to parents for food, for bread, for
fish, lor eggs, as among the humbler classes in Palestine ; and the fathers who are asked
for such things never think of mocking the hungry ones with a stone, a serpent, or a
scorpion. The earthly parent hears and answers the children's prayer ; the prayer is
efficacious. So will it be, argues our Lord, as we appeal for the needful blessings to our
Father in heaven. "If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children : how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that
ask him ? " It is surely instructive to think that earthly parents, in the midst of a
"reign of law," which they only partially understand, can yet know how to give good
things to their children. Be the times ever so hard, they can generally manage to give
the little ones bread and keep them off the parish. Is it not reasonable to argue that
the heavenly Father, who knows all " the reign of law," because its Author and LerA,
can give the Holy Spirit, or any minor and needful blessing his children crave, unto
the prayerful? We have only, in conclusion, to emphasize the fact that the Holy Spirit
is the great need of human souls. Let us ask him as God's supreme Gift, and we shall
«.ssuredly receive him even in Pentecostal power. It is this Gift which individuals and
Churches need to make them truly useful 1 — E. M. B.

Vers. 14 — S6.— Inspirations. Our Lord had just heW out the possibility of Divine
inspirations for prayerfiil disciples, and the evangelist next takes up and contrasts
diabolical inspirations with this. Unless we notice the artistic treatment by the
accomplished author of the Third Grospel, we shall miss much of his meaning. The
cu-cumstance which led to the question of infernal inspiration was the healing of a man
who was possessed by a dumb devil. Here was a case, then, where a demon, entering
into and possessing a human being, had sealed his lips so that he could not speak. Our
Saviour expelled the demon, and the man immediately recovered the power of speech.
At this the people wondered. But the wise men among his enemies had a theory to
meet the case ; they insisted that it was because Beelzebub, the chief of the devils,
dwelt in Christ that he was able to expel the inferior demon. Others insisted on a
sign from heaven to supplement these " signs" on earth. To bi>th classes he gives due
answer. Let us look at the two theories, and the interlude which separates Christ s
treatment of them, in their order.

I. The theory that Jesus was possessed by Beelzebub. There was something
plausible in this. Assuming that demons are subject to their superiors, the hostile
ppirits in.sinuated that Jesus had jiot the chief of the devils in him, and so was able to
order the inferior demons. In the theory there was the admission that the devil, who



m THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [ch- xi. 1— 54,

had made the poor possessed one dumh, had obeyed Christ's command and left hii
victim. But so far from this demonstrating Christ's goodness to their suspicious souls,
it only demonstrated his league with the chief of the devils. It is truly wonderful how
unholy hearts can twist the clearest demonstrations into the foulest suspicions and
insinuations. The question of infernal inspirations is thus raised, as a set-off and con-
trast to the Divine inspirations which Jesus showed his disciples were possible for them,
and which he illustrated in perfection himself. Let us see how our Lord meets ttie
insinuation of his enemies. 1. Christ shows that in expelling the dumh devil he had leen
$0 fax breaking up Satan's kingdom. Although, therefore, it must be acknowledged
that Satan and his emissaries do often take suicidal courses, and by fancied wisdom
really undermine their kingdnm, yet it could not be supposed that the chief of the
devils would deliberately restore a man to sanity and the power of speech. This would
be too insane a course for the arch-fiend to take. When souls are rendered sane and
social, we may conclude at once that it is not Satan's work. Hence in the fact that the
kingdom of Satan was being broken up by the philanthropic policy of Jesus, there was
proof positive that their theory was false. 2. Christ reminds them of Jewish exorcism,
and asks if they have considered the suspiaion their theory casts on their own exorcisti.
By certain incantatiors and tedious processes the Jews had been accustomed to expel
the demons and ctire the demented ones. The difference between the Jewish exorcisms
and this one of Jesus was that his was simpler and speedier. Hence if it was Beelzebub
that enabled him to exorcise the demon, it must be some other form of diabolic
inspiration which enabled their own exorcists to succeed. Our Lord thus used a
crushing argumentum ad Aominem, which they could not resist. 3. Jesus insists on the
victorious character of the spiritual inspiration of which he was at once an Embodiment
and the ISourre. It was by " the finger of God " he tx\ lelled the demons, and in his Person
the triumphant kingdom of God had come nigh to them. For, as he here shows, there
it a contention between two opposing parties fur the palace of the human heart. The
devil may for a time usurp possession. There is peace throughout the palace ; there
may even be silence, fu in the present case, when the devil had made the possessed one
dumb. But the Stronger One comes, the Spirit of Christ enters, overcomes the devil,
robs him of his armour in which he trusted, and divides the spoil. Thus graphically
does our Lord represent the conquest of the soul and the glorious result of the victory.
It is the Mij^htiest overcoming the strong, and claiming his rights in the palace of the
soul. Thus does God's kingdom come within us I 4. Jesus shows the dangers cf a
vacant soul. Referring possibly to the Jewish exorcisms, wherein the demons were
expelled, but no stronger occupant introduced to the palace of the soul, our Lord
shows how the vacant soul becomes a prey to demons once more. And the result of
reoccupation is generally worse than the first occupancy. How often is it seen that
superficial reform is followed by a backsliding worse than any previous sin 1 The last
state of the man is worse than the first. It is essential, therefore, that when a soul is
freed from one spirit, it should he tenanted by another and a better. Only the radical
change which the indwelling of the Divine Spirit sectirea can make the soul lafe
amid the temptations of Satau and his hosts.

II. 1'HE tHTEBLUDE UPOK THE BLESSEDNESS OF OBEDIENCE. (VcrS. 27, 28.) As

Jesus spake these wise words about inspiration, a woman in the crowd, touched by
their beauty and faithfulness, exclaimed, " Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the
paps which thou hast sucked ! " Her idea was that it must have been a great privilege
to be related to such a Person, especially to have been his mother. And the blood-
relationship, of course, could have no wide radius; only a select f.'W could stand around
him in actual relationship. But Jesus interposes at once to shuw that there is »
blessedness which all may realize, a blessedness which his mother or brethren could
not monopolize, and this is the blessedness of obedience to God's Word. Motherhood
involved many trials in the case of Mary, as well as many privileges ; but obedience ii
an open door into which nil may enter. In the keeping of God's commandments there
is a great reward. Thus he forbade all discontent and all envy, and put the woman
and the audience generally upon the true track in which to realize blessedness,
lleceiving Gud's Word in humble faith, trying to keep it in dependence upon Qod'a
pace,- this is the secret of true blessedness. Such spiritual relationship is better than
blood-relat'nnship. At it all of us siiould aim.



OB. XI. 1—54.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKB. 32£

rn. The theory op instiffioient signs. (Vers. 16, 29 — 36.) The miracles of
healing, it would seem, were insufficient to convince Christ's enemies that he was from
God. They demanded more — a sign from heaven ; something, that is, which would
connect him with the heavenly world. 1. Now, the way our Lord meets this unreason-
able demand is by denying their right to such a sign. It was most unreasonable,
and to unreasonable clamour our Lord never yielded. His miracles were of sucli a
character, were so numerous, and so instructive, that nothing but wilful blindness
could prevent tbe demonstration from being final and conclusive. 2. Jesus dtclares
that in the history of Jonah theywould have a sign. (Vers. 29,30,32.) Now, in what
respect was Jonah a sign to the Ninevites? Accepting as historic the narrative of his
Bight, his imprisonment in the fish, his release from it, and his subsequent preaching
to the Ninevites, we see a striking parallel between it and the history of Christ. As
Jonah was buried in the fish, and so the endangered seamen were saved, so Jesus was
buried in the tomb, and through his death saved endangered sinners. Again, as Jonah
was cast forth from his imprisonment to land and life again, so Jesus by resurrection
passed from the imprisonment of the tomb into the newness of immortal life. And as
Jonah became a witness to the Ninevites of the truth of God's threatenings and God's
mercy, so Jesus, in the persons of his apostles, and in Pentecostal power, became a witness
to his generation. Moreover, the Ninevites repented at the preaching of Jonah, and in
Bodoing they would be a standing rebuke and condemnation to Christ's contempi>raries,
who resisted his preaching and would not repent of their sins. In the light of Christ's
subsequent fate, the sign of the Prophet Jonah must have proved striking in the
extreme. 3. Jesus declares that the Queen of Sheba would condemn his contemporaries,
as she was attracted by the wisdom, of Solomon, while a greater than Solomon was here.
(Ver. 31.) The wisdom of Solomon was not associated with any miracle. It stood
alone. It was rendered impressive by a halo of worldly glory ; but this was all. Yet
it commanded the queen of the south, who came from her distant land and learned
wisdom at Solomon's feet. The worth of wisdom is the lesson of her long journey.
But Christ's contemporaries, who have more wisdom by far in his discourses, and who
have the miracles backing up the whole, are refusing the matchless testimony. Their
condemnation shall be all the greater considering the noble conduct of the queen.
How prone we are to despise the present opportunity, and to imagine that the former
days were better than these, when the truth may be that now the most magnificent
opportunity of all the ages is lying to our hands! 4. The great necessity he shows is single-
ness of eye. (Vers. 33 — 36.) This is the practical lesson with which our Lord closes
his answer to his enemies. There is a light in the world, and it is not hidden. As
the Light of the world, he was himself occupying a sufficiently elevated candlestick, and
illumining all within the house. But if his hearers and interviewers had duplicity
and not singleness of aim, they would miss the illumination and be filled with dark-
ness. This was their danger. Hence he urges singleness of eye._ If they but gazed
on him with the proper motive, they would find their whole lives illumiiied, and
glory waiting upon their work. He was anxious for this result — hence his warn-
ing. We learn, then, the necessity of singleness and simplicity of aim. In such a
case we shall need no theories to account for Christ's power, but acknowledge it»
Divine and gracious character at once. Then shall our whole heart go forth in
sympathy to him, and we shall be with him in co-operatiou and in success. — ^R. M. E.

Vers. 37 — 54. — Pha/risaism and legalism rebuked. Our Lord, who was eminently
social in his habits, accepts an invitation to dine with one of the Pharisees, and meets
many Pharisees and lawyers there as guests. Such scenes were, to his pure and
philanthropic mind, important opportunities, and as such he entered upon them. In
this case be breaks ground at once by deliberately neglecting the usual preliminary
ablutions. This was through no slovenliness in his personal habits, we may be sure ;
for if cleanliness is next to godliness, we may be pretty certain Jesus practised it.
But as it is quite possible lor men to put cleanliness in place of godlmess, to be
scrupulous about outward cleansing and careless about the heart, it was necessary that
Jesus should expose the Pharisees' error and danger in this particular. Accordingly,
we find him at this dinner-table exposing with great power first, Pharisaic hypocnsy,
»nd, secondly, legalized unpositions. Let us look at these in their order.



S30 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xi. 1— 54.



L Christ's exposition of Pharisaic htpocbisy. (Vers. 37 — 44.) Pharioaism
was a supreme regard for appeaiaiices. Long garments, phylacteiies, multiplied ablu-
tions, long prayers in public places, ostentatious tithing of littlt) things, combined to
make up Pharisaism, a reputation based upon externals. One who looked upon the
heart, lii^e our Lord, could easily see that all this outward decorum was quite com-
patible with wickedness of heart. And so he told his host deliberately, "Now do ye
Pharisees make clean the outside of the cup and the platter; hut your inward part
is full of ravenina; [' extortion,' Revised Version] and wickedness." The cure is
suggested when he leads him to think of God as alike tlie Author and Observer of what
is without and within. " Ye fools ['foolish ones,' Revised Version], did not he that
made that whioli is wilhout ['the outside,' Revised Version] make that which is
within [' the inside '] also ? But rather give alms of such things as ye have [' Howbeit
give for alms those things which are within,' Revised Version] ; and, behold, all things
are clean unto you." In this way he tries tu lead his PharisHic host to spirituality of
life, to the expenditure of sympathy, of love, of brotherly kindness upon others, instead
of indulging in outward acts behind which there was no real heart, but only a desire
for personal reputation. Following up this line, he cliarges them with tithing pot-
herbs, "the mint, anise, and cummin," while the weightier matters, "judgment and
the love of God," matters that were within and spiritual, were lelt undone. Their
preference for appearances, for the uppermost seats in the synagogues, for greetings in
the marl<ets, and all that goes to form a reputation, showed that they had not weighed
ariglit the matter's of the h "art. No wonder that he concludes by comparing them to
yraves — " tombs," Revised Version — that appear not, over which men unwittingly tread.
Whited sejiulchres they were, beautiful outwardly, but within were dead men's bones
and all uncleanness. It was a manly and terrible indictment for our Lord to make
against them. And in doing so he exposed the principle of hypocrisy. It rests on
appearances, on superficial judgments, on a forgetfiilness that God searcheth the heart.
It can be got rid of only by our getting down to first principles, and remembering that
God " searcheth the hearts and trieth the reins of the children of men, even to give to
every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings " (Jer. xviL
9, 10).

II. Christ's bxposcbb op i.bgalizbd impositions. (Vers. 4.'5 — 54.) A lawyer in
the company, seeing his Pharisaic friends so severely handled by Christ, complains
that his special department was involved also in the reproach. This leads our Lord to
handle the lawyers more severely still. Their position was one of monopoly of the Law,
To sustain their profession they had to make a great mystery of the meaning of the
Law. Though it was largely plain enough for a runner to read and understand, it
would have swept away all their privileges and profits to have left such an impression
on the common people. Hence they took the Law into their own especial keeping, and
interpreted it for the people as they pleased. The result of this was the imposition of
heavy burdens upon the ignorant people. This has been the temptation of legal experts
always ; they increase the burdens of the common people — burdens which they leave
the people to carry alone. Not only so, but the lawyers were manufacturing reputations
out of the shortcomings of their fathers. Their fathers had murdered the prophets ; the
sons were now busy building their sepulchres, and so far pretending to dissent from
their fathers' murderous spirit. But our Lord shows that this policy is a simple
hypocrisy, for, in seeking the life of Jesus, they were demonstrating that the old spirit
was still within them. It is easier to serve on a building committee than to entertain
kindly feelings towards the Saviour. All this hypocrisy, however, will receive judg-
ment in due season. Upon the generation that murdered Christ will descend the judg-
ment which the murderous spirit of so many generations deserved. Our Lord in this
way brings out how we may, by our conduct in the present, become involved in the
responsibilities of the past. We cannot isolate ourselves from the past ; we are not only
heirs of all the ages, but share the responsibilities of all the ages by reason of our atti-
tude towards them. History is thus brought into the field of responsibility, and we are
either for or against the good in the olden time. It would be well for us to treat his-
tory in a sympathetic fashion, and have our hearts in proper training as we review th«
past. We may sin by hating an old martyr's memory just as really as by despising
his counterpart to-day. Our Lord concludes by denouncing the dog-in-the-mangei



OH. XII. 1-59.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST, LUKE.



831



policy of the lawyers, pretending to knowledge, while at once they had lost the key
and kept others effectually from flndina; it. No wonder that, when our Lord came out
from the banquet, he found himself violently beset on every side by those he had so
exposed, in hope that some such statement would form the basis of his accusation.
But they found themselves baffled by his limitless knowledge of human nature.
Instead of contending with him, it will be better for us all to submit to hia superior
judgment and gracious pleasure. — B. M. E.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XXL
Vera. 1 — 59. — The Lord, after leaving the
Pharisee's house, ipeahs at great length to a
numerous crowd waiting for him, addressing
his words principally to his own disciples.
The foregoing scene (ch. zi.). when the
Master addressed his bitter reproaches to
the learned and cultivated of the great
Pharisee party, took place in a private
house belonging to an apparently wealthy
member of this, the dominant class. The
name of the large village or provincial town
where all this happened is unknown. The
crowd who had been listening to the great
Teacher before he accepted the Pharisee's
invitation still lingered around the house.
Many from the adjoining villages, hearing
that Jesus was in this place and was publicly
teaching, had arrived ; so, when the Lord
came out from the guest-chamber into the
street or market-place, he found a vast
crowd — literally, myriads of the multitude
^waiting for him. The words descriptive
of the crowd in ver. 1 indicate that a vast
conoourse was gathered together. His fame
then was very great, though his popularity
was on the wane.

Ver. 1. — Beware ye of the leaven of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. In dwelling
on this and similar expressions used by our
Lord in respect to the life and work of this
famous section of the people who were gene-
rally so bitterly hostile to him and his
teaching, we must not condemn their whole
character with a condemnation more sweep-
ing than the Master's. Utterly mistaken in
their views of life and in their estimate of
God, whom they professed to know, our
Lord here scarcely charges them with deli-
berate hyp^risy. These mistaken men
dreamed that they possessed a holiness
which was never theirs ; unconscious hypo-
crites they doubtless were, without possibly
even suspecting it themselves.

Vers. 2, 3. — ^For there is nothing covered,
that shall not he revealed ; neither hid, that
■ball not be known. Therefore whatsoever



ye have spoken In darkness shall hs heard
in the light. The day would come when his
estimate of this now popular teaching of
the Pharisees would be found to have been
correct. Its real nature, now hid, would be
revealed and fully known and discredited ;
while, on the other hand, the words and
teaching of his disciples, now listened to
but by few, and those of seemingly little
account, would become widely and generally
known and listened to. IFpon the house-
tops. These were flat, terraoe-like xoufi,
and, the houses generally beiug low, one
who spoke from them would easily be heard
in the street beneath. " These words have
a strong Syrian colouring. The Syrian
house-top (in Matt. x. 27 and here) presents
an image which has no sense in Asia Minor,
or Greece, or Italy, or even at Antioch.
The flat roofs cease at the mouth of tne
Orontes ; Antioch itself has sloping rnofs "
(Benan, <Les Evangiles,' p. 2ti2, note 1).

Ver. 4. — And I say unto yon my Mends,
Be not afraid of them that Idll the body, and
after that have no more that they can do.
All this the Master knew was true and
would shortly happen. His words were
verified before fifty years had passed. The
triumphant success of the great Ohristian
preachers and the discredited condition of
the old rabbinic schools is testified to by
such words as we find in St. Paul's letters.
" Where is the wise V where is the scribe ? "
(1 Cor. i. 20). But this success tlie Master
well knew would be accumpanied with
many a suffering on the part of the heralds
of his message. Persecution in its many
dreary forms would dog their footsteps ; a
death of agony and shame not unfrequeutly
would be ttieir guerdon. It was, for instance,
we know, the earthly recognition of that
devoted servant of tlie Lord (Paul) who, w«
believe, guided the pen of Luke here. 'This
painful way, which his disciples must surely
tread, had alrealy been indicated in no
obscure language by the Master (" some of
tliem"~my apostles — "they shall slay and
persecute," ch. xi. 49). A triumph, greater
than any which had ever been given to the
sons of men, would surely be theirs, but th«
Master would not conceal the earthly price
which his chosen servants must pay for thif
spleniiid success. There was a point, how-



332



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xiL 1— 59.



ever, beyond which human malice and
enmity were utterly powerless; he would
have his servants turn their thoughts on
that serene region where men as men would
have no power.

Ver. 5. — But I will forewarn yon whom
ye shall fear: Tear him, which after he
hath killed hath power to oast into hell;
literally, into Gehenna. This is simply
Gee-hinnom, " valley of Hinnom," translated
into Greek letters. This valley was situated
in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem, and
originally was noted for the infamous rites
practised there in the worship of Moloch, in
the times of the idolatrous kings of Judah.
King Josiah, to mark his abhorrence of the
idol-rites, defiled it with corpses ; iires were
subsequently kindled to consume the putre-
fying matter and prevent pestilence. The
once fair valley, thus suceessively defiled
with hideous corrupting rites, by putrefy-
ing corpses, and then with blazing fires lit
to consume what would otherwise have
occasioned pestilence, was taken by rab-
binical writers as a symbol for the place of
torment, and is used not unfrequently as a
synonym for "hell." The translators of the
Authorized Version have done so here. The
reminder is, after all, we need not fear men.
When they have done their worst, they have
only injured or tortured the perishable body.
The One whom all have good reason to fear
is God, whose power is not limited to this
life, but extends through and beyond death.
Some have strangely supposed, not God, but
the devil, is intended here to be the real
object of human fear. The devil can be no
object of fear to the Master's disciples.

Vers. 6, 7. — Are not five sparrows sold
for two fartiiings, and not one of them is
forgotten before God? Btit even the very
hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear
not therefore: ye are of more value than
many sparrows. Tliough persecutioa and
bitter suffering, even death, may be the
guerdon of the Lord's true servants here,
none of these things can happen without
the consent of God. This thought will
surely give them courage to endure. Srffer-
ing undergone in God's service, inflicted,
too, with his entire consent, so that the
suffering becomes part of the service, — what
an onlook is aft'orded to the brave, faithful
seiTant by such a contemplation 1 Oh the
welcome from God he is sure to meet with
when such a death lias been endured I These
extreme instances of God's universal care —
bis all-knowledge of everything, however
little and insignificant, belonging to his
creatures — are cliosen to give point to the
Master's words. If be knows of the dentli
of these little, almost valueless, bir.ls — ay,
even of the falling of one of the many hairs
of your head — surely you cannot doubt his



knowledge of, his caring for, the life of
death of one of his proved and gallant fol-
lowers. These little sparrows were sold in
the markets, strung together, or on skewers.

Ver. 8. — Also I say unto yon, Whosoever
shall confess me before men, him shall the
Sou of man also confess before the angels of
God. The great Teacher pursues the subject
of the future of his disciples. It is by no
means only to a wise fear of that God,
whose hand stretches beyond this life, that
he appeals as a mighty inducement for his
servants utterly to disregard all dangers
which may meet them in the course of their
service; he tells them, too, of a splendid
recompense, which will assuredly be the
guerdon of all his true followers. Before
that glorious throng of heavenly beings,
whose existence was a part of the creed of
every true Jew ; before the mighty angels,
the awful seraphim; before that countless
crowd of winged and burning ones who
assisted at the awful mysteries of Sinai,
would they who witnessed for him, and
suffered because of him, be acknowledged
by him. Their sufferings in the service of
the King of heaven, whom they knew on
earth as the poor Galilee Teacher, would
be recounted before the angels by the same
King of heaven, when he returned to bis
home of grandeur and of peace in heaven.

Ver. 9. — But he that denieth me before
men shall be denied before the angels of
God. Splendid as would the reuompense be
to the faithful and the loyal, equally shame-
ful would be the guerdon nietod out to the
cowardly and faint-hearted. Before the
same glorious throng would the King detail
the failure, through slavish fear, of those
whom he had chosen for so royal a service.
Such an announcement as this proclamation
of glory and of shame before the holy
angels, in which stupendous scene he, the
poor Galilsean Eabbi, was to play the part
of the Almighty Judge, could only have
been made in tho last weeks preceding his
Passion. All reticence was then laid aside.
Before friend and foe, in public and in
private, in these last solemn weeks Jesus
tore away the veil of reticence with whicli
he had been pleased hitherto in great mea-
sure to shroud his lofty claims, and the
Master now declared before all that he was
the King of kings, the Lord alike of angels
and of men. In the face of such an an-
nouncement, his prosecution by tho priests
and the Pharisee party for blasphemy na-
turally follows. He was either a daring

impostor or . In the latter case, to the

poor Galilee Eabbi belonged the Name of
names which no Jew dared to pronounce.

Ver. 10. — And whosoever shall speak a
word against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him. And yet even that offence^



3H.xn. 1— 59.J 'I'HE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



333



wliioh consisted in playing the rpnegade
and the coward ; which refused to suff r for
him here ; which, out of slavish fear of man,
consented to abandon his pure and righteous
cause; — that offence, which would be pro-
claimed before the angels of heaven, would
in the end find forgiveness. Some com-
mentators point, as an illustration of this,
to the fact of the dying Lonl praying on
the cross for liis murderers ; but the offence
alluded to here, whioli should in the end be
blotted out, was of far deeper dye. He
prayed on his cross for those Romans wlio
Binned, but sinned in the face of little light.
But this forgiveness was to be extended to
men who, through fenr of men and love of
the world, should deny him whom they
knew to be their Redeemer. This is one
of the most hopeful passages which treats
of sin eventually to be forgiven, in the whole
New Testament. But even here there is no
BO-called universal redemption announced,
for in the next sentence the Lord goes on
to speak of a sin which he emphatically
said shall never have forgiveness. But unto
him that blasphemeth against the Holy
Ghost it shall not be forgiven. What is
this awful sin? We have only to speak of
its connection in this place. Here there is
no possibility of mistake ; it was that deter-
mined hatred of holiness, that awful love
of self, which had induced the Pliarisee
leaders to ascribe his beneficent and loving
works to the spirit of evil and of darkness.
The accusation was no cliance one, the fruit
of impulse or of pasaion. They who accused
him knew better. They had heard him
teach, not once, but often ; they had seen
his works; and yet, though they knew that
the whole life and thoughts ami aspirations
were true, who were conscious tliat every
word and work was holy, just, pnd pure, in
order to compass their own selfish ends,
Bilnply because they felt his life and teach-
ing would interfere with them, they dared
to oicribe to the devil what their own hearts
told them came direct from God. This sin,
now as then, the merciful Saviour tells us
hat no forgiveness.

Ver. 11.— And when they bring you unto
the synagogues, and unto magistrates, and
powers, take ye no thought now or what
thing ye shall answer. The Master cnnies
back again to his old calm, and continues
his loving instructions to his disciples ; ami
turning again to the little group of his
friends, he says to them, " When they bring
you before hostile tribunals, special help, you
will find, will be given you. Have no fear,
then, that you will be wanting in wisdom
or courage; the Holy Spirit of God will
bo your Advocate, and will whisper to you
words for your d. fence." The best example
of thio supernatural aid to the accused



followers of Jesus which we possess is the
grave and stately apology of Stephen before
the Sanliedrin. Peter's speech before the
same tribunal, and Paul's before Felix and
Festus, are also fair instances.

Ver. l.S. — And one of the company said
unto him. Master, speak to my brother, that
he divide the inheritance with me. Ap-
parently there was a pause here in the
Lord's teaching. The Master was about to
enter on a new subject, and at this juncture
one of the crowd, waiting for such a break
in the Master's discourse, came forward with
a question. It was purely connected with
his own selfish interests. He seems to have
been a younger brother, discontented with
the distribution of the family property, of
which, most likely, in accordance with the
u.iual Jewish practice, a double portion had
been taken by the elder brother. This was
likely enough the point which he submitted
to the Lord. Such a, reference to a scribe
and rabbi of eminence was then not un-
common. Jesus, however, here, as on other
occasions (see John viii. 3 — 11), firmly re-
fuses to interfere in secular matters. His
work was of another and higher kind. The
word he addresses to the questioner has in
it a tinge of rebuke. The utter selfish
worldliness of the man, who, after hearing
the solemn and impressive words just spoken,
could intrude such a question, comes strongly
into view. Was not this poor unimpression-
able Jew, so wrapped up in his own paltry
concerns that he had no thought or care for
loftier things, perhaps a specimen of most
of the matei'ial upon whom the Lord had
to work ? Is he an unknown figure in our
day and time ?

Ver. 15. — And he said unto them, Take
heed, and beware of covetousness : for a
man's life consisteth not in the abundance
of the things which he possesseth. The
older authorities read, "beware of every
kind of covetousness." No vice is more
terribly illustrated in the Old Testament
story than this. Prominent illustrations of
ruin overtaking the covetous man, even in
this life, are Balaam, Achan, and Gehazi.
Has not this ever been one of the besetting
sins of the chosen race, then as now, now at
then ? Jesns, as the Reader of hearts, saw
what was at the bottom of the que^tion :
greed, rather than a fiery indignation at
a wrong endured. " A man's life." Bis true
life, would 1« a fair paraphrase of the Gieek
word used here. The Master's own life, land-
less, homeless, penniless, illustrated nobly
these words. Tliat life, as far as tarth was
concerned, was his deliberate choice. The
world, Ohristian as well as pagan, in each
succeeding age, with a remarkable agree-
ment, utterly declines to recognize the groiit
Teacher'" ^i"'" "f '''^ here. To make In-



334



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [on. xii. 1— 59.



meauiTig perfectly clear, the Lord told tliem
the following parable-story, which rends
like an experience or memory of Bomething
which bad actually happened.

Yer. 16. — The gionnd of a oertain rich
man brought forth plentifully. The un-
happy subject of the Lord's story was a
oommon figure in Palestine in an orrliuarily
prosperous tiiue. We have the portrait of
a landowner whose farms do not seem to
have been acquired by any unjust means.
This man, after years of successful industry,
having acquired great wealth, wholly de-
votes himself to it and to Its further increase.
Hf does not give himself up to excess or
proHigacy, but simply, body and soul, be-
comes the slave of his wealth; utterly,
hopelessly selfish, he forgets alike God and
his neighbour.

Vers. 17, 18.— And he thought within
himself, saying. What shall I do, because
I have no room vrhere to bestow my fmits]
And he said, This will I da: I will pull
down my bams, and bnild greater. "No
place to bestow my fruits." Well answers
St. Ambrose, " Thou hast bams — the bosoms
of the needy, the houses of the widows, the
mouths of orphans and of infants." Some
might argue, from the sequel of the story,
that God looks with diafavour on riches as
riches. St. Augustine replies to such a
mistaken deduction, " God desires not that
thou shouldest lose thy riches, but that thou
(houldest change their place" ('Serm.,'
xxxvi. 9). The Greek word rendered "barns"
(oTTofl^Koi — whence oar word "apothecary")
has a broader signification than merely
barns; it signifies store or warehouses of
all kinds, thus suggesting that the hero of
the story was more than a mere wealthy
farmer — he was probably also a trader. And
there will I bestow all my fruits and my
goods. As he grew richer, he grew more
covetous. Absolutely no care or thought
for anything save his loved possessions
seems to have crossed the threshold of that
poor mistaken heart of bis. This strange
hunger after riches for riches' sake is, alas I
a very usual form of loul-disease. Can it
be cured 7 Alas I it is one of the most hope-
lesi of Boul-maladies. This unhappy love
in countless cases becomes a passion, and
twines itself round the heart, and so de!>troys
all the affections and higher aspirations.

Ver. 19. — And I wiU Bay to my soul, Soul,
thou hast much goods laid up for many
years. "What folly 1" writes St. Basil.
" Had thy soul been a sty, what else couldst
thou have promised to it? Art thou so
ignorant of what really belongs to the soul,
that thou offerest to it the foods of the
body? And givest thou to thy soul the
things which the draught receives ? " Many
yean. How little did that poor fool, so



wiRe in all matters of earthly bnsinessi
snspeot the awful doom was so close to him I
He forgot Solomon's words, "Boast not
thyself of to-morrow" (Prov. zxvii. 1^
Take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.
" Extremes meet," suggests Dean Plumptre ;
" and tne life of self-indulgence may spring
either from an undue expectation of a
lengthened life" (as was the case here),
"or from unduly dwelling ou its shortness,
without taking into account the judgment
that comes after it. The latter, as in the
'carpe diem' of Horace ('Odes,' i. 11. 8),
was the current language of popular epicu-
reanism" (see St. Paul's reproduction of
this thought, 1 Cor. xv. 32); "the former
seems to have been more charaoleristio of
a corrupt Judaism."

Ver. 20. — But God said unto him. Thou
fool, this night thy soul shall be required
of thee. The literal rendering of the Greek
here is more solemn and impressive in its
awful vagueness: This night they require
thy soul of thee. Who are meant by they f
Most likely the angels: not necessarily
"avenging," as Trench would suggest;
Mmply those angels whose special function
it was to conduct the souls of the departed
to their own plaee. So we read in the
parable of Lazarus and Dives how angels
carried the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's
bosom. On the words, "they require,"
Theophylaot writes, "For, like pitiless
exactors of tribute, terrible angels shall
require thy soul from thee unwilling, and
through love of life resisting. For from the
righteous his soul is not required, but he
commits it to God and the Father of spirits,
pleased and rejoicing; nor finds it hard to
lay it down, for the body lies upon it as
a light burden. But the sinner who baa
enfleshed his soul, and embodied it, and
made it earthy, has so prepared it to render
its divulsion from the body most hard;
wherefore it is said to be required of him,
as a disobedient debtor that is delivered to
pitiless exactors." Then whose shall those
things be, whioh thon hast provided? Our
Lord here reproduced the thought contained
in passages with which no doubt he had
been familiar from his boyhood. "Yea,
I hated all my labour which I had taken
under the sun: because I should leave it
unto the man that shall be after me. And
who knoweth whether he shall be a wise
man or a fool ? " (Eocles. ii. 18, 19). " He
henpeth up riches, and knoweth not who
shall gather them" (Ps. xxxix. 6). "The
parallel in the apocryphal book, Ecolui. zi.
18, lU, is very close.

Ver. 21. — And is not rich toward God;
better rendered, if he it not. And ttiis
slight change helps us, too, in drawing the
right lesson. The heinq ririh is never con-



CH. XII. 1—59.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



.S35



demned by Jesus Chiist; nor even the
growing richer. Among the saints of God
in both Testaments are many notable rich
men, whose possessions seem to have helped
rather than hindered their journey to the
city of God. The lesson which lies on the
forefront of this parable-story is the especial
danger wliich riches ever bring of gradually
deadening the heart and rendering it im-
pervious to any feeling of love either for
God or man.

The directionB which immediately followed
apon this parable were addressed to the
inner circle of disciples. The general in-
struction, it will be seen, belongs to all who
in any age wish to be " of his Church ; "
but several of the particular charges cannot
he pressed as general commnnds, being
addressed to men whose work and office
were unique.

Ver. 22. — ^And he said nnto his disciples,
Therefore I say nnto yon, Take no thought
for your life, what ye shall eat; neither
for the body, what ye shall put on. A better
rendering for " Take no thought " is Be
not anxious about. This, too, suggests a
more prautioal lesson. " What ye shall
eat." How repeatedly in the Master's
sermons do we find the reminder against
the being careful about eating I We know
from pa^au writers in this age how gluttony,
in its coarser and more refined forms, was
among the more notorious evils of Eoman
society in Italy and in the provinces. This
passion for the table more or less affected
all classes in the empire.

Vers. 24— 27.— Consider the ravens: for
they neither sow nor reap; whioh neither
have storehouse nor barn ; and Ood feedeth
them. . . . Consider the lilies . . . they toil
not, they spin not : and yet I say nnto yon,
thfit Solomon in all his glory was not ar-
rayed like one of these. What a contrast
between the life of the rich and prosperous
landowner just related, whose whole heart
and soul were concentrated on a toil which
should procure him dainty food and costly
raiment, and these fowls fed by God so
abundantly, and those flowers clothed by
God BO royally I The ravens knew nothing
of the anxious care and the restless toil of
the rich man in the midst of which he died,
and yet thuy lived. The lilies simply grew,
and God's hand painted the rich and
gorgeous clothing for each golden-jewelled
flower ; Solomon, the splendid Jewish king,
the example of all that was magnificent,
was never arrayed, men knew, )ike one of'
these lilies. With such a God above them,
who surely loved each one as he never
loved 8 biril or flower, was it worth while



to wear a life away in toiling for less than
what God simply gave to raven and to lily f
Such was the Master's argument, adorned,
we may well conceive, with all the beautv
and force of Eastern illustration. We possess,
after all, but a scant riiumi of these Divine
sermons. To apostle and chosen missionary
his words had a peculiar interest. He
bade them, in coming days of poverty and
abandonment, never to lose heart. They
would remember then their loved Teacher's
words that day when he spoke of the fate
of one whose life had been wasted in filling
his storehouses and his barns ; would re-
member how he turned from the foolish,
toiling rich man, and told them of the birds
and flowers, and how God tenderly cared
even for such soulless things. Did they
think he would ever lose sight of them,
Ms chosen servants? They might surely
reckon on the loving care of that Master
to whose cause they were giving their life-
service. Yet have these and other like
words of the great Teacher been often mis-
understood; and St. Paul's earnest and
repeated exhortations to his converts — not
to neglect honest toil, but by it to win
bread for themselves, and something withal
to be generous with to those poorer than
they — were his protest against taking the
Master's words in too literal a sense, and
using them as a pretext for a dreamy and
idle life. Paul's teaching, and perhaps still
more Paul's life — that life of brave, simple
toil for himself and others — were hi» com-
ment upon this part of the Master's sermon.
The Uliet. It is a little doubtful whether
our Lord meant to speak of the red anemone,
B very common but beautiful flower, with
which the meadows throughout all Pales-
tine are enamelled (^Anemone coroiiaria\ at
the great white lily (Lilium candiduni), or
the exquisite red lily {Lilium rvhruni) ; these
latter are more rare. The Saviour, probably,
had each of these and other specimens of
the flora of Palestine in his mind, when ha
spoke of the inimitable beauty and the
matchless splendour of these flowers of
God.

Ver. 29. — And seek not ye what ye shall
eat, or what ye shall drink. Again, after
the moving, touching words we have been
commenting on, does the Lord return to the
pressing injunction with which he began
his lessons to his disciples upon the parable
of the " rich fool." Trouble not yourselves
about your eating and drinking. This
repeated insistence of the Master upon this
point in the future lives of his d isciples has
evidently a deeper significance than a mere
injunction to cast all their care on him,
and not to be over-anxious about their poor
earthly maintenance. This was, of course,
the first lesson they had to learn from thess



S36



THE GOSPEL ACCCRDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xii. 1— 59



words; but beneath all this they oould,
and no doubt often in later days did, read
in the words a clear expression c^ their
dear Lord's will in favour of the utmost
■implicity in all matters of food and drink.
His own must be marked men here, ever
frugal and temperate even to abstemious-
ness. It is a grave question whether liis
Church has ever fully grasped the Master's
meaning here. Neither be ye of doubtful
mind ; literally, do not tota about like boats
in the ojing (so Dr. Farrar very happily).
The word is not found elsewhere in New
Testament writers, but it is known in classic
writers. Its use here is one of the many
■igns of St. Luke's high culture.

Ver. 32. — ^Fear not, little flock. Another
term of tender endearment addressed to liis
own who were grouped near him. In the
earlier part of this discourse (ver. 4) he hud
called them " my friends." He had told
them of the troublous life which awaited
them, but at the same time wished to show
them how dear tliey were to him. It wag
as though he said, " Endure the thought of
these necessary trials /or my sake; are you
not my chosen friends, for whom so glorious a
future, if ye endure to the end, is reserved ? "

Yer. 33. — SeU that ye have, and give
alms; provide yourselves bags which waz
not old, a treasure iu the heavens that faileth
not. " Those of you who have riches, see,
this is what I counsel you to do with them."
In considering these much-disputed words
of the Master, we must remember (1) to
whom they were spoken : they were ad-
dressed to men and women who, if ihey
would follow him, must set themselves free
from all worldly possessions ; they must
literally forsake all to follow him. (2) We
must bear in mind (a) that the only com-
munity which attempted, as a community,
to obey this charge literally was the Church
of Jerusalem, and the result was that for
long years this Church was plunged into
the deepest poverty, so that assistance had
to be sent even from far-distant Churches
to this deeply impoverished Jerusalem com-
munity. [This we learn from Paul, the
real compiler of this very Gospel, where the
charge is reported. See many passages in
his letters, notably the Second Epiatle to
the Corintnians, pnssim.] (b) The mendi-
cant orders in tliu Midille A>;e8, with no
little bravery and constancy, likewise at-
tempted to carry out to the letter this direc-
tion. The impartial stuilctit of mediaeval
history, while doing all justice to the aims
and work of these ol'tun <lovotfd men, can
judge whe'.he] or no these nioudioaut onlers
can be reckoned among the permanently
■uccessful agencies of the cruss. We con-
clude, then, that these words had a literal
meaning only for those to whom they were



specially addressed, viz. the disciples. Whil«
to the Chuiuh generally they convey thii
deep, far-reaching lesson, a lesson all would-
be servants of Christ would do well to take
to heart— it is the Master's will that his fol-
lowers shuuld sit loose to all earthly posses-
sums, possessing them as though they possessed
not. Thus living, the heart will be free
from all inordinate care tor earthly treasure,
and will, in real earnest, turn to that serene
region where its real and abiding riche*
indeed are — even to heaven.

Vers. 35, 36. — Let your loins be gilded
about, and your lamps burning; and ye
yourselves like unto men that wait for their
lord, when he wiU return from the wedding;
that when he oometh and knooketh, they
may open unto him immediately. The
Master goes on with his te{u^hing on the
subject of covetousness, still addressing
himself primarily to the disciples. " There
is another reason why my chosen followers
should treat the amassing of earthly goods
with indifference ; no man knows when the
end of this state of things may come ; their
hearts must be fixed on something else
than perishable things. They must act as
servants on the watch for the return of their
lord. See now, my own," Jesus proceeds
to say ; " your attitude in life must be that of
servants, at once loyal and devoted, whom
their employer has left in his house while
he is absent at a great wedding-feast. The
day of his absence passes into evening, and
evening thades into night; and even the
night wears slowly and tediously away, and
still the master of the house comes not back
from his festival." But the faithful servants
all this while never slumber, or even lie
down to rest. All the time of his absence,
with their loose flowing Eastern robes taken
up, and the skirt fastened under the girdle,
with their lamps all trimmed and burning,
these watchers wait the coming of their
lord, though he tarry long, that they may
be ready to receive him and serve him the
moment he arrives. All kinds of busy house
service, too, carried on during the long night
of watching, is implied by the girt-up robes
and the lit lamps of the tireless watchers.

Ver. 37. — Blessed are those servants,
whom the lord when he cometh shall find
watching: verily I say unto you, that he
shall gird himself, and make them to sit
duwu to meat, and will come forth and serve
them. The title "blessed," when used by
our Lord, is ever a very lofty one, and im-
plies some rare and precious virtue in the
one to whom this title to honour is given.
It seems as though the house-master of the
parable scarculj expected such true devotion
from his servants ; so ho hastens to reward
a rare virtuo with equally raro blessedness
and honour. He raises th< siaveg to u posi-



OH. xn. 1—59.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE.



337



tion of equality with their master. These
true faithful ones are no longer his serTanta ;
they are his friends. He even deigns him-
self to minister to their wants. A similar
lofty promise is made in less homely lan-
guage. Tl le final glorious gift to the faithful
conqueror in the world's hard battle appears
in the last of the epistles to the seven
Churches: "To him that overcometh will
I grant to sit mOi ni« in my throne " (Rev.
iu. 21).

Yer. 38. — And if he shall come in the
seoond watch, or oome in the third watoh,
and find them so. Among the Jews at the
time of our Lord, the old division of the
night into three watches had given place
to the ordinary Roman division into four.
They were reckoned thus : from six to nine,
from nine to midnight, from midnight to
three, and from three to six. In this parable
the second and third watches are mentioned
M necessary for the completeness of the
picture ; for the banquet would certainly not
be over before the end of the first watch,
and in the fourth the day would be breaking.
The seoond and third watches, then, repre-
sent the still and weary hours of the night,
when to watch is indeed a task of difficulty
and painfulness ; and here again the Lord
repeats his high encomium on such devoted
conduct in his second "blessed are those
servants," It is perfectly clear that in this
parable the master's return signifies the
coming of Christ. 'The whole tone, then,
is a grave reminder to us, to all impatient
ones, that the great event niaj^ be long
delayed, much longer than most Christian
thinkers dream ; but it tells us, too, that this
long delay involves a test of their loyalty.
" The parousia does not oome bo quickly as
impatience, nor yet so late ai carelessnese^
supposes " (Van Oosterzee).

Vers. 39, 40.— And this know, that if the
goodman of the house had known what hour
the thief wonld come, he would have watched,
and not have suffered his house to he broken
through. Be ye therefore ready also: for
the Son of man cometh at an hour when ye
think not. The Lord abruptly changes the
scene of liis parable imagery, and with
another striking and vivid example enforces
his teaching on the subject of the urgent
necessity of his servants keeping a sleepless
and diligent watch and ward against his
coming again in judgment Very deeply
must this image of the Lord's sudden return,
as a thief breaks into the house in the still
hours of the night, have impressed itself on
the hearts of the awe-struck, listening dis-
ciples, for we find in the ease of SS. Paul
and Peter the very words and imagery, and
in the case of St. John the imagery again
made use of (see 1 Thess. v. 1, 2 ; 1 Pet.
iiL 10 ; Eev. iii 3 ; ivi. 15> The meaning
LDKX.



of the simile is obvious. The disciples and
all followers of Jesus would do well to
remain always on the watch for the second
advent of the Lord. The time of that awful
return was unknown, never could be known ;
men, however, must not be deceived by the
long tarrying; the day of the Lord would
surely come on the world as a thief in the
night.

Ver. 41. — Then Peter said unto him, Lord,
speakest thon this parable unto ns, or even
to allt Peter's question here referred
evidently to the longer and more important
parable-story, where the reward which the
faithful watchers were to receive is men-
tioned (ver. 37). The grandeur of that
reward seems deeply to have impressed the
impulsive apostle. Some true conception of
the heaven-life had entered into Peter's
mind; we know, too, that now and again
dimly Peter seemed to grasp the secret
of his Master's awful Divinity. What
meant, then, thought the faithful, loving man,
the figure in the parable of the lord ? Who
was that lord — himself teming his faithful
followers? The same ourious perplexity
evidently passed through Peter's mind when,
on the evening before the death, in a symbol-
act the Master repeated the words of the
great promise made here, and washed his
disciples' feet. Then we read how Peter
said to him, " Lord, dost thou wash my feet?"
Were all who followed Jesus to share in that
strange, mighty promise ; or only a few, such
as Peter and his companions, called for a
special purpose?

Vers. 42— 44.— And the Lord said, Who
then is that faithful and wise steward, whom
his lord shall make ruler over his household,
to give them their portion of meat in due
season 1 Blessed is that servant, whom his
lord when he oometh shall find so doing.
Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make
him ruler over all that he hath. Jesus goes
on with his discourse. Apparently he pays
no heed to Peter's question, but really he
answers it fully, giving in fact more details
on the subject of rewards to the faithful in
the life to come than even Peter's question
requiredL " Who then," asks the Lcjrd, " is
that faithful and wise steward, whom hit
lord shall make ruler over his household?"
Who? Peter must answer the question.
This steward should be Peter himself and
each of Peter's chosen companions. Thi*
high position of steward in the household of
the Lord should be filled by those whom
Jesus had specially chosen. If, when he
came again, the Lord found these faithful to
their solemn trust, then these should receive
a still higher and grander recompense even
than that inconceivably splendid reward
(mentioned in vtr. 37) which had so struck
Peter; and the higher reoomjjeuse which



t38



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [en. xn. 1—59



these, the faithful and wise stewards, should
then receive would be the being made rulen
over all that the Lord hath. The answer of
the Master then told Peter that all his
followers, if found true and loyal, should
receive the reward promised (in ver. 37) to
the watching servants, wlio in the world to
oome would he not the tervauts but the
friends of God, While the few, the chosen
apostles of the Lord, if they endured to tlie
end, it they were found wise and faithful, to
them would be given in the new life a yet
more glorious recompense; they would be
Ret in some special position of government
and dominion in the glorious city of God.
This teaches, too, indirectly, but with great
clearness, that in the heaven-life all Christ's
redeemed will enjoy in the friendship of
God a perfect blessedness. StiU, in that
perfect blessedness which will be the heri-
tage of all the redeemed, there will still be
degrees in glory.

Vers. 45, 46. — But and if that servant say
in his heart, Uy lord delayeth his coming ;
and shall begin to beat the menservants and
maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be
drunken ; the lord of that servant will oome
in a day when be looketh not for him, and at
an hour when he is not aware. " But," y^n-
tinued the Master, " although certain of my
servants have onlooks to higher digrees of
glory than the great mass of their fellows,
these seemingly favoured ones have at the
same time more perilous responsibilities;
and only if in these graver responsibilities
they are faithful to the end, will they re-
ceive their high and peculiar reward." If,
on the other hand, they fail in their per-
petual watch for the coming of their Lord,
and instead of the restless toil which the
Master has assigned to these stewards, these
servants, weighted with higher respunsL-
biUties, give tliemselves up to worldly
pleasures and passions, terrible will be their
doom. Again the excesses of the table are
specially mentioned. If, instead of spending
themselves in the cares of their high office,
they make a profit out of tljat office, if tliey
live as oppressors of the flock rather than as
shepherds, then to these unfaithful stewards
will the Lord suddenly oome, as pictured in
the parable imagery, a thief in the night.
And will out him in sunder, and will appoint
him his portion with the unbelievers. The
terrible punishment here specified was not
unknown among the ancients (ee Hero-
dotus, vii. 39 ; and Heb, li, 87). Isaiah was
said to have been sawn asunder, Bengel's
comment is curious : " Qui cor divisum habet,
iividetar." It has been suggtsted, to bring
the punishment into harmony with tlie state-
ment immediately following, which speaks
of a definite and, perhaps, of an enduring
position for the guilty one, a " portion with



the unbelievers," to understand the word ai
an equivalent for scourging ; so in the Latin
we find jlagellii discindere, to scourge the
back with the rod. There is, however, no
known instance of the Greek word SixoroiieTv
being used in this sense. The expression !■,
however, used as simply implying that a
terrible doom is surely reserved in the life
to come for those who have so sadly misused
their high opportunities and neglected their
great responsibilities, "The image of the
parable itself is blended with the reality
which the parable signifies ; this thought of
the human master who can punish his slaves
with temporal death passes into that of the
Divine Judge who can punish with spiritual
death " (Dean Mansel),

Vers, 47, 48, — And that servant, which
knew his lord's will, and prepared not him-
self, neither did according to his will, shall
he beaten with many stripes. But he that
knew not, and did commit things worthy of
stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes,
For unto whomsoever much is given, of him
shall be much required, These verses are
easy to understand. They explain the broad
principles upon which the foregoing state-
ments, in parable and in direct teaching, are
based. Rewards and punishments will be
allotted in the coming world with strict
justice. To some, great knowledge of the
Divine will is given and splendid oppor-
tunities of work are afforded ; to such, if
only they are faithful and true, will indeed
a high place in the city of God be allotted ;
but alas for them in the life to oome if they
fail, if they miss tlie splendid chance of
being true toilers with and for God I Their
portion will be the many stripes. To others
a knowledge of the Divine will, scanty com-
pared with those just spoken of, is given,
and opportunities of doing higli and noble
work are here oompiiiatively few; if ihoM
use the little knowledge and seize the few
opportunities, they will, while occupying
a lower grade in the hierarchy of heaven,
still enjoy the perfect bliss of friendship
with God. The punishment for failure here
is designated by the few stripes. In this
solemn passage it is notable that degrees
or grades in punishment as well as degrees
or grades in glory are distinctly spoken of.

Ver. 49. — I am come to send fire on the
earth. It is still the same train of thought
that the Master pursues— a train which
had been only slightly diverted by Peter's
question. The text, so to speak, of the
whole discourse was " the strange attraction
which riches possess for men, and the palsy-
ing effect which this attraction, when yielded
to, exeioises over the whole life." The
Master's argument was as follows : " Beware
of covetousness ; let your attachment to
earthly possessions sit very lightly on you



on. XII. 1—59.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE.



38S



all; and as for you, my disciples, do you
have nothing to do ■with these perishable
goods." And here, with an abrupt solemnity,
probably the voice cl anging here, and ring-
ing with an awful emotion, he enforces his
charge to the disciples with the words, " I
am come to send fire on the earth." " My
stern, sad work is to inaugurate a mighty
struufgle, to cast a firebrand on the earth.
Lo, my presence will stir up men — you will
see this in a way none now dream of; a vast
convulsion will rend this people asunder.
In the coming days of war and tumult, what
have you, my disciples, who will be in the
forefront of this movement, — what have you
to do with earthly goods ? Toss them away
from you as useless baggage. The pioneers
of the army of the future, surely they must
be unencumbered in the war, which is about
to break out ; for remember, ' I am come to
send fire on the earth.' " And what will I, if
it be already kindled ? better rendered, how
I would that it had been already kindled !
That is to say, " How I wish that this fire
were already burning!" (so Olshausen, De
Wette, Bleek, and Farrar). Through all
the woe, however, the Redeemer could see,
shining as it were through a dark cloud, the
unspeakable glory and blessedness of his
work. But this fire could not be kindled
into a flame until sometliing had happened.
The cross must be endured by him ; till then
his work was not finished ; and in his pure
human nature — it is with stammering tongue
and trembling pen we speak or write here —
he felt, we believe, the bitter stinging pain
of dread expectation of what was coming.
With this onlook he was weighed down, we
know, at times ; witness especially the Geth-
semane agony. He goes on to say —

Ver. 50.— But I have a baptism to bj
baptized with ; and how am I straitened tlU
it be accomplished! The baptism he here
speaks of was the baptism of pain and
Buffering and death — what we call the
Passion of the Lord. He knew it must all
be gone through, to bring about the blessed
result for which he left his home in heaven ;
but he looked on to it, nevertheless, with
terror and shrinking. " He is under pres-
sure," says Godet, " to enter into this suffer-
ing because he is in haste to get out of it,
mournfully impatient to have done with a
painful task." This passage of the dis-
course of Jesus here has been called "a
prelude of Gethsemane."

Ver. 51.— Suppose ye that I am come to
give peace on earth t I tell you. Nay ; but
rather division. But the Master quickly
leaves himself and his own sad forebodings.
He puts by for a season his own holy im-
patience and continues his warnings. "I
have been dwelling on the troublous times
quickly coming on. Do not deceive your-



selves, my disciples; the great change about
to be inaugurated will only be carried out
in war and by divisions in the individual
house as in the nation. I bring not peace,
but a sword, remember." And then follows
a curious picture of a home torn asunder by
the conflict of thouglit which would spring
up as the result of the cross and of the
preaching of the cross.

Ver. 54. — And he said also. A note of
the compilers, SS. Luke and Paul, which
seems to say, "Besides all the important
sayings we have just written down, which
were spoken on this occasion, the Master
added as a conclusion the following words."
It is probable that the expressions used in
the next seven verses were called out by the
general apathy with which his announce-
ment of the coming woes was received by
tlie listening multitude. Possibly he had
noticed a smile of incredulity on the faces of
some of the nearer by-standers. The words
had already been used on other occasions in
a different connection. Here he used them
as a last appeal, or rather as a remonstrance.
He seems to say to the people, " O blind,
blind to the awful sins of the times I You
are weather-wise enough, and can tell from
the appearance of the sky and the sighing
of the wind whether a storm is brew-
ing or no : why not use the same faculty of
discernment in higher and more important
matters? Ah I be wise; make your peace
witli God without delay ; it will soon be too
late; there is an awful judgment close at
hand I " When ye see a olond rise out of the
west, straightway ye say, There cometh a
shower; and so it is. To the west of Pales-
tine lay the great Mediterranean Sea, from
which, of course, came all the rains which
fell on that country.

Ver. 55. — And when ye see the south wind
blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it
cometh to pass. To the south ef Palestine
lay the desert; when the wind blew from
that direction, it was usually a time of heat
and drought.

Ver. 56. — ^Ta can discern the face of the
sky and of the earth ; but how is it that ye
do not discern this time 1 These things had
an interest for them. Heat and drought,
wind and rain, affected materially the pro-
spect of their wheat-harvest and vintage,
the fruitfulness of their orchards and olive-
yards, therefore they gave tlieir whole mind
to the watching of the weather ; but to the
awful signs of the time in which they were
living they were blind and deaf. What
were these signs? (1) The low stale of
morality among ptiblie men. Did none of
them notice how utterly corrupt were priests
and scribes and people, how hollow and
meaningless their boasted religious rites,
bow far removed from them was the presence



840



THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINO TO ST. LUKE. [on. xn. 1—59



of the God of their fathera? (2) Political
mtuation. Did none of them notice the
terribly strained relatione between the
Homan or Herodian, and the great national
party ? Were they blind to the bitter, irre-
concilable hatred to mighty Eome which
was seething scarcely beneath the surface
of Jewish society ? Were they deaf to the
rumbling noises which too surely heralded a
tierce and bloody war between little Pales-
tine, split up into parties and sects, and the
mighty world of Borne which had seized
them in its own grip? What could be the
result of such a war? Were they devoid
of reason as well as blind and deaf i
(3) Heavenly teaming: What had they
done with John' the Baptist 7 Many in
Israel knew that man was indeed a great
prophet of tlie Lord. His burning words
had penetrated far and wide; vast crowds
had heard the awful sounds with breathless
awe; but no one heeded, and the people
wiitched him die. And now — they had
listened to him who was speaking to them.
He bad told them all; no sign of power
was wanting to his ministry, and it was
just over, and the people had not repented.

Ver». 68, 59.— When thou goest with
thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou
art in the way, give diligence that thoa
mayest be delivered from him ; lest he bale
thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee
to the officer, and the officer oast thee into
prison. I tell thee, thou shalt not depart
thence, till thon hast paid the very last mite.
And then the Master passed into one of
those parable illustrations with which his
hearers were now familiar, and which in a
homely way taught the crowd the same
grave truth which lie had been dwelling
upon — the impending terrible judgment
which was coming on the people. The
lesson, " be reconciled to God while it is yet
time," 1b, of course, applicable to all lives,
precarious and hang^g seemingly on a



thread as they all are, but it was especially
spoken to that generation in view of the
awful ruin which he knew was so soon to
fall on every Jewish home. The general
meaning of the parable illustration was
obvious ; no hearer could fail to understand
the Lord's meaning. It is be/ore arriving
at the judgment-seat that you must be
reconciled with the one who accuses you,
otherwise it will be too late, and nothing
would remain for the guilty accused but
the eternal prison-house. At that moment,
when the Master was speaking, individual
or nation might have turned to the Lord
and lived. There was no time, however,
for hesitation. The sands in the hour-glass,
which marked the duration of God's long-
suffering with Israel, were just running out.
Theologians in different ages and of varied
schools have made much of the concluding
sentence (ver. 59). Roman Catholic divines
see in it a strong argument in favour of the
doctrine of purgatory, avguing that after
death condemnation would be followed by
liberation, when a certain payment had been
made by the guilty soul ; strange ways of
paying this debt by means of others we
know have been devised by the school of
divines who teach this doctrine of purgatory.
But the Lord's words liere are terribly plain,
aud utterly exclude any payment of the
debt of the soul by oihers. The Master
emphatically says, " till tlioa bast paid the
very last mite." The advocate who pleads
for universal redemption, and shrinks from
a punishment to the duration of whioh he
can see no term, thinks that in the words,
" till thou hast paid," he can discern the
germ at least of eternal hope. But the im-
penetrable veil which hangs between us aud
the endless hereafter prevents us, surely,
from even suggesting that any suffering
which the soul may endure in the unseen
world will ever pay " the very last mite,"
and 80 lead to pcurdou and peace.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 12. — An evil to he thunned, and a virtue to he cultivated. Jesus liad been
pkriaking of the light forenoon meal' with a Pharisee. In this Pharisee's house he pro-
claimed war to the death with the bigots who had been dogging his steps. A small
fire may kindle much wood. For some reason unknown to us, he had omitted the
washing of hands before sitting down to meat. Instantly the whole company turned
on him with scowl and sneer and shrug. And the action of the Truth incarnate, in
reply to this, was the utterance ot the six "woes" — scathing thunderbolts — which
St Luke has recorded between vers. 42 and 52 of the previous chapter. His utterance
was the signal for something like a riot (vers. 53, 54). Ah I thou Son of Mary, thou
Meekest and Lowliest, the column has turned. Hitherto thy progress has been, not
without contradiction of sinners, but for the most part one of sweet poetries — unbounded
the wonder and generous the admiration of the people. Thine enemies have been kepi
buck ; they have beep held in restraint by the lightning whiph has flashed from th^e



CH. XII. 1—59.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 341

But now thou must enter on a new pliasc of thy ministry ; henceforth the issues towardl
which thou hast been bolting will be hastened.

• Eide on, rido on in majesty I
The winged squadrons of tiie sky
Look down with sad and wondeiing eye»
To see the approucLing sacrifice."

"In the mean time," whilst the dinner with its tumultuous conversation Is proceeding,
the crowd has so accumulated that " many thousauds are gathered together." They
are so eager to hear the Prophet that some persons are trodden down. To this
seething mass Christ comes forth, his heart stirred by the controversy, vehement and
provocative, which single-handed he had sustained. Most natural, in view of tlie cir-
cumstances related, is the discourse which follows, addressed immediately to his fol-
lowers, but reaching the ear of "the many thousands." 1. First, there is the word as
to " the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy " (vers. 1 — 3). Hypocrisy was the
evil which permeated and vitiated their action. What is meant by hypocrisy ? The
hypocrite is " the man who has to play a part, to maintain a reputation, to keep
up a respectable position, to act consistently with the maxims of the party to which
he is allied, or the profession to which he belongs." As thus interpreted, is not the
" beware ! " of the afternoon long ago, a " beware ! " for this day as well ? " Pharisee "
and " Sadducee " are words which no longer distinguish classes ; but when the classe*
which they once designated are studied, it is found that, for what was most charac-
teristic of each, there are correspondents among us. Let it not be supposed that the
Pharisee was nothing else than a sanctimonious charlatan, a mere pretentious formalist.
He was the representative of the more earnest religious spirit. The Sadducee was
generally a wealthy man, one belonging to the ruling order. Content with easy and
low standards, the worldly or rationalistic Jews belonged to the party comprehended
by the name. The Pharisee disowned such a conception of religion. He would not
have any fellowship with such latitudinarianism. To him the Law was the Law of
God, and he was bent on keeping it to its minutest point. In over-zeal he even
added, to the observances enjoined, observances which might be inferred or which
had been added by rabbins. The traditions of the elders were, in his view, a sup-
plement to the Law and the prophets. " It is needless," as has well been observed,
" to show that there was something in Pharisaism worthy of admiration, for this is
inr.plied in the charge brought against the Pharisees of our Lord's time. They were
accused of being hypocrites, of not being what they pretended to be ; in which it is
implied that, if they had really been what they seemed, they would have deserved the
praise they claimed. And doubtless tliere were some whose goodness was more than
outside show, both in the first original of the sect, and in those later times when Phari-
saic culture prepared the soil on which the seeds of the gos|iel most readily flourished;
for to this sect belonged the majority of the first converts, and the many thousands
who believed are all described as ' zealous for the Law.' " * Any one playing the hypo-
crite will prefer the Pharisee type. The scanty clothing of the Sadducee will not suit ;
the fitting dress is the long robe and the well-phylacteried garment of the Pharisee.
The devil's homage to truth, which hypocrisy has been declared to be, is more becomingly
rendered in such a garb. A part-ovtor I Ah ! we need to be reminded that this is a
character still to be found in the religious world. Bunyan introduces us to persons
who are not mere fictions— My Lord Turn-about, my Lord Fair-speech, Mr. Smooth-
man, Facing-both-ways, the parson Mr. Two-tongues; the points in which all
agree being " that they never strive against wind and tide, and that they are always
most zealous when religion gnes in his silver slippers." A part-actor 1 Almost uncon-
sciously, we play a part which marks an excess of what we have ourselves verified— a
part beyond, if not covering, the very thought of the soul. " Beware of the leaven !^
Milton describes hypocrisy as " the only evil that walks invisible except to God alone."
To be real, not to be a Mr. Facing-both-ways, is one of the great lessons of the Ufa
of Christ. In any diagnosis of human nature, we must remember the mixture to be
found in character. Few persons intend, deliberately and systematically, to lie to God

» •Non-Miraoulous Christianity,' pp. 263, 264, by Professor Salmon, D.D., of Dublin



342 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xii. 1— 50

au(i man. The Pharisees whom onr Lord condemned were not — at least we may in
•harlty bo suppose — intentionally false. If they prayed to be seen of men, we need not
imagine that they secretly mocked at and disbelieved in the duty of prayer. The
leaven was the endeavour to maintain a reputation with which they were credited ; so
much had this endeavour gained on them, that they were far more anxious about it
than about their possession of truth in the inward parts. And thus they became part-
actors. Mow, so with regard to ourselves and our fellow-men. A pcirson is observeci
doing, in somo directions or at some times, what is inconsistent with his conduct at
other times or in other directions. And worldly minded people, always eager to scent
blemishes, cry out, " Hypocrite ! " This is a harsh, and may be a wrong, judgment. A
lapse from the standard aimed at does not evidence insincerity. Nay, tiiose who
observe most clostly the Jacts of life, can often trace what seems a twofoldness of
gelf. The Apostle Paul in a most ' stril^ing passage (Rom. vii.) has described the
struggle in his own heart, the contending laws, the spiritual and the carnal, the opposi-
tions and thwartings of the sin that dwelt in him — oppositions so fierce that it seemed
as if he were sold under sin. "0 wretched man that I ami" he cries. His hope,
his triumph, is, " I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord." Looking up to -Jesus
Christ, he saw his right and higher self; looking down on the evil ever present with
him, on the body of death in which he appeared to be enslaved, he saw the lower and
the wrong self. " I myself with the mind serve the Law of God ; but with the flesh the
law of sin." The one feature in this portrait is the determination of the will. That was
God's ; the deflections from it were the signs of an alien force from which he wished to
be free. So long as this feature is predominant, the sanctification may be imperfect,
but the life is true. What constitutes hypocrisy is appearing to be what one is not ;
concealing the want of piety in the heurt under the cloke of piety in the action ; such
a study of outward efi'ect that the conduct gradually becomes a tissue of dishonesties.
This posing to be something and this anxiety about the pose rather than the truth,
constitute the leaven of hypocrisy. " Be no part-actor," says Christ (vers. 2, 3) ; "be
no whisperer in daikness, be no mutterer in the ear in inner chambers. Be not one
thing in secret, and another thing in public. Keep clear of pretences of all sorts.
Remember, concealment cannot avail. Walls have ears. The universe lias its libraries
on which all that is whispered is written. And there is an Eternal Truth to whom
' all hearts be open, all desires kno^vn, and from whom no secrets are hid.'" 2. Next,
there is the word as to courage. Is it not the word which we might expect from him
who had defied the most compact order in the land? Listen to the Christian's " Pear
not" and the Christian's " Fear." " Fear not man, having power only over the body "
(ver. i). Have the courage of your convictions. Trust in God and do the right. Fear
God (ver. 5). Penr not to speak the truth ; fear to tell the lie. " Yea, I say unto you,
fear the Eternal Righteousness." The lesson is enforced by three considerations. (1)
The value to God of every true and honest life (vers. 6, 7). Not one sparrow is for-
gotten, not one of the tiniest and least valued of God's creatures is outside his care.
Every hair on your head is numbered. You are dear to God. He is waiting for you
to work with him. The life of each of you is of value to him. Fear not. (2) The
danger of trifling with conviction (vers. 8 — 10). Do not refuse, for some fear of man, to
give effect to it. You may possibly, says the Lord, quench the Holy Spirit. This was
the sin of the Pharisees. This is the unpardonable sin. A word against Jesus may
be spoken " ignorantly in unbelief; "and the Redeemer says, " Father, forgive; for they
know not what they do." But to shut the eye to the light, to refuse to see light as
light, to sophisticate the voice of God's Spirit speaking through reason and conscience,
this is to destroy the possibility of spiritual health. Christ says to the d'sciples, " To
confess me before men, no matter what the consequences to yourselves, is to deliver
your souls, is to realize the confession in heaven; to deny me is to lose the fellowship
of the holy angels, is to approach the confines of the sin which shall not b» forgiven."
(3) The support assured fur all testimony to him (vers. 11, 12). God is ever on the
side of the true. Christ bids those who confess him dismiss anxiety when brought to
" lynago'jues, magistrates, and powers." They are never alone. Moses, the stammer-
ing, had his Aaron with him when he went in unto Pharaoh. A Mightier than Aaron
is with the most timid and stammering of the confessors of the kingdom of God. " The
llnly Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say."



.XII. 1—69.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 841



Vers. 13 — 31.— WorldUness. To the earnest teacher nothing can be more irritating
than a half-attentive attitude or a remark which indicates preoccupation of mind with
other and inferior things. Think of Christ, towards the close of a day of controversy
with the Pharisees, and in the midst of solemn speech as to the duty of a true man,
Invited on a sudden to decide in a family quarrel, to settle a dispute about some money
or some acres of soil. We know nothing about the person who appealed to him (vor.
13) — " one out of the mnltitude." But it is evident that, while the discourse pro-
ceeded, he had been engrossed with the consideration of his own rights and interests ;
like many who may be in the multitude thronging around Jesus, but are secretly
busied with their own concerns — earth-grubs, intent only on getting all they can
get from others for themselves. The abrupt reply (ver. 14) shows the displeasure of
the Lord. It is a reply of reproof; it is a reply of instruction also. God has a great
variety of spheres and ministries for men, and the Son of God will not contravene his
Father's ordering. The judge, the measurer, the arbiter as to property, is a Divine
calling. Those who are entrusted with it are God's servants. The State is no less
sacred than the Church. Let each realize its own place, and each respect the other —
the State looking to the Church as the expounder of the eternal principles, the Church
looking to the State as charged with government and the settlement of the issues
between man and man. " My kingdom," says the Christ, " is not of this world." The
incident gives a new direction to the teaching of Jesus. It is a disclosure of the mind
against which he must warn his followers. And then follows one of the most solemn
and beautiful of expositions — that in which the Lord conveys his great lesson as to
worldliness. Observe (1) the more public instruction between vers. 15 and 21 ; and (2)
the more private instruction, specially addressed to the disciples, between vers. 21 and
32. The more public is the admonition conoernins covetousness ; tho more private is
the admonition cimcerning carefulness. The two types of the one spirit — worldliness.

L The former instruction is enforced by a parable, by observing the point of which
we discern the mbaninq which Cueist gives to the word " covBTonsNBSS," anb

THE principle IN RELATION TO IT WHICH HE LAT8 DOWN. NoticC, it Is the mOSt

insinuating, therefore the most dangerous, form of the temptation which is presented.
The ground (ver. 16) ol a man already rich brings forth plentifully. There is no dis-
honesty charged; tliere is no financial finesse suggested ; it is in the natural course of
things. The money makes money, and good soil and good harvests aid. The oovetous-
ness is the greed of having rather than getting ; it is manifest in the thought as to that
which has been already got. The anxiety is to treasure up for self. Existing barns
are insufficient (vers. 17, 18). What is to be done? There never enters the thought ot
any stewardship of the substance with which the man is enriched; never the feeling,
" Wliat I have God has given me. The labour of otheis, too, has helped me to acquire
it. I am the custodiar of so much of a commonwealth. God wills that I enjoy
richly, but not that I keep all to myself. I enjoy in the measure in which the use of
the gifts unites me to the will of him who is the Giver." Bingel remarks, " Not a word
of the poor in all his self-communion." It is simply a hard, selfish " greater bams."
Covetousness is not the desire to enjoy so much as the desire to have. First, the having
of a great store ; then, not until then (ver. 19), " Soul, thou hast much goods laid up
for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry." Very delicate is the
Master's touch. The happiness in the wealth is a thing future, and the future never
comes. Do we not often see abundance going about with a load of care on its back —
fear about losses, anxiety about investments, etc. ? The wealthy are often prevented
from getting the full good of their wealth. They are possessed by their money more
tlian they are possessors of their money. " The increase serves not as water to quench, but
as fuel to fetd the fire; he that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver." Christ
is not condemning wealth or denouncing abundance of things. " The filling of the
barns with plenty, and the bursting out of the vats with new wine," is represented
(Prov. iii. 9, 10) as the blessing prepared for those who honour the Lord with their sub-
stance. What he condemns is the vice which specially threatens the rich — the tendency
to identify the life with the possessions (ver. 15), to love the money, to hoard it, and
regard it all as a treasure to be devoted to self. And truly the words of the Truth are
most needful for our time. " The desire to accumulate is the source of all onr s^catness
and of all oui baseness." The baseness begins when the barn, with its " much goods"



i4i The gospel ACCORDIlra fO ST. LUKE, [ch. xn. l— 69

ig regarded as the soul's portion ; when that is the man's main interest ; and, looking on
to some day when the pile will be complete, he says in himself, " Then eat, drink, and
be merry." Very striking the sentence (ver. 20). " Ood says. Thou fooU" Polly
indeed I Thomas Adams quaintly says, " The competency of earthly things is a bless-
ing ; but what is this to abundance ? Is not he as warm that goes in russet as another
that rustles in silk ? Has not the poor labourer as sound a sleep in his flock bed as the
epicure on his down bed ? Doth not q uiet lie oftener in cottages than in glorious man-
sions ? And, for a good appetite, we see the toiling servant feed savourly of one homely
dish when his surfeited master looks loathingly on his far-fetched and dearly bou^^ht
dainties. This gentleman envies the happiness of his poor hind, and would be content
to change states with him on condition he might change stomachs. It is not the
plenitude, but the competency of these things that affords even content ; so that a man's
estate should be like his garment, rather tit than long." Folly indeed 1 What stupidity
to contemplate the many years ! " This night thy soul shall be required." Thy soul,
thyself, without all the goods. " When I die, let my hands be outside my shroud,"
said the emperor, " that all may see they are empty." And what is to become of the
" much goods " ? Pass into the hands of others, possibly only to do them harm, neither
the accumulator nor his kind made the better for all the gathering. " Fool, fool ! this
thou art, man, who, without generosity of heart or liberality of hand, day by day
scrapest the dust of earth to thy store, oblivious of the celestial crown above thy head,
rich in man's estimation, but (rer. 21) a pauper, a bankrupt, towards God."

n. The mobb oenebal instruction sounds the warning. " Take heed, and keep
yourselves from all oovetousness." The more special and private iiistructi<m to the
disciples is joined to the preceding parable by a " therefore " (ver. 22). It, too, is an
admonition against umrldliness. It presents that aspect of the worldly spirit which
more immediately tempted the disciples of Jesus ; it gives also the key-note for that
higher life which, as those joined to the Lord, they are called to live. The two parts
of the discourse illustrate the meaning of St. Paul's saying as to " the new man created,
after God, in righteousness and true holiness [or, ' holiness of trath '] " (Eph. iv. 24).
The righteousness which is incumbent on all, from the very nature of their existence
and their relation to God and men, is represented in the part already considered ; " the
holiness of truth " — ihntplus which is because of our place in the body of Christ, and
our relation to him as the Head of the body — ^is represented in the beautilul words
which are prefaced by the injunction, " Be not anxious for your life, what ye shall eat,
nor yet for your body, what ye shall put on." With some variations, a part of the
sermon from the mount is repeated (see homiletics on the sermon). One or two
remarks will here suffice. 1. The life which marks the holiness of the new man
created in Christ Jesus consists in a supreme preference (ver. 31). What distinguishes
this life is that it has a " rather " or a " howbeit " at its heart. Its first concern
is the kingdom of the Father; its second is (ver. 30) the things which the nations of
the world seek after. " These things " — eating, drinking, clothing, etc., have their value.
But the mind is not in search of them. They are not its good or portion. Its
sympathies and craving are towards the eternally right and true. To realize that in
self, and aid its fulfilment everywhere, is the highest aim and object of the being.
The property of the soul rich towards God is, indeed, a vast property; but it has
heights as well as lengths ; it is the threefold estate — " all things are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's." The things which the nations of the world seek after
are given into the bargain, so to speak, as far as they are necessities, to all who seek the
Father's kingdom. 2. For those in whom this life is formed, a rule is laid down
(ver. 22), " Be not anxious as to these things." The rendering of the Greek word in
the Authorized Verdon might mislead. Christ himself has taught us to take thought
for our life — to provide for the morrow. He bade his disciples gather up the fragments,
that nothing might be IobL He had a bag, of which Judas was the bearer, from which
tilings needful were purchased. It is a sign of the savage, not the civilized man, to
live only for the present hour, wasting what he does not immediately consume. The
teaching is that, living the true life, and preferrint^ what is right to what is merely
politic, we may reckon on God for the supply of all our need. As to eating and drink-
ing, we will not ask the i-atiety of abundance, we will ask only sufficiency ; and on thi*
we may rely. He who feeds the ravens will not forget those who faithfuUy serve him



•H. in. 1—59,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 846



(vers. 23, 30). We are to labour constantly and diligently whilst we have strength to
sow and reap, to " provide things honest ; " for labour is God's appointed means of feeding
and clothing — as even the raven witnesses, which God feeds, but which yet is ever pick-
ing what it can find ; as even the lily witnesses, which is faifhful to the conditions of its
growth. But we are to toil with a free heart, delivered from carking and worrying
care, turning ever trustfully to the love of our Father in heaven. Matthew Henry puts
it thus : " As in our stature, so in our state, it is our wisdom to take it as it is, and make
the best of it; for fretting and vexing, carking and caring, will not mend it." "Do not
live in suspense ; do not cherish the doubting, doubtful mind," says the Lord to his
followers. " Do uoi fear A little flock you may seem ; but the shepherding is perfect.
Live generously, self-denyiugly, self-sacrificingly (ver. 31). The purses which hold
good deeds never wax old. The treasure bestowed on that which is out of sight is laid
up in the heavens (ver. 33), and no thief can abstract it, and no moth c«n destroy it.
Living in the unseen, in God's kingdom of grace as its subjects, your heart (ver. 34)
will settle towards its treasure; you will be prepared and fitted to be the princes of
your Father's kingdom of glory."



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 2, 3. — Bidden things. Our Lord's affirmation implies that there Is a great deal
which has been long beneath the surface, and we naturally ask — Does God hide t And
the answer is — Yes, truly, " thou art a God that hidest thyself." He hides his own
glory, that we may not be dazzled thereby ; he hides the bliss of the beatified, that we
may not be discont"iited thereby. Like as a father hides from his children many
things which they will better learn a little later on, or had better make out for them-
selves, so God hides many things flrom us for the very same reasons. But he has so
hidden treasures of truth and wisdom from us, that we have every possible inducement
to search for them, and full capacity to find them.

I. The provision made for cub tempobal wblpaeb. Did he not hide the coal,
the copper, the iron, the lead, the silver, the gold, that we might discover, might raise,
might refine, might shape them to our use ? And the corn which he gives us to eat, the
raiment to wear, the music to enjoy, — these are only to be had by searching, by inquiry,
by study, by endeavour. The powers of steam, of electricity, were long hidden firom
the knowledge of mankind, but they, with the other secrets of the world, are being
known.

IL His SAVING and sanctiftino teuth. Paul speaks much of "the mystery-
hidden from the generations," i.e. God's great purpose to redeem, not a nation from
political bondage, but the whole human race from spiritual servitude and degradation ;
his purpose to accomplish this by coming to the world in the Person of his Son Jesua
Christ. This was hidden in Old Testament promises, and in the Law given by
Moses ; it was there, undiscovered by any but a few discerning souls ; and it was " not
revealed unto the sons of men " until, enlightened by the Spirit of God, the apostles
made known the riches of his grace. There are still some things in connection with
Christian doctrine which may be said to be hidden, but which sooner or later will be
revealed and known. '

III. Human chabacteb and human lifb. There are depths of secrecy in these
human hearts of ours. Evil thoughts may hide there unknown to any but to those
that entevtain them ; nay, may lurk and work within the soul unsuspected even by
that soul itself For men are both better and worse than they know themselves to be.
What purity and gentleness and self-sacrificing love may steal silently through life,
and may pass and be forgotten I what deeds of truest heroism may be wrought which
no pen records and no tongue recites ! Yet the wrong shall be exposed, and the right
be understood and honourS ; human character shall be read in the light of truth ; the
guilty shall be humbled and the upright be exalted "in that day." 1. Our duty. It
is that of: (1) Exposure. Tear the mask from the hypocrite; let the covering be torn
ofif the false man, the charlatan, the betrayer of the soul, with a firm and fearless hand ;
make him stand out before his fellows stripped of his pretences ; make it true that
" there is nothing covered," etc. (2) Disclosure. Live to teach, to enlighten, to enlarge.



546 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [ch. xti. 1— 59

Let the secret of health, of wisdom, of usefulness, be published on every hand. Tell
all you can reach — the children in the school, the sick by the bedside, the loiterers by
the wayside, the congregation in the cottage, or the hall, or the church — the secret ot
pure and lasting joy, of real and true success. 2. Our danger. Sinco God will cause
the hidden things to be known, since he will "bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and make manifest the counsels of all hearts," since he " will judge the
necrets of men," well may the guilty shudder, well may we all ask — Who shall abida
that solemn hour ? But there is an alternative. " The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
from all sin." True penitence and genuine faith will secure for us such a covering
that nothing shall be revealed. There is a Divine forgiveness which swallows up and
hides for ever the wrong that we have done. 3. Our hope. " And then " — at that
day — " shall every man have praise of God; " i.e. every man who is, in the true sense,
praiseworthy ; every man to whom Christ will be free to say, " I was hungry, and ye
gave me meat ; for inasmuch," etc. He who does good " to he seen of men " has his
reward now ; his recompense is exhausted here. But he who works for Christ and for
men in the spirit of his Master has not his reward now ; he has only a foretaste of it.
The best of it has yet to come. And it will come ; for there is nothing hidden that
shall not be revealed. Blessed is the quiet, humble life of unpretending goodness,
which is like the silent spring that makes the meadows green ; from such lives as
these come deeds of loveliness and usefulness to be made mention of by the lips of the
Lord himself, when the things that are covered now shall be revealed, and the things
which man overlooks God will own and honour. — 0.

Vers. 4, 5. — Th« power to hurt and Hess. We are admonished of —

L The poweb which man has to hurt us. 1. He can wound our body. He can
■mite, can wound, can slay us. The sad story of human persecution contains only too
many illustrations of this fact. 2. He can wound our spirit. This is a course he can,
and still does very often take; he can mock, can sneer, can indulge in heartless
ribaldry, can hold up our most sacred convictions to ridicule, and thus he can inflict
on us a very deep wound. For words, though they may be the slightest, are yet the
keenest of weapons, and " a wounded spirit who can bear ? " 3. He can tempt us is
tvil. This is the worst thing he can do ; he can make the evil suggestion, can give
the perilous invitation, can make the guilty overture, which leads down to sin and to
spiritual failure. There is no measure of pain he can inflict, or loss he can cause us
to suffer, which equals in shamcfulness this act of dark temptation. That is the deadly
thing to do.

IL The limitation of his poweb. Beyond these lines our worst enemies cannot
gQ. 1. No man can follow us into the unseen realm. Beyond the veil we are safe
from the questions of the inquisitor, the blows of the tyrant, the suggestions of the
tempter. These may hunt us to very death, but " after that have no more that they
can do." Truly, if this life were the sum of our existence, that would be much indeed
— it would be everything. But since we know that it is not so, but only its first short
term, only its initial stage, only its brief introduction, we may console our hearts with
the thought that it is no great barm that the strongest potentate, with the sharpest
iword, can do us. 2, No man can compel us to sin. A siuful deed includes the con-
sent of the agent ; and all the forces of iniquity and error can never compel a true and
brave soul to assent to an evil act. The only great harm that can be done us is that
which we do ourselves when we " consent to sin " when men tempt us to sin, — after that
there is no more that ihey can do; if more is done, if the line is crossed, it is of our
own accord ; the tempting is theirs, the sinning is ours.

III. The only One of whom we have to be afraid. " Fear him," etc. ; i.e. shrink
from the disfavour of that Divine Lord of the huu.an spirit who can punish according
to our desert. To shrink from the condemnation of God is not an unworthy act on our
part. It is both right and wise ; for his condemnation is that of the Righteous One,
and of the Mighty One also. It is only the guilty that are lost to all sense of obliga-
tion, and the foolish that are dead to all sense of prudence, who will be indifferent to
the anger of God. Fear God's solemn displeasure, for if he rebukes it is certain that
you are grievously in the wrong; tear it, for if he inflicts penalty there is none to
deliver out of his hand, and, what is more, even death, that does deliver from the hand



OH. xn. 1—59.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. L,UKE. 841

of man, is no shield {rom his power. Beyond the veil we are as much within his reach
as we are on this side of it. There is every reasoa why we should seek and find his
Divine favour, and live in the light of his countenance. We may go on in our thought,
and he reminded hy our Lord's words of —

IV. The One whose fbiendsuip we should seek. " I say unto you, myfriendt"
We do not simply want to escape the wrath of an offended Judge ; we aspire to hit
favour and his love. Jesus Christ is offering us his friendship (see John xv. 14, 15).
If we will cordially accept him for all that he desires to he to us, we shall find in him
the Friend in whom we shall implicitly confide, whom we shall gladly and happily lore,
hy whose side and in the shelter of whose guardian care we shall walk all the way till
th" gates of home are reached. — 0.

Vers. 8, 9. — Confessing Christ. From these solemn words we gather—

I. That Chbistianitt centres ik the Person op Jesus Christ. Out Lord taught
us much concerning ourselves — the inestimahle value of our spiritual nature ; the real
source and spring of evil in our own souls ; the true excellency of a iiuman lifts ; whom
we should regard as our neighbour, etc. But he taught us still more of hirriself— of his
relations with the Divine Father ; of his essential superiority even to the greatest among
mankind; of his sorrow and his death on hehalf of the human race; of his mission to
enlighten, to redeem, to satisfy the souls of men. And he not only affirmed, hut fre-
quently and emphatically uri;ed, the doctrine that, if we would enter into life, we must
come into the very closest personal relation with himself — trusting in him, loving him,
abiding in him, following him, making him Refuge of the heart. Sovereign of the soul,
Lord of the life. Nut his truth, but himself, is the Source of our strength and our hope.

IL That Jesus Cubist demands an open confession of our faith in him. More
than once (see Mark viii. 38) he insisted upon a clear recognition of his authority and
regal position. He will have us " confess him before men." How shall we do that ?
1. In a heathen country, by avowing the Christian faith, renouncing Hinduism,
Buddhism, Confucianism, etc., and declaring before all that Jesus Christ is the one
Teacher of truth and Lord of man. 2. In a Christian country, by making it clear that
we have accepted him as the Lord whom we are living to serve. We shall probably
think it right to do this by attaching ourselves to some particular Christian community ;
also hy regular, public worship of Christ ; but certainly, in all cases, (1) by paying
honour to his ^ame; (2) by upholding against his enemies the truth and worth of his
religion ; (3) by translating his will into active human life in all its departments —
domestic, social, commercial, political, ecclesiastical.

III. That compliance with his demand will soon prove to be an act of thb
FIRST importance. The day draws on when we shall meet our Master: then will he
tell us what he thinks of us. Then, if we have failed to honour him, he will refuse to
honour us " before the angels of Godl" What is involved in that denial ? The worst
of all exclusions — exclusion from the favour, from the home, of God. And then, if we
have honoured him, he will acknowledge us as his own. And what will that include?
1. Acceptance with the Judge of all. 2. The expression of his Divine approval — the
" well done " of the Lord. 3. Admission to the heavenly kingdom, with all its advanc-
ing glory, its deepening joy, its extending influence, its enlarging life. — 0.

Ver. 15. — A man's life. What is the worth of a man's life ? Clearly that doei not
depend merely on duration. For while to the insect the term of seventy years would
seem a most' noble expanse, on the other hand, compared with the age of a mountain or
the duration of a star, it is an insignificant span. The truth is that the value of human
life depends on what is done within its boundaries. Here quality is of the chief account.
To the insensible stone all the ages are as nothing ; to the dormant animal time is of
no measurable value. To a thinking, sensitive spirit, with a great capacity for joy and
MTTOW one half-hour may hold an inestimable measure of blessedness or of woe.
There are three things it may include ; we take them in the order of value, beginning

at the least. , » , i

L Having what is good. " The things which a man possesseth are of value to
him. " Money is a defence," and it is also an acquisition, for it stands for all thoM
necessaries and comforts, all those physical, social and intellectual advantages which it



84S THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE, [ch. xn. 1— 59



will buy. But it is a miserable delusion — a delusion which has slain the peace and
prospects of many a thousand souls — that the one way to secure the excellency of life
is to gain amplitude of material resources. 1. Muchness of money does not even ensure
human happiness. The wealth that lives in fine houses and sits down to sumptuong
tables and moves in " good circles " is very often indeed carrying with it a heavy heart,
a burdened spirit, an unsatisfied soul. This is not the imagination of envy; it is the
confession of sorrowful experience, uttered by many voices, witnessed by many lives.
2. Muchness of money does not constitute the excellency of human life. In a country
where "business" means as much as it does in England, we are under a strong tempta-
tion to think that to have grown very rich is, by so doing, to have succeeded. That
is a part of some men's success ; but it does not constitute success in any man's life.
A man may be enormously rich, and yet he may be an utter and pitiable failure. " In
every society, and especially in a country like our own, there are those who derive their
chief characteristics from what they have ; who are always spoken of in terms of revenue,
and of whom you would not be likely to think much but for the large account that
stands in the ledger in their name. ... So completely do they paint the idea of their
life on the imagination of all who knew them, that, when they die, it is the fate of the
money, not of the man, of which we are apt to think. Having put vast prizes in the
funds, but only unprofitable blanks in our affections, they leave behind nothing but
their property, or, as it is expressly termed, their effects. Their human personality
hangs as a mere label upon a mass of treasure " (Dr. Martineau). A man's life should
rise higher than that.

II. Domo WHAT IS JtiST AND KIND. Far better is it to do the just and kind acdon
than to hxve that which is pleasant and desirable. Life rises into real worth when it
is spent in honourable and fruitful action. In sustaining right and useful relationships
in the great world of business, carrying out our work on principles of righteousness and
equity ; in ruling the home firmly and kindly ; in espousing the cause of the weak, the
ignorant, the perishing ; in striking some blows for national integrity and advancement •
— in such a healthful, honouiable, elevating action as this " a man's life" is found. But
this, in its turn, must rest on —

HI. Being what is eight. For "out of the heart are the issues of life." Men
may do a large number of good things, and yet be " nothing " in the sight of heavenly
wisdom (see 1 Cor. xiii. 1 — 3). The one true mainspring of a worthy human life is
" the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." To love God, and therefore to
love all that is good ; to love God, and therefore to interest ourselves in and try to help
all those who are so nearly related to him ; to love God, and therefore to be moving on
and up in an ever-ascending line toward Divine wisdom and worth; — this is the one
victorious and successful thing. Without this, " a man's life " is a defeat and a failure,
hold what it may ; with it, it has the beginnings of a true success — it is already, and
will be more than it now is, eternal Ufe.—C.

Ver. 20. — Sudden death. The parable which Jesus Christ delivered in rebuke ol
covetousness puts in striking and even startling form the facts on which God's provi-
dence requires us to look. For we know —

I. That sudden death is an event which may occub to any one of us. Human
science has done much for us ; and much in the direction of preserving and prolonging
life. It has given to us a considerable knowledge of disease, and therefore an increased
sense of danger. But it has not materially diminished the fact of a sudden and unan-
ticipated end of our mortal life. It is probable that with the advance of civilization
and the growing in trie icies, complications, and obligations of human life, diseases of the
heart have increased, and it is quite open to doubt whether sudden death is less fre-
quent than it was. Certainly it is an ordinary rather than an extraordinary event.
It is probable that these two words will be found at the head of at least one paragraph
in any newspaper we mav chance to be rcadina;. Little as we realize it, it is a stem
fact that it is quite possible tfiat any man, enjov ing the most robust health and in the
midst of the most pressing and weighty duties, may be dead within the day on which
we speak to him ; that to this possibility there is absolutely no exception. Just new
life may be to us and to those related to us of the greatest value ; there may bo a
thousand reasons why, as it seems to us and to them, our life should be spared; acd



OH. xn. 1—59.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE?. 349



yet it may be of us that the word is passed in that realm where there is none to hinder
"This night thy soul shall be required of thee." It may be very trite, but it is most
seriously true, that sudden death may come to any one of us.

II. That some suddenness in death is an expeeibnoe wb are all likely to
SHARK. Few remarks are more often made than that death was " sudden at the last."
Even the sick man thinks that he will live ; that there are months, or at least weeks,
before him. They who are clearly and even loudly admonished, either by serious
illness or by advanced age, that their end is drawing on will think and talk of the
days that are coming, of the things they will accomplish. It is usually with a start
of surprise that the patient learns from his attendant that he must die. Such is our
human nature that, even when death comes gradually and kindly, the Master's words
are applicable : " In such an hour as ye think not, the Son of man oometh."

III. That amidst human dncebtainties wb may hold fast some Divinb and
KTEB-LiTiNa truths. 1. That it matters little whether our life be long or short, if
only it be given to the service of Christ. Our Lord died a young man, and the term
of his active public life is counted by months rather than by years ; but what did he
achieve I 2. That temporal success is not the true or the wise aim to set before the
souL There are far higher things we can do, and therefore should do ; besides, our
material achievements and possessions may be taken from our grasp at any hour.
8. That the right and wise course to take is to be ready for death whenever it may
come. Readiness for death will secure us a true peace when the hour of trial arrives ;
it will also give us calmness of spirit, and therefore capacity for service and for pure
enjoyment in the midst of life. — C.

Ver. 21. — " Rich toward Ood." Jesus Christ is here drafting a contrast between the
inwaid and the abiding on the one band, and the outward and the perishing on the
other hand. When he disparages the act of " laying up treasure for ourselves," he
does not mean to say either (1) that material wealth is not of God, for it is he who
gives us "power to get wealth" ("Deut. viii. 18); or (2) that the spiritttal treasure
a man secures is not " for himself, — indeed, that is the only treasure he can make
permanently his own ; he that is wise is wise for himself (Prov. ix. 12), and he has
" rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another." But Christ would have us regard
material acquisitions as of very small account indeed in comparison with the enrich-
ment of the soul in God, with spiritual wealth. To be rich toward God may include —

I. A wealth of biqht feeling toward God. There are certain thoughts and
feelings which every intelligent being ought to cherish toward his Creator, in the
absence of which he himself is poor, and in the presence of which he is rich. The
more we have in our hearts of reverence for God ; of trust in his Word of promise ; of
gratitude for his goodness and faithfulness; of love for him, our Father and oui
Saviour ; of filial submission to his holy will ; of consecration to his cause and interest
in the advancement of his kingdom, — the more " rich we are toward " him.

II. Wealth in qualities which abb Dpvinb, or being rich in the direction in
which God himself is rich. We cannot, indeed, hope to be rich in lome of his attri-
butes — in majesty, in power, in wisdom. But there are qualities in him in which we
may have a real and a valuable share. As God is rich in righteoiisness, in truth and
faithfulness, in goodness and kindness, in mercy and magnanimity, so may we hope,
knd so should we strive and pray, that we may be " partakers of the Divine nature "
in these things also. lUumiLed by his truth, guided by his example, and inspired by
his Spirit, we may have a goodly share in these great and noble qualities.

ILL Wealth in God himself ; in the enjoyment of his Divine favour and friend-
ship ; in the indwelling of his Holy Spirit in our souls, being thus enriched with his
abiding presence and his gracious influence ; in the enlarging and elevating contem-
plation of his character and worship of himself. 1. Have we any treasure at all in
Ood t As the Church at Laodicea imagined itself to be spiritually rich when it was
miserably poor (Eev. iii. 17), so may any Christian society of our own time ; so may
any individual member of a Church of Christ. If, in a searching and devout examina-
tion we find that we are poor, there is nothing for us but to go to Jesus Christ anew,
in humblest penitence and simplest faith and whole-hearted surrender. 2. Are we rich
tovxtrd Qod t There are many degrees between beggary and wealth. We may not



850 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xn. 1-59.

ue absolutely destitu», and yet we may be far from rich toward God. We Bhonld
aspire to " abound," to " be enlarged," to have a good measure of those qualities which
constitute spiritual wealth. We must " buy of Christ " (Rev. iii. 18), that we " may
be rich ; " we must abide in him, and so " bring forth much fruit " (John xv. 5). 3. If
we are rich toward God we may thankfully rejoice. The man who is " laying up
treasure for himself" may bo essontiallj' and radically poor; he may be securing that
which will give him no happiness, but only be a burden and a bane to him; he must
part witli it all soon. But he who is " rich towa'd God " has that which is wealth
indeed; lias a treasure which will gladden his heart and brighten his life; has a joy
and an inheritance which are his for ever. — C.

Vers. 22 — 30. — Anxiety or trustfulness f We read of " care-encumber«d men;"
and truly we see more than we coiikl wish of them. As we look into the faces of those
we meet daily, we are saddened with the thought that a great weight of care rests on
our race as a heavy burden. And when we see, as we do, a few faces that wear the
look of a sweet serenity bom of holy trust in God, we ask — Is it necessary that such an
oppressive burden should be borne by the children of men? Jesus Christ answers this
question in the negative. lie says that anxiety is quite needless to the children of
God ; he says, " TVtist and rest ; believe in God, and be at peace ; recognize the power
and the love of your heavenly Father, and do not be ' greatly moved ' by temporal neces-
sities." Anil he reasons with us on the subject ; he desires to prove to us the needless-
ncss of anxiety in the presence of such a God and Father as is he whom we worship.
He argues this —

I. Fkom God's greater kindness to oitesblvbs. (Ver. 23.) Any one of our
friends who would do us a very great kindness would certainly be prepared to render
us a very small favour. To one who has done us a valuable service we should look
with perfect confidence to do some slight office for us. The love which is equal to the
one will be more than equal to the other. Now, God has given us life, and has been
sustaining us in being by his constant visitation; he has given us our wonderfully
constituted body, and he has been preserving it in health and strength for years. Will
he who has conferred these great boons upon us withhold from us blessings so simple
and so slight as food and raiment ? " Is not the life more than meat [food], and the
body than raiment ? " Will he who grants the j;reater refuse the less ?

II. Fkom God's caeb op thinos that are of less account than we are. (Vers.
24, 27, 28.) " Consider the ravens " — birds of the air, creatures that are interesting in
their degree, but unintelligent, unaccountable, perishable : God feeds them. " Consider
the lilies, how they grow ; " they do nothing for their clothing ; and not only are they
unintelligent and irresponsible like the birds, but they &re unconscious, insentient
things ; yet they are exquisitely fair: God clothes them. If he takes thought for such
creatures and for such things as these ; if he concerns himself with that which is so
much lower in the scale than are we, his own beloved children, created in his image
and formed to share his own immortality, how certain it is that he will provide for us I
The Divine wisdom that expends so much upon the lower will not neglect the higher.

III. The completeness op ocb de.'endence on God. (Ver. 25.) So completely
are we in the hands of our Creator that wo cannot, by any amount of thinking, " add
one cubit to our stature." Do what we may, try what we can, we are still absolutely
dependent on God. It rests with him to decide what shall be the length of our
days, what shadow or sunshine shall fall on our path, whether our cup shall be sweet
or bitter. We are in his Divine hands ; let us be his servants ; let us ask his guidance
and blessing ; and then let us trust ourselves to his power and his love. And this the
more that we should remember —

IV. The dnworthiness op great concern for such temporalitibs. To be greatly
troubled about what we shall eat, or what we shall wear, or in what house we shall
live, — this is pagan, but it is not Christian ; leave that to " the nations of the world "
(ver. 30).

V. The relation in which God stands to ds. (Ver. 30.) This is that of an all-
wiw Father. " Our Father knows." We are in the power of One who is })erfectly
acquainted with our circumstances and with ourselves ; he will nut deny us anything
"e need because he is ignorant of our necessity; he will not give us anything thftt



OH. xn. 1—59.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 351

would be hurtful, for his fatherly love will constrain him to withhoM it. We are
immeasurably safer in his hands than we should bo in those of the kindest of our human
friends, or than we should be if it rested with our own will to shape our path, to fill
our cup. — 0.

Ver. 31. — Service and sufficiency. It has been much debated whether God should
be represented as the Sovereign or the Father of mankind. It has been but a foolish
strife ; it has been another case in which both disputants have been right and both
wrong. God is the Sovereign of the world, and a great deal more than that ; God is
the Father of men, and a great denl beside. He is a royal Father, or a fatherly King.
The Lord's Prayer might have taught us this : " Our Father , . . thy kingdom come."
God ii to us all and much more than all both these human relationships represent, only
that one presents him in one aspect and the other in another. Here Christ invites us
to think of him as a Sovereign ; and we look at —

I. The kingdom of God, of which we may become citizens. " Seek ye [the citizen-
ship of] the kingdom of God." Jesus Christ launched a perfectly new idea when he spoke
of this kingdom. In his mind that was nothing less than a universal spiritual empire ;
a kingdom of peace, righteousness, and joy, wide as the world and lasting as time ; a
kingdom to be established without forming a regiment, or shaping a sword, or fashion-
ing a crown j a kingdom of God, in which all men of every land and tongue should
own him as their rightful Sovereign, should cheerfully obey his righteous laws, should
dwell together in holiness and in love.

II. The allegiance which is oub sacred dutt. Christ summons us to citizen-
ship. He says imperatively, " Seek ye the kingdom ; " and he bids us seek entrance
into it " rather " than pursue any earthly objects, rather than be anxiously concern-
ing ourselves about temporal supplies. He indicates that this is something which has
the first claim on our thought and on our endeavour. And so, indeed, it has. For
God is that King (1) without the exercise of whose sovereign power there would be
no other kingdom, no subjects, no liberties, no riches, no honours, in fact, no being ;
(2) to be disloyal to whom is the lowest depth of ingratitude, is the deliberate aban-
donment of the most bounden duty, the guilty severance of the most sacred tie. Being
what he is to all men, and having done what he has wrought for all men, he rightly
demands of us, through Jesus Christ, our fealty, our loyal service. To respond to this
summons of the Saviour and to become citizens of the kingdom of God, we must offer
him something more than the honour of the bended knee, or the tribute of the acclaim-
ing voice, or the service of the dutiful hand ; we must bring the homage of the reverent
spirit, the affection of the loving heart, the submission of the acquiescent will. And
out of this inward and spiritual loyalty will proceed the praises of the tongue and the
obedience of the life. Seeking the kingdom means a reiil returning of soul unto God
and a consequent devoting of the rest of our li fe to his service.

HI. Christ's promise of supficienot to all loyal subjects. " All these things shall
be added unto you." It is well for the world that there is not attached to the service
of Christ any very valuable and attractive treasures which are of this earth. If there
were, we should have the Church choked with insincere and worldly minded members,
paying as little devotion as they thought necessary for as much enjoyment and pros-
perity as they could reap. Christ has mercifully saved us from this calamity; but
he has not found it needful to leave us without a provision for our need. 1. He ha»
made present happiness an attendant upon virtue, and virtue is an appanage of piety.
2. But he has given us a promise and a pledge in our text. He assures to those who
enter his holy kingdom not, indeed, luxury, not a large measure of prosperity aiid
enjoyment on an earthly ground, but sufficiency. They who yield themselves to hini
and who live in his service may be well assured that they will want "no good thing;
nothing that would really make for their weU-being will he withhold AH resources
are at his disposal, and he will see that his children are supplied. (1) Let none be
kept out of the kingdom because they dread social or pecuniary evils ; God will shield
and save them. (2) Let none who are in the kingdom despond, though circumstances
are against them; at the right moment God will appear on their behalf; goodness
and mercy wUl follow them all the days of their life," and attend them right up to tha
gates (rf the heavenly city. — C.



852 THE GOSPEL ACOOEDING TO ST. LUKE. [ch. xn. 1—58

Vers. 35 — 40. — Death a Divine visitation. To us the coming of the Son of man
means the hour of death ; that is the practical view and therefore the wise view of the
subject. And we may well regard our departure from this world as a coming of Qod
to us.

L Death as a Divine visitatioit. 1. At death God comes to us all in judgment
Death is the appointed penalty of ain. It is true that the burden of that penalty is
spiritual rather than material, and that God grants us a kind reprieve before he executes
it; but still, in conformity with it, the accidents of death have to occur to us; that
Ancient sentence has to be fulfilled ; the shadows of the last hour must fall around us;
and whenever and however that may happen, with whatever mitigations, God will come
to us then in solemn penalty, saying, " My child, thou hast sinned, and thou must die,''
2. At death God comes to us in providence. (1) God has given to us a perishable
frame, one that is only constructed to last for a term of years, that after a certain
point begins to waste and wane. (2) He suffers, if he does not send, the special cir'
cumstances which lead up to death ; at the least, he withholds the interposing act or
suggestion which would prolong the life that is taken. Man never " goes to his long
home" but we may say, "Thou tumest man to destruction; and sayest, Betum, ye
children of men." Go each such occasion the Son of man comes and says, " Put off
thy tabernacle, and come within the veil." 3. At death Christ comes to us in sacred
summons. In life God's voice should be daily heard saying, " Put out those powers;
use those opportunities; cultivate that spiritual nature I have entrusted to thee; serve
thy brethren j glorify my Name." But at death Christ comes to us and summons ui
to his presence; then we hear him say, " Give account of thy stewardship;" " Beap
what thou hast sown."

II. Beadiness fob death a fart or human wisdom. " Let your loins be girded
about ... be like men that wait for their Lord . . . the Son of man cometh at an
hour when ye think not." 1. It is true that there is usually less suddennesB than
there seems in cases of sudden death ; on inquiry, it is nearly always found that there
were premonitory signs of danger, kindly warnings from the Author of our nature, that
the end was not far oft. 2. But it is also and equally true that death is unexpected when
it does arrive. (1) So do we cling to life, that we are not willing to acknowledge con-
cerning ourselves the fact which is obvious to every one else respecting us. (2) It is
our mental habit to expect continuance where we ought to look for severance and
cessation. The ofteuer we have crossed the decaying and breaking bridge, the more
confidently we do cross it, though we know well that it is nearer than ever to it* falL
We may be almost sure that, in whatever form and at whatever hour the Son of man
comes to us, we shall be surprised at his appearance. 3. It will be a terrible thing tc
be unready ; to have to do, if we can, in a few brief hours that for which a long life is
not a day too long. 4. It will be a blessed thing to be ready for this vision of our
Lord ; not merely, nor chiefly, because we shall thus be enabled to cross, with calm
hopefulness, into the other country, but because we shall then be ready for those high
services and celestial honours which our gracious and generous Master intends to confer
apon us (ver. 37). — 0.

Yen. 49, 60. — Spiritiml strenitoumeu. Our Lord's life deepened and enlarged as it
proceeded, like a great and fertilizing river. And as conflict became more frequent and
severe, and as the last scenes drew on, his own feeling was quickened, his spirit was
aflame with a more ardent and intense emotion. We look at the subject of spiritual
•trenuousness —

I. In view of otTB Lord's personal experience. In these two verses we find
him passing through some moments of very intense feeling; he was powerfully affected
by two considerations. 1. A compassionate desire on behalf of the world. He came to
the world to kindle a great fire which should be a light to illumine, a heat to cleanse, a
flame to consume. Such would be the Divine truth of which he came to be the Author,
especially as it was made operative by the Divine S|)irit whose coming should be so
intimately associated with and should immediately follow his life-work (see ch. iii. 16 ;
Acts ii. 3). As he looked upon the gross and sad darkness which that light was so
much ne«led to dissipate, upon the errors that heat was so much required to purify,
iqion the corruption that flame was so esi>eutial to extinguish, his holy and loviug



OH. xn. 1—69.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 863



spirit yearned with a profound and rehement desire for tlie hour to come when thes9
heavenly forces should be prepared and be freed to do their sacred and blessed work.
2. A hwnan longmg'to pass through the trial that awaited him. " But "—there was not
only an interval of time to elapse, there was a period of solemn struggle to be gone
through, before that fir* would be kindled. There was a baptism of sorrow and of
conflict for himself to undergo, and how was he " straitened " in spirit until that was
«ccomplished I Here was the feeling of a son of man, but it was the feeling of the
noblest of the children of men. He did not desire that it should be postponed ; ho
longed for it to come that it might be passed through, that the battle nii^ht be fou'o-iit
that the anguish might be borne. Ti-uly this is none other than a holy human spirit
with whom we have to do; one like unto ourselves, in the depth of whose nature were
these very hopes and fears, these same longings and yearnings which, in the face of a
dread future, stir our own iouls with strongest agitations. How solemn, how oieat
how fearful, must that future have been which so profoimdly and powerfully af^cted
his calm and reverent spirit I

IL In vibw ow odb own bi>ibituaIi STBCoaLBB. We cannot do anything of very
great account unless we know something of that spiritual strenuousness of which our
Lord knew so much. 1. We should show this in our concern for the condition of the
world. How much are we affected by the savagery, by the barbarism, by the idolatry,
by the vice, by the godlessness, by the selfishness, which prevail on the right hand and'
on the left? How eagerly and earnestly do we desire that the enlightenment and the
imrification of Christian truth should be carried into the midst of it ? Does our desire
rise to a holy, Christ-like ardour ? Does it manifest itself in becoming generosity, in
•ppippriate service and sacrifice ? 2. We may show this in our anxiety to pass through
the tnal-hour that awaits us. Whether it be the hour of approaching service, or sorrow,
or persecution, or death, we tnai/, like our Master, be straitened until it be come and
gone. Let ng see that, like him, we (1) await it in calm trustfulness of spirit ; and
(2) prepare for it by ftuthful witness and close communion with Gkxl in the hours that
lead up to it. — 0.

Vw. 67. — Individual respon»ibQity, " Why even of yourselves judge ye not what
Is right ?" Those to whom our Lord was speaking were men of intelligence, education,
religious privilege. They exercised their mental faculties with great keenness on some
•ubjects (vera. 54, 55) : why could they not recognize the supreme &ct of their time,
m. that the Messiah was before them (ver. 66)? why did they' not employ their
powers to discern between the false and the true, between the evil and the good ?

L That wb hat not devolve oub accountabiutt fob holding thb tbuth on
any one or any body of men. It has not been merely " the right of private judgment "
wiuch has been in question, which some have striven so hard to withhold, and which
others have suffered so much to obtain or to preserve. It has been the sacred duty of
determining for ourselves what is the mind and the will of God, the solemn obligation
to put into use the talents he has committed to our care. We are to discharge this
duty under all circumstances and whoever may propose to relieve us of it. We may
not delegate it : 1. To the State. The State may prescribe Islamism in one region,
Confucianism in another, Catholicism in a third ; but we are not at liberty to make our
religious creed depend on the latitude and longitude where we reside. 2. To the Church ;
ot Jesus Christ himself would have been criminal, for he entirely disregarded the
decision of the " council," and the Christian Church has, in its collective capacity,
spoken differently in different times and places. 3. To society ; that is frequently at fault.
4. To (fte parent. For a time this is necessary, right, becoming, praiseworthy ; but the
time comes when the son must no longer shield himself behind his filial obedience, be
must think and must decide for himself. If we are possessed of ordinary himian powers
and privileges we must "of ourselves judg« what is right." It is a solemn burden,
a sacred duty, which our Creator has laid on each human spirit he has called into
being.

IL That God bab omxD cb with a BPntiruAL natubb for thiB very purpose. He

has endowed tis with reoMti, or with that faculty which intuitively perceives the great

and deep truths which are presented to it ; With conscience, the faculty which commends

and condemns, filling witii inward joy or inward pain ; with Judgment, the faculty that

LUKB. 2 A



854 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, LDKB. [ch. xn. 1—59.

compares and concludes, and arrives at just decisions as to the thing that should ba
done, the way that should be taken. It is, indeed, only too tme that a long course of lin
will warp and degrade this spiritual nature of ours ; but where there is as much enlighten-
ment as the Jews of our Lord's time had, and as we ourselves possess, we ought to be
abl3 by its means " to judge what is right."

III. That the healthpul action of cub bpibituaii NATrBs is one labok pabt
OF CUB PBOBATioN. If " the light that is in us be darkness," if our conscience is mis-
directing UB, it is because we have been wrong, it is because we have not been true to
ourselves. Sin has weakened or even distorted our faculty of spiritual discernment.
But if we are true to ourselves, if we (1) honestly seek to know what the will of God
is concerning ourselves and others ; (2) faithfully endeavour to do what we believe to be
his will ; (3) earnestly ash for Divine guidance in our pursuit of wisdom ; — we shall be
" led into the truth." We may not see everything in the light in which other true-
hearted people see it, but we shall recognize those great leading truths which bring us
into right relation to God, which constrain us to take a right attitude toward our
brethren, which light up our earthly path and conduct us to our home. 1. We may
not refuse our responsibility imder any plea, not even that of humility. It would be
pleasant to say, " We will leave to others who can do it better the work of deciding what
is true, which message is from God, which path leads heavenwards." But we may not
say this without declining the sacred duty our heavenly Father devolves on each one
of his children, 2. Accepting our post as truth-seekers, we must do our work con-
scientiously, thoroughly, without prejudice. 3. We may be sure that Christ will grant
us all the Divine aid we need if we honestly endeavour and devoutly pray. — C,

Vers. 68, 69. — The intxorcible. From the lips of such a parabolic teacher as Jesus
Christ we expect to have some strikino; illustration of a general principle, our duty
being to detect that principle and to make our own practical applications of it. Here
the great Teacher adduces an illustration drawn from the legal practice of his time ;
the general truth underlying it is evidently this — that law is a rigoroui thing, a broken
law a terribly exacting thing ; that, if we are in any danger of coming under its power,
we should refrtun from so doing with the greatest care^ness ; that, if we do not act
thus prudently, we must be prepared to pay a very heavy penalty a little way on. The
principle applies to —

I. A BREAOH OF THE LAW OF PEACE. We are here in this world to sustain toward
one another interesting and important relationships. It is the will of God that, in all
of these, we should be actuated by the spirit and be ruled by the law of love, of kind-
ness, of charity, of peace. But in this world of sin the Divine Law is continually
broken, and the broken Law exacts a terrible penalty. What wretched homes it
makus I what lamentable feuds in families 1 what miserable ruptures of friendship ! what
deplorable contentions even in Christian Churches 1 what social dissensions I what
national and international strife 1 The violated law of love exacts " the uttermost
farthing " from those who break it. Christ's word of wisdom is this — Look to it kt
once; do not lose a day; fill up that little crack; tear up that small root; let every-
thing, even devotion itself (Matt. v. 24), give place to the sacred work of recondliation ■
do your best, your quickest, your utmost, to heal the breach before it widens inlo a
gulf, or the slight difference, the small suspicion, the trivial offence will grow and
deepen, and hearts that once were the home of trust and love will become the haunts
of doubt and enmity. Therefore agree with thine adversary quickly. The same
principle applies to —

II, A BBEAOH OF THE LAW OF YiBTDE. We owe it to ourselvcs to be temperate,
truthful, pure, industrious ; we owe it to others to be just, fair, kind, considerate ; we are
under law to be all this — the sacred Law of God, This Law we break, and it becomes
our " adversary ; " it arraigns us as its debtors, and it makes us pay the penalty that is
due. And what a penalty ! In the body — disease, pain, weakness, shattered nerves,
death ; in drcwnstancet — loss, poverty, beggary ; in reputation — humiliation and dis-
grace; in heart — compunction, agony of soul; in character — deterioration, baseness,
ruin. Christ says, " Beware of the first step ; if tempted to violate any law of virtue
of any kind, consider what you will have to pay a little i'urther on ; think how that
l/r(jken law will rise against you and condemn you, and you will not escape until the



OH. III. 1—69.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 8S6



iMt farthing has been paid." If there shovild be any breach, however minute It may
be, hasten to repair it.

in. A BBBAOH OF THK LAW OF PEivttEGB. Privilege and peril, opportunity and
obligation go together, like substance and shadow ; they cannot be dissociated. From
those to whom much is given will much he required (see vers. 47, 48). It is a constaat
law, and its violation will be rigorously attended with penalty. If we neglect oar
privilege, if we abuse our opportunity, we must expect " many stripes," the uttermost
farthing of condemnation and retribution. We are the firstborn children of privilege;
ours is the dispensation, the period, the land, the home of privilege. Ill will it fare with
ns if we pass on to the last tribunal and stand before the great Judge, not having repaired
this breach, not having sought and found forgiveness for this great transgression. — 0.

Vers. 1 — 12. — A call to courage. The commotion between the scribes and Pharisees
and onr Lord seems to have increased his audiences, as we find "an innumerable
multitude," as the Authorized Version has it, or " the many thousands of the multi-
tude," as the Revised has it, treading on one another in eagerness to hear him. And
his subject at this time is important—a denunciation of Pharisaic hypocrisy and a call
to courage under their certain opposition. And here we have to notice —

L The oubk fob htpoorist. (Vers. 1 — 3.) Our Lord brings this out in a distinct
revelation that everything is yet to be dragged into the light of day. These are his
words : " There is nothing covered [' covered up,' Revised Version], that shall not be
revealed ; neither hid, that shall not be known." There is nothing in nature which
would lead us to such a wonderful truth ; it is a matter of distinct revelation. Every-
thing, it appears, is constructed on the puhlic principle. We are all living puhUc livm
if we only knew it. All attempts at secrecy are destined to prove failures ; conse-
quently, hypocrisy is a mistake. It can impose only for a time ; sooner or later it will
be exposed and despised. Hence our Lord recommends the people to speak, if they
have tio do so, in the darkness only what they are willing should be heard in the light,
and to whisper in closets only such things as may be proclaimed on the housetops. By
God's arrangement secrecy is impossible, and publicity the inevitable destiny of aU
and of everything. It is consequently this persuasion of ultimate publicity which con-
stitutes the Divine remedy for hypocrisy. All hypocrisy proceeds from forgetfulnesa
or disbelief of this.

IL Thb EZFULsrvB FOWEB OF CK>DLT FEAB. (Vers. 4, 6.) Our Lord wishes to guard
the people from the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy, and also from cowardly
fear of Pharisaic opposition. Accordingly, he points out that the Pharisees could at
the very most kill the body ; they have, after that, " no more that they can do." But
there is another One who can cast into " Gehenna" after he hath killed, and him they
should fear. We discard the idea suggested by Stier and others that this is the devil;
especially as courage is not likely to be created by substituting, for fear of diabolical
men, the fear of the devil himself. This would be a poor basis for the martyr-spirit.
We believe that the fear of man is to be expelled and supplanted by the fear of God,
who can consign the soul to Gehenna after death. And our Lord shows here that the
fear of God begins in dread of his infinite power. No soul, we suppose, ever turns
to God without passing through this stage, however brief may be the sojourn in it.
God's vaster power makes the hostile power of mere men appear trifling, and we wisely
resolve to have men for our enemies rather than God. But once this sense of God g

great power has overcome our craven fear of man, we begin to realize that we may
ave all his power on our side. He wiU pardon us and take us under his protection,
and enable us to fear no eviL Godly fear, consequently, gets modified in our expe-
rience, and passes firom slavish fear and dread into reverential and filial fear of God as
an almighty Father.

HI. God's miobo8CX>fio and fbebemt pbovidenoe. (Vers. 6, 7.) The sparrows may
be cheap in man's estimation— five for two farthings — ^but " not one of them is for-
gotten before God." He caters for them. His providence is minute enough to take
them under his wings. Men ought, therefore, to take courage from the assurance that,
in God's sight, they " are of more value than many sparrows." And God's oversight
is so microscopic that he counts the very hairs of our head. Hence the contest with
their Phariiue and worldly foes is to be conducted under the sweet assurance that



356 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xn. 1— 5a

greater is he who is for them than all who are against them, and that his care is so
minute as to extend to the numhering of the hairs of their head. A great Being on
our side, so minute and careful in his interest, is fit to inspire with dauntless courage
every one who realizes his presence by faith and trusts him.

IV. The impobtancb of confessing Cheibt. (Vers. 8, 9.) Our Lord further shows
how important it is to confess him ; but in the other life there is to be another confes
sion — the confession before the angels of the courageous souls who have confessed
Christ here. On the other hand, there is to be a denial of the cowards who denied
Christ here. Out of the publicity of the future life, therefore, our Lord draws such
considerations as are fitted to rally souls around him in coura<;eous confession. And
there can be no doubt that this great publicity which our Lord locates in the future
life is a fountain-head of courage for souls struggling with opposition. The highest
type of courage can undoubtedly be produced through the doctrine of a future life
with its rewards and punishments.

v. The danqeb of blasphemy against the Holt Ghost. (Ver. 10.) The intro-
duction of the Holy Ghost in connection with the Pharisaic opposition seems to have
been suggested in this way : the Pharisees, not content with libelling and defaming
Christ, professed to trace lus power over demons to its source. This, they asserted,
was not the Holy Ghost, but Beelzebub within him. That is to say, they attributed
spiritual results to * diabolic origin. In this way they blasphemed the Holy Ghost.
Now, our Lord, in his meekness and lowliness of mind, declares that there is forgire-
ness for unfair words against him, but warns those who are misinterpreting the Spirit's
work, that blasphemy against him if continued cannot be forgiven. Now, this subject
of the unpardonable sin has given rise to much discussion, but, perhaps, the best view
is that adopted by such men as Stier, Tholuck, Olshausen, Hahn, Julius MuUer, and
HofTmann — " an internal state of the highest sinfulness which cannot be changed, and
shows itself in speech or action, resisting or deliberately setting the soul against the
influences of the Holy Ghost." Its practical value is immense. It should lead every
thoughtful soul to guard against all trifling with or grieving of the good Spirit whose
agency within us sdone secures the victory over evil. The Pharisees were treading
on the confines of the terrible sin in their denunciation of Christ, and the mtiltitude
Christ was addressing and all who have the offer of spiritual help should guard against
all offence offered to the all-important Spirit.

VI. The inspieations to be expected fbom the good Smbit. (Vers. II, 12.)
The calumniated Spirit would sustain the confessors of Christ before their enemies, so
that all the tried men had got to do was to rely on his inspirations, and they would
never fail them. The. Holy Ghost would prompt such words and thoughts as would
secure on their part a good confession. And a similar aid is to be expected by all
Christ's witnesses as they confront the world. If we but rely on his help, he will
never fail us. Of course, this does not encourage idleness and want of preparation for
the emergencies of life. The Spirit is more likely to inspire a studious, careful, prayer
ful man than a self-reliant idler. But reliance on the Spirit's inspirations must sever
be rendered needless or doubtful by any prudent forethought we entertain. We are to
be organs of the Spirit, and ought to act worthy of our high calling. — R, M. E.

Vers. 13—21.—^ warning against covetousness. Amid the important teaching ol
our Lord there comes an interlude by reason of a brother, who had been wronged out
of his share of the inheritance, appealing for redress to Christ. He wanted our Lord
to play the part of a small attorney and get conveyed to him some share. This our
Lord deliberately declines to do, indicating that he has come into the world f^r higher
work than worldly arbitration. This aspect of the subject has been well handled by
Robertson of Brighton, and, following him, by Bersier of Paris.* But our Lord does
far better for the poor brotlier than if he had become arbitrator for him. He warns
him against covetousness, and indicates that "a man's life consisteth not in the
abundance of the things which he possesseth." To back up the lesson, he relates a
parable about a certain rich man whose whole concern was to multiply his possessions,
but who is surprised by dtath while doing so. He leaves his wealth behind him, and
enters the other world utterly poor. If by this timely warning our Lord succeeds in
' Bohertson'i ' Sermons,' leoond series, p. I ; and Bersier's ' Sermons,' tome i% p. S.



OH. xn. 1—69.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LtJKB. ^5^

leading the claimant to the possession of better riches, then all will be welL And
here we notice —

L A MAN CAN KEVER BE SATISFIED WITH THINGS. (Ver. 15.) This is thc great
mistake men are making. They imagine that things can satisfy tlieir hearts; wiereas
we are so constituted, with our afifections and emotions, that fellowship with persons
is indispensable to any measure of satisfaction, and to full satisfaction with bo less
a Bein^ than God himself. All the effort, consequently, to be satisfied with things,
with gifts, when the Giver is left out, proves vain.* No abundance can satisfy the
craving of the heart. And the feverish desire for more and more wealth on the part
of worldly men demonstrates simply that they are on the wrong track altogether, and
that satisfaction can never be found in things. Covetousness, consequently, as the
idolatry of things, is a total mistake. It misinterprets human nature, and is doomed
to terrible disappointment.

II SnooEss MAT DOOM MEN TO LIFELONG WKONG. (Vers. 16 — 18.) The ricb fool,
M iUe man in the parable has been generally called, is overwhelmed by success. It
outgrows his calculations. His bams are too small; they must be pulled down to
allow of bigger barns being built, so that years of anxious labour are provided out of
his inordinate success. He gets steeped to the lips in care. His Ufe becomes a cease-
less worry. His grasping only secures his misery. It is truly lamentable to witness
the self-inflicted wrong which worldly minds experience as they try to gamer more
and more of this world's goods to the neglect of better things. How well our great
dramatist understood this I In his poems Shakespeare says —

" The profit of excess
Is but to surfeit, and such griefs sustain,
That they prove bankrupt in this poor-rioh gala.
The aim of all is but to nurse the Ufe
With honour, wealth, and ease, in waning age;
And in this aim there is such thwarting stiifs.
That one for all, or all for one, we gage.
As life for honour in fell battle's rage,
Honour for wealth ; and oft that wealth doth cost
The death of all, and altogether lost."

HL In the oabeeb of success there is only a vain desire fob best. fVer. 19.J
The soliloquy betrays the utter weariness of the man. After his bigger Dams are
built, away down the fretful years he will reach, he hopes, a time when he will be in
a position to say to his soul, " Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years;
take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry." He longs for rest, but it will be years yet
before he can think of it. All the worry and the fret of the interval must be passed
before rest can come. His idea is to winjeat by wealth ; to buy it up by a certain
measure of success. And the experience of all men is that rest is never got on this
line at alL It is something that cannot be purchased, but must be Gtod-given.* How
often do we see men who have retired with a competency at a loss how to kill time,
andfts weary and restless as ever !

Iv. Death outs the soul off at once fbom his woeldlt possessions. (Vers.
20, 21.) We never hear of millionaires carrying their money-bags with them. A
moment after death Croesus is no richer than the beggar. The things which were so
anxiously amassed remain to be divided among the heirs, while the owner goes out
into another world absolutely penniless. The state to which death reduces him is pitiful
indeed. Having forgotten God the Giver through occupation with his gifts, he faces
his Judge without a single feeling or aspiration which, in God's sight, is valuable at
all. A miserable and wretched soul receives dismissal from the gracious God whose
bounty was ignored and whose Being was despised.

V. How all-impobtant in these cieoumstances to accept of contentment and
MBT A8 the Saviour's offeeed gift. If the young man had accepted of content-
ment in place of cherishing covetousness, he would have been at ease at once. Rest oi
spirit and growth of spirit would thus have been secured, and he would have been on

• Of. Gerok's ' Bvangelien-Predigten,' s. 690.
« Cf. Goebel's ' Osterbeute,' 8. 272.



358 THE OOSPBL AOCOBDINa TO ST. LUKE. [oh. xii. 1— 69

not only equal terms with, but most probably superior terms to, his more gruping
brother. It is thug that Jesus deals with us. He can give us a present rest from sin,
frum worry, from care of all kinds, and make us rich in the sight of Gtod. With the
riches of the soul in graces and gifts, we may hope to pass into the Divine presence
and enjoy the Divine society and escape being castaways. — R. M. E.

Vers. 22 — 40. — Ltston* from the fowh and Kies. Our Lord, having related the
parable against covetousness, or the selfish use of money, proceeds in the present section
to show how foolish the anxious thought is about these temporal things. And here
we have to —

L CONSIDEB HOW VOOB THB LITE IB WHICH HAKES EATINa ASD DBESBIRa THE OHIET

THOUGHT. (Vers. 22, 23.) A man's life i« intended to be much more assuredly than
this ; and yet are there not some who have no thought beyond this ? The weight of
anxiety is purely secular and physicaL The devotees of the table and of the fashions
make eatii^ and dressing aU. Now, the idea of the passage is that no one is so circum-
stanced as to be compelled to think only or chiefly of food and raiment. There ia not
a poor man but may feel that he was bom for higher thoughts and things than to
" keep the pot boiling " and to have something seemly to wear I He can think of the
government of the world, and gain insight into it. He can rise into the thought of the
government of Qod'a kingdom, and the noble ideas it embodies. He can make ends
meet without being the slave of circumstances and the creature of a day. He can
walk among the eternities like others of his kind. Hence we must be on our guard
against such a low view of life as this purely secular and temporal one.^

II. CONBIOEB THE I.BSS0N ABOUT FOOD FUBNIBHED BT THE FOWLS. fVcrB. 24 — 26.)

The fowls of the air are not " gentlemen at large," but most patient gatherers of their
food. Life is not a sinecure with them, but a season of continual work. True, they
do not become anxious farmers, sowing seed or reaping harvests, or building and
stocking barns. They are spared a world of anxiety, but they accept the world of
provinon as God gives it to them. That which he gives they on vmwearied wing
gather. " God feedeth them " in the wisest way, and they accept it as he sends it.
Moreover, the feeding of themselves is not their whole labour. There is much more in
the bird's day than the quest of food. Whether they appreciate the beauty about them
or no; whether their thoughts are like ours as from dizzy heights we see magnificent
1 irnlxcapes or stretches of sea, we cannot of course tell; but one thing seems certain,
111.. I the birds realize something more in the make-up of life than the mere satisfaction
ol their appetites. Their lesson Ib, therefore, one about a busy life, a thoughtful life,
not always occupied with the satisfaction of the flesh. Let us trust God more in
temporal matters, and think more of eternal things; and then life will be more
thoughtful and more happy. No amount of thinking will add a cubit to our stature ;
and no amount of anxiety will deliver us from life's burdens. It is better to let God
reign, and accept the conditions which in his wisdom he assigns.

III. CONBISEB THE LESSON ABOUT BAIMENT FBOM THE LILIES. (Vers. 27, 28.) Here

again we are fiice to face with nature. The purple lilies which deck the spring fields are
gorgeously apparelled. Even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of them.
So that when God is allowed to work, he weaves a more splendid texture in his loom
than ever was produced by man. The lilies are evidences of his microscopic care of
the flower of the grass, how worthy he regards it of beautiful raiment. But then he
values his children more than his plants. Men may go the length of lavishing mora
attention upon their exotics and their flowers than upon their children. But this is
not Gk)d's order. He has taken more thought for his human children than for all his
gardens and their magnificent contents. He loves a family more than a conservatory ;
a school mora than a forest ; a population more than a deer-park or prairie. Hence we
may trust him about raiment; it will come in due season and order. He will not give
it to us like paupen? clothing, for we should hardly like it in that way ; but to honest
work there will come substantial reward.

IV. CONBIDEB THE NOTOBIOUS 8E0ULABITT OF THE NATIONS. (Vers. 29 — 32.)

Now, the analysis of heathenism will show that at heart heathen are secular. There is
no better way of seeing this than by looking into their prayers. Asonehassaid, "Idola*

> Of. Martinaan's ' Hours of Thought,' vol. i. pp. 17—44.



OH. xn. 1—69.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. 86t



trous nations haTO in all places and in all ages prayed with unanimous voice that theii
god would give tl^tu health and physical force, riches, honour, pleasure, success ; for it
Is indeed for these the pagans pray." • This is what composed the life of paganism for
the most part, and does so still. There is all the more reason why the Lord's little
flock should trust him about the kingdom he has promised, and give themselves fear-
lessly to the bringing in of the kingdom from above. If we seek God's kingdom and
glory first, we shall find a sufficient amount of food and raiment stored for us by no
niggard and no pauperizing hand.

v. CoNSiDBB THE BENEFIT OF ALMSsiviNO. (Vcrs. 33, 34.) Now, by almsgiving
we are to understand enlightened and not lackadaisical charity. It is the investment
of love, the expenditure of money for God's sake and for his kingdom. It is truly
wonderful how all may become almsgivers. Is this not proof positive that God is a
bountiful Provider ? How is it that there is hardly one in this hard world but could
give if he only tried? And what a transference of the heart's affections this will secure !
The heart no longer grovels amid the secular and temporal, but passes outward to the
spiritual and eternal. Then the people whom we have tried to help, on the principle
of giving " the greatest amount of needful help with the smallest encouragement to
undue reliance on it," will form for us a bright and wholesome field for thought and
hope, and the building up of God's kingdom shall be the result.

VI. Consider the duty op waiting fob the advent. (Vers. 35 — tO.) From
almsgiving our Lord proceeds to the duty of diligence in expectation of his advent.
He has gone to attend a wedding, and will return when the marriage is complete.
This has surely an instructive bearing upon the advent as subsequent to the completed
plan about the bride, the Church. But what we have to notice is his readiness to serve
the servants wlio are found faithful and diligent in his work. He has had a sufficiency
at the wedding-feast ; he can consequently wait at the supper-table of the servants.
And what an honour it will be to receive such attention from the Lord himself I Let
OS, then, be semper paratus, and then, whether his advent be soon or late, we shall be
overtaken by no surprise I * — B. M. E.

Vers. 41 — 59. — The glories and responsibtlities of the Christian ministry. The
previous parable attracts Peter by reason of its glorious promise, and he accordingly
wonders if it can apply to all believers or to the apostles only. Having asked oui
Lord, he receives light upon the responsibilities and glories of the ministerial office.
From our Lord's words we learn —

L It IS Chbist'b will these should be btewabds in hib Chuboh, whose ddtt
rr 18 to give his people meat in due season. fVers. 42 — 44.) This is the great
design of the ministry — to feed the flock of God. All other duties are subsidiary to
this. For souls need to be as regularly fed with truth as the body with food. To
this end the Christian ministry should, therefore, direct all its effects, that the people
may be fed. And need it be said that the truth which nourishes men's souls is the
truth as it is in Jesus? When Jesus is presented in the glory of his Person and offices,
then the famished souls are saved and satisfied. Now, our Lord declares that the
ministry will continue for such a purpose until his advent. The household of God will
always need the food furnished by the ministry. No time will come when the ministry
shall be superseded. And the ministers who are diligently employed at their teaching
and feeding of souls when our Lord comes will find themselves blessed (1) in their own
experience, and (2) in the magnificent promotion awaiting them. Christ promises the
faithful minister no less than universt^ influence. He is to be ruler over all he has.
Others may have some influence, but a faithful minister will, in the world made new,
have universal sovereignty. Ministerial influence is often incomparably the grandest
and widest exercised among men in this life : how much more in the life and order
which will be ushered in by the advent 1

II. OUB LOBD AT his ADVENT WILL MAKE SHOBT WORK OF SPIBITUAL DESPOTS.

(Vers. 45, 46.) Some in the ministry, it would seem, instead of living in eipectatioi]
of the advent, will live as if the long-delayed advent would never come. In such ,(
case selfish tyranny over the people committed to them will soon manifest itself; arnj

' Bougemont's ' La Vie Humaine,' p. 279.

• Ct Gerct's ' PUgerbrod,' s. 787; also ' Aus Emater Zdt,' ■. la



360 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. LUKE. foH. xii. 1— 51

upon the self-indulgent despot onr Lord shall come suddenly, to appoint him hia
porlion with the unbelievers. A ministry that is not earnest, but self-indulgent and
tyrannical, has before it a terrible doom.*

III. He also shows that JUnaMENT IIl the world to come shall be OBAnnATEO

ACCORDING TO DESERT. (Vers. 47, 48.) The difficulties about the Divine judgment
have been partly owing to the forgetfulness of the fact that sinners are not to be cast
indiscriminately into some common receptacle, but subjected to a series of graduated
punibhments of the most carefully adjusted character. The rhapsodies which are so
plentiful against any thoroughness in punishing the impenitent are based mainly upon
the false assumption of indiscriminating punishment. According to a person's oppor-
tunities will he his doom.

IV. OUB LOKD DECLABBS THAT HIS PRESENT ADVENT MUST GENERATE OFPOBITIOII.

(Vers. 49 — 53.) The fire which our Lord came to kindle is that of spiritual enthusiasm;
such a fire as) burned in the disciples' hearts as he spoke to them on the way to Enunaus;
such a fire as was promised ia the baptism with the Holy Ghost.* Such incendiarism
is just the blessed commotion the world needs. But in the kindling of the holy flame
our Lord will have to pass through a bloody baptism. He sees how inevitable this
dread experience is, and yet he pants for the cross which is to crown his work and
revolutionize the world.^ The cross of Christ is really the great divider of mankind ;
by its instrumentality families are divided into different camps, and the battle of the
truth begun. But the division Christ creates is infinitely better than the imity without
him. Better far that we should have to fight for truth than that we should live, like
lotus-eaters, through indifference towards or ignorance of it. The battle for Christ is
wholesome exercise, and the victory at last is assured.

V. He OHABGES them with MISUNDERSTANDINQ THI BIONS of THB TIMES, WHUiK
THEY CAN APPRECIATE THE SIGNS OF THE WEATHER. (Vers. 54 56.) He is nOW

speaking to the people, and not to the apostles. He points out how they can anticipate
shower and heat by certain signs on the face of nature. People become " weather-
wise," and can often show wonderful predictive power. And yet the times were pro-
videntially more significant than the weather. And before their eyes were hung the
signs of a great contest between good and evil, between Christ and the world ; and yet
their hypucritical hearts would not allow them to appreciate the signs or take the
proper side. It is a curious fact that many will study the laws of physical nature
with intense interest and success, and yet neglect utterly those laws of the Divine
government which involve the mightiest of revolutions. The hypocrisy of the heart
is, our Saviour here says, the secret of such inconsistent apathy.

VI. He DECLARES THE URGENCY OF RECONCILIATION WITH GOD. (Vers. 57 59.)

The adversary, magistrate, and officer, are three individuals needful for the initiation
and execution of human judgment. But the context shows that Jesus here refers to
the Divine judgment which these hypocrites are courting. In this case — as Godet, in
loco, observes — the adversary, judge, and officer are united in the Person of God. He is
the Adversary to charge us with our defaults; he is the Judge to decide onr guilt; he
is the Officer to execute due vengeance on us in case we incur it. Christ consequently
urges reconciliation with God without delay upon these hypocrites. To secure this he
appeals to their conscience. They can surely come to this conclusion themselves, that,
in opposing and persecuting him, they are not doing right. Their own inward monitor
must witness to the guilt of tlieir present course. Let them see to it, then, that they
are delivered from their doom. Onlj' one way is open, and that is by throwing them-
selves upon his mercy manifested in Christ. In this appointed way our Lord leaves
them without excuse. There is surely a hopeless air about the terms of this judgment.
The payment of the last mite is surely impossible in the prison-house of eternity, and
current remedial programmes about the future life are but " will-o'-the-wisps " to lure
thoughtless minds onwards towards doom! May we calculate upon no poat-mortem
reformation, but enter upon the pardon and spiritual progress God offers to us now I
— R. M. E.

' Cf. Urwiok on 'The Second Advent,' pp. 46, 47.

• Cf. Tholuck's ' Werke,' band iii. s. 304.

* Cf. HuU'g * Seimoni preaohed at King's Lynn,' vol. UL p. 70.



homhetioal index



«D



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. LUKE.



VOLUME L



OHAPTEB L



rAOB

Pre&oe to the Gospel .„ ,„ 13

Zackarias and his Vimon ... ... 14

The Anuoonoement to the IHrgin ... 15

The Two Evpeotant Mothers ... 16

The Name-giving, and what followed it 17

Certainties concerning Ghriat ... 18

Life in its Completeness ... ... 19

Parental Ambition ... „. 20

The Greatness of Jesos Ohriat ... 20

The Voice of Praise ... ... 21

God revealed in Jesns Christ ... 22

J07 and Awe at a Human Birth ... 23

The Conrse of the Christian Life ... 24

Christ onr Light ... ... ... 25

Ohristonr Peace ... ... ... 26

The Service of Solitnde ... ... 26

The Absolute Certainty of the Chris-

tian Beligion ... ... ... 27

The InaognratioB of the Dispensation

of Grace ... ... ... 29

"The Beginning of the Creation of

God" 81

Inspirations amid the Hills of Jndaa 33
The Birth and Development of the

Baptiat .m ••• ••• 35



OHAPTEB n.

The Birthplace and the Birth ... 44

The Shepherds and the Herald Angela 45



The Circumcision, and Presentation

in the Temple ... ... ... 4fl

The Childhood and the Waiting-Time 48

Christ exclnded ... ... ... 60

Welcome News from Heaven ... 61

The Hnman and the Heavenly World 52

The Wisdom of Devont Meditation ... 62

A Satisfied Homan Spirit ... ... 63

The Tonchstone of Tmth ... ... 64

The Testimony of Womanhood ... 65
The Dawn of Sacred Daty : a Sermon

to the Tonng ... ... ... 56

Growth, onr Lord's and onr own ... 67
The Savionr*! Birth and the Angel's

Sermon ... ... ... 57

The Circnmcision and Presentation

of JesBB ... ... ... 69

The Visit of Jesns to Jenualem when

• Boy... .» ^ ^61

OHAPTEB m.

The Foreronner, and his Ministry ... 72
The Baptism of Jesns, and the Descent

of the Holy Ghost ... ... 74

Boman WorldlinesB and Hebrew De-

Totedness ... ... ... 76

John before Jesns; Bepentanoe be>

fore Salvation ... ... ... 76

The Ministry of Tear .^ ... 77

The Fatile in Religion, eta. n. 78



INDEX.



TKnn TAQM

Th* Wudom of • Tnw Estinuit* ... 78

God'i G«od Pleanre in as... ... 79

Tke Miaiitiy of (he Baptist ... 80

The BdptUm and Qenealogj of Jesus 82



OHAPTBB IV.

The Temptation In the Wildemasa ... 93

The Visit of Christ to Kasareth ... 95

A Sabbath Daj's Work ... ... 96

Solitnde and Struggle ... ... 98

The Teasptation of the Flesh ... 99
Temptation: Ontward and Inward

Grandeur ... ... ... 100

TemptatioB to Gnilty Haste ... 100

The Poor and the Gospel ... ... 101

Healing the Broken-hearted ... 101
Spiritual Bandage and Ohristiaa

Freedom ... ... ... 102

Spiritnal Blindness ... ... 103

The Bruised ... ... ... 104

The QraoiousnesB of the Words of

Christ ... ... ... 104

Fame and Power »• ... 105

The Healing Saviour ... m. 106

The Temptation of Christ ... ... 106

Christ's Sermon in Nazareth ... 108

Oar Lord's Labours at Capernaum ... 110



CFAPTEE V.






The Call to be Fishers of Men


—•


120


The Power present to heal


*..


121


The New and the Old


...


123


Weary Workers ...


..."


125


The Sonl shrinking from God


...


125


The Cleansed Leper


...


126


Christ at Prayer ... ...


...


127


Present Power ... ...


...


128


Saperalmnnding Kindness...


M.


129


Following Christ


...


130


Christian AsBooiation .„


...


180


Christian Naturalness ...


...


181


Fishers of Men ...


...


132



The Healing of the Leper and the
Paralytic ... ... ... 136

The Call of Leri, and the Subse.
qaeat Banquet... ... ... 137

CHAFTXB VL

Christ and the Sabbath Day ... ISO

I'he Foiudation of the Kingdom ... 161



Sim disabling, Christ restoring .„ 168

The Designation of the Twelre .^ 164

The BlessedncBB of Humility ... 155

The BlesBeduesB of Spiritnal Hunger 165

The BlessednesB of Martyrdom ... 156
Seeking the Highest Good firom the

Highest Motiye ... ... 157

The Golden Bule ... ... 158

Human Judgment ... ... 159

Human Besponsiveness ... ... 160

Christian Teaching ... ... 160

Keenness and Dolness of Spiritnal

Vision ... ... ... 161

Being and Doing... ... ... 162

Good and Bad Building ... ... 163

The Greatest Bnin ... ... 164

The Lord of the Sabbath, and his

Work ... ... ... 168

The Legislator on the Mount ». 167

CHAPTBB Vn.

The Centurion ... », „, 180

The Widow's Son ... ... 181

The Message of John Baptist, and

the Discourse occasioned by it ... 182

The Woman who was a Sinner ... 183

Faith in its Fnlness ... ... 186

Patriotism and Piety ... ... 186

Christ visiting and abiding ... 187
Human Goodness and the Perma-
nency of the Gospel ... ... 188

The Leprosy of Sin .„ ... 189

Christ as an Offence ... ... 190

Christ's Estimate of John ; Character

and Privilege ... ... ... 190

Christian Abstinence and Participa-
tion ... ... ... ... 191

Our Treatment of Wisdom ... 192

Loving and Forgiving ... ... 193

Christ and Simon : the Correcting

Word ... ... ... 194

The Saviour of Sick and Dead ... 195

The Deputation from John ... 197

Love the Proof of Pardon ... m. 198

CHAPTER VUL

The Ilvangelistio Circuit ... ... 211

Storm and Calm ... ... ... 213

The Demoniac whose Name was

Legion >• m ~. S14



INDEX.



iU



JuroB, and what happened on the

Way to hig Honse ... ... 216

The Gospel of the Kingdom ... 218

Ohristianity and Woman ... ... 219

Failnre and SnocesB in Hearing ... 219

Covered Character ... ... 220

Bevelation — a Dukj, a Fact, a Oer>

tainty ... ... ... 221

Christ'i One Belationahip ... ... 222

Christ the Lord of Nature... ... 223

The Sleep of Christ ... ... 224

Onr Betnm for Qod's Greater Kind-
nesses ... ... ... 225

Jesns Christ : Bejection and Welcome 226

Christ's Discriminating Notice ... 226

A Needless Anxiety oonceming Christ 827

Incidents in Evangelistic Work ... S28

A Cheap of Miracles »• h< SSO

OHAPTEB IX.

The Life saved, and the Life loik ... S46
The Transflgnration ... S48, 268

Humility and Charity ... ... 860

The Face steadfastly set ... ... 861

Lessons from the First Commission 263

The Tetraroh and the Teaober ... 254

The Healing Hand of Christ ... 266
The Divine Provision for the World's

Need ... ... .„ ... 250

Life gained by losing it .„ ... 256

The Priceless ... ... ... 267

The Wisdom of hearing Christ ... 269

The Healing of the Lnnatic Child ... 260

The Chnroh and the Child... ... 261

Ezdnsiveness and Nentrality — the

Forbidden and the Impossible Thing 261

Wisdom, Dnty, Danger ... ... 262

Decision and Indecision ... m. 263

The Workman's QnalificatioB ... 264

The MIsBion of the Twelve ... 266

The Saviour's Secret Bevelationa ... 267

The Secret of Sncoessfnl Work ... 868

CHAPTBB X

The Mission of the Twelve, and the

Mission of the Seventy ... ... 278

ntteranees on the Betnra of the

Twelve, and of the Seventy ... 880

The Parable of the Good SaioaritaD SU



rAua

The Love of the Neighbour ... 283
Christ's Sermon in the Honse of

Martha 288

Spiritual Husbandry ... ... 287

Our Due ... .„ ^. 288

Guilt and Pnnishment ... ... 289

The Largeness of our Life „. 290

Better Things ... ... ... 291

The Gladness of Gratitude, etc. ... 291

Apostolic Advantage and Disadvan-
tage ... ... ... ... 292

Our Love of God ... .„ ... 293

Who is our Neighboar t ... ... 294

Christ at Bethany ... ... 295

The Mission of the Seventy ... 296
The Good Samaritan, and the Good

Part ... ... ... ... 297



OHAPTEB XI.

Christ teaching his Disciples to piay 310

Christ and his Adversaries ... 312

The Voice out of the Crowd ... 813
Truth ; the Conditions of its Recep-
tion, and onr Besponaibility with

Regard to it ... ... ... 314

The Inflnenoe of Devout Example, etc. 316

The True Service of the Loitl's Prayer 317

The Will of God ... ... ... 318

Continuance in Prayer ... ... 319

The Argument from the Human

Fatherhood to the Divine ... 819

Christianity the Benignant Power ... 820

Spiritual Failnre... ... ... 821

Christ and Solomon ... ... 822

Comparative Guilt ... ... 823

Spiritual Sight ... ... ». 824

Piety out of Perspective .m m. 325

Lessons on Prayer „. ... 826

Inspirations ... ... ... 827

Pharisaism and Legalisia rabaked ... 829



OHAPTEB Xn.

▲n Ivil to be shunned, and a Yirtna

to be cultivated ... ... 840

Worldliness ... ^ ,„ 843

Hidden Things ... ... ». 84S

The Power te hait ami Uasa ». S46

Confessing Christ ... m. M7



Iv



INDEX.







MOB


A Uan'i Life ^ »•


...


847


Sadden Death ... ...


...


348


" Eiok toward God "


...


349


Anxiety or Trnatfujnesi f ...


...


850


Bervioe and Snfflcienoy ...


».


361


Death a Dirine TiaitAtion ...


N.


8(2


touritoal Btreanoiiaiiew ...


BM


868



Indiridnal BesponaOiility ..j ... 368

The Inexoiabla ... .„ ... 354

A Call to Coorage ... ,„ 355

A Warning against CoretonsneBS ... 356

Leasoni from the Towls and Liliei ... 858
The Glories and Besponiiibilitiai of

the Christian Mimstiy .m ... 359
