CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104796


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED   BY  THE


VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ;


AND   BY  THE


REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.


WITH


INTRODUCTIONS


BY  THE


VBN.  AECHDEACON   F.    W.    FAEEAE,   D.D.,    P.E.S.— EIGHT   EEV.  H.    COTTEEILL,   D.D,
P.E.S.E.— VEEY  EEV.  PEINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EEV.  CANON  G.
EAWLINSON,  M.A.— EEV.  A.  PLTJMIIEE,  M.A.,  D.D.


FUKK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto.


THE

PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EDITED   BY  THE

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ;

AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

AMOS.

®)eposilion :
By  EEV.  W.  J.   DEANE,  M.A.,

RECTOR  OF  ashen;

iljoinilctics :
By  rev.   J.   EDGAR  HENRY,  M.A.

i^oinilies  bji  l)avious  !^utl)ois :

SEV.  PROF.  J.  R.  THOMSON,  M.A.  REV.  A.  ROWLAND,  B.A.,  LL.B.

REV.    D.   THOMAS,   D.D.


FUNK    &   WAG-NALLS    COMPANY
New  Yoke  and  *r6BONTO.


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.

INTRODUCTION.


I   I.    SUBJIOT  OF  THE   BOOK.

At  the  time  when  Amos  prophesied  both  Israel  and  Jndah  stood  high  in
prosperity  and  wealth.  The  warlike  Jeroboam  II,  had  overcome  the
Syrians,  and  recovered  the  original  territory  of  his  kingdom  from  Hamath
in  the  extreme  north  to  the  Dead  Sea  (2  Kings  xiv.  25,  28).  Uzziah  King
of  Jadah  had  snbdned  the  restless  Edomites  and  Philistines,  reduced  the
Ammonites  to  subjection ;  and,  while  largely  encouraging  agriculture  and
the  arts  of  peace,  he  raised  a  powerful  army,  and  strongly  fortified  Jeru-
salem (2  Ghron.  zxvi.).  Israel,  secure  from  outward  enemies  and  strong
in  inward  resources,  was  very  far  from  expecting  ruin  and  destruction.
Prosperity  in  both  kingdoms  had  produced  its  too  common  fruits — pride,
luxury,  selfishness,  oppression.  In  Zion  and  Samaria  alike  such  sins  were
rife ;  but  in  the  northern  kingdom  they  were  accentuated  and  increased  by
the  calf-worship  which  was  still  practised  there.  To  Bethel,  the  central
seat  of  this  idolatry,  Amos  was  sent  from  Jerusalem.  His  mission  was
to  rebuke  this  iniquity,  and  to  announce  to  these  careless  sinners  the
approach  of  Divine  judgment.  It  was  probable  that,  in  a  kingdom  where
impostors  abounded,  a  seer,  coming  from  a  foreign  district  and  claiming
to  be  commissioned  by  the  Lord,  might  command  respect ;  though  the  issue
proved  very  different.  Never  since  the  man  of  God  came  out  of  Judah  by
the  word  of  the  Lord  in  the  days  of  the  first  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xiii.)  had
any  southern  prophet  gone  on  such  an  errand.  Now  a  second  message  was
sent ;  and  in  this  book  the  utterances  of  the  prophet  on  this  great  occasion
are  gathered  together  and  arranged  in  due  order.  Though  his  special
mission  was  directed  to  Israel,  Amos  does  not  confine  himself  altogether
to  denunciations  of  this  kingdom.  His  cry  extended  to  Jadah  and  to  the
hostile  nations  which  surrounded  the  covenant  people.

The  book  naturally  divides  itself   into  four  parti — an  introduction :
'  addresses ;  Tiaiomi ;  and  Messianic  prophecy.

AKOB.  i


INTRODUCTION  TO


The  introdnction  (oh.  i.,  ii.)  oonsista  of  dennnciatioiia  of  the  heathen
kingdoms  bordering  on  Israel,  foretelling  the  destraotion  that  shall  befall
them,  vis.  Damascas,  Fhilistia,  Tyre,  Sidon,  Edom,  Ammon,  Moab.  Jndah,
too,  is  placed  in  the  same  category,  because  it  also  was  alienated  from
God.  The  judgment  on  Israel  is  proclaimed  here  in  general  terms;  the
remainder  of  the  book  particularizes  the  denounced  sins  and  confirms  the
awful  sentence.

The  second  part  (ch.  iii.— yi.)  contains  three  prophetic  addresses,  divided
by  the  recurrence  of  the  solemn  refrain,  "  Hear  ye."  The  first  address  con-
yicts  Israel  of  ing^titnde  for  God's  past  mercies;  shows  that  the  Lord
must  needs  punish  the  nation,  and  that  he  has  commissioned  the  prophet  to
announce  the  judgment.  Israel  has  sinned  by  injustice  and  violence  ;  its
palaces  and  holy  places  shall  be  destroyed,  and  its  people  carried  into
captivity.  The  second  address  depicts  the  sins  of  oppression  and  idolatry ;
teUs  how  God  had  visited  the  people  with  various  chastisements,  but  they
were  still  incorrigible ;  therefore  he  will  inflict  further  punishment,  to  see
if  perchance  they  will  repent.  In  his  third  address  Amos  laments  the  fate
of  Israel,  exhorts  earnestly  to  amendment,  and  then,  with  a  double  "  Woe !  "
he  shows  how  hopeless  is  their  trust  in  their  covenant  relation  to  Jehovah,
and  how  baseless  their  fancied  security  from  danger ;  for  ere  long  their  land
should  be  invaded,  their  cities  should  be  destroyed,  and  they  themselves
should  be  carried  into  captivity.  This  last  "  woe  "  is  to  affeot  Judah  also,
even  "  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion  "  (ch.  vi.  1).

The  visions  (ch.  vii. — ix.  10)  are  closely  connected  with  the  preceding
addresses,  and  carry  on  the  warnings  there  enunciated,  giving,  as  it  were,
the  stages  or  gradations  of  punishment.  The  first  two  visions,  of  locusts
and  fire,  correspond*  to  the  visitations  mentioned  in  ch.  iv.  6 — 11.  These
chastisements  stop  short  of  utter  destruction,  being  alleviated  at  the  inter-
cession of  the  prophet.  The  third  and  fourth  visions  confirm  the  irrevocable
character  of  the  judgments  threatened  in  the  previous  addresses.  The
plumb-line  intimates  that  forgiveness  is  now  not  to  be  expected.  Here
Amos  introduces.au  historical  episode,  detailing  Amaziah's  opposition  to
his  prophecy  and  God's  sentence  upon  him.  He  then  proceeds  to  the  foufth
vision,  which,  under  the  figure  of  a  basket  of  summer  fruit,  exhibits  Israel
as  ripe  for  judgment ;  and  he  enforces  this  lesson  by  foretelling  that  their
feasts  should  be  turned  to  mourning,  and  that  those  who  now  despise  the
Word  of  God  shall  some  day  suffer  a  famine  of  the  Word.  The  last  vision
displays  the  Lord  destroying  the  temple  and  its  worshippers,  yea,  the
whole  sinful  nation.  Yet  it  should  not  be  utterly  annihilated.  "  Sifted  "
shall  the  people  be  among  the  nations,  yet  shall  not  one  good  g^rain  perish.

The  prophecy  ends  with  one  promise — the  only  one  in  the  book — that
the  fallen  kingdom  should  be  raised  again,  should  be  extended  by  the
incoming  of  the  heathen,  should  be  glorified  and  enriched  with  Divine
graces,  and  that  its  duration  should  be  eternal — a  promise  which  has  its
fulfilment,  not  in  any  temporary  restoration  of  Israel  to  its  own  laud,  but


THX  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  fii


in  the  fonndatioa  of  the  Christian  Chnroh  »nd  its  final  conquest  of  th«
world  (see  the  reference  to  this  prophecy  by  St.  James  in  Acts  xr.  16).
Amos  notrhere  mentions  the  person  of  the  Messiah,  bat  his  reference  to
the  house  of  Darid  includes  and  leads  up  to  Christ.

$   II.    AUTHOB.

Amos  is  the  third  of  the  minor  prophets.  His  name  is  usually  taken  to
signify  "  Carrier,"  but  is  better  interpreted  "  Heavy  "  or  "  Burden,"  in
allusion  to  the  grierous  message  which  he  had  to  deliver.  Jewish  com-
mentators suggest  that  he  was  so  called  because  he  stammered  or  was  slow
of  speech,  as  St.  Paul  says  of  himself  that  his  speech  was  considered  con-
temptible. In  old  time  he  was  by  some  confounded  with  Amoz,  the  father
of  Isaiah  ;  but  the  final  letter  of  the  two  names  is  different,  being  samec  in
the  case  of  the  prophet,  and  tzadi  in  that  of  the  other.  The  name  does
not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament ;  but  in  St.  Luke's  genealogy  of
our  Lord  (iii.  25),  we  meet  with  an  Amos,  son  of  Naum  and  father  of
Mattathias.  Amos  was,  as  he  himself  tells,  a  native  of  Tekoah,  a  small
town  of  Judah,  situate  on  a  hill  about  five  miles  south  of  Bethlehem,  lying
in  a  pastoral  district.  "  A  road,"  says  Dr.  Thomson,  "  leads  from  Hebron,
through  a  rough  and  mostly  deserted  region,  to  Tekua,  the  ancient
Tekoah.  ,  .  .  The  ruins  of  that  city  are  some  three  miles  south  of  the
Pools  of  Solomon,  and  cover  a  broad  swell  of  the  mountain,  which  runs  up
to  a  great  height  towards  the  south-west"  ('The  Land  and  the  Book,'
pp.  304,  330).  "  Tekoa,"  says  Mr.  Porter,  "  is  now,  and  has  been  for  ages,
an  uninhabited  waste.  So  complete  has  been  the  overthrow  that  I  could
not  find  even  a  fragment  of  a  wall  sufficient  to  shade  me  from  the  scorching
sun.  The  ruins  are  scattered  over  the  broad  summit  of  one  of  the  highest
hills  in  the  Judsean  range.  The  view  is  magnificent  and  full  of  interest
On  the  west  is  seen  the  sweep  of  the  range  from  Mizpah  to  Hebron ;  on
the  east,  'the  wildemess  of  Judah'  sinks  down,  white,  rugged,  bare,  to
the  Dead  Sea.  In  that  wilderness  David  kept  his  sheep,  and  afterwards
wandered  a  refugee  from  the  court  of  Saul.  On  the  north,  a  few  miles
off,  I  saw  Bethlehem.  To  the  right,  in  the  bottom  of  a  wild  ravine,  is  the
cave  of  AduUam.  Further  down,  on  the  shores  of  the  Dead  Sea,  are  '  the
cliffs  of  the. wild  goats,'  from  whose  side  springs  the  fountain  of  Engedi.
And  beyond  the  sea  is  the  wall-like  ridge  of  Moab,  and  to  the  south  the
ruddy-tinted  mountains  of  Edom.  A  mournful  and  solitary  silence  broods
over  that  wonderful  panorama.  In  the  touching  words  of  the  old  Hebrew
prophet,  '  the  earth  mourneth  and  languisheth '"  ('  Travels  in  Palestine,'  p.
20).  From  Tekoah  came  the  wise  woman  who,  suborned  by  Joab,  made  use
of  a  parable  to  incline  David's  heart  to  his  banished  son  Absalom  (2  Sam.
xiv.).  It  was  also  one  of  the  places  fortified  by  Rehoboam  as  a  defence
against  invasion  from  the  south  (2  Chron.  xi.  6).  Thither  Jonathan  and
Simon,  the  Maocabeans,  fled  to  escape  the  attack  of  Bacchides  (see  1  Mace.
ix.  33,  etc).    At  this  place  Amos  was  bom.    At  first  a  herdsman  and  a  poo»


iy  INTRODUOnON  TO


cultiTator  of  lycamore  trees  (ch.  vii.  14),  he  received  the  Divine  call,  and,
untrained  in  the  schools,  no  prophet  nor  prophet's  son,  was  sent,  to  prophesy
against  Israel.  So,  like  an  apostle,  leaving  all  at  his  Master's  word,  travel-
ling from  Jndah  he  came  to  Bethel,  the  temple  and  snmmer  palace  of  the
king,  in  order  to  raise  his  voice  against  the  worship  of  the  calf  which  pre-
vailed there  in  profane  nnion  with  the  service  of  Jehovah.  Here  he  was
opposed  by  Amaziah,  the  idolatrons  high  priest,  who  complained  of  him  to
the  king  as  a  dangerous  conspirator.  He  was  accordingly  banished  from
the  northern  kingdom,  and  compelled  to  return  to  Jndah,  where  probably  he
composed  the  book  in  the  form  in  which  it  has  reached  our  hands.  But
he  seems  to  have  found  opportunity  to  deliver  his  stern  message  in  Samaria
(ch.  iii.-  9  ;  iv.  1)  before  his  final  expulsion  at  Bethel ;  for  Amaziah  complains
that  he  had  "  conspired  in  the  midst  of  the  house  of  Israel,"  and  that  "  the
land  was  not  able  to  bear  his  words  "  (ch.  vii.  10).

Though  of  such  humble  extraction,  Amos  had  an  eye  to  the  geographical
peculiarities  of  his  native  land,  so  as  to  use  with  effect  his  knowledge  of
various  localities;  nor  was  he  unacquainted  with  the  history  of  his  own
and  other  countries.  Tradition  (ap.  Pseudo-Epiph.,  c.  xii.,  •  De  Vit.
Proph.')  asserts  that  he  was  cruelly  maltreated  at  Bethel,  and  returned  to
Tekoah  only  to  die.     His  tomb  there  was  still  shown  in  St.  Jerome's  time.

§  III,   Dam.

Amos  is  said  (ch.  i.  1)  to  have  prophesied  "  in  the  days  of  TTzriah  King  of
Judah,  and  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash  King  of  Israel."
Uzziah's  reign  (according  to  data  corrected  by  Assyrian  monuments)  lasted
from  B.C.  792  to  740,  and  Jeroboam's  from  B.C.  790  to  749.  The  tima
specified  above  probably  refers  to  the  period  during  which  the  two
monarchs  were  contemporaneous,  viz.  from  B.C.  790  to  749,  a  period  of
forty-one  years.  Another  computation  assigns  Jeroboam's  reign  to  b.o.
gig — 775 ;  but  there  is  still  some  uncertainty  about  the  exact  date.  Hence
we  cannot  determine  the  time  of  our  prophecy  with  perfect  satisfaction.
It  could  not  have  been  the  commencement  of  Jeroboam's  reign,  as
Amos  intimates  that  this  king  had  already  overcome  his  enemies  and
regained  his  lost  ttriitory  (ch.  vi.  2,  13,  compared  with  2  Kings  xiv.  25)  ;
nor  could  it  have  been  the  end,  because  he  makes  no  mention  of  the
Assyrians  who  about  that  time  were  beginning  to  threaten  Palestine.  The
further  specification  in  the  text,  "  two  years  before  the  earthquake,"  is  not
determinate,  as  that  event  is  not  mentioned  in  the  historical  books.  One
that  happened  in  Uzziah's  day,  as  Jewish  tradition  said,  in  consequence  of
or  coincident  with  his  usurpation  of  the  priest's  office  (Josephus, '  Ant.,'  ix.
10),  was  well  remembered  some  centuries  afterwards  (Zech.  xiv.  5),  and  is
perhaps  alluded  to  elsewhere  (e.g.  Joel  iii.  16 ;  Isa.  ii.  19) ;  but  we  are
unable  to  fix  the  date  of  the  occurrence.  Every  detail  in  the  prophecy
eonfirms  the  authenticity  of  the  statement  in  the  introduction.  Jeroboam
is  mentioned  (ch.  rii.  10),  and  the  circumstances  of  his  time,  as  we  noted


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa


above,  are  accTirately  alluded  to.    The  taking  of  Gath  by  Uiziah  ia  inferred
(ch.  vi.  2  compared  with  2  Chron.  uvi.  6).

The  prophet  uttered  hie  warnings,  not  at  intervals  during  all  the  period
named,  but  at  some  definite  time  therein,  and  probably  during  a  very  short
space.  He  must  haye  been  contemporaneoas  with,  if  not  a  little  earlier
than  Hosea,  and  later  than  Joel,  as  he  takes  np  this  prophet's  words  in  the
commencement  of  his  own  prediction  (comp.  ch.  i.  2  with  Joel  iii.  16),  and
quotes  him  in  ch.  ix.  13  (see  Introduction  to  Joel).

§   rV.     GlNBKAL   ChAIUCTBB.

Critics  since  Jerome  have  called  Amos  imperitu*  termone,  reasoning
from  his  occasional  use  of  homely  images  drawn  from  flock  aud  herd  and
pastoral  life,  the  matters  with  which  his  occupation  was  concerned  (ch.  ii.
13;  iii.  4,  5,  8,  12;  iv.  6—9;  v.  11,  17;  vi.  12;  viii.  8 ;  ix.  6).  And  cer-
tainly his  style  is  not  sublime  or  pitched  in  the  highest  strain  of  poetry,
but  it  is  notable  for  clearness  and  energy,  and  shows  considerable  literary
skill  both  in  the  arrangement  of  rhythm  and  in  the  grouping  of  parallelisms.
The  imagery  based  on  scenes  amongst  which  he  dwelt,  far  from  being  a
defect  in  the  work,  adds  a  special  charm  ;  and  one  would  be  very  loath  to
miss  the  vividness  and  naturalness  which  are  thereby  imparted  to  it.  The
changes  in  nature  (ch.  iv.  13),  the  dangers  from  wild  beasts,  the  starry
sky  (ch.  T.  8),  flood,  tempest,  lightning,  were  observed  by  him  in  his
watchingB  and  wanderings,  and  left  their  reminiscence  in  his  language.  If
at  times,  as  some  critics  suppose,  he  uses  the  dialect  of  the  people  instead
of  the  more  refined  terms  of  court  and  school,  this  would  be  in  entire
keeping  with  his  simple  life  and  character.  We  are  not  to  snppose  that
inspiration  overrides  a  man's  habitual  mode  of  expression,  or  compels  an
untrained  peasant  to  adopt  the  language  of  a  learned  scribe.  The  book,  at
any  rate,  shows  that  we  have  received  it  such  as  its  author  wrote  it,  with-
out adventitious  ornamentation  or  amendment.  If  he  speaks  mostly  in
prose,  surely  visions  Bach  as  he  narrates,  denunciations  such  as  he  utters,
are  thus  more  effectively  presented.  The  very  simplicity  of  his  language
makes  it  impressive.  We  see  in  him  a  confirmation  of  the  theory  with
which  Wordsworth  has  made  us  familiar,  that  the  diction  of  unedu-
cated people  has  in  itself  a  certain  poetic  power  which  raises  it  to  an
equali^  with  that  of  higher  social  station.  Without  anything  of  poetry
in  the  words,  what  force  is  there  in  that  sudden  and  unexpected  summons,
"  Because  I  will  do  this  [what  ?]  unto  thee,  prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  O
Israel"  (ch.  iv.  12)  !  There  is  true  pathos  when,  having  shown  how  the
luxurious  spared  nothing  in  ministering  to  their  own  selfishness,  Amos
ends  with  the  accusing  cry,  "  But  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  affiction  of
Joseph."  The  strophio  arrangement  of  some  of  the  periods  is  very
remarkable.  The  oft-recniring  formula,  "  for  three  transgressions,  and  for
four  "  (ch.  i.,  ii.),  the  sorrowful  burden,  "  Tet  have  ye  not  returned  uato
me.  saith  the  Lord  "  (oh.  iy.),  are  patent  instances  of  this.


ISTBODDCTIOif  TO


This  Tinedaoated  prophet's  accurate  acqnamtstnce  with  the  Law  of  Moses
denotes  mach  more  than  a  familiarity  with  the  national  traditions.  His
knowledge  of  the  Pentatench  appears  not  only  in  general  allnsions  to
history,  ritual,  ceremony,  but  in  the  actual  use  of  verbal  forms  and  expres-
sions which  belong  to  the  Mosaic  writings.  "  Blasting  and  mildew  "  are  the
punishment  of  disobedience  (ch.  iv.  9  compared  with  Deut.  zxvui.  22) ;
"  gall  and  wormwood  "  are  the  bitter  fruits  into  which  the  sinners  turned
righteousness  and  judgment  (ch.  vi.  12  with  Deut.  zziz.  18)  ;  the  sad
refrain  mentioned  above  (ch.  iv.  6, 8,  9, 10, 11)  is  founded  on  Deut.  iv.  29,  30.
The  oppressors  "  lie  down  on  clothes  laid  to  pledge  "  (eh,  ii.  8  with  Exod.
xxii.  26),  "  turn  aside  the  way  of  the  meek,  and  turn  aside  the  poor  in  the
gate  "  (ch.  ii.  7 ;  ver.  12  with  Exod.  xxiii.  6 ;  Dent.  xvi.  19,  etc.).  Unnatural
immorality  "  profanes  Ghjd's  holy  Name  "  (ch.  ii.  7  with  Lev.  xviii.  21 ;  xx.
3) .  One  hardly  need  multiply  quotations  to  prove  the  prophet's  knowledge
of  the  history  and  ritual  of  the  Mosaic  books.  He  allndes  to  the  Exodus,
the  overthrow  of  Sodom,  the  gigantic  stature  of  the  Amorites,  the  sacrifices
of  the  Law,  the  Nazarite  vow.  His  threats  and  promises  are  often  couched
in  Mosaic  language  (comp.  ch.  iv.  6,  7  with  Deut.  xxviii.  23,  48,  57  and
Lev.  xxvi.  19,  20 ;  oh.  iv.  11  with  Deut  xxix.  23 ;  ch.  t.  11  with  Deut.
xxviii.  30),

Thus  Amos  presupposes  that  his  hearers  were  well  acquainted  with  the
Pentateuch,  and  had  a  firm  belief  in  its  history;  otherwise  much  of  the
prophecy  would  have  lost  its  force  or  have  been  unintelligible.  Hosea  and
Jeremiah  seem  to  have  borrowed  from  or  to  have  been  acquainted  with
our  prophet.  Compare,  for  instance,  ch.  ii.  5  with  Hos.  viii.  14 ;  ch.  vii.
17  with  Hos.  ix.  3  j  ch.  i.  4  with  Jer.  xlix.  27;  ch.  i.  16  with  Jer.  yHt  3.
Further  parallelisms  will  be  found  noted  in  the  Exposition.

We  may  conclude  that  in  simple,  unadorned  eloquence,  in  structural
regularity,  in  nataral  vigour,  and  in  loftiness  of  thought,  Amos  reaches  a
well-grounded  eminence ;  and,  as  Lowth  decides  ('  De  Poes.  Hebr.  Prtel.,'
XX.  1),  the  author  of  such  writings  was  in  no  wise  behind  the  very  chiefest
of  the  prophets.

f  V.    LmtBATtTKB.

We  need  not  enumerate  the  commentators  who  have  written  upon  the  whole  of  the
minor  prophets,  patristic,  mediwval,  and  modem,  as  the  chief  of  them  have  already
been  mentioned  in  the  Introduction  to  Hosea.  Two  recent  Bomaa  Catholic  commen-
taries, however,  may  be  specially  noted,  one  by  L'Abb*  Trochon  (Paris,  1883),  contain-
ing the  Latin  Vulgate  with  a  French  translation,  and  a  commentary  considerably
indebted  to  Keil ;  and  the  other  by  J.  Knabenbauer  (Paris,  1886),  forming  a  part  of
the  '  Cursus  ScripturiB  Sacraa,'  edited  by  Jesuit  blathers.  It  consists  ol  a  commentary
written  in  Latin,  and  containing  useful  answers  to  the  rationalistic  theories  of  the
present,  day.  Here,  too,  may  be  mentioned  Archdeacon  Farrar's  '  The  Minor  Prophets,'
in  the  'Men  of  the  Bible'  series  (1891).  Among  monographs  on  this  prophet  may  be
iientioned  the  following :  Luther,  •  Enarratio  in  Prophetam  Amos ; '  Gerhard, '  Anno-
atinnoa'  Mnna.  1  fi76\ :  Harenbere.  'Amos  Exnositus'  CLevden.  176.'^^!  DaM   «  Amn.


r7  Uhland,


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  vii


Justi,  Vater,  Benefield,  and  Laurent.  Of  the  above,  the  commentaTy  of  Bainr,  with  a
valuable  introduction,  ia  most  generally  useful.  Articles  by  Wellhausen,  In  the
'  Brit.  Encyclop.,'  ziii.,  and  by  KSldeke,  in  Schenkel'a  '  Bibel-Lexicon/  will  repay
examination.

f  VL  Abbasoeuxht  of  thi  Book  ih  BKonoxi.

The  book  is  best  arranged  in  four  partg.

Part  I.  (Ch.  i.,  ii.)    Approaching  judgment :  a  prelude.

§  1.  (Ch.  i. — ^ii.  3.)    Summons  of  the  nations  bordering  on  the  Holy  Land.

§  2.  (Ch.  ii.  4,  6.)    Summons  of  Judah.

§  3.  (Cb.  ii.  6—16.)    Summons  and  general  denimciation  of  Israel,
Part  U.  (Ch.  iii. — vi.)  Three  addresses  particularizing  the  sins  of  Israel  and  annoono*
Ing  imminent  punishment.

§  1.  (Ch.  iii.)    First  address.

§  2.  (Ch.  iv.)    Second  address.

§  3.  (Ch.  v.,  vi.)    Third  address.
Part  III.  (Ch.  viL — ix.  10.)    Five  visions,  with  explanatian&

§  1.  (Ch.  vii.  1 — 8.)    First  vision :  loousta.


§  2.  (Ch.  vii.  4 — 6.)    Second  vision :  fire,

(Ch.  vii.  7 — 9.)    Third  vision :  plumb-line.
'Ch.  vii.  10 — 17.)    Historical  parenthesis.
Ch.  viil.  1 — 14.)    Fourth  vision ;  basket  of  fruits.
ph.  ii.  1 — 10.)     Fifth  vision :  the  Lord  at  the  altar.
(Ch.  ix.  11 — 16.)    Epilogue :  establishment  of  the  new  kingdoak


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  L


Ver.  1 — oh.  iL  16. — Fart  I.  ApFBOAOHiHa

JUDGHENT.

Ver.  1— ch.  ii.  8.— §  1.  The  nation*  bor-
dering on  the  Holy  Land  are  solemnly  tum-
moned  to  judgment.

Vera.  1,  2. — Heading  of  the  book,  with
ibort  summary  of  its  ooutents.

Ver.  1. — Heading.  The  words.  So  Jere-
miah begins  his  prophecy  (Jer.  i.  1),  and
the  writer  of  Eoclesiastes  (i.  1).  That  the
words  are  not  those  of  Amos,  but  of  Jehovah,
is  shown  by  the  succeeding  clause,  "which
he  saw."  Herdmen.  The  Hebrew  word
naked  used  here  is  found  in  2  Kings  iii.  4,
applied  to  Mesha  King  of  Moab,  a  great
"  sheepmaster ;"  hence  some  have  considered
that  Amos  was  not  a  mere  mercenary,  but
a  rich  possessor  of  flocks.  His  own  words,
however  (ch.  vii.  14, 15),  decide  his  position
as  that  of  a  poor  labouring  man.  lekoah.
A  small  town  of  Judah  (see  above  in  the
account  of  the  author,  Introduction,  §  II.).
He  saw,  with  inward  intuition.  Hence  his
"  words "  were  inspired  (comp.  Isa.  ii.  1 ;
Hab.  i.  1).  Concerning  Israel  chiefly,  men-
tion of  Judah  being  introduced  only  inci-
dentally and  as  connected  with  the  destinies
of  Israel.  The  Septuagint  reads,  by  some
mistake,  "  concerning  Jerusalem."  In  the
days.  (For  the  date  of  the  prophecy,  see
above,  Introduction,  §  III.)  Earthquake.
No  mention  is  made  of  this  event  in  the
historical  books.  It  was  remembered  in
after-years  (see  Zech.  xiv.  5),  and  Amos
allndes  to  it  as  a  token  of  the  judgment
which  he  foretold,  such  catastrophes  being
regarded  as  signs  of  the  majesty  of  God  and
his  vengeance  on  sinners  (comp.  Exod.  xii.
18 ;  Pb.  Ixviii.  8 ;  Micah  i.  4 ;  Hab.  iiL  6,
10).  Josophus  ('  Ant.,'  ix.  10.  4)  attributes
this  earthquake  to  Ood's  displeasure  at
AHOB.


Uzziah's  nsnrptitlon  of  the  priest's  office  (9
Chron.  xxvi.  16).

Ver.  2. — And  he  said.    This  is  the  com-
mencement of  "  the  words  "  of  Amos  (ver.  1) ;
and  herein  the  prophet  gives  a  short  sum-
mary of  the  judgment  which  he  has  ta
pronounce.    The  following  clause  is  a  repe-
tition of  Joel  iii.  16;  and  Amos  thus  con-
nects his  prophecy  with  that  of  his  prede-
cessor, to    show   the    unity    of   prophetia
mission,  and  to  warn  the  Jews  that  Grod'a
pimishments  are  not  directed  exclusively  on
heathen  nations.    To  the  nations  denounced
by  Joel,  Amos  adds  others  of  Israel's  enemies,
viz.  Syria,  Ammon,  and  Moab.    Boar  .  ,  ,
voice.     The  thunder  is  the  voice  of  Qod,
announcing  his  coming  to  jndge.      From
Zion.      Not    from   Dan    and    Bethel,    the
seats  of  idolatrous  worship,  but  from  Jeru-
salem,  the   abode   of  his  presence.      The
habitations;    better,   the  pasturea.     It  is
only  natural    that    Amos,  the    shepherd,
should  use  such  terms  to  express  the  idea
that  the  whole  land,   irom  Jerusalem   on
the  south  to  Carmel  on  the  north,  should
feel  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord.      Shall
mourn;  explained  by  the  following  term,
shall  wither;  i.e.  shall  lose  their  verdure
(comp.  Jer.  xii.  11 ;  Hos.  iv.  3).    The  top
of  Carmel.      This  is  the   Mount  Carmel,
which  stretches  boldly  into  the  sea  on  the
south  of  the  Bay  of  Acre,  and  is  remarkable
for  its  extreme  fertility,  its  rich  pastures,  its
vines,  olives,  fruits,  and  flowers.    Thomson,
'  The   Land  and   the    Book,'   writes   thus
about  it :  "  The  celebrated  ridge,  called  in
the  Bible  Mount  Carmel,  and  by  the  Arabs
Jebel  Kurmul,  or  M&r  Ely&s,  in  honour  of
Elijah,  is    an    extension    of   the  hills   of
Samaria,   in   a    north-westerly    direction,
for  a  distance  of  about  eighteen  mQes,
terminating   in   the    bold   prsmontory  of
Carmel,  which    descends  almcet   literally
into  the  sea.     It  is  steep  and  lofty  where  it
overhangs  the  Mediterranean  above  Haifa.


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[oE.  1. 1— IGL


and  on  that  faoe  which  overlooks  the  Pliin
of  Acre  on  the  north,  and  that  of  Esdraelon
towards  the  sonth-east.  There  is  no  special
excellency  in  Oarmel  at  the  present  day,
whatever  may  be  said  of  Sharon.  Its  name,
Kurmul,  or  Kerm-el,  signifies  '  the  vine-
yard of  God;'  but  its  vineyards  have  all
disappeared.  It  was  a  glorious  monntaiu,
however,  and  a  prominent  landmark ;  ao-
cording  to  Jeremiah  (xlvi.  18),  Carmel
was  a  resort  of  herdsmen.  Amos  says,  *  The
habitations  of  the  shepherds  shall  monm,
and  the  top  of  Carmel  shall  wither,'  in  the
time  of  the  threatened  judgment,  and  this
implies  that  its  pastures  were  not  ordinarily
liable  to  wither.  This  may,  in  part,  have
been  occasioned  by  the  heavy  dews  which
its  lofty  elevation,  so  near  the  sea,  causes  to
distil  nightly  upon  its  thirsty  head.  I  found
it  qnite  green  and  fluwery  in  midsummer.
It  was  a  noble  pasture-field,  and,  in  refer-
ence to  that  characteristic,  Mioah  utters  his
sweet  prayer,  '  Feed  thy  people  with  thy
rod,  the  flock  of  thine  heritage,  which  dwell
solitarily  in  the  wood,  in  the  midst  of
Carmel;  let  them  feed  in  Bashan  and
Gilead,  as  in  the  days  of  old.' "

Vers.  3 — 5. — Before  announcing  the  judg-
ment on  Israel,  Amos  proclaims  the  punish-
ment on  neighbouring  heathen  nations  for
their  injurious  treatment  of  the  chosen
people,  thus  showing  Qod's  care  for  his
elect,  and  leading  them  to.  fear  vengeance
for  tbeii  own  greater  sins  towards  him.
The  order  observed  in  denouncing  these
nations  is  not  geographical,  but  is  regulated
by  the  nature  of  each  people's  relation  to
Israel,  and  the  degree  in  which  they  have
sinned  against  her.  The  denunciation  be-
gins with  Syria,  her  hitherto  most  oppres-
sive enemy,  and  the  least  akin.

Yer.  3. — For  three  transgressions  of
Damasons,  and  for  four.  This  form  of  ex-
pression is  repeated  in  each  of  the  following
strophes,  and  some  critics  have  taken  the
terms  literally,  and  have  tried  to  identify
that  particular  number  of  transgressions
in  each  case;  but  this  is  trifling.  The
phrase  and  others  similar  to  it  are  not  un-
common, and  are  used  to  signify  a  great
number,  the  last-mentioned  being  supposed
to  fill  up  the  measure  and  make  it  overflow.
Thus  Job  V.  19,  "He  shall  deliver  thee  in
six  troubles,  yea,  in  seven  there  shall  no
evil  touch  thee"  (comp.  Job  xxxiii.  29;
FroT.  XXX.  15,  18,  21 ;  Eccles.  xi.  2).  So
Hom.,  ■  Od.,'  V.  306,  Tpta-iiiicapes  Aaraol  Kai
T^rpixis :  and  Virg.,  '  Mn.'  i.  94,  "  O  terque
quaterque  beati;  comp.  Hor.,  'Oarm.,'  i.
31.  13.  Damascus  had  been  an  active
enemy  of  Israel  since  the  time  that  Bezon


threw  off  his  allegiance  (I  Kings  xi.  S3,
etc.),  and  seized  Damascus,  which  had  been
tributary  to  David  (2  Sam.  viii.  5).     The
history  of  the  wars  carried  on  by  Syria
against  the  Jews  may  be  read  in  the  sacred
books  (see  1  Kings  xv.  19,  etc.;  2  Chron.
xvi.  2,  etc. ;  1  Kings  xx. ;  xxii. ;  2  Kings
Tii. ;  ix.  14,  etc. ;  x.  32,  etc. ;  xii.  18 ;  xiii.
5,  25 ;  2  Chron.  xxiv.  23,  etc. ;  2  Kings  xiv.
28).    I  will  not  turn  away  the  punishment
thereof.     So   in    the   following   strophes.
Literally,  I  wiU  not  revert*  it.    Amos  does
not  expressly  say  what ;  but  he  means  the
sentence  or  judgment  (comp.  Numb,  xxiii.
20, "  I  cannot  reverse  it,"  where  the  same
word  is  used).    The  Latin  Vulgate  gives,
Non  amvertam  ernn,  i.e.  Vamaecum,  which
Knabenbauer  explains,  "I  will  not  avert
its  destruction,  will  not  turn  it  aside  from
its  downward  course."    The  LXX.  renders,
OitK  aTrotrTpa^^tro/iat  aiir^v,  '^  I  will  not  turn
away  from  it,"  i.«.,  as  explained  by  Theo-
doret,  "  I  will  no  longer  disregard  its  sins."
Becanse  they  have  threshed  Oilead.    This
is  the  culminating  offence  of  the  Syrians.
The  word  rendered  "  threshing-instrument "
(charutM)  .signifies    a    kind    of   corn-drag
made  of  heavy  planks  fastened  together  and
armed  beneatli  with  sharp  stones  or  iron
points.    This  machine,  weighted  with  the
driver  who  sat  or  stood  upon  it,  was  drawn
by  oxen  over  the  com  (comp.  Isa.  xxviiL
27;    xli.   15).     A  representation   of  it  is
given  by  Smith, '  Diet,  of  Bible,'  i.  31,  and
Kitto, '  Cyclop.,'  i.  86.    Such  an  instrument,
set   with  sharp  flints  in  rows,  was  to  be
seen  in  the  Indian  and  Colonial  Exhibition
of  the  year  1886,  in  the  Cyprus  department.
Another  kind  of  instrument  (moreg')  is  thus
described  by  Jerome :   "  Est  autem  genus
plaustri,  quod  rotis  subter  ferreis    atque
dentatis    volvitnr,    ut    excussis    frnmentis
stipulam  in  areis  conterat,  et  in  oibos  ju-
mentorum  propter  foeni  sterilitatem  paleas
oomminuat."    Such  an  implement  was  used
in  the  infliction  of  capital  punishment  by
David  (2  Sam.  xii.  81 ;  comp.  Prov.  xx.  26).
Gilead  is  here  put  for  all  the  country  east
of  Jordan  (Josh.  xxii.  9).    The  cruel  treat-
ment referred  to  in  the  text  occurred  in  the
time  of  Uazael  during  the  reign  of  Jehu
(2  Kings  X.  32,  eto. ;  comp.  xiii.   7).    Tha
Septuagint  has,  "Because  with  iron  saws
they   sawed   asunder  women  with   child."
This  is  doubtless  a  reminiscence  of  Elisha's
words  to  Hazael  (2  Kings  viii.  12).

Ver.  4. — rire.  Material  fire,  though  else-
where the  term  is  used  metaphorically  for
war  and  its  evils  (comp.  Numb.  xxi.  28;
Ps.  Ixxviii.  63;  Jer.  xlviii.  45).  This  pas-
sage of  Amos,  combined  with  ver.  14,  ia
quoted  by  Jeremiah  (xlix.  27),  where  he  is
pronouncing  the  doom  of  Damascus.  Hens*
of  Hazael  .  •  .  palaces  of  Benhadad.    Th«


OH.  I.  1—15.]


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa


t^o  expreesions  are  parallel,  or  they  may
signify  the  family  of  Hazael,  and  Damasoot
itself  with  its  magnificent  royal  palaces.
There  were  three  kings  of  Syria  named
Benhadad.  The  first  of  the  name  made
alliance  with  Asa,  and  fought  succsBsfully
against  Baasha  (1  Kings  xv.  20) ;  Benhadad
II.  was  the  contemporary  of  Ahah,  and
carried  on  war  for  many  years  with  the
northern  kingdom  (1  Kings  xx.).  He  was
murdered  either  by  Hazael  or  hi^  servaQts
(2  Kings  viii.  15).  Benhadad  III.,  the  son
of  Hazael,  was  a  monarch  of  small  ability,
and  Syria  under  his  sway  sank  into  insigni-
ficance (2  Kings  xiii.  4,  etc. ;  xiv.  27 ;  xr.
17).  All  this  happened  before  the  time  of
Amos,  who  probably  refers  to  all  the  kings
of  that  name,  Benhadad, "  Son  of  the  Sun,"
being  the  title  of  the  dynasty.

Ver.  5. — The  bar  which  secured  the  gate
of  the  city  (1  Kings  iv.  13 ;  Jer.  U.  30 ;  Kah.
liL  13).  Breaking  the  bar  is  equivalent  to
laying  the  place  open  to  the  enemy.  7rom
the  plain  of  Aven ;  Vulgate,  de  campo  idoli;
Hebrew,  bikath- A.ven ;  Septuagint,  c/c  ireSfaii
'Oy;  better,  from  the  valUy  of  Aven,  or
vanity,  perhaps  so  called  analogously  with
Hosea's  naming  Bethel,  Bethaven,  "  House  of
God"  and  "  House  of  vanity "  (Hos.  v.  8).
Robinson  ('  Bibl.  Ees.,'  677)  and  Pusey  refer
the  name  to  a  valley  between  Lebanon  and
Antilibanus,  a  continuation  of  the  Arabah,
still  called  Bukaa,  in  the  middle  of  which
stood  Baalbeo,  "the  Temple  of  the  sun
of  the  valley,"  called  Heliopolis  by  Oreek
and  Boman  writers  (see  '  Classical  Museum,'
iii.  136).  The  LXX.  renders  "  On  "  in  Gen.
xli.  45  by  "Heliopolis;"  and  On  and  Baal
being  both  titles  of  the  sun,  and  indeed
synonymous,  the  introduction  of  "  On  "  into
this  passage  may  be  accounted  for.  Him
that  holdeth  the  sceptre.  The  king  and
princes,  aa  ver.  8.  Prom  the  house  of  Eden ;
Hebrew,  Beth-Eden,  "House  of  delight;"
Vulgate,  de  domo  voluptatis ;  Septuagint,  l{
aydpur  Xa^piv,  "  out  of  the  men  of  Charran."
This  last  rendering  arises  from  considering
that  the  reference  was  to  the  Eden  of  Oen.  ii.,
which  the  translators  placed  in  the  region  of
Haran.  The  place  in  the  text  Keil  sup-
poses to  be  the  Paradisus  of  the  Greeks,
which  Ptolemy  (v.  15.  20)  locates  south-
east of  Laodicea.  Schrader  suggests  a
glace  on  the  banks  of  the  middle  Euphrates
etween  Bills  and  Biredschich  called  Bit-
Adini  in  inscriptions  of  Asumasirhabal
and  SalmanasBur  II.  But  this  seems  to  be
■  wrong  locality  (see  '  Die  Keilinschriften,'
p.  827).  The  passage  means  that  all  the
mhabitants  of  valley  and  city,  king  and
peasant,  shall  be  cut  off.  Shall  go  into
eaptivity.  The  word  implies  that  the  land
■hall  be  "stripped  "  or  "bared  "  of  its  in-
babitanti.    Wholesale  deportation  had  not


hitherto  been  common  in  these  regions.
Kir  has  been  identified  with  the  country  on
the  banks  of  the  river  Kar,  which  flows  into
the  Araxes  on  the  south-west  of  the  Caspian
Sea.  It  forms  part  of  the  territory  known
as  Transcaucasia.  From  this  region  the
Syrians  originally  emigrated  (ch.  ii.  7),  and
back  to  this  land  a  large  body  were  carried
when  Tiglath-Pileser,  some  fifty  years  later,
killed  Rezin  and  sacked  Damascus,  as  re-
lated in  2  Kings  xvi.  9.  Saith  the  lord.
This  is  the  solemn  confirmation  of  the
prophet's  announcement,  and  reonrs  in  vers.
8,  15  and  oh.  ii.  8.

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  judgment  on  Philistia.

Ver.  6. — Qaza  is  here  used  as  tlie  repro-
sentative  of  the  five  cities  of  the  Philistines,
Three  others  tae  mentioned  in  ver.  8,  Gath
being  omitted  as  having  long  lost  its  im-
portance, if  not  already  destroyed  (comp^
2  Chron.  xxvl.  6 ;  Jer.  xxv.  20 ;  Zeph.  ii  4,
where  see  note;  Zech.  ix.  5,  6).  Gaza,
modern  Outxeh,  was  the  most  southern  city
of  Fhilietia  in  the  immediate  neighbour-
hood  of  the  desert.  (For  a  description  of  the
Plain  of  Philistia,  see  Sir  O.  Warren,
'  Survey  Memoirs,'  volume  on  Jerusalem,  p.
436.)  The  whole  captivity;  Hebrew,  "an
entire  captivity,"  the  whole  people,  so  that
neither  age  nor  sex  was  spared.  A  similar
complaint  is  made  in  Joel  iii.  4,  6.  What
the  LXX.  mean  by  their  rendering  here  and
ver.  9,  MxtJuOiutrlav  rov  ^oKufjtdtv,  it  is  very
hard  to  say.  Probably  they  punctuated  the
word  translated  "perfect"  (^thelemah)  the-
lomoh,  making  "Solomon"  stand  for  hia
people  Israel.  Cyril  supposes  that  the  re-
ference is  to  cities  which  Solodion  estab-
lished among  neighbouring  nations;  these
had  now  been  destroyed  or  seized.  The
event  referred  to  may  be  the  invasion  of
Judah  by  Philistines  and  Arabians  in  the
time  of  joram,  mentioned  in  2  Chron.  xxi.
16,  etc.,  and  in  which  it  is  possible  that  a
compact  was  made  that  the  captive  Judasans
should  be  delivered  to  their  bitterest  enemies,
the  Edomites.  One  would  rather  have  ex-
pected a  reference  to  some  evU  inflicted  on
Israel  (as  in  ver.  8)  instead  of  an  injury
done  to  Judah.

Ver.  7. — A  4re.  Each  guilty  city  is  to
h»ve  its  own  special  punishment,  thongh
probably  the  calamity  of  each  is  common  to
aU.  Gaza  was  conquered  by  Sennacherib
when  he  invaded  Judiea  in  the  time  of
Hezekiah,  by  Pharaoh-Necho  (Jer.  xlvii.  1%
and  by  Alexander  the  Great,  who  spent
more  than  two  months  in  its  siege  ( Josepbui,
*  Ant.,'  zi.  8.  4 ;  Arrian.,  ii.  27 ;  see  note  on
Zeph.  ii.  4).

Ver.  8.— Ashdod,  "the  Waster,"  AmL
Midud,  or  Shdood  (called  Azotus  in  Acta
viii.  40),  and  still  a  large  village,  lay  about
thirty-five  miles  north  of  Oaia,  three  miles


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.


[oh.  l  1—16.


from  Iha  ■««.  AilUcelon  waa  sitnato  be-
tween the  two,  "  Askelon  differs  from  the
other  celebrated  oitiea  of  the  Fhiliatines,
being  seated  on  the  sea,  while  Ekron,
Gatb,  Jamnia,  Ashdod,  and  Gaza  are  in  the
interior.  It  never  could  have  had  a  harliour
of  any  considerable  size,  however.  .  .  .  The
topography  of  the  place  is  peculiar,  Aa
abrupt  ridge  begins  near  the  shore,  runs  up
eastward,  bends  round  to  the  south,  then  to
the  west,  and  finally  noitb-west  to  the  sea
again,  forming  an  irregular  amphitheatre.
On  the  top  of  this  ridge  ran  the  wall,  which
was  defended  at  its  salient  angles  by  strong
towers.  The  specimens  which  still  exist
show  that  it  was  very  high  and  thick,  bnUt,
however,  of  small  stones,  and  bound  to-
gether by  broken  columns  of  granite  and
marble.  This  clearly  proves  thnt  it  is  patch-
work, and  not  Askelon's  original  rampart

The  position  is  one  of  the  fairest  along  this
part  of  the  Mediterranean  coast ;  and  when
the  interior  of  the  amphitheatre  was  adorned
with  splendid  temples  and  palaces,  ascend-
ing, rank  above  rank,  from  the  shore  to  the
snmmit,  the  appearance  from  the  sea  must
have  been  very  imposing.  Now  the  whole
area  is  planted  over  with  orchards  of  the
various  kinds  of  fruit  which  flourish  in  this
region"  (Thomson,  'The  Lund  and  the
Book,'  Southern  Paleitine,  p.  171).  In  spite
of  its  bad  harbour,  it  carried  on  a  lucrative
foreign  commerce,  which  wastlie  chief  cause
of  its  power  and  importance  (Ewald, '  Hist,
of  Israel,'  i.  217,  Eng.  transl.).  It  was  about
fifty  Boman  miles  from  Jerusalem,  In
mediievat  times  there  were  two  cities  of  the
name,  one  on  the  coast  (Jer.  xlvii.  7),  the
same  as  Herod's  Ascalon,  and  one  inland.
In  its  palmiest  days  the  former  could  never
have  had  a  real  harbour  ('  Survey  Memoirs,'
lii.  pp.  245,  246).  Ekron,  hod'  Akir,  was
twelve  miles  north-east  of  Ashdod,  and
some  nine  from  tlie  coast,  Ashdod  was
taken  by  Uzziah  (2  Chron.  xxvi,  6),  by  the
tartan,  or  commander-in-chief,  of  Sargon
(Isa.  XX,  I),  and  by  Psammetichus  King  of
Egypt  (bo.  635),  when  it  sustained  a  siege
of  twentj-nine  years  (Herod.,  ii.  157).  Sen-
nacherib, in  a  cuneiform  inscription,  records
ho  w  he  treated  the  two  other  cities :  "  Zede-
kiah  King  of  Ashkelon,"  he  says,  "  who  had
not  submitted  himself  to  my  yoke,  himself,
the  gods  of  the  honse  of  his  fathers,  his
wife,  his  Bona,  hia  daughters,  and  his
brothers,  the  seed  of  the  house  of  his
fathers,  I  removed,  and  I  sent  him  to
Assyria,  I  set  over  the  men  of  Ashkelon,
Sarludari,  the  son  of  Bukipti,  their  former
king,  and  I  imposed  upon  him  the  payment
of  tribnte,  and  the  homage  due  to  my
majesty,  and  he  became  a  vassal.  .  ,  ,  I
murched  against  the  city  of  Ekron,  and  put
to  death  the  priesta  and  the  chief  men  who


bad  committed  the  sin  (of  rebellion),  and  I
bung  np  their  bodies  on  stakes  all  ronnd
the  city.  The  citizens  who  had  done  wrong
and  wickedness  I  counted  as  a  spoil "  (Pro-
fessor Sayce, '  Fresh  Light  from  the  Monn-
ments,'  pp.  120,  121),  I  will  turn  mine
hand;  literally,  vtill  bring  back  my  hand;
visit  again  with  punishment,  or  repeat  the
blow  (Isa.  i.  25 ;  Jer,  vi  9 ;  see  note  on  Zech.
xiii.  7).  The  remnant.  All  the  Philistines
who  had  as  yet  escaped  destruction  (oomp.
ch.  ix.  12;  Jer.  vl.  9).

Vers.  9,  10. — The  judgment  on  Tyre,

Ver.  9.— They  delivered  up  the  vhola
captivity  (see  note  on  ver.  6).  The  sin  of
Tyre,  the  great  Phoenician  merchant  city,
was  committed  in  concert  with  the  Philis-
tines (comp.  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  7),  and  was  of  the
same  character,  except  that  she  is  not  ac-
cused of  carrying  away  the  captives,  but
only  of  handing  them  over  to  the  Edomites.
It  is  probable  that  the  Phoenicians  had
gotten  into  their  hands,  by  purchase  or  some
other  means,  Israelitisb  prisoners,  whom
they  delivered  over  to  the  Edomites,  for-
getting the  brotherly  covenant  made  by
their  forefathers  with  David  and  Solomon
(2  Sam.  V.  11 ;  1  Kings  v.  1, 7—11 ;  ix.  11—
14  ;  2  Chron.  ii.  11).  The  cruel  conduct  of
Tyre  was  quite  unprovoked,  as  no  Jewish
kin^  had  made  war  against  Phoenicia  or  its
capital.

Ver.  10, — A  fire,  as  ver.  7 ;  see  Ezekiel'a
prophecy  against  Tyre  (xxvi,).  She  had
long  been  tributary  to  Assyria,  but,  revolt-
ing, was  punished  by  Sargon,  and  later  was
attacked  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  who  besieged
it  for  thirteen  years,  with  what  success  is
not  known.  The  Assyrian  monuments  afford
no  account  of  its  capture  by  this  monarch
(comp.  Isa,  xxiii. ;  Jer,  xlvii.  4 ;  Arrian.,
ii,  16 — 24),  (For  its  capture  and  destruc-
tion by  Alexander  the  Great,  see  notes  on
Zech.  IX.  2,  4.)

Vers.  II,  12. — The  judgment  on  Edom.

Ver.  1 1, — His  brother.  The  prophet  pro-
ceeds to  denounce  the  three  nations  cognate
to  Israel,  of  which  the  Edomitea  were  the
nearest  and  the  most  inimical.  From  the
time  of  Esau  imtil  now  they  had  been  con-
sistent in  enmity,  and  it  is  this  nnbrotherly
conduct  rather  than  any  specific  outrages
which  Amos  here  condemns.  Edom  is  ac-
cused of  relentless  persecution,  inhumanity,
savage  fury,  and  persistent  anger.  (For  the
brotherhood  of  Edom,  see  Numb.  xx.  14;
Dent.  ii.  4,  5,  8;  xxiii.  7,  etc.  For  hia
hostility  to  Israel,  see  Numb.  xx.  18;  1
Kings  xi.  14;  2  Kings  viii.  20;  2  Chron.
XX.  10;  XXV.  11,  12;  xxviiL  17.)  The  pro-
phecy of  Obadinh  is  directed  against  Edom
(comp.  also  Ezek.  xxv.  12;  xxxv.  5,  15;
Joel  lii.  19).    Sid  oast  ofi  all  pity ;  literally,


CH.  X.  1—16.]


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.


tatrupted  hi$  eompat$ioni }  Le.  did  violence
to  bia  natural  feelings.  So  Ezek.  xxriii.
17,  "Thou  hast  ooriupted  thy  wisdom,"
perverted  it  from  its  proper  end.  The  LXX.
gives,  i\vii'tiyaTO  firiripa  (peliTpav,  Alex.)  M
yTjs,  "  did  violence  to  the  mother  that  bare
them."  On  this  Jerome  remarks,  "Pro
misericordia  Septuaginta  vulvam  transtu.
lerunt,  ducti  ambiguitate  verborum,  quia  re-
liem  et  vulvam  et  misericordiam  significat."
Did  tear,  as  a  wild  beast  tears  his  prey.  So
in  Job  xvi.  9,  where  the  same  word  is  used,
"He  hath  t»m  me  in  his  wrath"  (comp.
Hos.  vl  1).  And  he  kept  Ms  wrath  for
ever ;  more  literally,  and  its  fury  it  (Edom)
keeps  for  ever.  -The  quarrels  of  relations
are  proverbially  bitter.  Arist., '  Folit.,'  vii.
7,  'OBev  clpigrai,  x"^'"'"'  y'^P  wiSAe/ioj  aSeX-
fwv,  Kal  il  Toi  vepa  arip^amfs,  ol  Si  koX  itipa
/ua-ova-ir  (p.  193,  Bekk.).

Ver.  12. — leman  is  the  region  of  Idumraa,
of  which  Bozrah  ia  the  capital.  Both
Jerome  and  Eusebius  ('Onomast.')  speak
of  a  city  so  called  not  far  from  Fetra ;  but
in  the  Old  Testament  the  name  is  applied
to  a  district;  and  as  the  word  in  Hebrew
means  "  south,"  it  is  probably  the  southern
portion  of  the  land  of  Edom.  Bozrah  (Iwd.
Busaireh)  was  the  old  capital  of  Edom,
situated  on  a  hill  south  of  the  Dead  Sea
(see  Gen.  xzxvi.  33 ;  Isa.  xxxiv.  6).  Jere-
miah (xlix.  17)  predicts  the  punishment  of
Edom,  and  Ezelnel  (xxv.  12 — 14)  does  like-
wise. The  monologue  of  Obadiah  has  been
already  referred  to.  The  instrument  of
vengeance  in  the  present  case  was  Nebu-
chadnezzar, though  it  suffered  much  at  the
hands  of  other  enemies,  as  the  Nabathsans
and  Maccabees.

Vers.  13 — 15. — The  judgment  on  Ammon.

Yer.  13. — Ammon  was  connected  with
Israel  as  being  sprung  from  Lot,  and  to-
gether with  Moab,  which  had  the  same
origin,  retained  the  stamp  of  its  incestuous
birth  in  habits,  character,  and  worship
(Gen.  xix.  30,  etc.).  The  Ammonites  seem
to  have  been  a  predatory  and  roving  nation,
though  the  abundance  of  ruins  in  the  dis-
trict shows  that  they  possessed  fixed  abodes ;
but  Kabbah  was  the  only  city  of  importance
in  their  territory  (2  Sam.  xi.  1).  _  Their
hostility  to  Israel  was  first  shown  in  their
participation  with  Moab  in  the  affair  of
Balaam  (Deut.  xxiii.  4).  Other  instances
are  seen  in  their  treatment  of  Jabesh-Gilead
(1  Sam.  xi.  1 — 3)  and  of  David's  messengers,
and  in  hiring  the  Syrians  to  make  war  on
David  (2  Sam.  x.  1—6).  We  have  no  his-
torical account  of  the  atrocious  outrage  on
the  Gileadites  mentioned  in  the  text,  but  it
is  quite  in  character  with  the  ferocity  of
their  disposition,  and  was  doubtless  intended
to  depopulate  the  territory  which  they  wished
to  acquire.    This  barbarity  is  spoken  of  in


connection  with  Hazael  (2  Kings  riii  12),
in  concert  with  whom  probably  the  Am-
monites acted  (comp.  2  Kings  xv.  16;  Hos.
xiii.  16).  Another  rendering  would  refer
the  clause  to  the  removing  of  landmarks,
and  yet  a  third  to  the  storming  of  lofty
fortresses.  But  the  Authorized  Version  is  un-
doubtedly correct.  That  they  might  enlarge
their  border.  The  Ammonites  laid  claim  to
the  territory  which  the  Israelites  had  wrested
from  Sihon,  lying  between  the  Arnon  and
Jabbok,  and  made  an  attempt  upon  it  in  the
time  of  Jephthah  (Judg.  xi.),  and  in  later
years  seized  on  the  possessions  of  Gad — a
proceeding  which  brought  upon  them  the
denunciation  of  Jeremiah  (xlix.  2 — 6).

Ver.  14.— Kabbah,  "the  Great,"  or  Bah-
bath-Ammon,  the  capital  of  Ammon,  was
situated  on  the  southern  arm  of  the  Jabbok,
and  was  a  place  of  remarkable  strength  (see
Deut.  iii.  11 ;  2  Sam.  xi.  1 ;  xii.  26,  etc. ;
1  Chron.  xx.  1 — 3).  "  For  picturesqueness
of  situation,  I  know  of  no  ruins  to  compare
with  Ammon.  The  most  striking  feature  is
the  citadel,  which  formerly  contained  not
merely  the  garrison,  but  an  upjjer  town,
and  covered  an  extensive  area.  The  lofty
plateau  on  which  it  was  situated  is  triangular
in  shape ;  two  sides  are  formed  by  the
valleys  which  diverge  from  the  apex,  where
they  are  divided  by  a  low  neck,  and  thence
separating,  fall  into  the  valley  of  the  Jab-
bok, which  forms  the  base  of  the  triangle,
and  contained  the  lower  town.  Climbing
up  the  citadel,  we  can  trace  the  remains  of
the  moat,  and,  crossing  it,  find  ourselves  in
a  maze  of  ruins.  The  massive  walls — the
lower  parts  of  which  still  remain,  and  which,
rising  from  the  precipitous  sides  of  the  cliff,
rendered  any  attempt  at  scaling  impossible —
were  evidently  Ammonite.  As  I  leant  over
them  and  looked  sheer  down  about  three
hundred  feet  into  one  wa,dy,  and  four  hun-
dred feet  into  the  other,  I  did  not  wonder  at
its  having  occurred  to  King  David  that  the
leader  of  a  forlorn  hope  against  these  ram-
parts would  meet  with  certain  death,  and
consequently  assigning  tlie  position  to  Uriah.
,  .  .  Joub  afterwards  took  the  lower  city,
which  he  called  '  the  city  of  waters,'  indi-
cating very  probably  that  the  Jabbok  was
dammed  into  a  lake  near  the  lower  city,  to
which  the  conformation  of  the  valley  would
lend  itself"  (Oliphant,  'Land  of  Giload,'
p.  259,  etc.).  'There  is  a  sketch  of  the  citadel-
hill  in  the  'Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  ii.
985.  The  city  was  takeu  by  Nebuchad-
nezzar (Jer.  xxvii.  3,  6;  xlix.  2,  3),  either
at  the  time  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,
or  in  the  course  of  his  Egyptian  campaign
(Josephus, '  Ant.,'  x.  9.  7).  The  expression,
I  will  kindle  a  fire  (not  "send,"  as  else-
where), possibly  implies,  as  Fusey  suggests,
a  conflagration  from  within.    The  shouting


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[CH.  L  1—16.


is  the  batUe-«ry  of  the  opposing  Host,  which
adds  to  the  horror  of  the  scene  (Job  xxxiz.
25).  With  a  tempest.  The  idea  is  that
the  walls  should  fall  before  the  invaders,  as
if  they  were  tents  swept  away  in  a  whirl-wind.
Ver.  15. — Their  king  ;  Septuagint,  oi  Pa-
ri\eis  auT^J.  So  Keil,  Troohon,  and  others
consider  that  the  King  of  the  Ammonites  is
meant.  The  Vulgate,  with  Aquila,  Sym-
mauhus,  the  Syriau,  and  Jerome,  retains  the
word  MelchouB,  or  Melcham,  which  is  the
same  us  Molecb,  theii  god.  This  interpre-
tation is  favoured  by  passages  in  Jeremiah,
ot  which  one  ii  evidently  quoted  from  Amos,


"For  Malcam  shall  go  into  captivity,  his
priests  and  his  princes  together  "  (Jei.  zlix.
3) ;  and  the  other  (zlviii.  7)  is  similar,  with
the  substitution  of  "  Chemosh,"  the  god  of
Moab,  for  "Malcam."  That  the  localized
deity  should  share  the  fortunes  of  his  wor-
shippers is  quite  in  accordance  with  the
ideas  of  the  time  (comp.  I'sa.  xlvi.  1,  2).
Probably  Amos  meant  to  include  both
notions — their  "  Malcam,"  whether  king  or
god,  should  be  carried  into  captivity,  accom-
panied by  the  prinoes,  all  the  chiefs,  military
■nd  sacerdotal,  so  that  no  one  should  be  left
to  head  a  future  revolt


HOMILETICS.

Yer.  1. — A  voice  from  Ihe  iheepeota.  The  Jewish  nation  li  almost  s«Ten  centuries
old,  A  wayward  nonage  had  passed  into  s  maturity  incorrigibly  perverse.  Alarmed
by  prophetic  thunders,  and  riven  by  the  lightning-bolts  of  judgment  (ch.  iv.  6 — 11),
Israel  clung  to  its  iniquities  in  spite  of  all  (ch.  ii.  4 ;  t.  11 ;  Isa,  L  6).  Yet  God  bad
not  cast  off  his  people  whom  he  foreknew.  There  were  other  arrows  in  his  quiver
Btill,  and  he  would  shoot'  them  against  national  obduracy  with  a  stronger  bow.  Amoi
shall  take  up  his  controversy  against  Israel  where  Moses,  and  Samuel,  and  Elijah,  and
Elisha  had  laid  it  down.  Famine  and  the  sword  and  captivity  shall  maintain  and
strengthen  his  expostulation  (ch.  ii.  14 — 16).  The  argument  shall  at  length  prevail,
and,  the  irreconcilables  destroyed,  a  remnant  shall  enjoy  hia  grace  and  choose  hit  way
(ch.  ix.  11 — 15).    In  this  prefatory  word  consider —

I.  The  8EEB.  An  idol-priest  supplies  the  title  (ch.  viL  12),  but  it  ia  smtable  and
endures.  A  prophet  sees,  where  other  men  are  blind,  the  meaning  of  what  is  and  the
nature  of  what  shall  be.  1.  Eisname,  Amossignifies"Bearer,"or"Burden,"or"Heavy."
And  it  was  prophetically  significant  of  the  owner's  work.  His  words  were  weighty
(ch.  viL  10),  the  burden  of  them  was  weightier  still  (ch.  vi.  1),  and  weightiest  of  all
was  the  Divine  authority  with  »hich  they  came  (ver.  3).  2.  Hii  extraction.  "From
among  the  shepherds."  These  were  probably  small  sheep-owners,  who  tended  their
own  flocks  (Keil,  Lange,  etc.).  They  were  in  the  lower  ranks  of  life,  the  rank  from
which  God  has  called,  and  calls  the  majority  of  his  servants  (1  Cor.  i.  27,  28).  The
poor  man  depends  for  all  his  well-being  on  spiritual  good  (Luke  vL  24).  He  therefore
chooses  it  more  readily  (Mark  xii.  37),  advances  in  it  more  easily  ^att.  xiii.  22),
rejoices  in  it  more  entirely  (Isa.  xxix.  19),  and  is  chosen  to  it  rather  than  the  rich
(Jas.  ii.  6).  "  Poverty  is  the  sister  of  a  sound  mind,"  was  a  heathen  maxim  embodying
a  kindred  truth.'  3.  Sis  calling.  "  A  herdsman  and  gatherer  of  sycamores."  This
occupation  would  be  no  mean  preparation  for  his  prophetic  ofGce.  A  true  prophet  must
be  tender  of  human  life,  even  when  he  denounces  death ;  and  if  from  the  love  of  man
we  may  rise  to  the  love  of  God  (1  John  iv.  20),  why  not  from  the  love  of  plant  and
animal  to  the  love  of  man  ?

"  He  prayeth  best,  who  loveth  beat
All  thing!  both  great  and  imKU;
For  the  dear  God  who  loveth  ua
Hath  made  and  loveth  alL"

4.  SU  horn*.  Tekoah,  a  city  aouth  of  Bethlehem,  in  the  land  of  Judab.  Thence  he
went  to  Bethel,  in  the  land  of  Israel,  to  prophesy.  That  he  may  not  be  "  without
honour,"  and  corresponding  influence,  he  goes  from  his  own  to  a  neighbouring  country
(Matt.  xiii.  67).  Then,  like  Elijah  and  John  the  Baptist,  he  goes  to  the  pampered  and
dissolute  town-dwellers,  that  with  the  healthy  tastes  and  simple  habits  and  strong
pure  life  of  a  dweller  in  the  fields,  he  might  put  their  laxity  and  luxury  to  ahame
(ch.  vi.  1—6).
II.  Thb  tisiok.    The  term  doei  not  occur  in  Amoa,  but  the  equivalent  of  it  doea,


otil— 16,]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.


and  it  is  common  elsewhere  in  Scripture  (Isa.  i.  1 ;  Hab.  ii.  2).  1.  It  was  what  "  Jut
law,"  Of  the  way  in  which  God  revealed  truth  to  inspired  men  we  know  nothing.  It
is  above  reason  and  outside  revelation.  It  was  not  with  the  bodily  eye,  nor  in  the
natural  sense,  that  the  vision  was  seen ;  but  the  revelation  was  adequate,  and  the  result
was  knowledge  (Acts  iv.  20).  Their  cognizance  of  matters  was  at  once  sure  and  clear
(1  Juhn  i.  1),  and  comparable  in  both  respects  to  that  of  Christ  himself  (John  iii.  11).
2.  It  was  "  words."  A  word  is  the  body  of  a  thought.  A  thought  is  the  spirit  of  a
word.  It  is  only  by  words,  or  something  answering  to  words,  that  thoughts  can  be
conveyed  from  man  to  man.  Analogy  would  suggest  that  the  same  method  is  employed
by  God.  If,  as  some  hold,  we  think  in  words,  the  hypothesis  would  be  greatly
strengthened.  In  any  case,  what  Amos  got  was  not  simply  thoughts,  but  words,  and
the  words  of  Scripture  are,  in  some  real  and  important  sense,  "  words  which  the  Holy
Ghost  teacheth  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  13 ;  2  Sam.  xxiii.  2).

III.  The  BPEAKiNa  of  the  vision.  Coming  from  his  simple  shepherd-life  into
a  luxurious  city,  and  with  the  burden  of  his  heavy  tidings  on  his  heart,  the  prophet's
speech  is  :  1.  Deeply  serious.  A  grave  character  and  a  grave  message  make  a  prophetic
utterance  a  solemn  thing.  Amos  had  to  tell  of  a  cup  of  iniquity  full,  of  a  Divine  patience
exhausted,  of  a  dispensation  of  forbearance  expired,  and  of  a  national  ruin  ready  to
fall ;  and  he  tells  it  as  one  weighted  down  with  the  piteous  tidings,  which  yet  he  cannot
choose  but  speak  (ch.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  1 ;  v.  1;  vi.  1).  2.  Bltmt.  Amos  is  outspoken  and  honest,
names  the  condemned,  and  unequivocally  denounces  their  impending  doom.  He  may
not  mince  his  tidings  who  is  the  messenger  of  death  (Matt.  iii.  10 ;  Luke  xiii.  3 ;
Bom.  i.  18).  Suppression  would  be  murder,  and  even  euphemy  would  be  cruel.  Life
and  death  hang  on  his  lips,  and  all  sentiment  apart  he  must  speak  out.

"  The  power  to  bind  and  loose  to  truth  is  given ;
The  month  that  speaks  it  is  the  mouth  of  Heaven."

8.  Characteristic.  His  style  is  bold  and  clear  and  tender,  like  his  own  nature  (ch.  iy.
4, 12, 13 ;  ix.  5,  8 ;  vi.  9, 10) ;  and  his  imagery  is  racy  of  the  mountains  and  fields  in
which  his  character  was  formed  (ver.  2 ;  ch.  ii.  9, 13 ;  iii.  4, 5 ;  v.  19).  The  word  of  God
in  one  sense,  it  is  in  another,  and  no  less  really,  the  word  of  Amos.  The  Divine  Spirit
supplies  the  breath  and  the  fingering,  and  determines  and  directs  the  time,  but  the
human  instrument  gives  forth  its  own  characteristic  sound.

IV.  The  wbitino  of  the  vision.  Scripture  contains  matters  that  were  written
at  the  Divine  dictation,  and  first  promulgated  in  their  written  form.  But  it  also  con-
tains much  that  was  spoken  first  and  written  afterwards,  for  preservation.  Such  is  the
Book  of  Amos.  The  writing  of  it  was :  1.  Some  years  after  the  speaking.  He  spoke
years  before  an  earthquake,  after  which  he  wrote  his  Ix>ok.  This  earthquake  he  had
foretold  in  his  oral  prophecy  (ch.  viii.  8 ;  ix.  5),  and  he  thus  puts  on  record  the  fulfil-
ment of  his  own  prediction.  "  After  fulBlling  his  mission,  he  probably  returned  to
Judah,  his  native  land,  where  his  prophecies  were  most  likely  first  committed  to  writ-
ing "  (Keil).  2.  In  a  different  form  from  the  speaking.  Amaziah  (ch.  yii.  10,  llj
refers  to,  and  gives  a  summary  of  "  words  "  that  are  not  recorded.  The  book  is  a  resume
of  the  essential  contents  of  the  oral  prophecies  (Keil,  Lange).  Accordingly,  it  does  not
contain  them  in  the  very  form,  nor  necessarily  in  the  exact  order,  in  which  they  were
spoken.  3.  With  a  tindened  purpose.  The  oral  prophecies  were  for  those  whom  they
directly  concerned.  The  written  prophecies  were  for  the  sages  and  the  agesthat  were
to  follow.  They  were  the  flower  of  the  prophecies  that  went  before  (Joel  iii.  16,  1^,
and  the  bud  of  those  that  came  after  (Hos.  viii.  14 ;  ix.  3 ;  Jer.  xlix.  3,  13—27 ;
xlvi.  6 ;  XXV.  30 ;  see  Lange).  They  also  contain  truths  essentially  important  and
requisite  for  the  perfecting  of  the  man  of  God  in  all  ages  (ch.  iii.  3,  6,  7 ;  v.  4 — 6,  14,
15 ;  vii.  2,  3).  4.  Under  the  same  Divine  guidance.  The  contents  of  the  book  lie
between  the  expressions,  "  thus  saith  the  Lord "  (oh.  i.  3),  and  "  saith  the  Lord  thy
God  "  (ch.  ix.  15).  These  formulse  cover  both  the  oral  and  the  written  prophecy,  each
being  the  subject  of  a  distinct  inspiration  for  its  own  special  purpose.  So  Paul  takes
an  inspired  utterance  of  David,  and,  under  inspiration,  charges  it  with  a  new  lesson
(comp.  Ps.  xl.  6  with  Heb.  x.  5 ;  also  Isa.  Ix.  1  with  Eph.  v.  14).  .     ,    m

V.  The  subject  of  the  vision.  It  is  brief,  but  it  covers  much  ground.  1.  The
Jews.    Judah  and  Israel  are  mentioned  separately,  having  been  distinct  kingdonu  for


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOa  [ch.  1.1—15,


above  a  century  (ch.  ii.  4,  6).  The  entire  Hebrew  people  are  also  grouped  together  ai
forming  the  family  of  Israel  which  God  redeemed  from  Egypt  (ch.  lii.  1).  It  is  aa
earthly  tiingdoms  that  destruction  is  denounced  on  both  (ch.  ii.  4,  6),  but  it  is  as  one
coTenant  people  that  they  Burvive  in  a  remnant,  and  are  restored  (ch.  iz.  11 — 15).  2.
Their  oppressors.  God  had  made  the  neighbouring  nations  "  the  rod  of  his  anger  "
(ch.  iii.  11 ;  t.  27 ;  Isa.  x.  4)  to  smite  Israel.  They  accomplished  his  purpose  uncon-
sciously, and  impelled  by  evil  motives  of  their  own  (vers.  3,  6,  9,  13 ;  Isa.  x.  7).
Accordingly,  their  wars  and  oppressions,  inflicted  on  Israel,  were  essentially  wicked,
and  deserving  punishment  in  turn.  It  is  thus  that  the  wrath  of  man,  which  he
punishes  at  last,  God  makes  meanwhile  to  praise  him  by  the  unwitting  execution  of
his  will.  3.  Those  who  resemble  either.  God  acts  on  the  same  principles  in  all  ages.
He  aCBicts  the  Church  for  the  sins  of  its  members.  To  the  insincere  his  judgments
mean  punishment  only  (Rom.  i.  18).  To  the  sincere  but  faulty  they  mean  discipline
also  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  To  the  Church  as  a  whole  they  mean  separation  between  tares
and  wheat  (Matt.  xiiL  29, 30).  To  the  outside  wicked,  through  whom  they  often  come^
they  mean  more  sin  now,  and  a  heavier  pimishment  at  last  (Luke  xriiL  7).

TL  The  time  of  tbb  vision.  On  this  point  we  have  information  the  most  explicit.
1.  Oenerally  it  woe  in  the  days  of  Uzziah  and  Jeroboam.  During  those  reigns  Judah
and  Israel  were  in  the  zenith  of  their  career.  It  was,  therefore,  a  vision  of  adversity
when  prosperity  was  at  its  height,  of  disastrous  war  when  peace  by  conquest  had  been
obtained  with  neighbouring  powers,  of  both  these  as  punishment  when  idolatry  and
corruption  were  at  their  worst.  This  proves  its  genuineness,  as  it  could  not  have  been
suggested  by  the  observed  shadows  of  coming  events.  At  the  same  time,  it  accounts
for  its  comparative  failure  as  a  warning,  the  future  predicted  being  so  utterly  unlike
the  present.  2.  Specially  it  was  "  before  the  earthquake."  "  The  presumption  is
natural  that  these  words  indicate  not  only  the  period  but  the  motive  of  the  composi-
tion "  (Lange).  The  approach  of  the  earthquake  was  the  occasion  of  the  oral  prophecy,
and  the  occurrence  of  it  the  occasion  of  the  written  one.  That  the  latter  should  con-
tain a  record  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  former  (ch.  viii.  8 ;  ix.  6)  is  proof  that  in  addition
to  being  genuine  the  vision  is  authentic

Ter.  2. — The  thunder  that  both  frights  and  smites.  These  words  are  an  echo  of  Joel
iii.  16.  We  hence  infer  the  continuity  of  the  two  prophetic  messages.  The  one  strikes
the  key-note,  and  the  other  takes  up  and  continues  the  strain.

I.  DiviKE  dTEBVENTioN.  This  is  to  end  a  period  of  quiescence.  It  is :  1.  Inter*
vention.  "  Utters  his  voice."  The  silence  of  God  is  often  treated  as  equivalent  to
inaction  (Fs.  xxviiL  1;  1.  21).  So  his  speech  would  mean  his  becoming  active,
whether  for  good  or  for  evil.  Here  the  breaking  silence  is  fur  evil.  God  bears  long
with  his  open  enemies,  and  longer  still  with  his  seeming  friends.  But  inactivity  does
not  show  indifference  nor  inattention.  It  la  simply  forbearance,  that  will  not  strike
till  it  must.  Action  delayed  is  no  less  certain,  and  will  be  no  less  vigorous  for  the
delay.  2.  Angry  intervention.  Shall  "  roar,"  like  a  lion  ready  to  devour.  Not  till
his  anger  burneth  sore  does  God  break  the  silence.  But  when  he  breaks  it  he  does
so  emphatically.  He  thunders  with  his  voice.  His  roar  expresses  wrath,  and  preludes
a  stroke ;  and  is  thus  power  and  light  in  one  (Job  xxxvii.  5 ;  xl.  9).  3.  Furcibls
intervention.  God's  speech  is  followed  by  action.  It  is  more ;  it  is  accompanied  by
action.  It  is  more  still ;  it  is  itself  action.  Creative  power,  preserving  power,  redeem-
ing power,  each  goes  forth  in  a  word  (Ps.  xxxiii.  6,  9 ;  Matt.  ix.  2).  Christ  says,
"  Be  clean,"  "  Come  forth ; "  and  the  sick  are  whole,  and  the  dead  live  at  his  word.  In
speaking,  God  acts.  The  thunder  of  his  voice  is  loaded  with  the  electricity  of  his  power.
The  vehicle  of  the  Divine  active  energy  is,  in  fact,  a  word.

II.  God's  basis  or  operations.  God  intervenes  in  character,  and  along  established
Bnes.  He  operates :  1.  From  Jerusalem.  This  is  God's  own  city,  the  metropolis  of
his  earthly  kingdom.  Nothing  could  be  more  appropriate.  Going  forth  to  war,  tha
king  marches  from  his  capital.  There  he  has  his  magazine,  his  arsenal,  and  his  head-
quarters. From  thence  he  can  bear  down  resistlessly  on  foes  from  whatever  side,  with
all  the  resources  of  his  kingdom.  2.  From  Zii,n.  God's  seat  and  citadel  within  his
city.  The  place  he  loves  and  chooses  and  honours  above  all  others  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  2 ;
sxxxii.  13 ;  xlviii.  12, 13).     Here  he  has  made  his  dwelling-place  (Ps.  Ixviii.  16 ;  cxxxii.


OH.  1. 1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


14).  The  place  out  of  which  go  forth  salyation  and  destruction.  The  place  out  of
which  the  things  that  come  are  perfect  after  their  kind.  If  they  be  blessings,  there
are  no  others  so  sweet;  if  curses,  no  others  so  stem.  Zion  is  the  beating  heart  of  the
spiritual  world,  which  sends  forth  pure  or  poisoned  blood  to  each  greatest  and  least
extremity.  3.  From  the  temple.  This  is  not  mentioned,  but  it  is  necessarily  implied.
The  glory  of  Jerusalem  was  Zion^  and  the  glory  of  Zion  (using  the  word  in  its  broad
sense)  was  God's  house.  This  was  his  sanctuary.  There  he  dwelt  in  symbolic
presence.  There  he  revealed  himself  in  symbolic  portraiture.  There  he  operated  in
unparalleled  energy.  Thence  accordingly  we  might  expect  his  activity  to  issue  (Ps.  xx.
2).  There,  too,  was  his  mercy-seat,  from  which  judgmeat  never  came  till  every  merciful
expedient  had  been  tried,  but  would  come  then  with  the  fiuy  of  outraged  goodness.
Kow,  Jerusalem  and  Zion  and  God's  house  are  each  a  type,  and  their  common  anti-
type is  the  Church  of  Christ.  And  this  is  God's  base  of  spiritual  operations  through
all  time  (Isa.  ii.  3 ;  Luke  xxiv.  47).  He  dwells  in  it  (Acts  vii.  33 ;  Eph.  i.  23),  speaks
by  it  (Eph.  iii.  10),  operates  through  it  (Dan.  iL  H),  and  conquers  in  it  (Dan.  Til.
18,  22>

III.  After  the  campaign.  God  makes  no  fruitless  expedition.  The  armies  of  hli
judgments  leave  desolation  in  their  track.  1.  The  pastures  wither.  God's  voice,  as  a
figure  for  meteorological  phenomena,  is  often  spoken  of  as  changing  the  surface  of  the
earth  (Ps.  xxix.  3 — 9).  Here  it  stands  for  many  agencies,  including  these,  and  especially
drought.  Nature  is  one,  and  if  any  part  suffers  the  other  parts  suffer  with  it  (Jer.  xxv.
86).  Amos,  as  a  herdsman,  thinks  naturally  first  of  the  calamity  as  it  would  affect  the
pastures  by  which  he  made  his  living.  God's  judgments  strike  each  man  in  his  special
interest.  It  is  as  menacing  this  interest  chiefly  that  they  are  feared.  2.  The  head  of
Carmel  is  dried  up,  Carmel  was  in  the  north,  and  the  pastures  in  the  prophet's  mind
were  in  the  south.  The  enumeration,  therefore,  points  to  the  withering  as  prevailing
over  the  entire  land.  Carmel  was  one  of  the  richest  and  best-watered  spots  in  Palestine.
When  it  was  withered,  all  other  places  must  have  been  scorched.  God's  judgments
come  seldom,  and  with  tardy  foot ;  but  they  are  thorough,  and  make  an  end  of  their
work  (1  Sam.  iii.  12 :  Isa.  Ix.  12).  Nor  was  this  a  passing  visitation.  It  remains  in
its  leading  characteristics  till  the  present  day.  Carmel,  as  its  name  implies,  was  rich
in  vineyards.  Now  there  is  only  scrub,  and  the  debris  of  ruined  walls.  The  "  head"
is  dried  up,  that  might  once  have  been  said  to  "drop  down  new  wine."

Ver.  3 — ch.  ii.  3. — A  hexade  of  woes.  The  heathen  in  Judgment ;  general  feature*.  In
these  verses  is  denounced  a  series  of  six  woes,  on  six  of  the  oppressing  nations,  round
about  the  land  of  Israel.  Each  woe  has  characteristics  peculiar  to  itself,  but  there  tn
points  common  to  them  all  to  which  it  will  be  well  to  make  preliminary  reference.

I.  In  every  case  jddqmbnt  is  the  act  or  God.  "  I  will  send  ; "  "  I  will  kindle  •
(vers.  4,  7,  10,  12).  It  is  not  fate,  whose  "  winged  shaft "  is  but  a  phantasy.  It  is  not
chance,  which  is  but  another  name  for  inscrutable  direction.  It  is  not  idols,  the  guess-
work likenesses  of  imaginary  things.  It  is  not  natural  laws,  which  are  simply  forces
put  into  things  by  their  Maker.  It  is  God — God  in  intelligence  of  device  and  energy
of  execution,  who  "  creates  evil  "(Isa.  xlv.  7) — the  evil  of  calamitous  events.

II.  In  EVERT  CASE  God's  judomekt  is  the  complement  of  man's  sin.  "Because
they  have  threshed;"  "  Because  they  carried  away."  The  connection  between  human
sin  and  human  suffering  is  original,  constant,  and  necessary.  They  came  together,  dwell
together,  and  will  die  together.  And  just  as  our  common  suffering  is  the  abiding  result
of  our  common  sinfulness,  so  special  suffering  connects  itself  somewhere  with  special
■in.  Its  relation  to  the  sin,  whether  as  a  punishment,  a  deterrent,  or  a  chastisement,  is
often  obscure.  The  particular  sin,  or  even  the  particular  sinner,  can  seldom  be  pointed
to  with  certainty.  There  is  a  warning  against  judging  harshly  of  the  specially  afflicted
(Luke  xiii.  4,  6).  Yet  the  plain  teaching  of  Scripture  and  experience  and  reason  is
that  sin  has  •'  brought  death  into  the  world,  and  all  our  woe  "  (Rom.  v.  12 ;  Job  iv.

7,8).

III.  In  every  CASE  the  sin  selected  for  punishment  is  teat  committed  against
God's  people.  In  five  cases  out  of  the  six  the  sin  was  committed  directly  against  Israel,
and  in  the  sixth  case  it  was  committed  against  their  ally,  God  loves  the  world  as  •
whole,  but  he  loves  his  people  best  (John  iiL  16 ;  xiv.  23).    He  gives  to  the  wicked


10  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  1. 1— Ifc

"  life  and  breath  and  all  things,"  but  he  gives  to  hia  saints  the  wicked,  and  all  they
haye  (1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22  j  Eph.  i.  22).  He  avenges  the  ill  done  even  to  the  sinner,  but
he  avenges  more  sternly,  because  he  personally  feels,  the  ill  done  to  his  people  (Zech.  ii.
8,  9).  Their  persons  are  more  s^acred  than  those  of  others  (Matt.  x.  30),  and  their  lives
more  precious  in  his  sight  (Ps.  Ixxii.  14;  cxvi,  15).  Accordingly,  the  worst  form  of
murder  is  martyrdom  (Luke  zviii.  7,  8),  and  the  worst  form  of  theft  is  sacrilege  (Mai.
iu.8).

IV.  Judgment  is  PBEOiprrATED  bt  febseverakcb  in  bin.  "  For  three  transgressions
and  for  four  "  is  the  invariable  formula.  The  expression  (see  Prov.  xxx.  15, 18,  21 ;
Job  V.  19 ;  Eccles.  xi.  2)  means  for  many  transgressions,  culminating  in  a  final  one.
Persistent  sin  means  cumulative  guilt.  Drop  is  added  to  drop  till  at  last  the  cup  is
full.  The  tendency  toward  sin  God  warns;  the  first  sin  he  rebukes;  the  second  he
threatens ;  the  third  he  menaces  with  uplifted  hand ;  the  fourth  he  smites.  God  bears
long  with  the  wicked,  but  they  may  sin  once  too  often.  Tour  past  offences  have
escaped,  your  next  one  may  endanger  the  Divine  forbearance.  "  Sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse
thing  come  upon  you."

v.  In  evert  case  the  extbeme  of  guilt  involves  the  extreme  of  funishment
OB  entire  destruction.  This  is  inflicted  by  fire,  the  most  destructive  element  in  each
case.  God  employed  fire  in  many  of  his  most  startling  miracles  (Gen.  xix.  24 ;  Exod.
ix.  23 ;  Kumb.  xi.  1 ;  xvi.  35  ;  Lev.  x.  2 ;  2  Rings  i.  10,  12).  In  the  language  of  figure
it  is  the  idtal  destructive  agent  (Isa.  iv.  4 ;  ix.  5).  In  prophecy,  too,  fire  is  or  symbolizes
the  agent  that  destroys  the  beast,  the  false  prophet,  and  all  the  wicked  (Dan.  vii.  11 ;
Rev.  xix.  20;  xx.  15).  To  the  impenitent,  fire  will  be  a  destroying,  not  a  cleansing
power.  It  points  onward  to  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire,  which  will  be  the  fitting
retribution  of  sin  at  last.

Vers.  3 — 5. — 2%e  woe  against  Damascui.  The  kingdom  of  Syria  is  here  named  from
its  capital.  The  crime  charged  against  it  had  been  foretold  by  Elisha  to  Hazael,  and
by  him  indignantly  repudiated  (2  Kings  viii.  12,  13).  But  a  man  in  one  set  of  circum-
stances little  knows  what  he  would  do  under  an  entirely  different  set ;  especially  a  man
beginning  a  sinful  life,  the  magnitude  of  the  crimes  of  which  he  may  yet  be  capable.
Accordingly,  Hazael  fulfilled  one  prophecy,  and  supplied  the  materials  of  another,  by
smiting  Israel  as  the  man  of  God  had  said  (2  Kings  x.  32,  33).

I.  The  criminal.  Damascxis  stands  by  metonymy  for  Syria,  judging  of  whom  by
her  representative  we  see  that :  1.  Riches  do  not  prevent  rapacity.  Damascus  was
noted  for  wealth,  the  fertile  neighbourhood  being  irrigated  by  numerous  canals,  and  the
city  itself  lying  in  the  highway  of  commerce.  Yet  greed  instigated  the  barbarous  treat-
ment described.  The  wars  waged  ajjainst  Israel  were  wars  ot  rapine  and  annexation.
"  The  eye  that  loveth  silver  shall  not  be  satisfied  with  silver."  Rather  dOBs  the  kist  of
gain  grow  by  what  it  feeds  on.  Whether  it  be  culture,  or  power,  or  pleasure,  or  wealth,
men  tend  to  make  a  god  of  the  thing  they  abound  in.  It  was  when  Israel  was  richest
that  her  oppression  of  the  poor  was  most  extreme.  It  was  by  her  richest  neighbours
that  she  herself  was  most  rapaciously  despoiled.  It  is  thus  that  the  conditions  leading
men  to  sin  are  the  guarantee  of  its  punisliment  in  kind.  2.  Beautiful  surroundings  do
not  humanize.  Writers  speak  in  glowing  terms  of  the  unrivalled  beauty  of  this  ancient
city.  "  Its  white  buildings,  embedded  in  the  deep  green  of  its  engirdling  orchards,  were
like  diamonds  encircled  by  emeralds  "  (Pusey).  Yet  here,  in  scenes  of  ideal  beauty,
grew  up  the  monsters  of  barbarity  who  took  the  women  and  children  of  Gilead,  and,
"casting  them  as  into  a  sort  of  threshing-floor,  savagely  threshed  them  out  like  ears  of
corn  with  saw-armed  wheels  "  (see  2  Kings  xiii.  7).  Physical  scenery  and  moral  character
have  no  necessary  connection.  The  fairest  lands  have  often  produced  the  coarsest  and
most  cruel  men.  The  determining  element  is  the  (iresence  or  absence  of  the  gospel  of
Christ.  It  is  not  sesthetics,  but  Christianity,  we  must  look  to  for  the  moral  elevation
of  men.  3.  27(6  possession  of  strength  is  a  temptation  to  violence.  The  beauty  of
Damascus  was  also  its  strength.  The  miles  on  miles  of  walled  orchards  in  which  it
was  set  formed  an  admirable  defence  against  an  advancing  enemy  (see  Pusey),  and
thus  entrenched,  the  legions  of  Syria  were  strong  beyond  their  seeming.  Now,  just  as
the  subtle  choose  diplomacy  and  the  rich  subsidy  in  the  settlement  of  disputed  matters,
so  do  the  strong  choose  force.    It  is  the  readiest  and  most  efi'ective  weapon  within  their


OH.  L 1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  U

reach.  How  many  wars,  how  mach  bloodshed  and  desolation  and  misery,  are  directly
traceable  to  "  the  strong  man  glorying  in  his  strength"  I

IL  The  cbime.  Gilead,  meaning  the  whole  land  given  to  the  two  tribes  and  a  half,
is  here  put  by  metonymy  for  the  inhabitants.  The  horrible  and  atrocious  outrages  on
the  people  described  by  Amos  suggest  that :  1.  The  obverse  of  wngodlinest  t$  inhumanity.
The  relation  to  God  is  the  fundamental  one.  If  it  be  wrong,  all  others  are  awry.  Morality
has  its  basis  in  religion.  There  is  no  duty  to  men  apart  from  a  God  and  a  revel  atioo  of
his  will.  There  is  no  good  will  toward  men  apart  from  his  gracious  influence  (Titus  iii.
3).  The  mere  animal  nature  is  selfish,  and  regardless  of  all  life  but  its  own.  It  will
kill  for  the  most  trifling  advantage,  and  sometimes  in  the  lust  of  blood  for  no  advantage
at  all.  Heathen  hearts  are  "  hateful  and  hating  one  another,"  and  a  heathen  home  is
"  a  habitation  of  cruelty."  2.  Bloodthirsty  men  make  war  even  with  the  implements  of
peace.  There  is  a  time  coming  when  warlike  weapons  will  be  converted  into  farming
implements  (Isa.  ii.  4 ;  Micah  iv.  3).  This  will  be  when  the  gospel  shall  universally
prevail.  Meanwhile  a  readier  ear  is  leant  to  Joel  (iii.  10)  than  to  Micah,  and  the
converse  process  goes  on  instead.  The  threshing-instrument  was  not  made,  but  only
pressed  into  service,  for  the  occasion.  Fallen  man  is  at  heart  a  savage,  and,  under  excita-
tion, his  inner  nature  will  break  out  through  the  artificial  habits  of  peace.  So  little  is
there  between  work  and  war,  between  lawful  industry  and  lawless  murder,  in  the  godless
life.  3.  Ideal  cruelly  is  utterly  indiscriminate.  Elisha's  prophecy  to  Hazael  (2  Kings
viii.  12),  of  which  this  horrid  butchery  was  the  fulfilment,  mentions  women  and  children
as  the  chief  victims  of  the  outrage.  There  is  a  bloodhound  instinct  in  wicked  men  which
is  aroused  to  fury  by  the  taste  of  blood.  The  horrors  of  the  French  Revolution  and  of
the  Spanish  Inquisition  reveal  it  in  the  infidel  and  the  fanatic  respectively.  It  knows  no
distinction  of  age,  or  condition,  or  sex.  It  simply  wants  to  "  slay,  and  slay,  and  slay."
It  is  a  humiliating  thonght  about  our  species,  but  it  is  a  fact  that  must  be  faced  by  all
who  would  humanize  the  race.  The  tie  of  blood  is  perhaps  a  natural  one,  and  respected
more  or  less  by  even  heathen  peoples,  as  it  is  by  the  very  beasts  that  perish.  But  even
this  scarcely  operates  beyond  the  filial  relation  and  the  period  of  childhood.  And  then,
as  for  friendship  and  philanthropy,  they  have  no  place  in  the  sphere  of  mere  nature.
The  question,  "  Is  man  utterly  selfish?"  is  rather  a  nice  one  than  practical.  He  has
shown  himself  sufficiently  selfiiih  to  make  unsafe  the  life  of  any  human  being  whom  he
could  gain  by  killing.

III.  The  sentence.  This  is  severe,  detailed,  and  striking.  1.  It/alls  on  the  things
in  which  the  nation  was  pre-eminent.  "  I  will  break  also  the  bar  of  Damascus."  The  bar
or  bolt  which  secured  the  gate  was  an  essential  part  of  the  city  defence.  To  break  it
would  be  to  throw  open  the  city  to  the  enemy.  By  this  figure  is  meant  the  breaking  of
the  national  strength  and  means  of  resistance,  and  leaving  the  nation  helpless  before  its
enemies.  Thus  God  declares  himself  omnipotent.  Those  who  glory  in  their  strength
are  broken,  and  those  who  trust  in  their  riches  are  impoverished  (Isa.  ii.  11 ;  xiii.  11 ;
Ps.  Iii.  7).  Punishment  adjusted  so  is  more  effectual  for  its  purpose,  whether  of  mercy
or  of  judgment,  for  it  brings  the  criminal  to  his  knees  at  once.  The  nico-ness  of  the
adjustment  is,  moreover,  a  revelation  of  the  Divine  directing  hand  in  the  whole  event,
and  so  a  lesson  in  itself.  2.  It  strikes  at  the  national  sin.  The  "  vale  of  Aven,"  whose
inhabitant  was  to  be  cut  off,  was  remarkable  as  containing  Baalbec,  or  Heliopolis,  the
seat  and  centre  of  the  Syrian  sun-worship.  There  were  observed  idolatrous  orgies,  in
which  men  and  women  abandoned  themselves  to  shameless  profligacy ;  and  there,  where
their  "  offence  smells  rank  to  Heaven,"  the  hottest  bolts  of  Heaven's  vengeance  fall.
Others  would  be  carried  into  captivity,  but  the  inhabitants  of  Aven  would  be  utterly
cut  off.  The  flies  of  God's  judgment  alight  upon  the  sores  of  our  idol  sins.  He,  strikes
the  covetous  in  his  pocket,  and  the  self-indulgent  in  his  power  of  enjoyment.  And  so
in  every  other  case.  The  practice  that  provokes  his  judgment  is  the  one  on  which  its
first  and  heaviest  eflfects  fall.  3.  It  includes  the  royal  house.  The  king  is  in  a  sense
the  figure-head  of  the  nation.  His  policy  embodies  the  national  sentiment,  if  it  does  not
Inspire  it.  Accordingly,  national  guilt  culminates  in  him.  It  would  be  an  anomaly  if
the  people  were  to  perish  and  he  escape.  Then  the  destruction  that  includes  king  and
people  is  utter  and  irretrievable.  There  could  be  no  restoration,  no  resurrection.  When
only  ashes  remain,  the  rekindling  of  the  fire  of  national  existence  has  become  impossible.
4.  It  denounces  on  all  poetic  Justice.  "  Shall  go  into  captivity  to  Kir."   •'  From  Kir  ta«


12  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  l  1— 1&

forefathers  of  the  Syrians  had,  of  their  own  will,  heen  hrought  by  the  pood  all-disposins
providence  of  God.  Now,  softened  as  they  were  by  luxury,  they  were  to  be  transported
back  to  the  austere  though  healthy  climate  whence  they  had  come"  (Pusey).  Th«
family  of  Ne'er-do-well  fall  into  the  mtid  out  of  which  they  were  raised  at  first,  and  find
it  has  got  deeper  in  the  interval.  The  last  state  of  the  misuser  of  good,  in  the  nature  of
the  case,  is  worse  than  the  first.

IV.  The  execution.  The  woe  fell  half  a  century  later,  in  the  time  of  Tiglath-
Pileser,  who  slew  Bezin  the  king,  and  carried  the  Syrians  away  captive.  Thut  the  event
VMS  fifty  years  after  the  prediction.  Prophecy  by  the  Spirit  of  God  is  as  easy  to  the
prophet  a  millennium  before  the  event  as  an  hour.  But  if  it  has  not  heen  forgotten  in
the  mean  time,  it  is  the  more  impressive  and  striking,  the  longer  the  interval  between
the  utterance  and  the  fulfilment.  Then  the  evil  prophesied  was  one  previously  unheard
of,  and  antecedently  most  unlikely.  "  The  transportation  of  whole  populations  was  not,
Bo  far  as  we  know,  any  part  of  Eastern  policy  at  the  time  of  the  prophet "  (Pusey).
There  are  unfulfilled  predictions,  loaded  with  the  world's  weal  or  ill,  whose  fulfilment  is
even  more  distant  and  more  unlikely.  But  the  "  sure  Word  of  prophecy  "  overrides  both
time  and  chance,  and  lifts  remotest  events  above  the  horizon,  and  into  the  light  of
decisive  certitude.  For  all  we  fear  and  hope  this  is  the  guarantee,  "  Ha.h  he  said  it,
and  shall  he  not  do  it?    Hath  he  spoken,  and  shall  he  not  make  it  good  ?  "

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  woe  against  Philistia.  Gaza  was  one  of  the  capitals  of  Philistia,  and
is  put  for  the  country  as  a  whole.  Its  wealth  and  strength  and  special  activity  against
Israel  fitted  it  to  be  the  representative  of  all  the  other  capitals  which  are  afterwards
(ver.  8)  enumerated  as  sharing  its  punishment.  The  outrage  charged  against  Gaza  is
probably  that  recorded  in  2  Chron.  xxi.  16  and  Joul  iii.  6,  and  which  occurred  in  the
time  of  Jehoram.     The  crime  denounced  was —

I.  The  oeownino  act  or  a  iong  beeibs.  Israel  and  Philistia  were  hereditary  foes.
In  the  history  of  their  feud  were  many  bloody  acts,  which  culminated  in  this  wholesale
deportation.  In  the  judgment  provoked  by  it,  however,  these  acts  would  all  be  punished.
So  the  murders  of  the  prophets,  throughout  a  series  of  ages,  remained  unavenged  till
they  culminated  in  the  death  of  Christ,  and  then  it  and  they  were  all  avenged  together
(Luke  xi.  49 — 51).  Thus  vicarious  is  much  of  human  suffering.  God  visits  the  iniquities
of  the  fathers  upon  the  children  generally  (Exod.  xx.  6),  and  specially  on  those  like-
minded  with  the  fathers  (Matt,  xxiii,  34 — 36).  The  sufferings  of  each  age  are  largely
an  inheritance  from  the  ages  before.

II.  An  act  of  wholesale  dbstbuotion.  "Because  they  carried  away  captives
in  full  number."  This  cruelty  was  gratuitous,  as  many  captives  could  have  given  their
captors  no  ofieiice ;  and  it  was  senseless  as  well,  for  many  would  be  utterly  worthless  as
slaves.  It  indicated  deep  and  indiscriminating  hate  of  the  entire  people,  and  a  6xed
purpose  to  root  out  and  utterly  exterminate  them.  Such  hatred,  directed  doubtless
against  Israel  in  their  character  as  the  people  of  God,  is  specially  criminal,  and  calls  for
special  punishment  (see  Matt.  x.  40,  41).

III.  An  act  of  agobatated  cbueltt.  Not  satisfied  with  the  suffering  they  could
inflict  themselves,  they  called  in  the  help  of  Israel's  bitterest  foe.  They  sold  the  people
to  the  Edomites,  and  so  became  responsible  for  the  intolerable  crueltiss  to  which  they
were  handed  over.  We  are  in  God's  sight  as  guilty  of  the  crime  we  procure  as  of  the
crime  we  commit.  The  Church's  mediaeval  device  of  condemning  heretics,  and  handing
them  over  to  the  civil  power  to  be  executed,  was  as  Tain  as  the  washing  of  Pilate's
hands.  The  blood  shed  at  our  instigation,  and  with  our  connivance  or  through  our
indifference,  is  blood  that  will  be  required  of  us  in  the  great  day  (Szek.  iii.  18 — 20)l

IV.  A    PUNISHMENT    IN    WHICH    THE    CAPITAL    OITIEB    ABB    SPEOIALLT    PBOUINENT.

Of  the  five  capitals  of  Philistia,  four  are  mentioned  by  name,  and  the  fifth  is  included
under  the  word  "remnant."  Capitals  are  centres  of  opinion,  and  are  largely  responsible
for  the  moulding  of  the  national  sentiment.  They  are  centres  of  power,  and  take  the  lead
in  determining  the  national  policy.  They  were  in  this  case  centres  of  commerce,  and  so
took  a  prominent  part  in  the  work  of  bartering  Israel  to  the  Edomites.  Moreover  Gaza,
the  one  singled  out  and  emphasized,  was  through  its  character  and  position  the  chiel
sinner  in  this  business,  and  so  is  the  chief  sufferer.  They  were  also  the  seats  of  as  many
different  idols — ^Ashdod  of  Dagon,  Ashkelon  of  Derceto,  Ekron  of  Baalzebub,  and  Gaza


OH.  L 1—15.]  TUB  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  IS


of  Mania — and  therefore  centres  of  national  sin  (see  Pusey).  Add  to  this  that  they
were  the  national  depots  and  strongholds,  and  therefore  the  places  which  it  would  most
weaken  the  nation  to  destroy.

V.  A    PUNISHMENT    TO    BE    FRAMED    AFTEB    THE    FASHION  OF  THE  CEIMB.       "The

remnant  of  the  Philistines  shall  perish."  As  they  had  spared  none,  so  none  of  them
would  be  spared.  This  is  God's  way  often.  That  it  may  be  adequate,  and  all  may  bs
•ble  to  recognize  it,  punishment  often  comes  in  the  likeness  of  the  crime.  The  rule,
"  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed,"  embodies  the  principle
that  like  will  be  the  punishment  of  like.  It  reappears  in  the  gospel  dictum,  "  With
what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  Not  only  will  sin  bo
punished,  it  will  all  be  punished,  and  puaished  fully.  When  God's  last  word  has  been
spoken,  the  criminal  shall  be  even  as  his  victim,  and  be  God's  enemy  besides.

Vers.  9, 10. — The  woe  against  Tyre.  Tyre  stands  for  Phoenicia,  of  which  it  was  the
capital.  It  was  a  renowned  and  very  ancient  city.  Greatest,  rioliest,  proudest,  and
most  luxurious,  perhaps,  of  all  the  cities  of  its  time,  it  passed  through  vicissitudes
which  were  equally  beyond  the  common  lot.  As  with  most  ancient  capitals,  there
were  points  at  which  its  path  and  that  of  Israel  crossed,  involving  that  there  should  bo
corresponding  points  where  they  would  recross,  and  on  these  the  prophet  has  intently
fixed  his  eye.     Of  the  denunciation  against  it  observe —

I.  It  sinned  in  chabactbb.  The  Phoenicians  were  a  commercial  people,  and  theirs
was  a  commercial  sin.  "  They  delivered  up  the  whole  captivity  to  Edom."  They  did
not  make  war,  nor  take  prisoners,  but  they  traded  in  them  as  slaves — ^bought  them
probably  from  the  Syrians  and  sold  them  to  the  lonians  ("  Grecians,"  Joel  iii.  6).
For  this  their  woe  is  denounced;  and  thus  early  was  branded  with  condemnation  "  the
wild  and  guilty  phantasy  that  man  can  hold  a  property  in  man."  The  image  of  God  is
not  a  thing  to  be  trafficked  in.  "  The  law  "  is  against  men-stealers  (1  Tim.  i.  10)  among
other  criminals.  A  man's  liberty  is  precious  to  him  next  to  life  itself.  Slavery  is  the
intolerable  theft  of  his  manhood  and  moral  agency,  and  is  contrary  to  the  entire  spirit
of  the  Bible.

II.  It  sinned  against  a  covenant.  This  was  no  doubt  the  covenant  between
Hiram  and  Solomon  (1  Kings  v.  12).  It  was  a  covenant  of  peace,  of  which  the  trading
in  Hebrew  captives  was  a  flagrant  violation.  This  circumstance  made  the  detestable
traffic  doubly  guilty.  It  was  two  sins  in  one — perjury  added  on  to  oppression.  And
all  Christian  sin  is  in  this  respect  its  counterpart.  The  believer  is  in  covenant  with
God.  He  has  said,  "  This  God  is  my  God  for  ever  and  ever,"  etc.  Any  after-sin  is,
therefore,  a  breach  both  of  God's  Law  and  his  own  vow.  'The  believing  sinner  has
broken  through  more  restraints  and  violated  more  laws  than  the  unbelieving,  and
so  is  double-dyed  in  guilt.  The  difficulty  of  bringing  such  to  repentance  again  (Heb.
vi.  4 — 6)  is  no  doubt  closely  connected  with  this  fact.

III.  The  roBaoTTEN  covenant  was  a  beotherly  covenant.  This  circumstance
aggravated  the  guilt  of  the  violation.  Ties  are  strong  in  proportion  as  they  are
amicable.  The  electric  core  of  friendship  in  the  cable  of  a  mutual  tie  gives  it  a
character  all  its  own.  The  breaking  of  it  means  to  both  parties  more  of  change  and
loss  in  proportion  as  this  core  is  relatively  large.  The  Phoenicio-Israelitish  covenant
was  brotherly :  1.  In  its  origin.  It  was  the  outcome  of  brotherly  feeling  and  affection
previousl}'  existing.  "  Hiram,"  we  read,  "  was  ever  a  lover  of  David"  (1  Kings  v.  1),
and  in  token  uf  it  he  had  voluntarily  sent  materials  and  workmen,  and  had  built  him  a
house  (2  Sam.  v.  11).  And  the  feeling  was  evidently  transferred  to  Solomon.  Hiram
and  he  were  on  such  cordial  terms  that  he  asked  for,  and  Hiram  readily  sent  him,  skilful
Sidonian  woodmen  to  hew  trees,  and  an  accomplished  Tyrian  graver  to  act  as  foreman
over  his  own  workmen  in  carving,  engraving,  embroidery,  and  doing  other  cunning  work
for  the  temple  (2  Chron.  ii.  3 — 16).  Solomon  in  turn  gave  Hiram  wheat  and  oil  in  liberal
measure  for  provisioning  his  house,  and  the  outcome  of  these  cordial  relations  was  that
'.'  they  tv^o  made  a  league  together  "  (1  Kings  v.  11, 12),  the  brotherly  covenant  referred  to.
T'hiB  covenant  was  brotherly  also :  2.  In  its  working.  It  was  renewed  from  time  to  time
with  various  additions,  and  was  long  kept  by  both  parties.  Israel  never  made  war
•gainst  Tyre,  nor  broke  the  letter  or  spirit  of  their  fraternal  league.  The  heartless  sin
«f  Tyre  wae^  therefore,  not  only  a  violation  of  the  covenant  provisions,  but  of  the


U  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [on.  1 1—18.

Intimate  and  cordial  relations  \rhlch  it  both  expressed  and  fostered.  It  was  a  ain
against  both  tows  and  close  relations,  and  put  on  thus  an  aspect  of  double  criminality.
3.  The  covenant  had  even  a  religious  aspect.  Hiram  grounds  the  good  will  and  help,
extended  to  Solomon,  on  the  facts  that  the  people  he  ruled  and  the  house  he  was  going
to  build  were  God's,  as  well  as  on  the  fact  .that  he  had  a  special  gift  of  wisdom  from
above  (2  Chron.  ii.  11, 12).  His  covenant  was  thus  made  with  Israel  as  God's  people,
and  in  testimony  of  his  belief  in  Jehovah  as  the  true  God,  and  his  desire  to  advance
his  glory.  This  fact  adds  much  to  the  significance  and  solemnity  of  the  covenant,  and
so  of  the  breach  of  it.  What  is  done  in  God's  name  and  as  an  act  of  homa<<e  to  him
is  done  under  the  highest  sanctions  possible.  The  commonest  act  is  glorified,  the
smallest  act  becomes  great  in  the  greatness  of  its  imderlying  principle.  And  as  is  the
doing  so  is  the  undoing.  The  higher  the  promiser  has  risen,  the  lower  has  the  violator
fallen.  Tyre's  sin  implied  and  sealed  a  large  amount  of  previous  deterioration,  and  so
the  more  emphatically  sealed  her  doom.

Vers.  11, 12. — The  tooe  againtt  Edom.  We  have  liere  an  inspired  description  of  mn
ideal  hate.  It  is  loaded  with  every  quality,  and  emphasized  by  every  circumstance,
and  stained  by  every  act,  which  could  conspire  to  establish  for  it  an  "unbeaten
record  "  in  the  emulation  of  evil  passions.

I.  It  bests  on  a  bbotheb.  Over  and  above  the  brotherhood  arising  ont  of  their
common  humanity  (Acts  xvii,  26;  Gen.  ix.  6),  Israel  and  Edom  were  bound  by  the
nearer  tie  of  descent  &om  the  twin  sons  of  their  common  ancestor  Isaac.  And  on  the
basis  of  this  relation  they  are  spoken  of  as  brothers  in  a  special  sense  (Deut.  xxiiL  7).
To  the  relation  of  brotherhood  belongs  the  duty  of  love  (1  John  ii.  10),  which  must  be
distinctive  in  proportion  as  the  relation  is  close  (1  Pet.  ii.  17).  And  the  breach  of  this
law  of  love  is  great  in  proportion  to  its  normal  strength.  It  is  bad  to  hate  an  enemy,
but  it  is  worse  to  hate  a  friend,  and  worse  still  to  hate  a  brother.  It  is  against  nature,
for  "  no  man  hateth  his  own  flesh  "  (Eph.  v.  29).  It  is  against  our  innate  tendency  to
love  them  that  love  ns.  And  it  is  against  the  popular  sentiment  which  expects  ni  to
"  love  as  brethren."    Hatred  of  a  brother  is  the  grossest  hate  there  is.

II.  It  is  agobebsive.  "  He  pursues  his  brother  with  the  sword."  It  is  hard  for
hatred  to  be  still.  It  is  a  restless  devil  in  the  heart.  It  wants  to  inflict  injury.  It
actually  inflicts  it  the  first  opportunity.  If  opportunity  does  not  come,  it  seeks  it  and
makes  it.  In  the  presence  of  the  hated  one  it  can  no  more  be  qniescent  than  fire
in  contact  with  fuel.  Edom's  hatred  of  Israel  did  not  fail  thus  to  express  its  intensity.
On  every  opportunity  it  broke  out  into  offensive  and  cruel  action  (2  Chron.  xxviiL  17 ;
Fs.  cxxxvii.  7 ;  Ezek.  xxv.  12).  Bapine,  outrage,  and  murder,  and  the  incitement  ot
others  to  these,  are  fitting  credentials  to  an  ide^  hate.

III.  It  IB  uuBDEBons.  "  Tears  in  pieces."  It  inflicts  not  injury  only,  but  deadly
injury.  It  must  have  blood.  And  it  not  only  kills,  but  murders.  Unable  to  fight
Israel  in  battle,  Edom  always  played  the  part  of  "  wrecker,"  and  spoiled  the  dead,  and
murdered  the  wounded,  after  some  stronger  enemy  had  defeated  them  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  7).
Then  it  murdered  with  an  excess  of  truculence  and  savage  cruelty  that  were  natural
to  weakness  rather  than  to  strength.  Hatred  is  a  passion  "blood  alone  can  quelL"
"Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer;"  a  murderer  in  fact  if  opportunity
offers,  in  any  case  a  murderer  in  heart.  Let  hatred  enter  your  heart,  and  from  the
moment  it  settles  you  wear  the  brand  of  Cain.

IV.  It  IB  PITILESS.  "Did  cast  off  all  pity.*"  No  special  occasion  or  act  la
mentioned,  because  the  thing  was  habitual.  A  traditional  and  inordinate  hate  ot
Israel  was  fostered  till  it  became  a  first  principle  of  the  Edomite's  creed,  and  was
gratified  till  it  ate  all  his  humanity  out.  Too  weak  to  he  a  soldier,  he  became  a
murderous  looter,  and  when  the  Assyrian  or  Philistine  had  vanquished  ^rael  in  battle,
the  Edomite  came  vulture-like  on  the  scene  to  butcher  the  living,  and  pillage  and
mangle  the  dead  (Obad.  10 — 14).  There  is  a  pity  proper  to  the  human  heart  on  the
platform  of  mere  nature.  Of  the  "  flowers  of  Eden  we  still  inherit "  is  a  ruth  that
■brinks  from  murder  in  cold  blood.  Where  the  crime  is  committed,  this  feeling  hat
previously  been  choked  out.  The  power  to  do  this,  to  harden  and  deaden  his  own
nature,  is  one  ot  man's  most  fatal  gifts.  He  disregards  the  voice  of  pity  till  it  become*
dumb.    He  fights  against  the  movings  of  passion  tUl  at  last  they  are  felt  no  more.


,1.1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  U


V.  It  is  insatiable.  "  His  anger  endures  for  ever."  The  persistence  of  Edom's
hate  was  malter  of  contemporary  notoriety  (Ezek.  xxxv.  5),  and  it  was  precisely  what
one  might  expect.  There  is  an  infinity  that  belongs  to  the  human  soul,  and  which
imparts  itself  to  all  its  affections.  Love  is  not  exhausted  by  indulgence,  but
strengthened.  It  goes  on  and  grows  for  ever,  and  so  with  hate.  One  who  knew  well
has  said —

"Now  hatred  ii  by  far  the  longest  pleasure;
Men  love  in  hasten  bat  they  detest  at  leisure."

(Byron.)

Hate  is  fed  by  indulgence  as  a  fire  ia  fed  by  fuel.  Do  not  think  your  hatred  will  be
appeased  when  you  have  got  what  you  consider  a  just  revenge.  It  will  only  then
begin  to  burn  with  normal  fierceness.  Such  feelings  grow  by  what  they  feed  on.  The
only  way  to  banish  them  is  to  cut  off  the  supplies.  Starve  a  hungry  hate,  by  giving
it  neither  outlet  nor  audience,  and  it  will  soon  atrophy  and  die.

VI.  It  IB  ALL  ON  ONE  SIDE.  Israel's  relation  to  Edom  as  friendly,  considerate,  and
disinterested,  was  laid  down  in  explicit  terms  (Deut.  zxiii.  7 ;  ii.  4,  5),  whilst  the
brotherhood  of  the  two  nations  was  emphasized  (Numb.  xx.  14 ;  Deut.  ii.  8).  Cruel
things  were  done  in  spite  of  this  (1  Sam.  xiv.  47 ;  2  Sam.  viii.  14 ;  1  Kings  xi.  15, 16),
but  they  were  done  in  defensive  wars,  and  after  Edom's  enmity  had  proved  itself
incurable.  It  is  a  robust  and  thoroughly  malignant  hate  that  beats  down  and  burns
in  spite  of  others'  friendly  attitude  and  feeling.  Such  hate  belongs  to  a  nature  utterly
inverted,  and  no  longer  human  but  devilish.  And  iu  proportion  as  it  is  such  it
becomes  impossible  of  cure.  The  fire  that  burns  without  fuel,  and  in  spite  of  water,
has  the  elements  of  perpetuity  in  it.  It  is  the  beginning  of  the  fire  that  shall  never  be
quenched.

Vers.  13 — 15. — 2T4«  woe  against  Amman ;  brutality  in  its  element.  There  ia  •
climax  in  these  woes  as  we  advance.  Each  seems  to  outdo  in  horror  the  one  before.
This  one  in  which  Ammon  figures  has  circumstances  of  wanton  atrocity  and  senseless
savagery  in  it  unparalleled  in  any  other.

I.  UNNAT0BAL   CONNECTIONS   MAT   BE    EXPECTED   TO   BBEEO  UNNATUBAL   MONSTEBS.

Ammon  and  Moab  were  the  children  of  unnatural  and  shameful  lust  (Gen.  xix.  30
— 38).  Begotten  in  drunkenness,  and  conceived  in  a  paroxysm  of  lewdness,  their
chance  of  inheriting  a  healthy  physical,  mental,  or  moral  organization  was  very  small.
The  almost  inevitable  moral  twist  with  which  they  entered  the  world,  their  education
by  dissolute  mothers  would  only  strengthen  and  confirm.  And  the  passionate  and
sensual  nature  he  inherited,  Ammon  transmitted  to  the  nation  of  which  he  became  the
father.  An  illustration  of  this  inherited  coarse  corruption  in  the  Ammonites  was  their
gross  and  indecent  treatment  of  David's  servants,  sent  on  a  friendly  errand  (2  Sam.  x.
4,  5).  The  other  occasion,  recorded  in  our  text,  is  an  example  of  savage  and  seustless
atrocity  unparalleled  in  the  annals  of  human  violence.  As  to  the  women,  it  was  from
their  number  that  Solomon's  harem  was  largely  recruited  (1  Kings  xi.  1,  7),  and  they
took  to  harlotry  as  easily  as  their  ancestress  herself  (Numb.  xxv.  1;  xxxi.  16_).  Our
besetting  sins  are  likely  to  be  those  of  our  forefathers,  and  therefore  against  these  we
should  be  specially  on  our  guard.  They  are  likely  also  to  beset  our  children  after  us,
and  should  be  all  the  more  vigorously  rooted  out,  lest  we  transmit  to  posteiity  the
heritage  of  our  sin  and  shame.  That  the  thing  can  be  done,  let  the  virtuous  simplicity
of  Ruth  the  Moabitess  prove.  Trained  and  moulded  in  a  godly  Hebrew  family,  she
responds  to  religious  influence,  and  exhibits  a  character  that  has  been  the  admiration  of
all  the  ages.

II,  OtHEB   THINGS   BEINO  EQUAL,   THAT   18  THE   GREATEST   SIN   FOB   WHICH  THERE  Ig

THE  LEAST  OCCASION.  "  He  who  has  committed  injustice  for  a  less  advantage  has  done
it  under  the  impulse  of  a  less  temptation.  .  .  .  The  more  paltry  it  is  in  respect  of
profit,  the  more  profane  it  may  be  in  respect  of  principle  "  (Chalmers).  In  the  case  of
Ammon  there  was  the  extreme  of  disproportion  between  the  crime  and  the  incentive  to
it.  The  object  was  to  enlarge  their  border,  an  object  (1)  unnecessary,  (2)  under  the
circumstances  unjust,  (3)  in  itself  supplying  no  occasion  for  the  horrid  outrage,  and  (4)
to  the  attainment  of  which  the  atrocity  was  in  no  wise  essential.    The  act  was  simply


16  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  1. 1—16.

one  of  stolid  barbarism,  unsoftened  by  any  extenuating  circumstance,  and  unaccounted
for  by  any  consideration  of  need  or  fitness.

m.   MUBDEB    AS    AN    ACT    OF    BEFEISAL    IS    STILL    UOBDEB.      David    had    pUt    thfl

inhabitants  of  Babbah  of  the  sons  of  Ammon  to  a  death  as  dreadful  as  that  inflicted  on
the  women  in  Gilead  (2  Sam.  zii.  31).  The  present  act  of  Ammon  might  look  like
a  just  retaliation.  But,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  David's  conduct,  it  is  clear  that
sin  does  not  justify  more  sin.  Then  David's  siege  and  destruction  of  Babbah  wai
a  natural  and  suitable  act  of  defensive  warfare  against  persistent  attacks  by  Ammon
in  league  with  Syria.  The  aggressor  in  such  a  case  is  responsible  for  the  bloodshed  on
both  sides.  Man  has  a  natural  right  to  kill  in  self-defence,  and  he  whose  action
necessitates  such  bloodshed  is  the  party  on  whose  head  the  guilt  of  it  must  lie.

IV.  God's  judgments  stbikb  the  dbvisj:es  of  wickedness  as  well  as  the  doebs
OF  IT.  "The  king  and  his  princes."  These  ancient  kings  were  absolute  monarchs.
Every  national  act  was  an  expression  of  their  will.  With  them,  therefore,  the  responsi-
bility for  it  ultimately  rested.  It  was  done  by  their  direction  and  under  their  superin-
tendence, done  often  in  part  by  their  own  hand,  and  so  was  in  every  case  their  own  act.
And  the  princes,  as  the  king's  advisers,  were  parties  to  it.  Therefore  kings  and  princes
alike  must  suffer.  To  strike  them  was  to  strike  the  criminal  on  the  head.  Thus  far
and  wide  do  the  consequences  of  sin  reach,  devouring  from  every  side.  The  committer
of  sin,  the  suggester  of  sin,  the  deviser  of  sin,  the  tempter  to  sin,  the  procurer  of
Bin,  the  knowing  occasion  of  sin,  the  person  privy  to  sin,  all  are  sinners,  and  as  such
are  written  down  for  the  sword.  Some  are  nearer  the  centre  than  others,  but  all  are  in
the  Tortex,  and  all  must  be  swallowed  up  together.


HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORa

Ver.  1. — Amos  the  herdsman.  There  must  be  some  special  reason  why  this  prophet
puts  upon  record  the  employments  in  which  he  spent  his  earlier  years,  and  from  which
he  was  called  to  assume  the  office  of  the  Lord's  messenger  to  Israel.  On  the  barren
hills  to  the  south  of  Bethlehem,  where  there  is  no  tillage,  and  where  the  population
must  always  have  been  scanty,  Amos  tended  flocks  of  sheep  or  of  goats,  and  at  certain
seasons  of  the  year  gathered  the  fruit  from  the  wild  sycamore  trees.

I.  EUBAL  AND  MENIAL  OCCUPATIONS  WEBB  NO  BAREIBB  TO  THE  ENJOYMENT  OF  DiVINB
FAVOUE  OE  TO  ELECTION  TO  SPECIAL  AND  HONODBABLE  SEBVICE.      This  leSSOU,  taught  by

the  career  of  Amos,  was  taught  again  by  the  election  of  the  apostles  of  the  Lord  Christ.
The  great  of  this  world  are  often  apt  to  regard  men  of  lowly  station  with  disdain,  but
God  taki'S  DO  heed  of  social  and  artilicial  distinctions.

II.  The  SECLUSION  of  a  PASTOEAL  life  was  a  SUITABLE  TRAINING  FOB  THE  PBOPHETIO

VOCATION.  As  David,  when  guarding  the  sheepfolds  and  leading  the  flocks  to  water,
enjoyed  many  opportunities  for  solitary  meditation  and  for  devout  communion  with
God,  so  Amos  in  the  lonely  pastures  of  Tekoah  must  have  listened  to  the  voice  that
speaks  especially  to  the  quiet  and  the  contemplative,  the  voice  of  inspiration  and  of
grace.

III.  The  bubal  sueroundings  of  the  prophet  affobded  him  much  appeopeiatk
AND  STRIKING  IMAGERY.  The  rain  and  the  harvest,  the  sheep  and  the  hon,  the  bird
and  the  snare,  the  fish  and  the  hook,  the  cart  and  the  sheaf,  the  earthqualte,  the  fire,
and  the  flood,  etc.,  are  all  pressed  into  the  service  of  this  poetic  prophecy.  God  taught
his  servant  lessons  which  stood  him  in  good  stead  in  after-years.

IV.  By  eaisinq  Amos  from  the  herdsman's  to  the  prophet's  life  God  magnified
HIS  OWN  GRACE.  The  cultivated  and  the  polished  are  liable  to  take  credit  to  them-
selves for  the  efficiency  of  their  ministry.  But  when  the  comparatively  untaught  and
those  who  have  enjoyed  but  few  advantages  are  raised  to  a  position  in  which  they  do  a
great  work  for  God,  "  the  excellency  of  the  power  is  seen  to  be  of  God  himself." — ^T.

Var.  2. — The  voice  of  terror.  This  imagery  is  evidently  derived  from  the  prophet'i
own  experience.  In  the  south-east  of  Palestine  the  lion  was  a  frequent  and  formidable
visiter,  which  every  herdsman  had  reason  to  dread.    The  majestic  roar  of  the  king  ot


OB.  1. 1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AM03.  1»

beasts  ia  here  employed  to  denota  the  judgments  of  the  Lord  upon  the  disobedient  and
rebellious,  especially  of  Israel.

I.  Obsebye  whenob  the  voiob  of  THBEATENiHa  FBOOEEDS.  1.  It  is  the  Toiceof  the
Lord — that  voice  which  assumes  now  the  accents  of  compassion  and  mercy,  and  again
the  tones  of  wrath,  but  which  Ls  always  authoritative.  2.  It  proceeds  from  the  sacred
city,  which  was  the  favoured  abode  of  Jehovah.

II.  And  whithbb  the  voice  op  threatening  penetrates.  Prom  the  habitations
of  the  shepherds  in  the  south,  to  the  flowery  Carmel  in  the  north,  this  roar  makes  itself
heard.  That  is  to  say,  it  fills  the  land.  Judah  and  Israel  alike  have  by  disobedience
and  rebellion  incurred  Divine  displeasure,  and  against  both  alike  the  denunciations  of
the  prophet  go  forth.

III.  Consider  the  effect  which  the  voice  op  threatening  should  produce.  1.
Beverent  attention.  2.  Deep  humiliation  and  contrition.  3.  Repentance  and  prayer.
4.  Such  reformation  as  the  heavenly  summons  imperatively  demands. — T.

Vers.  3 — 5. — The  Judgment  on  Damascus.  The  beauty  of  Damascus  has  been  the
admiration  of  travellers  and  the  praise  of  poeta.  It  is  a  mournful  reflection  that  a
city  so  magniflcently  situated,  and  with  associations  so  romantic,  should  so  often  have
been  the  scene  of  human  injustice,  cruelty,  and  bloodslied.  The  "  pearl  girdled  with
emeralds  " — as  Damascus  was  gracefully  designated — is  beautiful  without,  but,  as  the
text  reminds  us,  has  often  contained  a  lawless  and  godless  population.

I.  The  offence  of  Damascus.  1.  In  itself  this  consisted  of  atrocious  cruelty.  The
records  inform  us  that  war  frequently  prevailed  between  Syria  and  Israel.  By  Qilead
in  this  passage  we  understand  the  land  possessed  by  the  Israelites  on  the  east  side  of
Jordan.  The  inhabitants  of  this  pastoral  territory  were  treated  by  the  Syrians  in  a
way  fitted  to  awaken  the  indignation  even  of  those  who  lived  in  times  when  savage
cruelty  was  but  the  too  common  accompaniment  of  war.  The  unfortunate  Israelites
who  were  conquered  in  war  seem  to  have  been  literally  torn  to  pieces  and  mangled  by
the  threshing-implements  fitted  with  wheels  and  armed  with  teeth  of  iron.  Thus  was
God's  image  defaced  and  God's  Law  defied.  2.  The  offence  was  aggravated  by  repeti-
tion. Thrice,  nay,  four  times,  had  the  Damascenes  oflended  the  Divine  Euler  of  men  by
their  violence  and  inhumanity.  The  sin  was  thus  shown  to  be  no  mere  outbreak  of
passion,  but  a  habit,  evincing  a  corrupt  and  degraded  nature.

II.  The  punishment  op  Damascus.  1.  Observe  upon  whom  it  came.  (1)  Upon
the  king,  the  rulers  and  princes  of  the  land.  These  were  the  leaders  in  the  nefarious
iiractices  here  censured.  Their  ambition  and  unfeeling  selfishness  accounted  for  the
sin;  and  upon  thsm  came  down  the  righteous  penalty.  The  annals  of  many  a  nation
may  prove  to  the  reflective  student  of  history  that  a  righteous  retribution  visits  those
royal  houses  which  have  been  infamous  for  selfish  ambition,  for  perfidy,  for  tyranny,
for  self-indulgence.  The  King  of  kings  asserts  his  authority,  and  brings  down  the
lofty  from  the  throne.  (2)  The  people  of  Syria  shared  in  the  disaster,  which  thus
became  national.  They  may  have  been  misled  by  their  rulers,  but  it  seems  rather  to
have  been  the  case  that  there  was  sympathy  between  kings  and  subjects,  and  that  the
soldiers  in  the  Syrian  array  delighted  in  the  opportunity  of  venting  their  evil  passions
upon  their  prostrate  foes.  2.  Observe  in  what  the  punishment  consisted.  (1)
Destruction  ("  a  fire ")  came  upon  the  royal  house.  (2)  The  splendid  and  powerful
city  was  laid  open  to  the  incursion  of  the  enemy.  The  brazen  •'  bar"  which  secured
the  city  gate  was  broken.  (3)  The  people  were  carried  into  captivity,  the  worst  mis-
fortune which  could  humiliate  and  distress  a  nation. — T.

Yers.  6 8. — The  Judgment  on  Philistia.  The  great  religious  truth  which  is  eonveyed

in  this  prophetic  warning  addressed  to  Philistia  is  this — national  retribution  is  inevitable.

I.  National  retribution  is  not  averted  by  wealth  and  prospbritt.  Philistia
was  a  fertile  plain,  abounding  in  all  material  riches.  The  people  not  only  possessed
the  produce  of  a  fruitful  soil ;  they  were  versed  in  the  arts  of  life,  being  famous  as
artificers  and  craftsmen ;  and  they  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  commerce  both  by  sea  and
land.  There  is  danger  lest  a  prosperous  nation  should  trust  in  its  riches.  Yet  history
tells  us  that  the  wealthiest  communities  have  been  overtaken  by  the  righteous  judg-
ments of  God.

AMOS.  4


18  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOa  [oh.  1 1— 18L

II.  National  retribution  is  not  averted  by  union  and  oonfedebaot.  The  five
cities  ol  the  Philistines  were  leagued  together ;  each  supported  the  other,  and  every
oue  furnished  a  contingent  to  the  national  armies.  Union  is  strength.  But  the  united
strength  of  the  Philistines  coulii  not  avail  them  in  the  day  of  the  Lord.  "Though  hand
join  in  hand,  tlie  wicked  shall  not  be  unpunished."

III.  National  retribution  is  not  averted  by  powebpol  alliances.  The
Philistines  on  the  west  of  Judah  leagued  with  the  Edomites  on  the  east.  And  when
ttie  Philistines  gained  an  advantage  over  the  Jews,  they  delivered  their  foes  into  the
hands  ol  their  allies  of  Mount  Seir.  But  Edom  was  not  able  to  deliver  her  confederate
in  the  time  of  trial  and  of  retribution.

lY.  National  retribution  is  not  averted  by  ceueltt  to  a  toe.  Human  policy
■ometimes  urges  that  the  complete  destruction  of  an  enemy  by  the  sword  or  by
captivity  is  the  surest  protection  against  revenge.  But  Divine  government  dominates
human  policy.  The  crafty  and  the  cruel  must  submit  to  the  decrees  of  the  Judge  of
the  whole  earth. — T.

Vers.  9, 10. — The  violation  of  a  brotherly  covenant.  The  reproach  addressed  to  Tyre,
on  account  of  Tyre's  league  with  Edom  against  the  Israelites,  is  peculiarly  severe.
This  is  to  be  explained  by  the  previous  history  of  the  two  nations.  Hiram,  King  of
Tyre,  had  been  a  warm  friend  both  of  David  and  of  Solomon.  A  close  and  intimate
connection  had  thus  been  formed.  And  when  Tyre  made  war  upon  the  Jews  and,  like
Philistia,  gave  Israel  into  the  hands  of  Edom,  the  grievance  was  felt  to  be  peculiarly
distressing.    In  fact,  it  was  recognized  as  such  by  the  inspired  prophet  of  Jehovah.

I.  The  deepest  foundation  for  national  friendships  is  their  common  brother-
hood IN  THE  FAMILY  OF  GoD.  The  Creator  has  made  them  of  one  blood,  has  appointed
the  bounds  of  their  habitation,  has  given  to  each  nation  its  own  advantages,  its  own
opportunities,  its  own  responsibilities.  Each  has  thus  a  service  to  render  to  the  Lord
and  Father  of  all ;  and  consequently  each  has  a  claim  to  the  respect  and  good  will  of
neighbouring  nations.

II.  National  friendship  is  recommended  and  promoted  by  mutual  interest.
The  exchange  of  commodities  which  had  taken  place  between  Tyre  and  Jerusalem  may
be  regarded  as  an  example  of  the  use  which  one  country  may  be  to  another — a  use  in
some  way  or  other  always  to  be  reciprocated.  In  peace  every  nation  may  supply  the
lack  of  others;  whilst  in  war  both  nations  so  engaged  Inflict  loss  and  injury.  No
doubt,  when  excited  by  passion,  nations  lose  sight  of  their  welfare ;  yet  it  is  well  to
cultivate  in  men's  minds  the  conviction  that  unity  and  concord  are  of  the  highest
material  as  well  as  moral  advantage.

III.  National  friendship  may  be  cemented  by  solemn  covenants  and  alliances.
Human  nature  is  such  that  it  is  contributive  to  many  desirable  ends  that  men  should
enter  into  solemn  compact  and  should  ratify  covenants  with  one  another.  When
nations  enter  into  friendly  alliance,  it  is  always  regarded  as  peculiarly  base  when  one
nation,  without  overpowering  reason  for  doing  so,  turns  against  the  other,  and  betrays
or  attacks  it.     Such  seems  to  have  been  the  action  of  Tyre.

IV.  Brotherly  covenants  between  nations  cannot  be  violated  with  impunity.
Tyre  was  one  of  the  great  cities  of  antiquity,  especially  famous  for  maritime  and
commercial  prosperity.  Proud  and  confident  in  its  greatness.  Tyre  little  anticipated
the  fate  which  Providence  had  in  reserve  for  it.  Yet  the  inspired  prophet  foresaw  the
ruin  of  Tyre,  and  connected  that  ruin  with  the  perfidy  for  which  the  city  was  in  this
passage  so  justly  blamed.  The  Lord  who  rules  in  the  whole  earth  is  a  Judge  righteous
and  supreme,  whose  sentences  will  surely  be  executed. — ^T.

Vers.  11, 12. — A  brother's  faithlasnega  and  injustice.  If  Tyre  was  doubly  blamable
because,  being  an  ally,  she  turned  against  Israel,  much  more  deserving  of  censure  was
Edom,  inasmuch  as  Edom  was  near  akin  to  Israel,  and  yet  was  guilty  of  the  conduct
described  in  this  passage.

I.  Kindred  involves  baored  oblioations  to  mutual  beoard  and  buccoub.
Noses  had  addressed  Edom  as  a  brottier,  and  Israel  had  forborne  to  attack  Edom,  even
when  tempted  to  do  so  by  most  unneighbourly,  unbrotherly  conduct.  The  proper
response  to  such  conduct  would  have  been  something  very  different  from  what  is  her*


OH.  1. 1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  19


recorded.    Amongst  all  nations,  and  in  every  stage  of  society,  common  descent  from
one  ancestor  is  accepted  as  a  bond  of  brotherhood  and  a  pledge  of  friendliness.

II,  There  are  instances  in  which  these  obliqations  are  utteblt  disregarded.
Such  was  the  case  with  the  Edomites.  We  trace  io  their  conduct  towards  their
kinsmen  of  Israel  several  stages  of  iniquity.  1.  Aggression.  Edom  "  pursued  his
brother  with  the  sword."  2.  Pitiless  anger.  Edom  "corrupted  his  compassions."  3.
Implacability.  Edom  "kept  his  wrath  for  ever."  Such  treatment  would  have  been
unjustifiable  from  any  nation  towards  another;  but  the  relation  and  circumstances
made  it  flagrantly  and  atrociously  wicked  in  the  instance  under  consideration.

III.  Violation  of  obliqations  so  sacred  incurs  Divine  displeasure  and  merited
PUNISHMENT.  A  nation  sins  and  a  nation  suffers.  Doubtless  innocent  persons  endure
in  many  cases  the  sufferings  which  the  guilty  deserve.  This  is  a  mystery  of  Divine
providence.  Yet  it  is  evident  that  cities,  tribes,  nations,  may  be,  and  often  have  been,
chastised,  as  a  proof  of  the  Divine  rule,  as  a  correction  for  human  disobedience,  and  as
an  inducement  to  repentance. — ^T.

Vers.  13 — 15. — Qreed  of  territory.  The  history  of  the  Ammonites  is  full  of
indications  of  their  natural  qualities  and  of  their  conduct  towards  Israel.  They  were
an  unprincipled  and  cruel  people,  and  were  continually  at  war  with  their  neighbours.
Their  settlement  on  the  east  of  the  Jordan  brought  them  into  constant  conflict  with  the
Jews,  and  from  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy  down  to  that  of  Nehemiah  references  to
Ammon  occur  from  which  we  gather  that  they  were  an  idolatrous,  restless,  pitiless,
lustful,  and  treacherous  tribe.  The  incident  upon  which  Amos  founds  this  prediction
was  an  incursion  which  the  Ammonites  made  into  Gilead  during  the  reign  of  King
Uzziah.

I.  Greed  of  tebbitobt  is  a  national  bin.  How  many  a  nation  has  been  possessed
with  a  selfish  desire  to  "  enlarge  its  border  "  1  When  population  increases,  emigration
and  colonization  may  become  necessary,  and  may  be  for  good.  What  is  blamed  is  the
desire  for  a  neighbour's  land,  the  extirpation  or  subjugation  of  friendly  neighbours,  in
order  to  obtain  room  for  expansion  or  increase  of  luxury  or  of  power.

II.  Greed  of  tebbitobt  leads  to  nefarious  cbubltt.  The  instance  here
mentioned  is  no  doubt  an  extreme  one ;  it  shows  convincingly  that  Ammon  had  no
sense  of  humanity,  compassion,  or  decency.  Alasl  the  annals  of  our  race  afford  too
many  an  instance  of  the  cruelty  to  which  ambition  leads.  The  history  of  the  Spaniards
in  America  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  the  awful  lengths  to  which  conquerors  will  go  when
urged  by  greed  of  power  or  of  gold.  And  settlers  even  from  our  own  land  have  not
seldom  been  guilty  of  most  indefensible  cruelty  and  oppression  towards  the  natives  of
the  territories  they  have  acquired.  For  the  protection  of  aborigines  it  has  been
necessary  to  awaken  public  opinion,  to  institute  special  laws.  Men  plead  necessity  or
expediency  in  defence  or  in  extenuation  of  conduct  which  is  a  reproach  to  any  people.

III.  Greed  of  teeritobt  and  its  frihtb  are  not  unnoticed  by  him  who  bules
ovEB  all.  "  The  earth  is  the  Lord's."  He  has  "  given  it  to  the  children  of  men  "
But  when  he  beholds  sordid  greed  animate  men  to  robbery,  and  not  to  robbery  only  but
to  inhumanity  and  vile  cruelty,  his  indignation  is  aroused.  Amos  makes  use  of  the
fire,  the  tempest,  the  whirlwind,  to  set  forth  the  retribution  which  must  overtake  the
capital  of  Ammon,  its  king  and  princes.  But  the  Lord  reigneth  over  all  lands.  The
violent  shall  not  always  prosper.  The  day  shall  come  when  their  schemes  shall  be
defeated,  and  they  themselves  be  laid  low  in  the  dust. — T.

Ver.  1. — The  true  teacher.  "  The  words  of  Amos,  who  was  among  the  herdmen  of
Tekoa."    In  the  little  village  of  Tekoa,  six  miles  south  of  Bethlehem,  the  young

rsant  Amos  lived.  He  was  a  lad  of  humble  birth  and  lowly  occupation.  Sometimes
trimmed  the  sycamore  trees,  and  sometimes  drove  the  cattle  to  and  from  their
pasture.  But  he  heard  the  voice  of  God  everywhere,  and  saw  his  works  in  all  the
scenes  around  him ;  for  he  was  devout,  and  feared  the  Lord  exceedingly.  Although  he
lived  in  Judah,  his  heart  was  stirred  with  the  thought  of  the  sins  committed  in  the
neighbouring  kingdom  of  Israel,  and  of  the  judgments  which  would  ultimately  ensue.
It  was  a  time  when  Israel  had  every  sign  of  prosperity.  The  warlike  Jeroboam  II.  was
on  the  throne,  and  his  frequent  victories  gave  his  kingdom  ]x>wer,  wealth,  aiui  security


20  TUB  BOOK  OF  AMOa  [oh.  1. 1—1  &

greater  than  it  hai  before,  or  would  ever  have  again.  Amos,  however,  as  a  true  "  seer,"
saw  under  the  surface  of  society.  He  was  not  to  be  diverted  from  sins  and  woes  at
home  by  dashing  enterprises  abroad.  He  kaew  that  the  poor  were  oppressed,  that
other  classes  were  sinking  into  luxurious  effeminacy,  that  the  worship  of  Jehovah  was
ignored;  and  these  and  other  evils  he  rightly  traced  to  the  idolatry  which  had  its
seat  in  Bethel.  Inspired  by  God  to  denounce  these  sins,  he  vitiited  the  towns  and
villages  of  Israel,  everywhere  delivering  his  message,  until  he  came  to  Bethel  itself,
and  boldly  denounced  idolatry  in  its  chosen  seat.  He  was  expelled  the  kingdom  by
force,  in  obedience  to  the  order  of  Jeroboam,  who  was  instigated  by  Amaziah  tiv  '
priest.  But  (as  Church  history  has  often  shown)  the  attempt  to  silence  a  vuice  ui.
Gbd  made  its  echoes  reverberate  through  all  the  ages.  Secluded  in  his  little  native
village,  Amos  recorded  the  words  which  God  bad  given  him  as  a  message  to  his
contemporaries,  and  hence  they  have  come  down  to  us  for  our  instruction.  The  history
of  the  man  and  the  style  of  his  teaching  la  themselves  teach  us  important  lessons.  We
are  reminded  first —

L  That  God  often  chooses  his  bervants  from  amongst  men  of  low  estate.
We  often  quote  the  words  (1  Cor.  i.  27,  28),  "  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of
the  world  to  confound  the  wise ;  and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  world  to
confound  the  things  which  are  mighty ;  and  base  things  of  the  world,  and  things  which
are  despised,  hath  God  chosen."  But  we  glide  over  the  surface  of  that  assurance  with-
out noting,  as  we  should  do,  its  deep  significance  and  profound  truth.  As  a  matter
of  history,  however,  it  is  true  that  the  world  is  most  indebted,  not  to  its  kings,  but  to
its  shepherds,  fishermen,  and  tentmakers.  In  the  stress  of  poverty  and  toil,  not  in  the
indulgences  of  luxury,  the  noblest  characters  have  been  formed.  It  is  what  a  man  is,
and  not  what  a  man  has,  that  fits  him  for  the  service  of  God.  The  Church  has  lost
much  moral  power  by  ignoring  that.  No  one  can  vbit  our  places  of  worship  without
noticing  that  members  of  the  artisan  class  are  conspicuous  by  their  absence.  Their
energy  and  activity  are  too  often  antagonistic  to  religion.  And  since  they  form  the
basis  of  society,  and  it  is  ultimately  their  work  which  makes  our  wealth,  the  outlook  is
sufficiently  serious.  Doubtless  they  are  to  blame,  but  the  Church  is  to  blame  also.
Abstention  from  places  of  worship  is  often  due,  in  its  initial  stage,  to  absence  of
welcome ;  to  the  unexpressed  desire,  on  the  part  of  Christians,  to  treat  certain  of  their
fellow-men  as  a  separate  class,  which  is  "  to  be  done  good  to "  with  effusive  bene-
volence. Once  more  let  it  be  true  that  "  the  rich  and  the  poor  meet  together,  and
the  Lord  is  the  Maker  of  them  all,"  that  "the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to
them,"  and  we  shall  see  a  marvellous  change.  Those  who  now,  when  intelligent,  are
too  often  cynically  sceptical,  or,  when  degraded,  are  too  often  sunk  low  in  drunkenness,
will  become  as  of  yore — amongst  the  noblest  upholders  of  love,  righteousness,  and  truth.

II.  That  God  desires  his  servants  to  do  their  work  naturally.  Amos  drew
almost  all  his  illustrations  from  the  natural  objects  and  scenes  with  which  he  was
familiar  in  his  calling  among  the  herdmen.  Perfect  naturalness  is  a  source  of  moral
power  to  any  teaolier,  especially  to  a  teacher  of  religious  truth.  Nothing  is  more
offensive  in  him  than  pretence,  unreality,  and  affectation.  To  ape  the  style  of  another
man,  to  speak  confidently  on  subjects  which  have  not  been  personally  studied,  etc.,
brings  nothing  but  contempt.  Be  real  and  genuine,  and  thoroughly  yourself,  wherever
you  are,  but  most  of  all  in  speaking  for  God.  Amos  the  herdman  would  not  put  on
the  style  of  Solomon  the  king.  He  was  as  wise  as  David  was  when  he  put  off  the
armour  of  Saul  because  it  was  untried  and  therefore  unsuitable.  The  shepherd  lad  was
mightiest  with  the  shepherd's  sling  and  stone.

III.  That  God  makes  ms  world  to  be  vooal  with  TBACHnia.  The  prophecy
of  Amos  is  crowded  with  scenes  which  the  herdman  had  witnessed.  It  is  worthy  ot
study,  if  only  as  a  bold  picture  of  the  inciilents  of  village  life  in  the  Bast  in  olden  ,
days.  Let  ns  trust  ourselves  to  his  guidance  in  imagination.  We  see  the  gin  set  for  the
bird,  and  the  snare  spread  for  the  game.  We  hear  the  roar  of  the  lion  in  the  thicket
when  he  has  caught  his  prey,  and  stand  by  the  fisherman  with  his  hooks,  as  with  skill
and  patience  he  plies  his  craft.  We  watch  the  man  fleeing  from  the  lion  only  to  meet
the  bear,  and  the  fugitive  bandit  hoping  for  refuge  in  the  caverns  of  Mount  CanneL
We  follow  Amos  to  the  field.  Here  the  ploughman  and  vinedresser  are  busy  at  work ;
•nd  there  the  gardens,  cursed  with  mildew  and  blasting,  bear  no  fruit.    Now  we  hear


OH.  I.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOSl  21

the  chirp  of  the  grasshopper  in  the  meadow,  and  now  the  patter  of  the  rain  as  it  falls
after  the  king's  mowings.  In  harvest-time,  as  we  walk  with  Amos,  we  see  the  laden
cart  pressed  down  with  the  weight  of  the  sheaves,  and  hear  the  thud  of  the  flail  as  it
falls  on  the  threshing-floor,  and  watch  the  corn  beaten  out  flung  into  the  sieve,  and
note  that  while  the  chaff  is  scattered  "  not  the  least  grain  falls  upon  the  earth."  Then
in  the  evening,  when  the  land  is  quiet,  and  the  heavens  are  glorious  with  stars,  we
hear  Amos  speak  of  him  who  "  made  the  Pleiades  and  Orion,"  who  makes  the  day
dark  with  night,  and  then,  in  all  the  splendour  of  the  Oriental  dawn,  turns  the  ihadow
of  death  into  morning.    What  an  example  is  he  to  us  I    Let  us  re-echo  the  prayer  of

M  ^ f

**  Thon,  who  bast  given  me  eyes  to  set
And  love  this  sight  so  fair,
Oive  me  a  heart  to  find  out  thee^
And  see  thee  everywhere."

IT.  That  God  would  have  holt  thoughts  assooiatkd  with  obddtabt  thuios.
We  all  know  the  power  of  association.  Sometimes  we  hear  a  riddle  or  a  joke  which
presents  a  text  or  hymn  in  a  ludicrous  aspect.  We  never  hear  the  text  or  the  hymn
afterwards  without  being  reminded  of  the  grotesque  thought.  Hence  such  "jesting
which  is  not  convenient,"  and  which  is  unhappily  a  staple  ingredient  of  American
humour,  should  be  repressed  by  thoughtful  men.  Our  endeavour  should  be  in  the
opposite ,  direction.  Instead  of  making  sacred  things  profane,  let  us  rather  make
profane  things  sacred,  so  that  the  prophecy  of  Zechariah  shall  be  fulfilled,  "In  that
day  there  shall  be  upon  the  bells  of  the  horses,  Holiness  unto  the  Lord ;  and  the
pots  in  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  like  the  bowls  before  the  altar."  All  things  belong
to  God.  He  is  present  in  the  fields  as  well  as  in  his  house.  He  is  near  us  in  our
homes  as  well  as  in»our  temples ;  and  the  life  we  live  as  Christian  men  has  sanctity,
whether  it  be  spent  in  the  engagements  of  business  or  in  the  services  of  the  sanctuary.
Let  us  seek  grace  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  Amos,  or  rather  in  the  footsteps  of  One
infinitely  greater  than  he;  and  then  when  we  see  the  sower  in  the  field,  or  the
merchant  in  his  business,  when  we  gaze  on  the  lilies  in  the  garden,  or  on  the  tares
amid  the  com,  we  shall  have  sweet  thoughts  of  those  higher  truths  which  our  Lord  has
associated  with  them.  The  voice  from  heaven  still  says,  "  What  God  hath  cleansed,
that  call  not  thou  oommon.''-r-A.  B.

Vers.  3,  6,  9, 11, 13 ;  ch.  ii.  1,  4,  6. — Great  sufferings  /ollovHng  great  sins.  "  For
three  transgressions  of  Damascus,  and  for  four,  I  will  not  turn  away  the  punishment,"
etc.  Amos,  we  are  informed,  was  a  native  of  Tekoah,  a  small  region  in  the  tribe  of
Judah,  about  twelve  miles  south-east  of  Jerusalem.  Nothing  is  known  of  his  parents.
He  evidently  belonged  to  the  humbler  class  of  life,  and  pursued  the  occupation  of  the
humble  shepherd  and  dresser  of  sycamore  trees.  From  his  flock  he  was  divinely  called
to  the  high  office  of  prophet ;  and  though  himself  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  his  mission
was  to  Israel.  He  was  sent  to  Bethel,  into  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes.  He  com-
menced his  ministry  in  the  reign  of  Uzziah,  between  B.o.  772  and  746,  and  therefore
laboured  about  the  same  time  as  Hosea.  In  his  time  idolatry,  with  its  concomitant
evils  and  immoralities  of  every  description,  reigned  with  uncontrolled  sway  amongst
the  Israelites,  and  against  these  evils  he  hurls  his  denunciations.  The  book  has  been
divided  into  three  or  four  parts :  First,  sentences  pronounced  against  the  Syrians,  the
Philistines,  the  Phoenicians,  the  Bdomites,  the  Ammonites,  the  Moabites,  the  Jews,
and  the  Israelites  (ch.  i.  and  ii.).  Second,  special  discourses  delivered  against  Israel
(ch.  iii.  to  vi.).  Third,  visions,  partly  of  a  consolatory  and  partly  of  a  comminatory
nature,  in  which  reference  is  had  both  to  the  times  that  were  to  pass  over  the  ten
tribes  previous  to  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  finally  to  what  was  to  take  place
under  his  feign  (ch.  vii.  to  ix.).  His  style  is  marked  by  perspicuity,  elegance,  energy,
and  fulness.  His  images  are  mostly  original,  and  taken  from  the  natural  scenery  with
which  he  was  familiar.  We  may  say  that  the  whole  passage,  extending  from  ch.  i.
13  to  ch.  ii.  8,  illustrates  the  three  following  great  truths :  1.  The  sins  of  all  the  people
on  the  earth,  whatever  the  peculiarities  of  their  character  or  conduct,  are  under  the
cognizance  of  God.    2.  That  of  all  the  sins  of  the  people,  that  of  persecution  is  peculiarly


22  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [tw.  i.  1— ItL

abhorrent  to  the  Divine  nature.  8.  That  these  sins  expose  to  suffering  not  only  the
actual  offenders,  but  others  also.  The  first  and  second  of  these  truths  we  will  not
here  notice ;  but  to  the  third  we  must  now  give  a  moment's  attention.  In  all  the
passages  to  which  we  have  referred  at  the  head  of  this  sketch  punishment  is  the
subject.     We  offer  two  remarks  on  this  subject.

I.  Gbeat  bins  entail  gbeat  buffebinob.  The  calamities  threatened  to  these
different  tribes  of  different  lands  are  of  the  most  terrible  description.  But  they  are  all
such  as  to  match  their  crimes.  1.  The  connection  between  great  sins  and  great
sufferings  is  inevitable.  The  moral  Governor  of  the  world  has  so  arranged  matters
that  every  sin  brings  with  it  its  own  punishment,  and  it  is  only  when  the  sin  is
destroyed  the'  suffering  ceases.  Thank  God,  this  sin  can  be  destroyed  through  faith  in
the  mediation  of  him  who  came  to  put  away  sin  by  faith  in  the  sacrifice  of  himself.
2.  The  connection  between  great  sins  and  great  sufferings  is  universal.  All  these
sinful  peoples  had  to  realize  it  from  their  own  bitter  experience.  It  does  not  matter
where,  when,  or  how  a  man  lives,  his  sins  will  find  him  out.

n.   GeEAT  bins  often  entail  OEBAT   BUyFEEINOB  UPON  PEOPLE  WHO  ABE   NOT   THI

ACTUAL  OFFENDEBB.  "  1'he  fire,"  wMch  is  here  the  instrument  of  God's  retribution  to
ns  sinners,  would  not  only  scathe  the  persons  and  consume  the  property  of  the  actual
offenders,  but  others.  The  fact  is  patent  in  all  history  and  in  all  experience,  that  men
here  suffer  for  the  sins  of  others.  We  are  so  rooted  together  in  the  great  field  of  life,
that  if  the  tares  are  pulled  up  the  wheat  will  be  injured  if  not  destroyed.  The  cry  of
men  in  all  ages  has  been,  "Our  fathers  have  sinned,  and  we  have  borne  their
iniquities."  Two  facts  may  reconcile  our  consciences  to  this.  1.  That  few,  if  any,
tiaffer  mare  than  their  consciences  tell  them  they  deserve.  2.  That  there  it  to  come  a
paiod  when  the  whole  will  appear  to  be  in  accord  with  the  Justice  and  goodness  of
God.—D.'T.

•

Vers.  3,  6,  9, 11, 13 ;  ch.  ii.  1, 4,  6. — 3^*  enormity  of  the  sin  of  persecution.  "  For
three  transgressions  of  Damascus,  and  for  four,"  etc.  "They  are  all  charged  in
general,"  says  an  old  expositor,  "with  three  transgressions,  yea,  with  four;  that  is,
with  many  transgressions,  as  by  'one  or  two'  we  mean  many;  as,  in  Latin, a  man  that
is  very  happy  is  said  to  be  Urque  quaterque  heatus — 'three  and  four' times  happy;'
or, '  with  three  and  four,'  that  is,  with  seven  transgressions — a  number  of  perfection,
intimating  that  they  have  filled  up  the  measure  ^  their  iniquities,  and  are  ripe  for
ruin ;  or, '  with  three '  (that  is,  a  variety  ot  sins),  and  with  a  fourth  especially,  which  is
speeded  concerning  each  of  them,  though  the  other  three  are  not,  as  Prov.  xxx.  15, 18,
21,  29.  Where  we  read  of  '  three  things,  yea,  four,'  generally  one  seems  to  be  more
especially  intended"  (Henry).  Now,  the  sin  especially  referred  to  here  as  the  "fourth"
is  taken  to  be  that  of  persecution,  that  is,  the  sin  of  inflicting  suffering  upon  others
because  of  their  peculiar  religious  convictions  and  doings.  Other  sins  innumerable,
varied  and  heinous,  they  had  committed,  but  this  fourth  seems  to  be  the  crowning  of
their  evil.  Persecution  has  been  called  the  measure-filling  sin  of  any  people,  the  sin
that  will  be  taken  into  account  on  the  last  great  day.  "  I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave
me  no  meat,"  etc.

I.  Pbbbbcutioh  is  a  most  abbogant  obimb.  The  religious  persecutor  acts  upon  the
assumption  that  his  ideas  of  religion  are  absolutely  true,  that  his  theological  knowledge
is  the  test  by  which  all  other  opinions  are  to  be  tried.  Such  a  man  is  represented  by
the  apostle  as  one  that  "  sitteth  in  the  temple  of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  ii
God  "  (2  Thesa.  iL  4).  Presumptuous  mortal  1  The  proud  tyrant  who  has  won  hit
way  through  seas  of  blood  to  the  throne,  and  claims  authority  over  men's  bodily
movements,  shows  an  arrogance  before  which  servile  spirits  bow,  but  from  which  au
thoughtful  and  noble  men  recoil  with  disgust  and  indignation.  But  his  arrogance  ia
shadowy  and  harmless  compared  with  the  arrogance  of  him  who  enters  the  temple  of
human  conscience,  and  claims  dominion  over  the  moral  workings  of  the  soul.  Yes,
■uch  arrogant  men  abound  in  all  ages,  and  are  by  no  means  rare  even  in  this  age  and
land  of  what  ii  called  civil  and  religious  liberty.  The  most  arrogant  title  that  mortal
man  can  wear  is  "  Vicar  of  Christ."

IL  Pebsbodtioh  is  a  most  abbued  obime.  Far  wiser  is  the  fool  who  would
Itgislato  for  the  winds  or  the  waves,  and,  like  Canute,  give  commands  to  the  billowa.


OH.  n.  1— !«.]


THE  BOOK  OF   AMOS.


23


*haa  he  who  attempts  to  legislate  for  human  thoughts  and  moral  convictions.  Still
more  foolish  to  attempt  to  crush  men's  religious  beliefs  hy  inflicting  civil  disabilities  or
corporesl  suffering.  In  sooth,  the  way  to  give  life,  power,  and  influence  to  religious
errors  is  to  persecute.  And  truth  never  seems  to  rise  in  greater  power  and  majesty
than  under  the  bloody  hand  of  cruel  persecution.  It  has  been  well  said  that  "the
blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church."

*  A  blameless  faith  was  all  the  crime  the  Christian  martyr  knew ;
And  where  the  crimson  current  flowed  upon  that  barren  sand,
Up  sprang  a  tree,  whose  vigorous  boughs  soon  overspread  the  land;
O'er  distant  isles  its  shadow  fell,  nor  knew  its  roots  decay,
Ei'en  when  the  Boman  Cosar's  throne  and  empire  passed  away."

III.  Pebskoution  18  A  MOST  OBUEL  ORiuK.  What  ruthlcss  inhumanities  are  in  these
verses  charged  against  the  various  peoples  mentioned — those  of  Damascus,  Gaza,
Tyrus,  etc. !  It  has  often  been  observed  that  no  anger  is  so  savage  as  the  anger  which
springs  up  between  relations  of  blood.  A  brotherly  hate  is  the  chief  of  hates ;  and  it
may  be  truly  said  that  there  is  no  animosity  that  burns  with  a  more  hellish  heat  than
that  connected  with  religion.  Gibbon,  referring  to  the  cruelties  inflicted  upon  the
early  Christians,  says,  "  They  died  in  torments,  and  their  torments  were  embittered  by
insult  and  derision.  Some  were  nailed  on  crosses,  others  sewn  up  in  the  skins  of  wild
beasts  and  exposed  to  the  fury  of  dogs ;  others,  again,  smeared  over  with  combustible
material,  were  used  as  torches  to  illuminate  the  darkness  of  the  night.  The  gardens  of
Nero  were  destined  for  the  melancholy  spectacle,  which  was  accompanied  by  a  horse-
race and  honoured  with  the  presence  of  the  emperor,  who  mingled  with  the  populace
in  the  dresi  and  attitude  of  a  charioteer." — D.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  n.


Vers.  1—8. — Judgment  on  Moab.

Ver.  1. — ^Moab.  The  prophet  now  de-
nounces the  other  nation  connected  by  ties
of  blood  witii  Israel  (see  on  oh.  i.  13).  Moab's
hostility  had  been^hown  in  the  hiring  of
Balaam  to  curse  the  Israelites,  and  in  seduc-
ing them  to  idolatry  (Numb.  xxii. — xxv.  3).
He  W618  their  oppressor  in  the  time  of  the
Judges  (Judg.  iii.  12);  and  David  had  to
take  most  stringent  measures  against  him
(2  Sam.  viii.  2).  The  Moabites  joined  in  a
league  against  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xx.
22),  and  later  against  Jehoii^im  (2  Kings
xxiv.  2),  and,  as  we  see  by  the  inscription
on  the  Moabite  Stone,  were  always  ready
to  profit  by  the  disasters  or  weakness  of  the
ehosen  people.  "I  erected  this  stone,"  says
Mesha,  "to  Chemosh  at  Ku-kha,  a  stone  of
salvation,  for  he  saved  me  from  all  despoilers,
and  made  me  see  my  desire  upon  all  mine
enemies,  even  upon  Omri,  King  of  Israel."
And  then  he  goes  on  to  recount  his  vic-
tories. He  burned  the  bones  of  the  King
of  Edom  into  lime.  This  profanation  of
the  corpse  of  the  King  of  Edom  (see  2
Kings  xxiii.  16;  Jer.  viii.  1,  2)  is  not
mentioned  in  the  historical  books.  Some
of  the  older  commentators,  as  Tirinus  and
Com.  &  Lapide,  think  that  the  prophet
wishes  to  efeow  that  the  sympathy  of  God
extends  beyond  the  covenant  people,  and


that  he  punishes  wrongs  inflicted  even  on
heathen  nations.  But  as  in  the  case  of  the
other  nations  Amos  reproves  only  crimei
committed  against  Israel  or  Judah,  so  the
present  outrage  must  have  the  same  connec-
tion. The  reference  to  the  King  of  Moab's
saoriflee  of  "  his  eldest  son,"  even  if  we
suppose  (which  is  improbable)  the  ion  of
the  King  of  Edom  to  be  meant,  is  plainly
inapplicable  (2  Kings  iii.  27),  as  the  offence
regarded  the  king  himself,  and  not  his  son,
and  the  expression,  "burned  into  lime,"
can  hardly  be  thought  to  refer  to  a  human
sacrifice.  The  act  mentioned  probably
occurred  during  the  time  that,  the  Edomites
joined  Jehoram  and  Jehoshaphat  in  the
league  against  Mesha,  the  King  of  Moab
(2  Kings  iii.  7,  9),  the  author  of  the  inscrip-
tion on  the  celebrated  stone  erected  by  Imn
at  Dibon.  Unfortunately,  the  last  lines  of
that  inscription,  describing  the  war  against
the  Edomites,  are  lost.  The  paragraph  that
remains  is  this :  "  And  Chemosh  said  to  me,
Oo  down,  make  war  against  Hdronaim  [i.e.
the  men  of  Edom],  and  take  .  .  .  Ghemoih
...  in  my  days.  Wherefore  I  made  .  .  ,
year  .  .  .  and  I  .  .  ."  The  Jewish  tradi-
tion, quoted  by  Jerome,  tells  that  after  thU
war  the  Moabites,  in  revenge  for  the  assist-
ance which  the  King  of  Edom  had  given  to
the  Israelites,  dug  up  and  dishonoured  his
bones.  Edom  was  then  in  vassalage  to  Israel,
but  regained  its  independence  some  ten  yean


u


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[oh.  u.  1—16,


later  (2  Kings  viii  20).  The  eaorilegiona
act  was  meant  to  redound  to  the  disgrace  of
Israel.

Yer.  2. — Kirioth;  dtiei,  and  so  taken  as
an  appellative  by  the  Septuagint  transla-
tors, Tuv  ir6\€av  ouT^i :  but  it  is  doubtless
a  proper  name  of  one  of  the  cliief  Moabite
towns  (Jer.  xlviii.  24, 41).  Keil,  after  Burck-
hardt.  Identifies  it  with  the  decayed  town
of  Kereyat,  or  Korriat ;  others,  with  Ar,  or
Kir,  the  old  capital  (Isa.  xv.  1).  The  plural
termination  of  the  word.like  Athense,  Thebss,
etc.,  may  denote  a  double  city — upper  and
lower,  or  old  and  new.  Moab  shall  die.  The
nation  is  personified.  •  With  tumult ;  caused
by  war  (comp.  Jer.  xlviii.  45,  and  the  pro-
phecy of  Balaam,  Numb.  xxiv.  17).  Sep-
tuagint, ii/  aSuraiiiif,  "  in  weakness."  With
shouting.  Omitted  by  the  Vulgate  (see  on
oh.  i.  14).  Trumpet  (cb.  iii.  6 ;  Jer.  iv.  19).
Troohon  cites  Virgil,  '.SIneid,'  ii.  313,
"  Exoritur  clamorque  virum  clangorqae
tnbarum,"  "Bises  the  shout  of  men  and
trumpets'  blare."

Ver.  3. — The  judge;  ikophet,  probably
here  a  synonym  for  "king"  (comp.  Mloah
V.  1).  It  implies  the  chief  magistrale,  like
the  Oartbaginiau  aufes,  which  ia  the  same
word.  There  ii  no  ground  for  deducing,
as  Hitzig  and  Ewald  do,  from  the  use  of
this  form  that  Moab  had  no  king  at  this
time.  The  country  was  conquered  by  the
Chaldeans,  and  tlienceforward  sank  into
insignificance  (Jer.  xlviii.;  Ezek.  xxv.
8—11).

Vers,  4,  5. — §  2.  Judah  it  summoned  to
Judgment,  the  prophet  thus  passing  ftom
alien  nations,  throiigh  the  most  favoured
people,  to  Israel,  the  subject  of  his  prophecy.

Ver.  4. — They  have  despised  the  law  of
the  Lord.  The  other  nations  are  denounced
for  their  offences  against  Rod's  people;
Judah  is  sentenced  for  her  ofiences  against
Ood  himself.  The  former  likewise  bad
ofieuded  against  the  law  of  conscience,
natural  religion ;  the  latter  against  the
written  Law,  revealed  religion.  By  thus
denouncing  Judah,  Amos  shows  bis  perfect
impartiality.  The  Law,  Torah,  is  the
general  name  for  the  whole  body  of  precepts
and  commandments,  chuqqim,  moral  and
ceremonial.  Their  lies ;  Vulgate,  idola  stia,
which  is  the  sense,  though  not  the  transla-
tion, of  the  word.  Idols  are  so  called  as
being  nonentities  in  themselves,  and  deceiv-
ing those  who  trust  in  them.  "  We  know,"
Bays  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  viii.  4),  "  that  an  idol
is  nothing  in  the  world."  The  Septuagint
gives,  t4  /idraia  avT&v  &  itrolTiffav,  "their
vain  things  which  they  maile."  Their
fathers  have  walked.  Tlu*  is  the  usual  ex-
pression for  attachment  to  idolatmus  prac-


tices. From  this  error  the  Israelites  were
never  weaned  till  their  return  from  the
penal  Captivity.

Ver,  5. — The  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by
the  Chaldeans  is  here  briefly  foretold  (Jer.
xvii.  27;  Hos.  viii.  14;  2  Kings  xxv.  9,  10).

Vers.  6 — 16. — §  8.  /Summons  and  general
denunciation  of  Israel  for  injustice,  cruelty,
incest,  luxury,  and  idolatry.

Ver.  6.— They  sold  the  righteous  foi
silver.  The  first  charge  against  Israel  is
perversion  of  justice.  The  judges  took
bribes  and  condemned  the  righteous,  t'.e.
the  man  whose  cause  was  good.  Fusey
thinks  that  the  literal  selling  of  debtors
by  creditors,  contrary  to  the  Law  (Exod,
xxi.  7 ;  Lev.  xxv.  39 ;  Neh.  v.  5),  is  meant
(comp.  ch.  viii.  6  and  Matt,  xviii.  25).
The  needy  for  a  pair  of  shoes.  For  the
very  smallest  bribe  they  betray  the  cause
of  the  poor  (comp.  Ezek.  xiii.  19) ;  though,
as  sandals  were  sometimes  of  very  costly
materials  (Cant.  vii.  1;  Ezek.  xvi.  10;
Judith  xvi.  9),  the  expression  might  mean
that  they  sold  justice  to  obtain  an  article
of  luxury.  But  the  form  of  expression  ii
opposed  to  this  interpretation.

Ver.  7. — That  pant  after  the  dust  of  the
earth  on  the  head  of  the  poor.  This  is  the
second  charge— oppression  of  the  poor.  The
obscure  expression  in  the  text  is  capable  of
two  explanations.  Hitzig,  Fusey,  Trochon,
assume  that  its  meaning  is  that  in  their
avarice  and  cupidity  the  usurers  or  tyran-
nous rich  men  grudge  even  the  dust  which
the  poor  man  strews  upon  his  head  in  token
of  his  sorrow  at  being  brought  to  so  low  a
state.  But  this  seems  unnatural  and  far-
fetched, and  scarcely  in  harmony  with  the
simple  style  of  Amos.  The  other  explana-
tion, supported  by  Kimchi,  Schegg,  Keil,  and
Knabenbauer,  is  preferable.  These  oppres-
sors desire  eagerly  to  see  the  poor  crushed
to  the  earth,  or  so  miserable  as  to  scatter
dust  on  their  heads  (comp.  1  Sam.  iv.  12;
2  Sam.  i.  2;  JobiL  12).  The  poor  (ddl,iuA
the  same  word  as  in  ver.  6);  depressed,  as
broughtlow  in  condition.  The  Septuagint
joins  this  with  the  previous  clause,  "And
the  poor  for  sandals,  the  things  that  tread
on  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  smote  on  the
heads  of  the  needy."  The  Vulgate  gives.
Qui  conterunt  super  pulverem  terrje  capita
pauperum,  "Who  bruise  the  heads  of  the
poor  on  the  dust  of  the  earth."  Turn  aside
the  way  of  the  meek.  They  thwart  and
hinder  their  path  of  life,  and  force  them  into
crooked  and  evil  ways.  Or  loay,  according
to  Kimchi,  may  mean  "judicial  process,"  as
Prov.  xvii.  23,  This  gives  to  the  clause
much  the  same  meaning  as  ver.  6,  Th*
meek  are  those  who  are  lowly  and  unassum-
ing (see  note  on  Zeph.  ii.  8).    And  a  mas


OH.  n.  1 — 16.]


THK   BOOK   OF   AMOS.


2S


and  Ms  father  ■will  go  in  unto  the  same
maid ;  LXX.,  EiaeiroptiovTO  uphs  r^v  abr^v
ratSlaKiiy.  The  Vulgate,  which  omits  "  the
same,"  is  closer  to  the  Hebrew,  Et  films
oo  pater  ejui  ierunt  ad  pueUam,  though
the  Greek  doubtless  gives  the  intended
meaning.  This  sin,  which  was  tanta-
mount to  incest,  was  virtually  forbidden
(Lev.  xviii.  8,  15 ;  xx.  11).  Some  (as
Ewald,  Maurer,  Gandell)  see  here  an
aUusiou  to  the  organized  prostitution  in
idol-temples  (Hos.  iv.  14),  but  this  seems
unnecessary.  To  profane  my  holy  Name
(Lev.  xxii.  32).  Such  crimes  dishonoured
the  God  who  called  them  his  people,  so
that  to  them  could  be  applied  what  St.
Paul  says  (Bom.  ii.  24),  "The  Name  of
God  is  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles
through  you"  (comp.  Lev.  xx.  3;  Ezek.
xxxvi.  20,  23).  The  word  lemaan,  "in
order  that,"  implies  that  they  committed
these  sins,  not  through  ignorance,  but  in-
tentionally, to  bring  discredit  upon  the
true  faith  and  worship.

Ver.  8. — The  prophet  condemns  the  cruel
luxury  which,  contrary  to  the  Law,  made
the  poor  debtor's  necessities  minister  to  the
rich  man's  pleasures.  Ihey  lay  themselves
down  upon;  Vulgate,  accubuerunt.  Ewald
translates,  "they  cast  lots  upon;"  but
the  Authorized  Version  is  supported  by
the  highest  authorities,  and  gives  the  most
appropriate  meaning.  The  Septuagint,
with  which  the  Syriac  partly  agrees,  refers
the  clause  to  the  immoralities  practised  in
heathen  worship,  which  the  perpetrators
desired  to  screen  from  observation,  Tib  i/tdna
avTwr  Sftriieiovres  a'xou'lois  jrapwireTdo'iA.ara
hroiow  ix^iiiva  rov  dvtriao'Tripiov,  "Binding
their  clothes  with  cords,  they  made  them
curtains  near  the  altar  "  This  is  far  from
the  intention  of  the  prophet's  words.  Upon
clothes  laid  to  pledge ;  or,  taken  in  pledge.
The  "clothes"  (begadim)  are  the  large
outer  garments  which  formed  poor  men's
dress  by  day  and  cover  by  night,  and
which,  if  pledged,  were  ordered  to  be
returned  by  nightfall  (Exod.  xxii.  26,  etc. ;
Deut.  xxiv.  12,  etc.).  These  the  hard-
hearted usurers  kept  as  their  own,  and
reclined  luxuriously  upon  them  at  their
feasts  and  carousals  in  their  temples.  By
every  altar.  At  the  sacrificial  feasts  in  the
temples  at  Dan  and  Bethel.  They  drink  the
wine  of  the  condemned;  Septuagint,  ohov
ix  ffvKoipavTi&ii.  Wine  obtained  by  fines  ex-
torted from  the  oppressed.  So  it  is  better
to  translate,  "of  such  as  have  been  fined."
In  the  house  of  their  god.  The  true  God,
whom  they  worshipped  there  under  the
symbol  of  the  calf.

Ver.  9. — God  complains  of  Israel's  in-
gratitude for  the  favour  which  he  had
•hown  them.    And  yet  I.    The  pei  sonal  pro-


noun has  a  prominent  position,  and  is  con-
tinually repeated,  to  contrast  God's  faith-
fulness and  the  people's  uuthankfulness.
The  Amorite  (Josh.  xxiv.  8,  18).  The  re-
presentative of  the  seven  nations  of  Canaan
who  were  dispossessed  by  the  Israelites
(Gen.  XV.  16;  Exod.  xxiii.  27;  xxxiv.  11).
The  hyperbolical  description  of  this  people
is  taken  from  Numb.  xiii.  32,  etc.;  Deut.  i.
28.  Thus  is  shown  Israel's  inability  to  sope
with  such  an  enemy,  and  their  entire  de-
pendence on  the  help  of  the  Lord.  Fruit
.  .  .  roots.  Keil  explains  that  the  posterity
of  a  nation  is  regarded  as  its  frnit,  and  the
kernel  of  the  nation  out  of  which  it  springs
as  the  root,  comparing  Job  xviii.  16 ;  Ezek.
xvii.  9;  Hos.  is.  16.  The  expression  is
equivalent  to  our  "root  and  branch"  (Mai.
iv.  1).

Ver.  10.— The  deliverance  from  Egypt
and  the  guidance  through  the  desert,
though  chronologically  first,  are  mentioned
last,  as  the  great  and  culminating  example
of  the  favour  and  protection  of  God.  First
God  prepared  the  land  for  Israel,  and  then
trained  them  for  possessing  it.  From  the
many  allusions  in  this  section,  we  see  how
familiar  Amos  and  his  hearers  were  with
the  history  and  law  of  the  Pentateuch.  Led
you  forty  years  (Deut.  ii.  7 ;  viii.  2 — 4).

Ver.  11. — ^Having  mentioned  two  temporal
benefits  conferred  on  Israel,  the  prophet
now  names  two  spiritual  favours — the  pre-
sence of  holy  speakers  and  holy  doers.  I
raised  up.  The  prophet  and  the  Nazarite
were  alike  miracles  of  grace.  The  former
gave  heavenly  teaching,  the  latter  exhibited
holiness  of  life.  It  was  the  Lord  who  gave
the  prophet  power  and  authority  to  pro-
claim his  will ;  it  was  the  Lord  who  in-
spired the  TOW  of  the  Nazarite  and  enabled
him  to  carry  it  out  in  practice.  Prophets.
To  Israel  belonged  Samuel  (1  Sam.  i.  1),
Abijah  of  Shiloh  (1  Kings  xiv.  2,  4),  Jehu,
.  son  of  Hanani  (1  Kings  xvi.  7),  Elijah
and  Elisha,  Hosea  and  Jonah.  Young
men.  In  the  height  of  their  passions,
lusty  and  strong.  Hazarites.  The  law  con-
cerning the  Nazaritcs  is  given  in  Numb,  vi
The  special  restrictions  by  which  they
bound  themselves  (viz.  abstention  from
strong  drink,  from  the  use  of  the  razor,
and  from  all  ritual  defilement)  were  the
outward  signs  of  inward  purity  and  devo-
tion to  God.  Their  very  name  implied
separation  from  the  world  and  devotion  to
God.  They  were,  in  fact,  the  religious
of  the  old  Law,  analogous  to  the  monks
of  Christian  times.  The  vow  was  either
temporary  or  lifelong.  Of  perpetual  Naza-
rites  we  have  as  instances  Samson,  Samuel,
and  John  the  Baptist.  Is  it  not  even  thus  1
Is  not  the  existence  of  prophets  and  Na-
zarites  among  you  a  proof  that  you  ara


26


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[oh.  n.  1 — 1&


Kgnally  faTouied  by  God,  separate  from
other  nations,  and  bonnd  to  be  a  holy
people  ?  Taking  the  general  Import  of  the
passage  and  the  signification  of  the  word
"Nazarite,"  the  LXX.  renders,  eh  i,yia<rii6i>,
"I  took.  .  .  .  and  of  your  young  men  for
eDnBecmtion."

Ver.  12. — Te  gave  the  Nazarites  wine  to
drink.  Far  from  profiting  by  their  example,
or  acknowledging  the  grace  of  God  dis-
played in  their  holy  lives,  ye  tried  to  get
rid  of  their  testimony  by  seducing  or
forcing  them  to  break  their  vow.  Prophesy
not.  Israel  was  impatient  of  the  continued
efforts  of  the  prophets  to  warn  and  to  win ;
and,  unmindful  of  the  fact  that  the  man  of
God  had  a  message  which  he  was  bound  to
deliver  (comp.  Jer.  xx.  9 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  16),
this  ungrateful  nation  systematically  tried
to  silence  the  voices  which  were  a  standing
rebuke  to  them.  Thus  Amos  himself  was
treated  (ch.  vii.  10,  etc.).  (For  proof  of
this  opposition,  see  1  Kings  xiii.  4;  xviii.
10,  etc.;  lix.  2;  xxii.  26,  27;  2  Kings  vi.
81 ;  2  Chron.  xzv.  15,  16 ;  and  comp.  Isa.
zxx.  10,  etc. ;  Micah  ii.  6  ;  Matt,  xxiii.  37.

Vers.  13 — 16  threaten  severe  punishment
for  the  sins  mentioned  above.

Ver.  13. — Behold,  I  am  pressed  under
yon ;  Septuagint,  kvaIu  moKdra}  iiijov,  "  I
roll  under  you;"  Vulgate,  slridebo  suhter
vo>;  Syriac,  as  Anglican;  Hitzip:,  "I  make
it  totter  beneatli  you,  as  a  cart  tottereth ; "
Ewald,  Keil,  "  I  will  press  you  down,  as  the
cart  presseth ; "  Baur,  Pusey,  "I  straiten  my-
•elf  under  you,  as  a  cart  is  straitened  ; "  Ee-
vised  Version,  "I  will  press  you  in  your  place,
as  a  cart  presseth."  The  translation  of  Keil,
which  is  that  of  Geseniug,  is  most  suitable.


meaning, "  I  will  press  yon  with  the  fall  fore*
of  war,  as  a  loaded  wain  presses  the  earth  over
which  it  passes."  The  sense  of  the  English
Version  is  that  God  is  burdened  and  wearied
with  their  sins,  aa  Isa.  xliii.  24 ;  Mai.  ii.  17.
The  verb,  being  hiphil,  is  an  objection  to
this  explanation.  The  comparison  of  the
wain  id  very  natural  in  the  mouth  of  the
shepherd  Amos.

Ver.  14. — In  this  and  the  two  following
verses  Amos  indiviilualizes  the  "  pressure  "
that  awaits  them,  when  every  means  of
resistance  and  escape  shall  fail.  The  flight
shall  perish  from  the  swift.  The  swift  of
foot  shall  have  no  time  or  way  to  flee  (Jer.
XXV.  35 ;  xlvi.  6).  Ewald,  Pusey,  Gandell,  for
"flight"  render  "place  of  flight,  refuge,"
as  Job  xi.  20;  Fs.  cxlii.  5;  Septuagint,
(piryii :  Vulgate, /u^a.  Shall  not  strengthen
his  force.  The  strong  man  shall  not  be
able  to  collect  or  put  forth  his  strength  to
any  good  purpose  (comp.  Frov.  xxiv.  5;
Kah.  ii.  1).  Neither  shall  .  .  .  himself.
Some  of  the  Greek  manuscripts  omit  this
clause.  Deliver  himself  occurs  three  times
— a  kind  of  solemn  refrain.

Ver.  15.— Stand  (Jer.  xlvi.  21 ;  Nab.  ii.
8).  The  skilled  archer  shall  not  stand
firm.    That  handleth  the  bow  (Jer.  xlvi.  9).

Ver.  16. — He  that  is  courageous  among
the  mighty;  literally,  the  strong  in  hit  heart;
i.e.  the  bravest  hero.  The  LXX.  t^kes  the
words  differently,  'O  xparaths  ov  /iij  evp^tret
T^v  KapSiay  avrov  ^v  SvaourreCats,  "The  strong
shall  not  find  his  heart  (confidence)  in
powers."  Naked.  Casting  away  heavy  gar-
ments and  weapons  and  whatever  might
hinder  flight  (comp.  Mark  xiv.  52 ;  John  xxi.
7).  Virgil,  'Georg.,'  i  299,  "Nudna  ara,
sere  nudus."


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 8. — The  ume  against  Moab.  Much  that  has  been  said  of  Ammon  applies
equally  to  Moab.  The  two  nations  had  close  relations  and  aflanities,  and  in  Scripture
are  generally  mentioned  together.  Both  were  mildly  treated  by  Israel  (Deut.  ii.  9,  19)
as  long  as  such  treatment  was  possible.  Yet  were  they  at  one  in  an  implacable  hatred
of  her,  and  a  national  policy  of  outrage  towards  her.  A  spring  raid  into  Hebrew
territory  seems  to  have  been  an  established  Moabitish  institution  (2  Kings  xiii.  20
literally,  "were  wont  to  come").  Again,  Moab  adopted  the  novel* and  unlikely
expedient  of  employing  a  prophet  of  God  to  curse  his  own  people  (Numb,  xxiii.  7).  Of
the  comprehensive  and  thorough  character  of  the  national  hatred,  which  these  doings
reveal,  we  have  evidence  in  the  passage  before  us.

I.  The  national  hates  op  Moab  were  determined  by  its  hate  of  Israel.
"It  has  burned  the  bones  of  the  King  of  Edom."  The  particular  occasion  referred  to
here  is  not  known.  But  the  events  that  led  up  to  it  are  briefly  recorded.  Moab  was
for  some  time  tributary  to  Israel,  and  rebelled  against  it  in  the  reign  of  Jehoram
(2  Kings  iii.  1,  4,  5).  In  the  repressive  war  that  followed,  Jehoram  was  joined  by  the
King  of  Judah  and  the  King  of  Edom,  then  probably  a  tributary  of  Judah  (2  Kings  viii,
20).  This  war,  the  only  one  in  which  Edom  and  Moab  came  into  conflict,  exasperated'
Moab  against  it  even  more  fiercely  than  against  Israel  itself  (2  Kings  iii.  26,  27).     The


OH.n.  1— 16.]  THE  BOOK   OF  AMOS.  27

harrible  aacrifice  of  the  King  of  Edoin'8  son  by  the  King  of.Moab,  and  the  subsequent
burning  of  the  King  of  Edom's  bones  by  the  Moabites,  were  both  expressions  of  thi9
wild  and  savage  resentment.  Moab's  hatred  of  Edom  was  hatred  of  her  as  Israel's  ally^
and  therefore  at  bottom  was  hatred  of  Israel  itself.  So  the  ungodly  hate  things  from'
the  standpoint  of  their  connection  with  religion.  They  hate  believers  for  Christ's  sake-
(Matt.  X.  22),  and  the  friends  of  believers  for  believers'  sakes.  The  compensation  for
this  is  that  for  Ohrist's  sake  also  Christians  love  each  other  and  the  ungodly  as  well,
and  God  for  his  own  iake  loves  them  all.

II.  Moab's  was  a  hate  that  even  death  could  not  appease.  This  fact  illustra'.es
its  insatiability.  "  The  soul  being  after  death  beyond  man's  reach,  the  hatred  vented
upon  his  remains  is  a  sort  of  impotent  grasping  at  eternal  vengeance.  It  wreaks  on
what  it  knows  to  be  insensible  the  hatred  with  which  it  would  pursue,  if  it  could,  the
living  being  who  is  beyond  it "  (Pusey).  The  employment  of  the  burnt  bones  as  lime
is  a  circumstance  which,  like  the  ripping  of  pregnant  women  by  Ammon,  reveals  the
savage  debasement  of  the  people,  and  that  contemptuous  disregard  of  the  human  body
which  is  generated  by  a  career  of  blood  and  lust.  There  is  a  sacredness  about  death.
It  introduces  an  unseen  factor,  marks  off  a  territory  into  which  we  may  not  intrude.
There  is  a  sacredness,  too,  about  the  human  body.  It  is  for  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  to  be  treated  as  holy  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20).  Its  members  are  to  be  members  of  Christ,
and  to  be  treated  as  consecrated  things  (1  Cor.  vi.  15 — 18).  The  best  guarantee  against
intemperance,  uncleanness,  violence,  and  every  abuse  of  the  body  is  respect  for  it  ai
the  home  and  instrument  of  God.

III.  The  oiecumstanoe  that  makes  Moab  the  enemy  of  Edom  makes  God  heb
Friend.  Edom's  alliance  with  Israel  had  results  in  two  directions.  It  embroiled  her
with  Israel's  enemies,  and  commended  her  to  Israel's  friends.  And  primarily  it  com-
mended her  to  Israel's  God.  His  favour  to  his  people  includes,  to  certain  intents,  their
friends.  Members  of  the  families  of  Noah  and  Lot  were  spared  for  their  fathers'  sake.
A  mixed  multitude  of  foreigners  were  fed  miraculously  in  the  desert,  because  they  were
servants  to  the  Israelites.  Even  the  Egyptians  were  favoured  because  they  for  a  time
had  given  Israel  a  home  (Deut.  xxiii.  7).     So  with  Edom.    He  was  a  brother  by  blood

g)eut.  xxiii.  7),  and  had  been  an  ally  against  Moab,  and  so  his  cause  is  championed  by
od  in  this  exactly  as  the  cause  of  Israel  is  in  the  other  woes.  So  with  more  spiritual
relations.  The  virgin-companions  of  the  bride,  the  Church,  are  brought,  as  her  com-
panions, to  the  King  (Ps.  xlv'.  14).  The  final  judgment  apart,  service  rendered  to  God's
people  will  not  go  unrewarded  (Matt.  x.  40—42).  No  investment  brings  in  surer
return  than  help  and  kindness  shown  to  the  saints  of  God.

IV.  Moab's  doom  was  one  that  matched  its  life.  "  Shall  die  with  Jumult."
The  Moabites  were  "  sons  of  tumult "  (Numb.  xxiv.  17 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  45),  and  as  in
tumult  they  lived,  so  in  tumult  they  should  die  (see  Pusey).  This  is  providential,  the
punishment  being  made  appropriate  to  the  crime.  It  is  also  natural,  violence  provoking
violence,  and  so  fixing  the  character  of  its  own  punishment.  Moab  had  probably  lost
its  kings  before  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  but  the  judges  and  princes  who  had  headed
the  nation  in  its  violence  fitly  head  it  in  its  destruction  also.

Vers.  4,  6. — The  woe  against  Jvdah.  In  the  form  of  this  woe,  as  compared  with
those  before,  is  nothing  to  indicate  the  difference  of  underlying  principles  which  it
involves.  A  woe  on  a  Hebrew  and  a  heathen  have  little  in  common  but  the  inevitable
connection  between  punishment  and  sin.

I.  The  sins  for  which  God  visits  bespeotivelt  those  who  know  him  and
those  who  know  him  not  abb  vert  different.  The  six  woes  against  the  heathen
are  fathered  exclusively  on  their  sins. against  Israel  or  its  friends.  This  woe  against
Judah  is  denounced  with  exclusive  reference  to  sins  against  God  himself.  This  is
exactly  what  we  might  expect.  Each  is  judged  out  of  his  own  law  (Rom.  ii.  12).
The  revelation  of  God  and  duty  to  him  was  the  first  great  commandment  of  the  Law
given  to  the  Jews  (Matt.  xxii.  37,  38),  and  for  this  God  reckons- with  them — first,
because  it  was  at  once  the  guiltiest  sin,  and  the  sin  of  which  they  were  oftenest  guilty.
The  law  revealed  to  the  heathen  made  known  the  existence  and  many  perfections  of
God  (Ps.  xix.  1 ;  Rom.  i.  20),  and  threw  a  side-light  on  the  way  to  worship  him  (Acts
xvii.  29).     But  this  was  not  their  clearest  revelation,  and  so  their  sin  against  it  is  not


28  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa  [oh.  lu  1—18.

the  sin  that  is  emphasized.  The  law  written  on  their  heart  (Rom.  iL  14, 16) — i.e.
speaking  in  reason,  conscience,  and  human  feeling — ^was  specially  the  law  of  duty  to
their  fellow-creatures ;  and  it  is  for  their  sin  in  this  matter  specially  that  God  brings
them  into  judgment.  It  is  its  blindness,  and  not  its  darkness,  that  is  the  condemnation
of  the  world  (John  iii.  19).  Where  the  white  ray  of  revelation  focusses,  there  the  red
ray  of  judgment  shall  fall  and  burn.

II.  Contempt  ot  law  and  the  violation  of  law  involve  bach  othbb.  "Despised
the  Law  of  Jehovah,  and  kept  not  his  commandments."  The  Law  is  the  abstract  thing
— God's  revealed  will  as  a  whole.  The  commandments  are  the  "  particular. precepts"
(Keil)  into  which  it  is  broken  up.  The  first,  being  general,  is  fitly  described  as  being
"  despised ; "  {.e.  its  drift  disliked  and  its  authority  spurned.  The  second,  being
precepts  enjoining  particular  duties,  is  said  with  propriety  to  be  disobeyed.  The  order
of  enumeration  is  also  the  logical  and  natural  order.  Action  is  ever  the  outcome  of
sentiment,  and  its  expression.  What  a  man  outwardly  disobeys  ho  has  begun  by
inwardly  despising.  And  so  what  he  begins  by  despising  he  naturally  goes  on  to
disobey.  It  is  in  the  heart  that  the  eggs  are  hatched  which,  in  a  later  stuge,  are  the
birds  of  evil-doing.  It  is,  therefore,  at  the  door  of  his  heart  that  the  wise  man  will
mount  guard  (Prov.  iv.  23).

III.  All  tbansobbssion  is  the  outcome  op  idolatby.  Their  lies  led  them
astray.  "By  'lies*  here  we  are  to  understand  idols.  And  the  figure  is  most  appro-
priate. Amos  calls  the  idols  '  lies,'  not  only  as  res  gitm  fallunt,  but  as  fabrications
and  nonentities"  (Keil ;  see  1  Cor.  viii.  4).  It  is  this  lying  character  that  makes  them
inevitably  the  occasion  of  sin.  The  first  sin  was  brougtit  about  by  a  lie,  in  which  the
truth  of  God's  threat  was  denied,  and  so  its  practical  power  destroyed.  And  every
idol  is  just  such  a  lie  in  embodied  form.  It  is  an  abrogation  of  God's  authority,  a
denying  of  his  very  existence;  and  it  is  a  substitution  for  these  of  a  god  and  a  code
congenial  to  our  fallen  nature.  Under  such  circumstances  violation  of  God's  Law  is
a  foregone  conclusion.

IV.  The  idols  op  the  children  are  the  idols  of  the  fathers.  Imitation  is
easier  than  invention.  Hence  Israel,  when  they  first  wanted  an  idol,  adopted  the  calf
of  Egypt  (Exod.  xxxii.  4) ;  and  Jeroboam,  also  just  left  Egypt,  set  up  calf-woiship  in
Dan  and  Bethel  (1  Kings  xii.  28).  Then,  other  things  being  equal,  the  persons  men
are  most  likely  to  imitate  are  their  fathers,  who  are  their  teachers  and  guides  and
natural  examples.  Add  to  this  that  national  tastes  and  habits  and  characters,  formed
in  connection  with  a  particular  idol-worship,  would  be  in  special  harmony  with  it,  and
would  be  transmitted  with  it  from  sire  to  son.

V.  Sijr  inside  and  outside  the  spiritual  circle  is  dealt  with  on  the  same
PBiNOiPLBs.  The  manner  of  the  sin  was  the  same  with  Judah  and  the  heathen.  It
was  a  transgression,  or  act  of  disobedience  to  a  known  law,  as  distinguished  from  a
sinful  disposition.  It  was  a  series  of  these  acts,  culminating  in  a  final  one  of  special
enormity.  "  For  three  transgressions,  and  for  four."  The  manner  of  treatment  was  the
same.  God  threatened  to  strike.  Then  he  lifted  his  hand  for  the  stroke.  Then  he
withlield  it  for  a  time.  Then  he  declared  the  limit  of  forbearance  was  past,  and
nothing  could  now  prevent  the  falling  of  the  blow.  2%e  mode  of  punishment  was
to  be  the  same.  The  agent  would  be  devouring  fire.  This  would  fall  on  the  capital
Sin  in  a  visible  spiritual  relation,  and  however  mixed  up  with  acts  of  worship,  is  no
whit  less  guilty.  There  is  only  one  bell,  and  all  sin  alike  deserves  it,  and,  unrepented
of,  must  bring  to  it.

Ver.  4. — Heredity  and  the  idol-taint.  "  And  their  lies  led  them  astray,  after  which
their  fathers  walked."  Idolatry  was  Israel's  besetting  sin.  Within  two  months  'of
their  leaving  Egypt  they  fell  into  it,  and,  in  spite  of  Divine  deterrent  measures,  they
returned  to  it  persistently  for  nine  hundred  years.  They  took  to  idol-worship,  in  fact,
as  "  to  the  manner  bom."  And  that  the  sin  was  constitutional,  and  in  the  grain,
is  evident  from  the  fact  that  there  was  no  corresponding  secession  from  idol-worship
to  the  service  of  the  true  God  (Jer.  ii.  11).  It  was,  moreover,  the  germinal  sin.
Deranging  the  primary  relation  to  God,  it  led  to  the  derangement  of  all  other  relations
subordinate  to  this.  From  it,  as  a  fruitful  seed,  sprang  up  in  »  luxuriant  crop  the
hateful  national  vices,  in  which  the  heathen  around  were  not  merely  imitated  but


CH.  u.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  29

outdone.  And  then,  as  was  natural,  all  the  national  troubles,  including  the  crowning
one  of  captivity  in  Babylon,  were  brought  on  them  by  this  and  its  resultant  sins,  and
were  designed  to  be  at  once  its  punishment  and  cure.  How  near  the  practice  lay  to
the  sources  of  national  corjuption  and  calamity  this  passage  shows.     We  have  here —

I.  An  idol  a  lib.  This  is  a  strong  figure,  and  very  apt  (Jer.  xvi.  19,  20 ;  Eom.  i.
25).  1.  It  is  a  figment  of  the  imagination.  "  An  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world "
(1  Cor.  viii.  4).  It  is  simply,  as  the  very  name  implies,  the  creation  of  an  errant
fancy.  If  we  think  that  to  be  something  which  is  nothing,  we  deceive  ourselves;
and  the  idol  which  is  the  occasion  of  the  deception  is  an  illusion  and  a  lie.  There  are
idols  in  every  human  heart.  Such  are  all  its  passions  and  lusts  (Col.  iii.  5 ;  1  John  v.
21).  And  they  are  lies.  They  are  conversant  with  unrealities  only.  They  deceive
by  false  shows  and  promises.  They  promise  joys  that  are  purely  visionary.  They
afford  joys  that  turn  out  greatly  poorer  than  they  seemed.  They  refuse  to  believe
in  evil  consequences  that  are  manifold  and  inevitable.  Every  man  who  has  given
them  entertainment  has  deceived  himself  (Bom.  vi.  21).  2.  It  is  the  deviV a  figure-head.
This  is  Paul's  reading  of  the  natural  history  of  an  idol  (1  Cor.  x.  19,  20),  and  it  was
that  of  Moses  (Lev.  xvii.  7 ;  Deut.  xxxii.  17)  and  Ezra  (2  Chron.  xi.  15)  and  David
(Ps.  cvi.  37)  before  him.  Thus  the  imaginary  god  is,  after  all,  a  real  devil,  and
therefore  doubly  a  lie ;  for  he  "  is  a  liar,  and  the  father  of  it."  He  suggests  it,  and
designs  it,  and  works  through  it,  and  embodies  himself  in  it,  and  then  crowns  all  by
concealing  the  fact.  The  "kingdom  of  the  beast"  in  prophecy  is  probably  the  great
idolatrous  confederation  or  false  Church  in  which  idolatry  is  wedded  to  empire  (Dr.
Wylie,  'Great  Exodus').  So  with  the  spiritual  idols  of  our  hearts.  They  are  of  the
devil  (1  John  iii.  8),  produced  by  his  working  (Acts  v.  3)  and  charged  with  his  evil
nature  (John  viii.  44).  To  serve  the  flesh  in  the  lusts  of  it  is,  in  a  very  literal  sense,
to  serve  the  devil.  3.  It  disappoints  all  expectations  from  it.  "  Ye  are  of  nothing,"
says  Isaiah,  addressing  idols,  "and  your  work  of  nought"  (Isa.  xli.  24).  So  we  say,
"  Out  of  nothing  nothing  comes."  Idol  impotence,  declared  in  Scripture  (Jer.  xiv.  22),
and  proved  by  experiment  (1  Kings  xviii.  24,  29),  is  a  corollary  from  the  very  nature
of  things.  So  with  spiritual  idols.  Nothing  comes  out  of  them  to  the  purpose.
Covetousness  and  concupiscence  and  frivolity  promise  happiness,  and  it  never  comes,
but  is  wasted  by  them  beyond  recovery.  And  then,  instead  of  happiness,  there  comes
a  ruined  estate,  and  shattered  health,  and  blasted  hopes,  and  an  accusing  conscience,
and  the  first  tooth  of  the  worm  that  never  dies.

II.  An  idol  a  oorbuptino  lib.  "Caused  them  to  err,"  or  "led  them  astray."
There  is  a  whole  philosophy  of  morals  in  this  statement.  1.  Wrong  helief  leads  to
wrong  action.  The  modern  byword  that  "religion  is  not  a  creed,  but  a  life,"  is  cant
generally,  and  a  blunder  always.  Religion  is  neither  a  creed  nor  a  life;  it  is  both.
"  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them."  You  cannot  do  them  other-
wise ;  and  in  that  case,  to  know  them  is  useless.  It  is  impossible  to  steer  right  with
a  wrong  theory  of  navigation  or  with  no  theory.  So  a  right  life  is  impossible  where
there  is  a  wrong  creed  or  no  creed.  A  creed  is  but  a  formula,  of  which  the  intelligent
life  is  the  filling  up.  Belief  in  idols,  or  in  any  ordinance  of  their  worship,  is  a  mistake,
and  acted  on  must  lead  astray.  So,  too,  with  the  idols  of  sinful  appetites.  We  expect
happiness  from  serving  them,  and  serve  them  with  that  view.  What  is  this  but
committing  sin  on  principle — wrong  practice  the  inevitable  outcome  of  wrong  theory?
2.  Idolatry  casta  off  God,  and  so  all  restraints  on  ill-doing.  Morality  has  its  basis  in
religion.  The  standard  of  it  is  God's  character.  The  ground  of  it  is  God's  command.
If  there  is  no  God  there  is  no  duty,  as  theists  understand  duty,  and  men  may  live
as  they  list.  This  was  what  Israel  did  as  soon  as  they  became  idolatrous  (ver.  7).
Idolatry  was  equivalent  with  them  to  a  deed  of  idemnity  for  sinning.  So  with  the
worshippers  of  idol  lusts.  The  idolatry  that  makes  a  god  of  ourselves  makes  us  also
a  law  to  ourselves.  3.  An  idol  is  evil  even  as  a  conception,  and  the  worship  of  it  maktt
the  idolater  like  it.  "Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean?"  The  idol
invented  by  corrupt  man  is  a  corrupt  creation.  The  gods  of  Greece  and  Rome  were
many  of  them  simply  the  embodiments  of  human  vices ;  and  as  they  were  models  for
men  to  study  and  imitate,  the  worship  of  them  made  the  people  like  them.  We  are
naturally  assimilated  to  the  likeness  of  the  thing  we  serve,  if  we  serve  it  truly.  Let
this  warn  us  to  take  service  only  with  a  pure  master.


80  THE  BOOK  OF   AMOS  [oh.  n.  1— 1&

III.  An  idol  an  hebeditabt  lik.  "  After  which  their  fathers  walked."  Season
suggests  and  history  shows  that  the  idols  of  the  fathers  are  the  idols  of  the  children.
1.  All  practices  tend  to  become  hereditary.  Children  are  imitative.  They  do  what
they  see  done.  An  act  repeated  becomes  a  habit,  and  the  habit  leading  to  persistence
in  the  act,  presses  it  on  others'-  attention,  and  leads  to  its  being  imitated.  It  is  thug
that  the  social  and  religious  customs  of  a  community  assume  an  aspect  of  heredity,
and  propagate  themselves  down  the  generations.  2.  Evil  practices  do  so  especially.
(Prov.  xxii.  15.)  Evil  is  congenial  to  human  nature,  and  men  will  do  the  thing  that
is  pleasant.  Hence  evil  never  dies,  whilst  good  is  dying  out  continually;  and  evil
propagates  itself,  whilst  good  can  be  propagated  only  by  a  perpetual  exercise  of  Divine
influence.  3.  Family  sins  are  the  most  surely  hereditary  of  all.  Dispositions  run  in
the  blood.  The  drunkard,  the  thief,  the  libertine,  each  transmits  his  evil  appetite  or
tendency  to  his  children,  and  so  practically  ensures  their  falling  into  his  sin.  There  ia
no  reason  to  except  a  taste  for  idol-worship  from  the  operation  of  this  law.  In  the
literal  sense  it  is  an  appetency  easily  transmissible.  In  the  spiritual  sense  it  is  more
easily  propagable  still.  If  "  the  fathers  have  eaten  the  sour  grapes "  of  idol-service
in  any  form,  "  the  children's  teeth "  are  more  than  likely  to  be  "  set  on  edge."  4.
Idol-worship  is  self-worship  in  an  insidious  form,  and  therefore  specially  congenial  to
human  nature.  Self  is  the  idol  easiest  to  enthrone.  The  injunction  to  love  ourselves
is  not  given  in  Scripture.  It  is  safely  and  properly  assumed,  and  made  the  model  and
measure  of  our  love  to  others  (Matt.  xix.  19).  Self-love  is  an  affection  native  to  the
heart,  and  that  in  ideal  strength.  Now,  an  idol  represented  the  maker's  ideal  of
himself.  It  was,  therefore,  agreeable  to  his  nature,  and  its  service  congenial,  and
so  of  easy  transmission  from  generation  to  generation.  All  sin  is  really  at  bottom
self-worship.  We  prefer  ourselves  to  God ;  our  will,  our  pleasure,  our  way,  to  his.
We  push  him  off  the  throne,  and  ourselves  on  it,  and  then  do  as  we  list.  It  is  only
grace  that  says,  " Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do? "

Vers.  6—8. — The  woe  against  Israel.  This  is  the  last  woe  and  the  greatest.  "The
thunder-cloud  of  God's  judgments  having  passed  over  all  the  nations  round  about,  and
even  discharged  the  fire  from  heaven  on  Judah  and  Jerusalem,  settles  at  last  on
Israel"  (Pusey).  Just  as  God's  honour  suffered  specially  by  their  sin,  so  does  his
heart  suffer  specially  in  their  punishment.  And  so,  whilst  compendious  justice  may  be
meted  out  to  heathen  nations,  the  destruction  of  the  chosen  people  cannot  be  denounced
without  regretful  enlargement  on  the  circumstances  of  the  case.

I.  COVBTOUSNESS  PUTS  A  CONTEMPTnOUB  ESTIMATE  ON  HUMAN  UFB.      "  They  Sell  the

righteous  for  money,  and  the  poor  for  a  pair  of  shoes."  This  may  be  either  a  com-
mercial or  a  judicial  transaction,  but  in  either  case  the  principle  involved  is  the  same.
An  undue  estimate  of  wrong  involves  an  inadequate  estimate  of  all  else.  Wealth
becomes  the  one  good,  and  gain  the  one  pursuit.  Human  lite  is  as  nothing  in  com-
parison with  personal  aggrandizement  to  the  extent  of  even  a  paltry  sum.  Officialism,
to  which  the  death  of  a  human  being  is  mainly  a  question  of  a  burial  or  registration
fee,  is  not  an  altogether  unheard-of  thing.  This  principle  has  a  bearing,  not  only  on
murder  and  the  perversion  of  justice,  but  on  slavery,  oppression,  the  opium  and  liquor
traffics,  and  every  method  of  making  money  at  the  expense  of  human  life  or  health  or
well-being.  The  extent  to  which  such  things  prevail,  and  the  tens  of  thousands  of
human  lives  annually  sacrificed  for  gain,  is  a  startling  commentary  on  the  maxim  that
"  the  love  of  money  is  a  root  of  all  evil."

II.  The    DOMINATING    VICE    OF    A    COMMUNITY    MAKES    ALL    THE    OTHEB    VICES    ITS

TEIBUTABIEB.  Israel's  besetting  sin  as  against  their  fellow-men  was  covetousness.  1.
This  VMS  inhuman.  It  bore  hardest  on  the  poor.  These,  being  helpless,  were  its
easiest  victims.  Humanity  was  put  out  of  the  question,  and  the  unspeakably  greater
suffering  involved  in  making  the  same  gain  off  the  poor,  as  compared  with  the  rich,
was  no  deterrent  whatever.  Gain,  though  it  be  the  very  heart's  blood  of  miserable
fellow-creatures,  was  all  they  had  an  eye  lor  or  a  heart  to  consider.  2.  It  was  ungodly.
It  made  special  victims  of  the  righteous.  This  course  was  partly  utilitarian,  no  doubt.
The  righteous  might  be  expected  to  submit  to  the  maximum  of  wrong  with  the
minimum  of  retaliation.  But  it  was  profane  as  well.  The  wicked  hate  good,  and  all
'n  whom  it  is  foimd.     "  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in


CH.n.1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  81

him."  It  was  natural,  therefore,  that  a  worldly  act  should  assume  an  ungodly  cha-
racter where  opportunity  arose.  3.  /*  was  devilish.  "  Who  pant  after  the  dust  of  the
earth  on  the  head  of  the  poor."  It  rejoiced  in  all  the  inoidentnl  evils  which  oppression
of  the  poor  involved.  When  those  it  impoverished  were  levelled  in  the  dust  of  misery
and  degradation,  this  was  the  sort  of  thing  it  panted  after.  One  side  of  a  man's  moral
nature  cannot  become  vitiated  without  affecting  the  other  sides.  The  vices  have  an
affinity  for  one  another,  and  tend  to  come  together  in  groups.  If  evil  gets  in  the  little
finger  of  one  vice,  the  intrusion  of  the  whole  body  is  only  a  question  of  time.

III.  When  men  oet  sated  with  simple  sins,  they  bbsobt  to  coMPonND  sins  fob
A  NEW  sensation.  Sin  does  not  satisfy  any  time,  and  the  longer  it  is  followed  up  it
satisfies  the  less.  In  the  commission  of  it  appetite  increases,  and  relish  diminishes
pari  passu,  and  so  the  candle  of  actual  enjoyment  is  being  shortened  at  both  ends.
One  device  in  mitigation  of  this  is  to  increase  the  dose,  and  another  to  multiply  the
ingredients.  Reduced  to  the  latter  expedient,  Israel  mixed :  1.  Carousal  with  unclean-
net*.  The  two  things  often  go  together.  They  are  the  two  chief  indulgences  craved
for  by  carnal  appetite.  The  one,  moreover,  helps  to  produce  the  other.  A  Falstaff
who  combines  the  drunkard  with  the  libertine  is  the  typical  debauchee.  3.  Unclean-
ness  with  incest.  "A  man  and  his  father  go  to  the  same  girl."  This  act  was
equivalent  to  incest,  which  was  a  capital  crime  according  to  the  Mosaic  code  (Lev.
xviii.  7,  15  ;  XX.  11).  It  outdid  the  heathen  themselves,  among  whom  this  crime  was
not  so  much  as  named  (1  Cor.  v.  1).  An  apostate  is  always  the  vilest  sinner  (2  Pet.
ii.  21,  22).  3.  Bobbery  with  all  three.  "  Stretch  themselves  upon  pawned  clothes."
This  was  robbery  in  two  forms.  They  retained  pawned  clothes  overniglH,  contrary  to
the  Law  of  Moses  (Exod.  xxii.  26, 27),  and  in  further  violation  of  it  used  them  to  sleep
on  (Deut.  xxiv.  12,  13).  "And  drink  the  wine  of  the  amerced."  Again  a  double
injustice.  The  fine  was  unjustly  inflicted,  and  then  dishonestly  appropriated.  4.
Profanity  with  the  entire  troupe.  "  In  order  to  profane  my  holy  Name."  Incest  was
the  guiltiest,  but  as  a  carnal  indulgence  it  had  no  advant^e  over  any  other  form  of
uncleanness.  It  must,  therefore,  have  been  sought  out  because  of  its  very  horrors,  and
with  a  view  to  the  profanation  of  God's  holy  Name,  making  the  "  members  the  mem-
bers of  an  harlot,"  '•  Before  every  altar,"  t.e.  at  Beersheha  and  Dan,  where  Jehovah
was  worshipped  after  a  fashion  (see  Keil),  and  therefore  in  determinate  contempt  of
Otoi.  "  In  the  house  of  their  God,"  not  the  idol-god  probably,  but  the  God  of- Israel.
"  In  the  time  of  Jeroboam  II.  there  was  no  heathenish  idolatry  in  the  kingdom  of  the
ten  tribes,  or  at  any  rate  it  was  not  publicly  maintained"  (Keil).  But  the  sin,  though
less  complicated,  was  scarcely  less  heinous  than  if  idolatry  had  been  a  part  of  it.  It
wag  done  of  set  purpose  to  dishonour  him,  and  in  order  to  this  the  place  selected  for
the  commission  of  it  was  his  house,  and  the  occasion  the  celebration  of  his  worship.
What  a  horrible  exhibition  of  extreme  and  multiplex  depravity  1  "  They  condensed
sin.  By  a  sort  of  economy  in  the  toil  of  sinning  they  blended  many  sins  in  one  .  .  .
and  in  all  the  express  breach  of  God's  commandments  "  (Pusey).

Vers.  9 — 11. — Ihe  manifold  mercies  of  the  covenant  people.  In  striking  contrast  to
Israel's  treatment  of  God  stands  out  his  treatment  of  them.  Mercy  rises  above  mercy,
tier  on  tier,  in  a  mighty  pyramid  of  blessing.    Of  these  there  was —

I.  National  adoption.  This  is  not  mentioned,  but  it  is  implied,  as  underlying  all
the  other  favours.  God's  first  step  was  to  make  them  his  people.  He  loved  and
chose  them  (Deut.  x.  15 ;  vii.  7,  8).  He  separated  them  from  the  peoples,  and  took
them  into  covenant  with  himself  (Exod.  xxxiii.  16 ;  Gen.  xvii.  7,  19).  That  covenant
he  sealed  (Gen.  xvii.  13),  and  all  who  observed  the  seal  he  styled  his  own  people
(Isa.  xliii.  1),  lavishing  on  them  in  addition  many  a  title  of  affection.  This  national
adoption  is  the  fact  that  subtends  the  whole  line  of  Israel's  national  favours.

II.  National  deliverance.  "  Brought  you  up,"  etc.  (ver.  10).  This  was  a
stupendous  providence;  stupendous  in  its  measures  and  stupendous  in  its  results,  and
therefore  of  immense  moral  significance  and  weight.  The  mighty  forces  of  nature  are
utilized.  A  haughty  heathen  nation  is  brought  to  its  hended  knees  before  the  God  of
the  down-trodden  Israel.  A  rabble  becomes  an  army.  Crouching  slaves  become  the
fearless  free.  And,  out  of  the  chaos  of  despair  and  death  emerges  the  young  world  of
a  fresh  national  life.     This  astounding  work  was  Jehovah's  rod  to  conjure  with  in  the


38  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  ii.  1— 1ft

after-centuries.  Be  makes  it  the  fulcrum  on  which  to  rest  the  lever  of  resistless
motive.  His  Law,  in  its  moral  (Bxod.  xx.  2),  judicial  (Deut.  xxiv.  18 — 22 ;  xv.  15),
and  ceremonial  aspects  (Deut.  xvi.  12),  is  bespoken  a  ready  and  glad  obedience  in  the
word,  "1  am  the  Lord  thy  God,  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,"  etc.

III.  National  preservation.  "  And  led  you  forty  years."  The  sustained  but
quiet  miracles  of  the  desert-pilgrimage  were  a  worthy  sequence  to  the  prodigies  of  the
Exodus.  Divine  energies  were  not  exhausted  in  the  thunder-bursts  under  which  Egypt
was  made  to  reel.  They  were  but  the  stormy  prelude  to  the  sunshine  and  soft
showers  and  gentle  wooing  winds  of  a  long  spiritual  husbandry.  In  the  manna
falling  silently,  and  the  mystic  guiding  pillar,  and  the  Shechinah-glory  lighting  up  the
most  holy  place,  Jehovah  by  a  perpetual  miracle  kept  himself  before  the  nation's  eye
in  all  providential  and  saving  relations.  The  resistless  Deliverer  was  the  jealous  Pro-
tector, the  bounteous  Provider,  and  the  solicitous  and  tender  Friend.

IV.  National  triumph.  "  I  destroyed  the  Amorite,"  etc.  The  Hebrews  had  fierce
and  powerful  enemies  in  all  the  neighbouring  nations.  These  were  generally  their
superiors  in  physical  strength  and  courage  and  the  warlike  arts.  Apart  from  miracu-
lous help,  it  is  doubtful  whether  Ijyael  would  not  have  been  overmatched  by  almost
any  one  of  them  (Exod.  xvii.  11 ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  42).  Yet  the  giant  races  were  subdued
before  them  and  wasted  off  the  earth.  When  the  grasshopper  (Numb.  xiii.  33)  seizes
on  the  lion's  domain  there  are  forces  at  work  that  invert  the  natural  order  of  things.
To  make  the  minnows  of  un warlike,  timid,  plodding  Israel  victorious  over  the  tritons  of
Anak,  the  colossal  warriors  of  Hebron  (Josh.  xi.  21),  was  a  moral  miracle,  sufficient  in
itself  to  carry  a  nation's  faith  and  a  nation's  gratitude  till  the  end  of  time.

V.  National  enfeofment.  "  To  possess  the  land  of  the  Amorite."  An  earthly
inheritance  was  included  in  the  earliest  promise  to  Israel  (Gen.  xvii.  8).  The  tradition
of  this  ideal  provided  home  was  never  lost.  In  the  stubble-fields  and  by  the  brick-
kilns, where,  "like  dumb,  driven  cattle,"  they  toiled  throughout  the  years  of  their
Egyptian  bondage,  the  vision  of  it  came  as  a  ray  of  comfort  lighting  the  darkest  hours.
When  they  marched  from  Egypt  they  consciously  went  to  possess  their  own  land,  and
the  long  detention  in  the  desert  was  taken  as  a  tedious  but  appropriate  schooling  to
prepare  them  for  the  coming  of  age.  Palestine,  when  at  last  they  settled  in  it,  was
the  very  garden  of  the  world,  and  a  home  so  perfect  of  its  kind  as  to  be  made  an
emblem  of  the  eternal  home  above.  God's  standing  monument,  v?ritten  over  with  the
story  of  his  goodness,  was  to  every  Israelite  the  teeming,  smiling  land  in  which  he  lived.

VI.  National  evangelization.  "And  I  raised  up  of  your  sons,"  etc.  The
prophet  was  a  characteristic  national  institation  among  the  Jews.  He  was  a  man  to
whom  God  made  revelations  of  his  will  (Numb.  xii.  6),  and  through  whom  he  com-
municated that  will  to  the  people  (Heb.  i.  1).  Of  this  communication  more  or  less
was  generally,  although  not  invariably,  committed  to  writing,  and  embodied  in  the
Scriptures.  The  prophet  did  not  regularly  instruct  the  people;  that  was  rather  the
business  of  the  priest.  But  he  did  so  often,  and  was  besides  God's  mouthpiece  for  the
communication  of  new  truth,  speaking  it  alwa3's  according  to  the  analogy  of  faith  (Deut.
xiii.  1 — 5).  The  permanent  establishment  thus  of  a  Divine  oracle  in  their  midst,
giving  constant  access  to  the  fountain-head  of  truth,  was  a  notable  privilege  to  Israel.
The  institution  of  Nazarites  was  little  less  so  in  another  direction.  They  were  conse-
crated ones,  separated  from  common  men  and  common  uses,  and  devoted  in  a  special
manner  to  God  (Numb.  vi.  1 — 21).  Such  consecration  was  the  ideal  human  life  (John
xvii.  19).  Therefore  what  the  prophet  did  for  truth  in  the  abstract  the  Nazarite  did
for  it  in  the  concrete.  The  one  revealed  God's  will,  the  other  embodied  it,  or  at  least
its  great  central  principle.  Their  respective  functions  were  complemui  tary  of  each
other,  and  between  the  two  the  Isiaelitish  nation  was  "  througlily  furnished  unto
good  works."

Ver.  12. — "  Children  that  are  corrupters."  "  But  ye  made  the  dedicated  drink  wine;
and  ye  commanded  the  prophets,  saying.  Ye  shall  not  prophesy,"  Action  and  reaction
kava  a  natural  connection  and  a  normal  relation  to  each  other.  In  all  departments  of
being  they  meet  and  answer,  as  face  answers  to  face  in  a  glass.  The  rebound  is  as  the
blow,  the  conviction  as  the  argument,  the  response  as  the  appeal.  The  mention  of
what  (Jod  had  done  for  Israel  brings  up  the  question — How  had  Israel  been  affected  by


OH.  11.  1— 16.J  THE    BOOK   OF   AMOS.  S3

it  all?  Had  things  occurred  in  th?  normal  way?  Had  gratitude  waited  on  bJegsing
in  due  proportion,  and  improvement  followed  privilege  ?  This  verse  is  the  disappoint-
ing answer.  Israel's  response  to  God's  appeal,  as  contained  in  his  gracious  dealings,
was  not  the  gratitude  and  fealty  due,  but  unaccountable  and  aggravated  sin.  God
delivered  them  from  bondage,  and  they  oppressed  each  other;  he  defended  them
against  unjust  violence,  and  they  wrought  injustice.  He  guided  them  in  their
journeys,  and  they  led  one  another  astray.  He  plied  them  with  evangelizing  agencies,
and  tney  responded  by  committing  sacrilege  and  procuring  blasphemy.  The  last  is
the  sin  charged  against  themJiere.

L  This  was  pbimabilt  a  bin  against  God.  The  Nazarite  and  the  prophet  were
both  Divine  institutions.  The  vow  of  the  one  and  the  message  of  the  other  were  alike
prescribed  by  God  (Numb.  vi.  1 ;  xii.  6).  It  was  his  will  that  they  should  perform
their  characteristic  acts.  In  doing  so  they  were  but  his  instruments,  accomplishing
his  purpose  toward  the  nation.  Accordingly,  Israel's  action  against  them  was  really
against  him,  against  his  servants,  against  his  ordinance,  against  his  authority.  So
with  all  action  against  God's  people  as  such.  As  we  deal  by  them  will  he  regard  us
as  dealing  by  himself.  They  are  all  God's  prophets,  understanding  the  mysteries  of
his  kingdom,  and  "  holding  forth  the  Word  of  life."  They  are  all  his  dedicated  ones,
separate  ftoru  the  world,  and  living,  "  not  to  themselves,  but  to  him  who  died  and  rose
•gain  for  them."  And  whether  as  the  one  thing  or  the  other,  they  are  his  accredited
representatives  on  earth  (Matt.  x.  40).  Our  treatment  of  them  is  virtually  our  treat-
ment of  him  that  sent  them  (Matt.  xxv.  40).  A  kiss  to  them  reaches  the  Master's
lips ;  a  blow  to  them  touches  the  apple  of  his  eye.

II.  PBOXiMATBtT  THIS  WAS  A  SIN  AGAINST  MAN.  It  consisted  in  Compelling  the
prophet  and  the  Nazarite  to  disobey  God.  Now,  disobedience  is  sin,  even  when  com-
mitted under  pressure.  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."  Men  have  faced
death  rather  than  the  guilt  of  disobedience  to  known  law.  And  so  long  as  there  is  any
alternative,  even  death  itself,  there  is  no  place  for  disobedience.  Israel's  was  the  sin  of
compelling  others  to  sin.  This  was  soul-murder,  and  therefore  guilt  of  the  darkest
dye.  Early  persecutors  sometimes  compelled  Christians  to  swallow  poison,  an  infernal
device  to  make  them  suicides  as  well  as  martyrs,  and  so  destroy  them  soul  and  body
both.  So  diabolically  ingenious  was  the  young  persecutor,  Saul  of  Tarsus,  that  he
compelled  believers  to  blaspheme  (Acts  xxvi.  11) ;  and  when  recalling  the  sin  of  his
unconverted  life  he  makes  that  fact  the  bitterest  count  in  bis  self-accusation.  Kindred
to  this  was  Israel's  sin.  It  was  an  attempt  to  compass  not  men's  death  alone,  but
their  damnation — a  crime  to  which  killing  the  body  is  as  nothing.  And  it  is  not  so
uncommon  in  Christian  lands  and  Christian  Churches.  How  many  among  us  are
tempters  to  drunkenness,  tempters  to  uncleanness,  tempters  to  falsehood,  tempters  to
profanity !  Well,  every  tempter  is  a  murderer — a  murderer  not  merely  in  the  ordinary
sense,  but  in  the  Satanic  sense  of  destroying  or  trying  to  destroy  an  immortal  souL

III.  Ultimately  it  was  a  am  aoainbt  the  binneb'b  own  intebebts.  All  sin  is
unprofitable,  but  this  was  doubly  so.  The  prophet  brought  God's  message,  not  for
their  destruction,  but  for  their  salvation.  When  they  shut  his  mouth  they  cut  them-
selves off  from  their  only  chance  of  being  saved.  "  Where  no  vision  is  the.  people
perish ; "  and  in  deliberately  cutting  it  off,  Israel  sealed  its  own  destruction.  Then  the
Nazarite  was  an  embodied  revelation,  a  typical  representation  of  a  consecrated  life.  A
heedful  eye  might  have  read  a  spiritual  lesson  out  of  his  separation.  "  The  life  of  the
Nazarites  was  a  continual  protest  against  the  self-indulgence  and  worldliness  of  the
people.  ...  It  was  a  life  above  nature  aud  thought.  . .  .  They  were  an  evidence  what  all
might  do  and  be  if  they  used  the  grace  of  God  "  (Pusey).  But,  in  the  compulsory
violation  of  his  vow,  the  rich  page  was  blotched  and  its  lesson  blotted  out.  It  presents
the  piteous  sight  of  a  people  stopping  the  fount  of  life  in  order  that  they  may  die  of
thirst.  Israel  would  neither  listen  to  the  Divine  voice  nor  look  at  the  Divine  life.
And  the  sight  is  not  confined  to  Israel  (2  Tim.  iv.  3).  There  are  Churches  that  will
not  tolerate  faithful  preaching.  There  is  a  preaching  that  minces  the  gospel  testimony
against  sin.  It  is  the  case  of  Israel  over  again.  The  people  sinfully  silence  the
preacher,  and  the  preacher  sinfully  submits  to  be  silenced.  A  Church  asleep,  and  the
minister  rocking  the  cradle,  is  a  poor  interpretatipn  of  the  pastoral  relation.

IV.  Altooetheb  it  was  a  sin  agoeavated   by  TBS  enjoyment  of  spboial


84  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  n.  1— !«.

UERCiGB.  All  that  God  had  done  was  a  motive  to  obedience  and  an  argument  against
Bin.  But  all  the  arrows  of  influence  fell  pointless  and  broken  from  their  hearts  of
stone.  The  more  Divine  mercies  multiplied,  the  more  did  abominable  wickednesi
increase.  8in,  under  sucli  unlikely  circumstances,  argues  special  inveteracy,  and  .
involves  corresponding  aggravation  of  guilt  (Rom.  li.  4).  With  every  want  supplied
and  every  better  feeling  appealed  to,  it  was  sin  not  only  without  temptation,  but  in
spite  of  strong  deterrents,  and  was  therefore  hopeless  as  it  was  guilty.  The  love  and
goodness  of  God  are  the  most  potent  persuasives  to  his  service.  Where  these  fail  ths
case  is  desperate.  What  mercy  cannot  bend  judgment  will  only  break.  If  you  sin
against  mercy  you  can  sin  eternally.  There  ii  no  Bpiritual  argument  that  can  make
you  yield  (2  Pet.  lii.  15  j  Bom.  ii.  4).

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  wrath  of  outraged  goodnets.  "  A  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ?  "
Even  God  will  not  bear  it  for  evermore.  A  "base  contempt  of  covenant  mercies,"
exemplified  here,  may  go  too  far.  The  limit  of  intelligent  forbearance  will  be  passed,
and  the  pent-up  vials  of  wrath  restrained  will  be  poured  forth.

I.  The  Crusher.  "  Behold,  I  will  press  you  down  as  the  cart  presses  that  is  filled
with  sheaves"  (Keil).  This  is  a  strong  figure.  God,  in  his  retributive  action,  is
compared  not  only  to  a  cart,  but  to  a  heavUy  loaded  one,  which  crushes  all  it  passes
over.  His  stroke,  when  it  falls,  will  be  heavy  in  proportion  as,  in  mercy,  it  has  been
long  suspended.  His  love  had  long  been  spurned,  and  now  at  last  it  is  turned  into
righteous  hatred.  Unspeakable  goodness  disregarded  persistently  will  now  give  place
to  thick  disasters.  His  power  had  been  insanely  dared,  and  Israel  would  now  discover
whether  they  had  an  arm  like  his.  "  On  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  shall  grind  him
to  powder."  How  indignant  love  can  be  that  has  suffered  persistent  outrage  I  How
stern  goodness  becomes  when  it  finds  itself  thrown  away  on  inappreciation  and  con-
tempt! How  overwhelming  Omnipotence  is,  which  nevertheless  endm°es  defiance  from
worms  of  the  dust  so  long !  How  terrible  God  will  be  as  a  Foe  where  he  will  not  be
accepted  as  a  Friend  (Ps.  xviii.  26 ;  Prov.  i.  24 — 28)  I

II.  The  obushed.  Tbise  are  not  the  nation  in  general,  but  each  class  in  particular
— the  strong,  the  courageous,  the  swift,  the  fighter,  the  runner,  and  the  rider  alike.
None  shall  escape.  God's  wrath,  like  his  love,  is  distinctive — rests  not  on  masses,  but
on  individuals.  And,  answering  to  this,  the  judgments  which  execute  his  wrath  are
elaborated  in  detail.  They  are  no  more  necessary  than  reluctant,  no  more  reluctant
than  sure,  no  more  sure  than  thorough.

*♦  The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,    .
But  they  grind  exceeding  smalL"

It  is  noticeable,  too,  that  of  those  who  fall  in  the  sweep  of  God's  sword,  it  Is  the  best
protected  who  are  emphasized.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  weak  and  timid  and  slow.
Their  destruction  might  be  taken  for  granted.  But,  lest  any  should  cherish  a  hope  of
escape  under  any  circumstances,  the  persons  to  whom  such  hope  would  be  most  natural
are  doomed  by  name.  An  occasion  of  remaining  in  sin  is,  with  many  wicked,  the
stealthy  hojw  that  somehow  or  other  they  wiU  escape  at  last  (Isa.  xxviii.  15).  Perhaps
they  have  no  definite  expectation,  no  theory  even,  on  the  subject.  They  know  the
Word  of  God  to  be  decisive,  and  feel  the  chances  are  against  them.  But  they  cajole
the  judgment  into  negligently  making  the  wish  the  father  to  the  thought,  and  go  down
to  death  the  half-conscious  victims  of  a  make-believe.  The  gospel  to  such  wants
heralding  with  a  Saviour's  warning  cry,  "  How  can  ye  escape  the  damnation  of  hell  ?"
HI.  The  crushing.  A  variety  of  figures  combine  to  illustrate  this.  1.  It  cannot
be  resisted.  "  The  strong  one  will  not  fortify  his  strength,"  etc.  There  are  no  arms
we  can  use  against  God.  They  are  suited  to  a  material,  not  a  spiritual,  foe.  There  is
no  strength  to  be  put  in  competition  with  his.  The  bare  thought  of  a  struggle  is  the
climax  of  all  absurdity.  "  Let  the  potsherds  strive  with  the  potsherds  of  the  earth."
2.  It  cannot  be  faced,  "  The  courageous  one  among  the  heroes  will  flee  away."  Man
has  strength,  and  confldence  in  it,  for  a  struggle  with  fellow-man.  But  his  strength
leaves  him  in  God's  presence  (John  vii.  44).  He  cannot  even  attempt  resistance.
"  He  falls  at  his  feet  like  one  dead."  3.  It  cannot  be  escaped.  "The  flight  will  be  lost
(o  the  swift."    To  fly  from  Omnipresence  is  as  inconceivable  as  to  fight  against  Omni<


OB.  n.  1—16.]  THE   BOOK   OF   AMOS.  U

potence.  Darkness  cannot  hide,  nor  distance  separate,  from  God.  We  live  in  liis
presenca  We  sin  in  his  presence.  We  die  in  his  presence.  Even  the  destruction /roTTi
his  presence  as  gracious  (2  Thess.  L  9)  is  destruction  in  his  presence  as  filling  heaven
and  earth.  (1)  Judgment  is  the  oiverse  of  grace.  There  are  only  the  two  ways  of  it.
There  is  no  compromise  hetween  obedience  and  disobedience  (Matt.  xii.  30).  8o  there
is  no  via  media  between  salvation  and  destruction.  The  coin  of  Scripture  truth  comes
to  us  with  a  nimbus  on  the  one  side  and  a  death's  head  on  the  other.  We  may  choose
between  the  two,  but  one  or  other  we  mvist  take  (Mark  xvi.  16).  God  will  save  if  he
may,  but  he  will  destroy  if  he  must.  (2)  Qrace  is  the  converse  of  Judgment.  Judgment
empties  the  strong  of  strength.  Grace  makes  the  weak  to  be  strong  in  God.  You  may
have  either ;  and  you  must  have  one.    Which  shall  it  be  ?

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOUa

Verg.  l-^._ — Moab't  brutaiity  avenged.  It  is  natural  for  the  mind  to  lay  hold  upon
and  to  retain  in  memory  some  one  out  of  many  characteristics  of  a  nation,  some  one  out
of  many  incidents  of  a  war.  The  one  thing  that  is  remembered  is  representative  of
many  things  that  are  forgotten.  So  is  it  with  Amos's  treatment  of  the  sins  of  the
surrounding  nations.  Several  of  these  are  characterized  by  some  special  quality.  In
the  case  before  us  in  this  passage  an  incident  of  malignant  brutality  is  mentioned,  not
as  standing  alone,  but  evidently  as  a  sample  of  the  conduct  of  which  the  children  of
Lot  had  been  guilty,  and  which  was  about  to  bring  down  upon  them  the  wrath  of
Heaven.

I.  Ieebveeencb  asd  insult  opfebed  to  the  dead  indicate  a  base  and  abandoned
DISPOSITION.  We  know  nothing  of  the  circumstance  here  referred  to.  The  Moabites
had  made  war  upon  the  Edomites ;  had  conquered  them,  had  captured  their  king,  and
had  slain  him,  and  then  consumed  his  bones  with  fire.  This  last  action  must  be  judged
by  the  standard  of  the  habits  and  feelings  of  the  time.  In  some  nations  and  at  some
periods  cremation  has  been  regarded  as  an  honourable  mode  of  disposing  of  dead  bodies.
In  the  time  of  the  prophet,  and  among  the  Hebrews  and  their  neighbours,  it  was  held
in  detestation.  No  greater  insult,  no  more  horrible  evidence  of  brutality,  was  possible.
The  dead  are  always  considered,  by  civilized  and  religious  communities,  as  entitled  to
tender  and  reverential  treatment.  Especially  those  who  believe  in  a  future  life  are
bound  to  support  their  creed  by  treating  a  dead  body  as  something  better  than  a  carcase.
The  instance  of  irreverence  here  recorded  was  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  it  was  a  king
whose  body  was  thus  treated.  War  is  in  itself  bad  enough ;  but  savage  brutality
renders  war  still  worse.

II.  Divine  Pbovidbnob  visits  bbutalitt  with  appbopriate  eetribution.  L
War,  with  all  its  accompanying  horrors,  is  the  doom  of  the  savage  slaughterers.  They
that  take  the  sword  perish  by  the  sword.  The  measure  they  mete  is  measured  to  them
again.  2.  In  this  retribution  the  great  suffer  equally  with  the  multitude.  They  who
insult  their  neighbours'  kings  may  suffer  in  the  person  of  their  own  mighty  ones.  Fire
devours  the  palaces  as  well  as  the  cottages,  and  the  judges  and  princes  are  cut  off  and
slain  along  with  the  meanest  of  the  subjects.  The  Lord  is  King  and  Judge,  and  ha
will  not  allow  those  nations  always  to  prosper  which  violate  his  Law  and  defy  hia
authority. — ^T.

Ver.  4. — Hie  privileged  but  faithless.  The  preceding  denunciations  refer  to  the
Idolatrous  nations  by  whom  the  chosen  people  were  surrounded.  But  the  impartiality
of  the  prophet  is  apparent  from  his  condemnation  of  his  own  kindred.  Amos  came
from  Tckoah,  a  city  of  Judah,  and,  instructed  by  the  righteous  Buler  of  all,  he  did  not
•pare  his  own  tribe.

I.  The  tbansgebbsion  of  Judah  was  aggravated  by  theib  possession  and
THEIR  neglect  OF  THE  DiviNE  Law.  From  the  days  of  the  desert  wanderings  the
Jewish  people  had  enjoyed  the  unspeakable  privilege  of  possessing  the  laws  of  Moses,
which  were  the  laws  of  Jehovah.  A  treasure  of  incomparable  value  should  have  been
highly  esteemed  and  diligently  used.  That  there  were  those  to  whom  the  Law  was  u
«  fine  gold,"  as  "  honey  and  the  honeycomb,"  cannot  be  questioned.    But  the  people  ai


86  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  n.  1— Ift

a  whole  were  ingensible  of  their  privileges,  and  neglected  and  abused  them ;  indeed,  they
are  charged  with  having  despised  them.  The  surrounding  and  heathen  nations  were
not  guilty  of  this  heinous  offence.  Great  is  the  sin  of  those  who  have  the  Word  of
God,  but  who  treat  it  with  neglect  and  disdain.

II.  The  TEANSOBE88I0N  OF  JUDAH  WAS  AGGRAVATED  BY  THEIB  FAILUBE  TO  PROFIT
BT  THE  LESSON  OF  WARNING  OFFERED   IN  THE   HISTORY   OF   THKIB    FOEEFATHBRS.       The

chosen  people  were  taught  not  only  by  words,  but  by  facts ;  not  only  by  the  books  of
Moses,  but  by  the  history  of  their  ancestors.  How  often  had  the  Hebrew  people  for-
saken their  God  I  How  grievously  had  they  sinned !  And  how  terribly  had  they  been
scourged  for  their  folly !  Yet  the  lesson,  emphatic  and  impressive  though  it  was,  was
overlooked  and  unlearnt.

III.  The  transqbbssion  of  Judah  was  aoobavated  bt  theib  lapse  into
IDOLATRY.  The  "  lies  "  spoken  of  by  the  prophet  refer  to  the  deceptive  and  hideous
rites  and  practices  of  the  heathen.  Jehovah  was  the  true  God;  the  "gods  of  th»
nations"  were  but  idols,  the  professions  of  whose  worshippers  and  priests  were  delusive
and  vain.  That  those  who  had  been  trained  to  idolatry  should  persevere  in  it  was
intelligible ;  but  that  Judah  should  forsake  the  righteous,  pure,  and  gracious  God  for
the  capricious  and  obscene  and  ridiculous  divinities  of  the  surrounding  nations,  was
monstrous,  and  only  to  be  accounted  for  by  an  awful  abandonment  to  self  and  gin.
The  greater  the  height  from  which  one  falls,  the  deeper  is  his  descent.

IV.  The  aoqbavated  tbansgbbssion  of  Judah  met  with  a  severe  betbibution.
Nebuzaradan  and  the  army  of  the  Chaldees  fulfilled  this  prediction  to  the  letter, — T.

Vers.  6 — 8. — A  nation's  crimes.  The  ministry  of  Amos  was  mainly  to  the  northern
kingdom.  With  this  passage  commences  the  long  impeachment  and  warning  which
the  prophet  was  inspired  to  address  to  Israel.  The  previous  denunciations  are
pungent,  but  brief;  now  Amos  puts  forth  all  his  strength  of  invective,  reproach,  and
expostulation.

L  Ungodliness  is  at  the  root  op  a  nation's  moral  debasement.  Israel  did  not,
indeed,  abjure  religion;  but  Israel  abjured  God.  "The  house  ot  their  god,"  says  the
prophet  with  a  quiet  irony,  referring  to  the  idol-temples  which  the  people  had  taken  to
frequenting.  The  reverence  of  the  supreme  Lord  of  righteousness  is  the  very  root  of
national  morality.  Let  a  people  worship  such  deities  as  were  worshipped  by  Israel's
neighbours,  the  Philistines,  the  Amorites,  the  Syrians,  and  it  is  well  ^own  to  what
fatal  results  such  worship  will  surely  lead.  And  let  a  nation  abandon  all  worship,  and
live  a  life  of  sense,  and  it  is  certainly  upon  the  high-road  to  moral  ruin.

II.  Gbeed  and  oppression  are  among  the  fruits  op  national  ungodliness.
In'  the  state  of  society  with  which  Amos  was  conversant,  these  immoral  habits  dis-
played themselves  in  the  enslavement  of  the  poor  or  in  their  deprivation  of  the
ordinary  comforts  of  life.  There  was  no  human  law  to  prevent  some  of  the  base
transactions  mentioned,  and  all  belief  in  a  Divine  Law  was  abandoned.  History  gives
us  many  proofs  of  the  pernicious  effect  of  secularism  and  superstition  upon  human
relations.  Not  oidy  are  all  restraints,  save  those  of  civil  law  and  physical  force,
spumed  and  ridiculed ;  there  is  no  impulse  and  no  motive  to  a  higher  than  the  selfish
and  animal  life.

III.  Flagrant  licentiousness  is  another  fruit  of  a  nation's  irrelioion.
The  passions  which  lead  to  such  atrocities  as  those  here  mentioned  are,  no  doubt,  deep
seated  in  human  nature.  But  religion  assists  men,  not  in  repressing  them  wholly,  but
in  controlling  and  guiding  them.  It  is  believed  by  many  that  Amos  refers  to  some  of
the  practices  which  were  encouraged  by  the  idolatries  to  which  the  Israelites  were  con-
forming. Certain  it  is  that  infidelity  is  often  associated  with  the  vilest  principles  of  an
Immoral  life,  and  tends  to  the  letting  loose  of  that  wild  beast — sensual  appetite — which
works  dire  devastation  in  society.

Application.  These  considerations  should  induce  those  who  prize  true  religion  for
themselves  to  seek  its  maintenance  at  home  against  the  assaults  of  infidelity,  and  to
seek  its  propagation  in  lands  where  its  absence  is  so  morally  deleterious.  — T.

Vers.  9 — 11. — A  nation's  privileges.  The  transgressions  of  Israel  were  all  the  more
reprehensible  because  of  the  peculiar  favour  which  had  been -shown  to  the  people  who


«H,ii.l— 16,]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  37


were  descendants  of  the  father  of  the  faithful  and  the  fnend  of  God.  Upon  these  special
privileges  the  prophet  here  dwells  and  expatiates,  with  a  view  to  bring  home  to  tha
offenders  the  magnitude  of  their  sin.

I.  A  NATION  SHOULD  TBAOB  THE  BAND  OF  GOD  IN  THE  DELIVEBAKOES  WBOUOHT  ON

ITS  BEHALF.  Israel  was  established  in  the  land  of  the  Canaanites,  of  whom  the
Amorites  are  in  this  passage  taken  as  the  representatives.  These  foes  of  the  chosen
nation  are  pictured  majestic  as  the  cedar  and  mighty  as  the  oak.  Yet  Jehovah  had
smitten  them  in  the  lofty  branches,  and  had  extirpated  them  from  the  roots,  and  had
planted  in  their  stead  the  vine  brought  out  of  Egypt.  It  was  not  by  Israel's  sword  or
bow,  but  by,  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord,  that  the  Amorites  had  been  vanquished.  A
devout  mind  will  trace  the  presence  and  the  action  of  Divine  Providence  in  a  nation's
history.  In  great  crises  England  has  been  succoured  by  the  interposition  of  Omni-
potence from  the  assaults  of  powerful  and  unpitying  foes.  The  "good  hand  of  our
God  "  has  been  upon  us  to  protect  and  to  deliver.

II.  A  NATION   SHOULD  EEMABK   THE  GUIDANCB  OF  THE   ALL-WISE  GoD  APPABBNT  IN

THE  EVENTS  OF  ITS  POLITICAL  LIFE.  "  I  led  you : "  such  is  the  language  in  which
Jehovah  reminded  the  forgetful  and  unfaithful  Hebrews  of  his  treatment  of  his  chosen.
The  epoch  of  wilderness-wandering  was  the  critical  epoch  of  Israel's  life ;  it  was  then
that  the  nation  was  consolidated  and  disciplined.  A  marvellous  story  it  remains  to
this  day,  the  story  of  the  forty  years  in  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai.  Fraught,  too,  with
encouragement  for  all  who  trust  God.  What  Christian  nation  has  not  reason  to  give
thanks  to  "him  who  led  his  people  through  the  wilderness:  for  his  mercy  eudureth  for
ever  "  ?  The  eye  must  be  dull  which  cannot  see,  the  heart  must  be  cold  which  does
not  confess,  the  directing  hand  of  the  Eternal  in  the  career  of  such  a  nation  as  our  own.

III.  A   NATION   SHOULD  GRATEFULLT  HONOUR   GOD  FOB   BAISING  UP  WISE  AND   HOLT

HEN  A8  NATIONAL  TEACHEBS  AND  EXAUPLES.  The  prophets  and  Nazaritcs  of  the  Jews
may  represent  men  of  sanctified  genius  and  insight,  and  mental  and  moral  force,  whom
Providence  appoints  to  be  the  inspiration  of  the  community  towards  all  that  is  beautiful
and  good.  A  people's  greatest  strength  and  most  valuable  possession  must  be  sought
in  its  finest,  purest,  ablest  men.  God  did  much  for  Israel  in  the  way  of  outward
guidance  and  interposition ;  but  all  his  mercies  were  transcended  by  the  gift  of  heroes
and  saints,  judges  and  seers,  valiant,  true-hearted  kings,  fearless  prophets,  faithful
priests.  Bich  as  our  own  country  is  in  many  other  respects,  its  true  wealth  must  be
sought  in  its  noblest,  most  unselfish  sons.  Qod  give  ua  grace  to  appreciate  and  to
profit  by  his  goodness  in  this  respect! — T.

Yer.  13. — Men's  sins  a  Divine  harden.  The  figure  of  the  text  is  one  taken  by  Amoa
from  his  own  experience  as  a  husbandman.  In  the  harvest-field  the  cart  is  piled  high
with  sheaves  to  be  taken  to  the  garner  or  the  threshing-floor.  The  wain  groans — as
poets  put  it — ^beneath  the  load.  Even  so,  it  is  represented  that  the  sins  of  Israel
oppress  Jehovah  ;  he  is  distressed  by  their  magnitude  and  their  aggravations.

I.  Light  is  cast  by  this  language  upon  the  ohabaotbb  of  God.  1.  His  repug-
nance to  sin  is  here  brought  before  us.  The  deities  of  the  heathen  do  not  seem  to  have
been  represented  as  hating  sin,  though  they  were  pictured  as  resenting  the  neglect  of
their  worshippers.  It  was  otherwise  with  Jehovah,  for  he  was  not  an  invention  of
human  ignorance  and  frailty.  The  Old  Testament  writers,  with  one  consent,  represent
the  Eternal  as  holy,  and  as  hating  sin  as  sin.  2.  His  distress  at  sin  is  conveyed  in  this
declaration.  This  is  no  imperfection.  Mere  disapproval  would  have  been  an  imperfec-
tion. But  it  is  an  encouraging  view  which  we  are  justified  in  taking  of  the  Divine
character,  as  we  read  that  God  is  pained  by  human  iniquity.  What  an  appeal  to
sinful  man  is  this,  "  I  am  pressed  under  you"  I

II.  Light  is  oast  by  this  language  upon  the  natubb  of  human  sin.  Men's
transgressions  are  not  unheeded  by  God,  neither  are  they  a  matter  of  indifference  to
him.  The  Supreme  Being  is  not  oppressed  by  the  vast  care  of  the  material  universe.
But  sin  is  so  heinous  and  awful  tnat  it  affects  his  feelings — if  we  may  use  language  so
human.  Shall  man  be  careless  with  regard  to  that  which  is  so  felt  by  the  infinite
heart  ?    Of  all  ills  there  can  be  none  like  this.

III.  Light  is  oast  by  this  language  upon  the  prospect  or  redemption.  This
light  may  be  dim,  but  it  is  an  advance  upon  darkness.    If  man's  sin  is  so  distressing


US  THE  BOOK  OP  AM03.  [oh.  n,  1—18,

to  God,  there  is  reason  to  hope  that  Divine  wisdom  and  grace  will  concur  to  provide
means  for  its  forgiveaess  and  its  cancelling.  The  feeling  which  is  uttered  in  the
figurative  language  of  the  text  found  full  expression  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  in  the
gospel  of  salvation. — T.

Vers.  14 — 16. — Judgment  inevitable.  In  the  preceding  verses  there  is  observable  an
accumulation  of  human  transgression  and  iniquity.  And  in  these  closing  verses  of  the
chapter  the  reader  is  equally  struck  with  the  rhetorical  accumulation  of  figures  intended
to  convey  a  deep  impression  of  the  inevitableness  of  retribution.

I.  A  PIOTUEK  OF  HUMAN  8BEATNEBS.  Man  has  his  own  standard  of  greatness.  The
prophet  piles  up  epithets  to  represent  man's  power.  In  vivid  colours  and  in  rapid
succession  there  rise  before  t^e  imagination  the  figures  of  the  "  swift "  runner  who  is
wont  to  overtake  his  foe,  the  "  strong  "  hero  whose  blow  cleaves  the  helmet  in  twain,
the  "  mighty  "  whose  praise  is  upon  all  lips,  the  "  bowman  "  whose  arrow  pierces  the
fugitive  in  the  battle-field,  the  "swift  on  foot"  who  trusts  for  safety  to  his  speed,
the  "  horseman  "  whose  charge  has  often  broken  the  doughty  ranks  of  the  enemy,  the
"  courageous,"  "  the  strong  of  his  heart,"  whom.no  danger  daunts.

II.  A  VISION  OF  INEVITABLE  RETRIBUTION  AND  OF  THE  DISOOMFITUEE  OF  THE  ENEMIES

OF  God.  Even  such  as  those  who  have  been  described  shall  be  powerless  in  the  day
of  the  Lord.  Exemption  from  the  operation  of  righteous  law  is  not  to  be  obtained
by  any  human  craft  or  might.  The  swift  shall  be  overtaken,  and  the  arm  of  the
warrior  shall  fall  powerless  by  his  side.  Justice  must  be  vindicated ;  the  Lord  of  right
will  never  abandon  his  sovereign  throne. — T.

Vers.  9 — 13. — God  and  nations.  ."  Yet  destroyed  I  the  Amorite  before  them,  whose
height  was  like  the  height  of  the  cedars,  and  he  was  strong  as  the  oaks ;  yet  I  destroyed
his  fruit  from  above,  and  his  roots  from  beneath,"  etc.  These  verses  suggest  a  few
remarks  in  relation  to  God  and  nations.

L  He  reminds  nations  of  the  greatness  of  his  kindness  towards  them.  In  these
verses  he  reminds  Israel  of  two  great  merciful  interpositions  of  his  on  their  behalf.  (1)
The  destruction  of  the  Amorite — the  original  inhabitant  of  Canaan.  Amorite  here
stands  for  all  the  old  Canaanites.  He  drove  out  the  Canaanites  that  Israel  might
possess  and  enjoy  the  goodly  land  in  which  they  then  lived  (Exod.  xxiii.  27).  (2)
Their  emancipation  from  Egypt  and  their  guidance  into  the  Holy  Land.  "  Also  I
brought  you  up  from  Egypt,  and  led  you  into  the  promised  land."  These  two  great
acts  of  kindoess  are  mentioned  only  as  specimens  of  millions  of  others.  The  language
in  which  these  acts  are  represented  suggest  three  great  truths  in  relation  to  God's
conduct  toward  the  world.  1.  He  often  sacrijkea  one  people  in  order  to  advance  the
interests  of  another.  The  old  Canaanites  he  sacrificed  for  the  good  of  Israel.  In  the
history  of  the  world  this  is  often  done ;  one  country  ruined  for  the  advantage  of  another.
This  is  marvellous;  it  clashes  with  our  primitive  ideas  of  justice  and  Divine  goodness.
But  we  cease  to  murmur  when  we  remember  that  there  is  a  great  explaining  day,  and
that  the  peoples  that  have  been  ruined  for  the  interests  of  others  have  never  suffered
more  from  the  hands  of  God  than  they  have  justly  deserved.  2.  That  the  mightitit
human  powers  cannot  obstruct  him  in  his  procedure.  The  Amorites,  the  original
inhabitants  of  Canaan,  were  a  great  people.  It  is  said  their  "height  was  like  the
height  of  cedars,"  and  they  were  "  strong  as  oaks."  They  were  in  the  great  field  of
mankind  not  like  the  tender  sapling  or  the  stunted  shrub;  they  were  tall  as  the  cedars
and  mighty  as  the  oak  (Numb.  xiii.  32,  33).  Then  Egypt,  too,  from  which  he
delivered  them,  was  a  mighty  power.  Pharaoh  was  the  greatest  despot  of  the  old
world.  But  what  was  all  this  human  power  before  the  march  of  Omnipotence  ?  The
mighty  Canaanite  and  the  powerful  Egyptian  were  as  mere  stubble  under  his  feet,
God  will  not  be  hindered.  3.  That  he  fulfils  his  great  purposes  with  nations  by  the
agency  of  men.  He  crushed  the  Canaanites  and  he  crushed  the  Egyptians,  not  by
hurling  directly  from  his  hand  the  thunderbolts.  No ;  but  by  the  agency  of  Joshua
and  Moses.  God  works  with  men  by  men.  By  men  he  blesses  and  by  men  he
punishes.  He  allows  man  to  be  the  devil  of  man,  and  he  makes  man  the  saviour
of  man.

II.  He  reminds  nations  of  ths  abuse  of  the  mercies  he  had  oonferbed  on  them.


cH.  m.  1—15.]


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.


89


He  specifies  here  two  special  mercies  which  he  had  bestowed  upon  "Israel,  1.  A
spiritual  ministry.  "  And  I  raised  up  of  your  sons  for  prophets."  He  gave  them  men
whom  he  duly  qualified  to  indoctrinate  and  inspire  them  with  the  highest  truths  of
duty  and  of  destiny.  The  greatest  blessing  which  God  bestows  upon  a  people  is  a  true
ministry.  2.  Virtuous  young  men.  "  Your  young  men  for  Nazarites."  "  These  were
young  men  who,"  to  use  the  language  of  another,  "  bound  themselves  by  a  vow  to  God
and  his  service,  and,  in  pursuance  of  that,  denied  themselves  many  of  the  lawful
delights  of  sense,  as  drinking  wine  and  eating  grapes.  There  were  some  of  Iheir  young
men  that  were  in  their  prime  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  of  this  life,  and  yet
voluntarily  abridged  themselves  of  them ;  these  God  raised  up  by  the  power  of  his
grace  to  be  monuments  of  his  grace,  to  his  glory,  and  to  be  his  witnesses  against  the
impieties  of  that  degenerate  age."  Virtuous  and  high-minded  young  men  are  amongst
the  chief  ornaments  and  bi  ightest  hopes  of  a  people.  But  how  did  Israel  treat  these
Divine  mercies?  "They  commanded  the  prophets,  saying.  Prophesy  not."  They  did
not  wish  to  hear  their  voices;  they  closed  their  eai-s  to  their  ministry.  To  a  great
extent  this  is  the  case  with  our  own  country  now.  The  great  bulk  of  our  people  say
to  the  pulpits  of  England,  by  their  conduct,  "  Prophesy  not ; "  we  do  not  want  your
ministry.  Sad  state  this — a  state  of  sin  and  the  precursor  of  ruin.  How  did  Israel
treat  these  virtuous  young  men  ?  "  They  gave  the  Nazarites  wine  to  drink."  They
caused  them  to  break  their  vow.  This  they  did,  it  may  be,  by  seductive  promises,  or
frightening  threats,  or  abashing  ridicule  and  reproach.  A  greater  crime  than  the  crime
of  a  people  endeavouring  to  make  young  men  drunkards  can  scarcely  be  imagined,  and
this  crime  England  is  on  all  hands  earnestly  promoting.  The  multiplication  in  our
midst  of  beer-houses  and  gin-palaces,  all  under  the  sanction  of  law,  is  an  insult  to
Heaven,  an  outrage  on  decency,  a  curse  to  the  country.  It  behoves  every  philanthro-
pist to  take  his  stand  against  this  abomination,  and  to  sweep  from  the  earth  such  huge
establishments  of  the  devil  as  the  Burton  breweries  and  the  infernal  spirit-distilleries,
whence  streams  of  poison  flow  through  every  grade  of  social  life.  "  Every  inordinate
cup  is  unbless'd,  and  the  ingredient  is  a  devil ; "  "0  thou  Invisible  spirit  of  wine,  if
thou  hast  no  name  to  be  known  by,  let  us  call  thee  devill "  (Shakespeare).— D.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEB  in,
Ver,    1 — ch.  vi    14. — Part    n,     Thbeh

AdDBESSES    PARTICULAKIZING    THE    SiNS    OF

Ibbael  ahd  AiniouNCiNG  Imminent  Juna-

IIEKT.

Vers.  1 — 15. — §  1.  First  address:  the
prophet  begins  hy  showing  IsraeVs  ingrati-
tude for  past  mercies  (vers.  1,  2),  and  his
own  commission  to  announce  the  coming
judgment  (vers.  3 — 8).  They  have  drawn
this  upon  themselves  hy  iniquities  which
astonish  even  heathen  nations;  and  they
shall  le  punished  by  the  overthrow  of  the
kingdom  and  the  destrtustion  of  their  city
(vers.  9—15).

Ver.  1. — The  peculiar  favour  which  God
has  shown  the  Israelites  enhances  the  guilt
of  their  ingratitude  and  increases  their
punishment.  Hear  this  word.  Each  ad-
dress (ch.  iv,  1;  V.  1)  begins  with  this
solemn  call.  0  children  of  Israel.  The
summons  is  addressed  to  the  twelve  tribes,
as  the  following  words  prove ;  but  the  suc-
ceeding denunciation  is  confined  to  Israel,


Judah  being  only  indirectly  warned  that
she  may  expect  a  similar  fate  unless  she
ttuns  in  time.  I  brought  up  from  the  land
of  Egypt.  This  is  mentioned  as  the  crown-
ing act  of  God's  favour  (oh.  ii.  10).

Ver.  2. — Have  I  known;  i.e.  loved,  ac-
knowledged, chosen.  So  in  Hos.  xiii.  S
Gkid  says, "  I  knew  thee  in  the  wilderness ; "
and  St.  Paul  (2  Tim.  ii.  19),  "  The  Lord
knoweth  them  that  are  his"  (comp.  Nah.
i.  7),  The  peculiar  relation  in  which  God
allowed  Israel  to  stand  to  him  is  much
dwelt  upon  (see  Dent.  iv.  8,  20 ;  liv.  2 ;
2  Sam.  vii.  23;  1  Chron.  xvii.  21).  There-
fore I  will  punish  you ;  literally,  visit  upon
you.  They  must  not  presume  upon  their
privileges;  the  retention  of  God's  favour
depended  upon  obedience  to  liis  Word  (Exod.
xix.  5);  the  nearer  they  were  brought  to
God,  the  greater  their  guilt  if  they  fell  from
him.  Unlike  the  nations  denounced  in  the
former  chapters,  Israel  had  sinned  against
light  and  knowledge  and  love,  therefore
the  sentence  on  her  must  be  heavier
(comp.  Ezek.  ix.  6;  Luke  xii.  47;  1  Pet.
iv.  17).

Vers.  8 — 8. — Before  announcing  more  par-


40


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.


[oh.  m.  1— Ifik


tlcnlarly  the  coming  judgment,  Amos,  by  a
series  of  little  parables  or  comparisons,
establishes  his  right  to  prophesy,  and  inti-
mates the  necessity  laid  upon  him  to  deliver
his  message.  He  illustrates  the  truths  that
all  etfects  Ijave  causes,  and  tliat  from  the
canse  you  can  infer  the  effect.

Ver.  3. — Can  two  walk  together  except
they  be  agreed  ?  or,  except  they  have  agreed  t
The  "two"  are  God's  judgment  and  the
prophet's  word.  These  do  not  coincide  by
mere  chance,  no  more  than  two  persons
pursue  in  company  the  same  end  without
previous  agreement.  The  prophet  announces
Ck)d's  judgment  because  God  has  commis-
sioned him;  the  prophet  is  of  one  mind
with  God,  therefore  the  Lord  is  with  him,
and  confirms  his  words.  The  application  of
the  parables  is  seen  in  vers.  7,  8.  The
Septuagint,  reading  differently,  has,  "ex-
cept they  know  one  another."

Ver.  4. — Will  a  liou  roar,  etc.  ?  The  lion
roars  when  he  /las  his  prey  in  sight,  and  is
about  to  spring  upon  it.  So  God  makes  the
prophet  utter  his  voice  because  he  is  ready
to  execute  vengeance.  The  second  clause
expresses  the  same  fact  in  different  terms.
The  young  lion  (hephir)  is  not  a  whelp,  but
one  able  to  provide  for  itself.  He  growls
over  the  prey  which  he  has  in  his  lair.  So
Israel  lies  helpless  as  the  words  of  God's
threatenings  strike  upon  him.

Ver.  5. — The  thought  here  is  that  the
punishment  is  deserved  as  well  as  certain.
A  bird  is  not  caught  unless  a  trap  is  set  for
it.  The  trap  which  the  sinner  sets  for  him-
self is  sin.  Can  a  bird  fall  in  a  snare  (pack)
upon  the  earth,  where  no  gin  (moqesh)  is  for
him  ?  i.e.  is  set  for  him  ?  The  "  gin  "  is  a
net  with  a  stick  for  a  spring,  which  flew  up
when  touched,  carrying  part  of  the  net  with
it,  and  thus  the  bird  was  enclosed  and
caught  (see  Kitto, '  Oyclop.,' «.».  "  Fowling,"
ii.  36).  The  LXX.  probably  read  yoqeeli,
as  they  translate,  Sveu  i|euToB,  "  without  a
fowler."  So  the  Vulgate,  absque  aueupe.
The  second  clause  should  be,  SliaU  a  snare
(^pach)  spring  up  from  the  ground  without
taking  anything  ?  The  snare,  or  trap-slick,
would  not  rise  if  it  had  not  caught  some-
thing. The  sin  is  there,  and  the  sinners
shall  surely  not  escape.  When  God  appciiiitfl
retributive  punishments  for  the  guilty,  and
announces  the  same  by  his  prophets,  they
may  be  expected  with  absolute  certainty.

Ver.  6. — The  prophet  must  needs  speak:
shall  not  his  denunciation  arouse  alarm
among  tlie  people,  as  the  trumpet  suddenly
heard  in  a  city  excites  the  terror  of
the  inhabitants  (corap.  Ezok.  xxxiii.  2—5)  ?
Shall  there  bs  evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord
hath  not  done  it?    The  "evil"  is  afBiction,


calamity,  malum  pcenai.  As  states  hare  ns
future,  all  temporal  calamities  in  their  sase
may  rightly  be  regarded  as  the  punbhment
of  sin.  Thus  the  ruin  impending  on  Israel
was  sent  by  the  Lord,  whose  agent  was  the
enemy  now  approaching.  All  phenomena
are  ascribed  in  the  Bible  to  Divine  opera-
tion, no  second  causes  being  allowed  t«
interfere  with  tlds  appropriation  (see  Job  i, ;
1  Sam,  xviii,  10 ;  1  Kings  xxii.  19,  etc. ;  Isa.
xlv.  7).  The  verb  " do"  is  often  used  abso-
lutely, the  context  defining  the  result  (see
note  on  Hag.  iL  4).

Ver.  7. — This  and  the  following  verse
apply  the  foregoing  parables.  All  the  evils
announced  come  from  the  Lord ;  but  he
brings  none  of  them  on  the  people  with-
out first  warning  by  his  prophets  (comp.
John  xiii.  19  ;  xiv.  29).  His  secret  (tod) ;
unrevealed  till  then.  Septuagint,  -ruSc/av,
"  instruction ; "  so  the  Arabic.

Ver.  8. — As  the  lion's  roar  forces  every
one  to  fear,  so  the  Divine  call  of  the  prophet
forces  him  to  speak  (Jer.  xx.  9 ;  Ezek.  iL
8;  1  Cor.  ix.  16,  etc.).  St.  Gregory,  moral-
izing, takes  the  lion  in  a  spiritual  sense:
"After  the  power  of  his  Creator  has  been
made  known  to  him,  the  strength  of  hia
adversary  ought  not  to  be  concealed  from
him,  in  order  that  he  might  submit  himself
the  more  humbly  to  his  defender,  the  more
accurately  he  had  learned  the  wickedness
of  his  enemy,  and  might  more  ardently  seek
his  Creator,  the  more  terrible  he  found  the
enemy  to  be  whom  he  had  to  avoid.  For  it
is  certain  that  he  who  less  understands  the
danger  he  has  escaped,  loves  his  deliverer
less ;  and  that  he  who  considers  the  strength
of  his  adversary  to  be  feeble,  regards  the
solace  of  his  defender  as  worthless"  ('MoraL,'
xxxii.  14).  Of  course,  this  exposition  does
not  regard  the  context.

Vers.  9 — 15. — Having  vindicated  his  own
commission,  Amos  proclaims  what  God  pur-
poses to  do  unto  Israel.  He  is  bidden  to
summon  the  heathen  Ashdod  and  Egypt  to
bear  witness  to  the  iniquities  of  Samaria,
which  should  bring  about  the  overthrow  of
the  kingdom,  the  destruotCon  of  the  city
with  its  altars  and  palaces,  and  the  exile  of
the  people.

Ver.  9.— Ashdod  (oh.  i.  8).  God  bids  the
propliets  (publish  ye)  summon  the  iahabi-
tants  of  the  palaces  of  Philistia  (of  wisich
Ashdod  is  the  representative)  ami  Egypt,
because  they  had  been  the  chief  enemies  oi
his  people,  and  in  their  sight  had  mighty
works  been  wrought  for  Israel;  thus  they
could  appreciate  her  iniquity  and  ingrati-
tude. Some,  translating  al  "upon,"  say
that  the  prophets  are  bidden  publish  theii


«H.  m.  1 — 16.]


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.


41


mesiage  upon  the  flat  roofi  of  the  palaces,
that  it  may  be  heard  far  and  near  (comp.
2  gam.  xvi.  22 ;  Matt.  x.  27).  Keil  thinkB
that  not  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  are
summoned,  but  only  those  who  live  in  the
palaces,  who  alone  "could  pronounce  a
correct  sentence  as  to  the  mode  of  life  com-
monly adopted  in  the  palaces  of  Samaria."
But  this  seems  an  unnecessary  refinement.
The  Septuagint  reads, ' kva.yyfiKarf  x'^P""
if  'Airavpiois,  "  Proolaim  ye  to  the  regions
among  the  Assryians,"  doubtless  by  some
mistake  of  copyists.  Assemble  yourselves
upon  the  mountains  of  Samaria.  The  city
of  Samaria  was  built  on  a  hill  which  stands
alone  in  the  valley  or  basin,  but  it  is  sur-
rounded by  higher  mountains,  from  whence,
though  at  some  distance,  spectators  could
look  down  into  its  streets,  and,  as  from
the  seats  in  an  amphitheatre,  behold  the
iniquities  transacted  there.  Their  implao
able  enemies,  the  Fhilistiues,  and  those
they  were  then  courting,  the  Egyptians
(Uos.  vii.  11;  xii.  1),  are  alike  called  to
witness  this  spectacle.  Tumult;  the  dis-
order, where  might  makes  right.  LXX.,
em/naaTli.  iroAAci,  "  many  marvels,"  as  if  the
sight  were  a  surprise  even  to  the  heathen.
The  oppressed  (ashuqim);  better,  the  oppres-
tione,  i.e.  of  the  weak  at  the  hands  of  the
powerful  (comp.  ch.  ii.  6;  iv.  1).  It  was  to
the  eternal  disgrace  of  Israel  that  there
were  doings  in  her  cities  which  tbe  very
heathen  would  condemn.

Ver.  10. — They  know  not  how  to  do  right.
The  Samaritans  have  lost  all  sense  of  justice,
the  foundation  of  social  life  (Jer.  iv.  22).
LXX.,  OuK  ?7i'a>  &  ItTTai  ivavrlov  out^s,  "She
knew  not  what  things  shall  be  before  her."
Store  up  violence;  i.e.  the  fruits  of  violence
and  robbery  (rahaivaplay, "  misery,"  Septua-
gint), what  they  had  wrung  from  the  poor
by  oppression  and  rapine.

Ver.  11. — An  adversary.  The  Hebrew  is
forcible,  the  Lord  speaking  as  though  he
saw  the  foe  present :  "  an  enemy  and  around
the  land."  Ewald  and  Hitzig  take  tsar  as
an  abstract  noun, "  distress ; "  the  LXX.  and
Aquila,  pointing  it  ditterently,  read,  T6pos,
but  the  continuation  of  the  sentence  is
scarcely  to  be  deemed  a  translation,  Kvic\68iv
y  75  (Tou  4priiucetj(reTai,  "  Thy  land  shall  be
made  desolate  round  about  thee."  The  ad-
versary meant  is  Shalmaneser,  who  attacked
Israel  more  than  once  and  besieged  Samaria ;
or  his  successor,  Sargon,  who  claims  to  have
reduced  the  city  and  removed  the  inhabi-
tants (2  Kings  xvii.  and  xviii.  9,  etc. ;  see
Introduction  to  Micah).  Thy  strength.  All
wherein  thou  trustedst  shall  be  brought
down  to  the  ground  (Chad.  3).  Palaces,  in
which  were  stored  the  fruits  of  Injustice
and  rapine  (ver,  10).

Ver.  12. — The  prophet  shows  that  the


chastisement  is  inevitable,  and  that  only
the  smallest  remnant,  the  most  woit:hlesa
among  the  inhabitants,  and  they  with  much
dlfBculty,  can  escape.  The  illustration
from  a  common  incident  in  a  shepherd's  life
is  very  natural  in  Amos.  Taketh;  better,
rescueth.  So  below,  shall  be  taken  oat ;  shall
he  rescued.  The  usual  explanation  is  that
a  shepherd  attacks  the  lion  which  has  seized
one  of  his  sheep  (comp.  1  Sam.  xvii.  34,
etc.),  and  rescues  from  it  the  most  worthless
parts — "  a  couple  of  shank-bones  or  a  bit,  or
tip,  of  an  ear."  But  as  an  attack  on  a  lion
would  be  an  abnormal  act  of  courage  on  the
part  of  a' shepherd,  and  the  comparison  is
with  things  likely  and  usual,  it  is  probable
that  the  meaning  is  that  the  shepherd  finds
only  these  poor  remnants  after  the  lion  has
left  his  prey.  So  such  a  poor  remnant
shall  be  rescued  from  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel,
That  dwell  in  Samaria  in  the  comer  of  a
bed;  that  sit  at  ease,  lounging  in  the
cosiest  corner  of  the  divau,  an  image  of  in-
dolent ease  and  careless  security  in  the  face
of  impending  judgment.  And  in  Damascus
in  a  couch;  LXX.,  koI  iy  Actjuatr/c^:  Vul-
gate, et  in  Damasai  grdbato.  The  Syriac  and
Jewish  Versions  agree  in  consideripg  the
word  "  Damascus "  to  be  a  proper  name.
The  other  modern  rendering  takes  it  to  mean
the  material  which  we  call  "damask," -or
something  similar.  Hence  our  Revised  Ver-
sion gives,  "on  the  silken  cushions  of  a
bed ; "  and  others,  "  on  the  damask  of  a
couch."  Dr.  Pusey  retains  the  old  render-
ing, on  the  grounds  that  there  is  no  evi-
dence to  prove  that  the  manufactures  for
which  Damascus  was  celebrated  in  after-
time  existed  at  this  period,  its  exports  being
then  wine  and  white  wool  (Ezek.  xxvii.  18),
and  that  the  Arabic  word  dimahso  (which
critics  have  cited  as  connected  with  the
terra  "  damask ")  has  nothing  to  do  with
Damascus,  and  meant  "raw,"  not  manu-
factured, "silk."  He  translates,  "in  Da-
mascus, a  couch,"  and  explains  tliis  to  mean
that  Damascus,  which  Jeroboam  II.  had  won
for  Israel  (2  Kings  xiv.  28), "  was  a  canopied
couch  to  them,  in  wliich  they  stayed  them-
selves." This  agrees  with  the  ancient  Jewish
interpretation,  wliich  explains  the  clause  to
mean  that  the  Israelites  would  some  day
depend  for  help  on  the  Syrians  represented
by  Damascus.  A  third  exposition,  favoured
by  the  Latin  Vulgate,  makes  the  words  to
mean,  "  on  a  couch  of  Damascus ; "  i.e.  ■•
Syrian  couch  of  a  costly  and  luxurious
nature.  This  comes  to  the  same  as  tlie
modern  rendering  given,  above  and  seems  to
be  the  easiest  explanation  of  the  expression .
The  dif&culty  depends  chiefiy  on  the  puno-
tuation  of  the  word  -fBDl ;  or  there  may  be
some  corruption  in  the  text.  What  the
LXX.  meant  by  theii  rendenag  is  pioble-


42


THE  BOOK  OP   AMOS.


[oh.  in.  1— IS.


'  matioal,  KarivavTirrjs^Krjs  Koliv  Aa/iaffK^,
"  The  children  of  Israel  who  dwell  In
Samaria  in  the  presence  of  the  tribe  and  in
Damascua."

Ver.  13.  —  Hear  yo  ;  Septua^int,  'UpeTs
iiKoiiraT€, "  Hear,  0  ye  priests."  The  address
i*  to  tlie  heathen,  already  summoned  (ver.
9)  to  witness  the  sins  of  Israel,  and  now
called  to  witness  her  punishment.  In  the
house ;  better,  agaimt  the  house  of  Jacob,
the  tribes  of  Israel  (ver.  1).  God  of  hosts.
God  of  the  powers  of  heaven  and  earth,  and
therefore  able  to  execute  his  threats.  Sep-
tuagint,  d  UavTOKpdTtap,  "  the  Almighty."

Ver.  14.— That  in  the  day,  etc.  This
Terse  is  rightly  joined  to  the  preceding,  as
it  particularizes  the  threats  which  the
heathen  are  summoned  to  testify.  Visit
apon;  equivalt-nt  to  "punish"  (Zeph.  i.  8).
Altars  of  Bethel.  We  read  of  one  altar
being  set  up  by  Jeroboam  I.  (1  Kings  xii.
29,  83),  but  doubtless  others  had  been
added  in  the  course  of  time.  The  denun-
ciation of  1  Kings  xiii  2, 3  is  here  repeated.
The  horns  of  the  altar.  These  were  certain
projections  at  the  four  angles  of  the  altar,
perhaps  in  the  form  of  an  ox's  liorn,  on
which  the  blood  of  the  sin  offering  was
■meaied,  and  which    therefore  were   con-


sidered the  holiest  part  of  the  altar  (see
Eiod.  xxvii.  2;  xxix.  12;  Lev.  xvi.  18).
The  instruments  of  idolatry  or  impure  wor-
ship should  share  the  destruction  of  the
idolaters.

Ver.  15. — The  winter  house.  The  luxuri-
ous habits  of  kings  and  princes  had  led  thum
to  hiive  different  houses  for  the  various
seasons  of  tlie  year,  facing  north  or  south
as  the  case  might  be  (comp.  Judg.  iii.  20  ;
Jer.  xxxvi.  22).  Septuagiut,  rhv  oIkov  rhv
irtptiTTepov,  "the  turreted  house,"  which
Jerome  explains,  Domum  pinnatam,  eo  qtioot
ostiola  hnbeat  per  fenestras,  et  quasi  pinnas,
ad  magnitudinem  frigoris  depellendam.
Houses  of  ivory;  panelled  or  inlaid  with
ivory,  such  as  Ahah  had  (1  Kings  xxii.  39).
Solomon's  throne  was  thus  decorated  (1
Kings  X.  18;  comp.  Ps.  xlv.  8).  (For  the
Assyrian  practice  of  veneering  in  ivory,  see
Eawlinsou,  'Ancient  Monarcliies,'  i.  463;
comp.  also  Homer,  'Od.,'  iv.  73;  Virgil,
' jEneid,'  vi.  895.)  The  great  houses ;  better,
many  houses;  Septuagint,  erepot  oIkol  iro\Ao(,
"many  other  houses."  Not  only  palaces,
but  many  private  houses,  shall  be  destroyed
(comp.  Isa.  T.  9,  where  the  same  words  are
used).    '


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  judgment  of  apostates  a  foregone  conclusion.  This  chapter,  like
ch.  V.  and  vi.,  opens  with  a  call  to  attention.  God  is  going  to  speak,  and  his  voice  is
worth  listening  to.  He  is  going  to  speak  a  word,  moreover,  the  issues  of  which  are
capitaL     To  attend  to  his  communication  is  as  vitally  important  as  dutiful.

I.  God,  who  had  only  spoken  about  the  heathen,  speaks  to  Israel.  Syria  and
Edom  and  Tyre  may  never  have  heard  of  the  doom  to  which  they  were  going  down.
Their  first  intimation  of  the  tempest  of  Divine  wrath  was  likely  the  falling  of  the  first
drops.  Their  chance  of  repentance  and  escape  was  in  this  way  minimized.  Left  in
ignorance  of  the  danger  of  advance,  there  was  little  likelihood  of  their  turning  back  of
their  own  accord.  But  Israel  hears  from  inspired  lips  that  never  lied  the  guilt  of  her
sin,  and  its  inevitable  end.  This  putting  of  "  prophecy  between  his  secret  and  its
execution "  is  a  special  favour  on  God's  side,  and  a  corresponding  advantage  on  her
side,  whilst,  like  all  advantage.-it  involves  a  proportionate  responsibility.

II.  God's  special  keoard  for  Israel  had  expressed  itself  in  peodltar  favours.
1.  He  had  constituted  them  a  family  by  themselves.  Other  nations  in  their  rise  had
been  lett  to  circumstances  and  the  play  of  natural  affinities.  Israel  had  been  called
out  of  the  peoples,  constituted  a  nation  by  itself,  furnished  with  a  national  or<;anization
and  policy,  and  set  consciously  to  work  out  an  exalted  destiny.  This  was  fitted  ta
awake  a  lofty  national  aspiration,  and  give  direction  and  dignity  to  the  national  life.
The  choosing  of  God's  people  out  of  the  world  is  the  beginning  of  his  favours.  2.  He
had  brought  them  out  of  Egypt.  This  was  an  act  of  Divine  power,  an  instance  (jf
Divine  championship,  an  expression  of  Divine  distinguishing  favour,  and  a  beginning
of  Divine  help,  which  contained  in  it  the  promise  of  more  to  come.  Conversion,
following  on  election  (Acts  xiii.  48),  is  another  privilege  of  God's  people,  and  another
spur  to  grateful  service.  3.  He  had  taken  them  into  intimate  personal  relations.
"Known,"  etc.  This  is  "practically  equivalent  to  electing,  including  both  the  motive
»nd  result  of  election  "  (Keil).  God  took  special  notice  of  them,  set  them  in  a  gracious
relation  to  himself,  acknowledged  them  to  be  his  people,  and  brought  to  bear  on  them
the  influences  that  are  ever  coming  forth  on  those  in  covenant  with  him.


^^^lI.^J^J,


III.  JCTDGMKNT  18  INEVITABLK  WHEBB  MBECT  HAS  BEEN  REOEIVED  IN  VAIN,  "  There-
fore will  I  visit,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  Mercy  extended  is  made  iiere  the  ground  of  judgment
denounced.  Each  gift  bestowed  in  the  past  is  a  coi  ^i,  in  the  present  indictment.  1.
It  i§  inevitable  as  punishment.  Sin  by  God's  professing  people  is  specially  heinous.
It  involves  ingratitude  to  a  special  Benefactor,  insensibility  to  his  love,  contempt  of  his
gifts,  and  disregard  of  special  claims  on  their  allegiance.  The  guilt  is  in  every  aspect
extreme,  and  so  the  punishment  is  sure.  2.  It  is  inevitable  as  testimony.  God's
honour  is  closely  identified  with  his  people's  conduct,  which  must  therefore  be  closely
looked  after.  Any  siu  in  it  must  be  rigidly  punished  if  God  would  vindicate  his  purity
and  impartiality,  hating  sin  as  such,  and  wherever  it  appears.  "  It  is  necessary  that
God  should  vindicate  his  own  honour  by  making  it  appear  that  he  hates  sin,  and  hates
it  most  in  those  that  are  nearest  him  "  .(M.  Henry).  3.  It  is  inevitable  as  discipline.
Judgments  are  corrective  as  well  as  punitive.  In  this  aspect  they  are  sure,  and  will  be
severe  in  proportion  to  the  love  and  mercy  despised.  Whom  God  leaves  without  cor-
rection he  bastardizes  (Heb.  xii.  8),  but  he  expresses  fatherly  interest  in  the  application
of  the  rod.  Judgment  with  Israel  was  just  a  change  of  corrective  treatment.  Mercy
had  failed,  and  now  love  would  try  another  way,  that  nothing  might  be  left  undone  to
separate  Israel  from  sin.     This  is  why  judgment  begins  at  the  house  of  God.

Vers.  3 — 8. — No  smoke  without  fire.  God  cannot  utter  empty  threats.  His  every
declaration  is  bona  fides.  When  he  roars  he  is  about  to  rend.  Let,  then,  the  doomed
sinner  tremble.     Fur  all  his  insensibility  he  is  no  better  than  a  dead  man.    -

I.  Sin  involves  disconnection  fbom  a  holt  God.  "Can  two  walk  together," etc.?
This  deep  principle  involves  that :  1.  Israel,  quarrelling  with  Qod,  cannot  reckon  on  hi*
company.  For  so  far  God  had  associated  with  them.  In  Egypt,  in  the  wilderness,  in
Canaan,  he  had  vouchsafed  them  close  companionship.  But  their  rebellious  attitude
against  him,  approaching  as  it  was  a  climax  of  irreconciiableness,  must  make  a  con-
tinuance of  intimate  relations  impossible.  2.  The  prophet,  walking  as  he  did  with  Qod,
must  he  regarded  as  in  agreement  with  him,  and  so  expressing  his  will.  Amos  spoke
as  God's  seivant  and  mouthpiece.  He  look&l  at  Israel's  sin  from  God's  standpomt.
In  reference  to  it  he  was  as  emphatically  associated  with  God  as  he  was  dissociated  from
them.  Underlying  this  formal  association  it  must  be  believed  there  was  real  agreement
"  He  whom  God  hath  sent  speaketh  the  words  of  God."

II.  When  the  thitndee  or  God's  theeatenings  is  heaed,  the  lightning  of  his
JUDGMENTS  IS  IMMINENT.  That  peril  is  sure  and  near  is  taught  in  a  series  of  similes
of  a  graphic  kind.  1.  When  Qod  utters  his  war-cry  it  is  evident  that  he  is  just  about
to  strike  his  enemy.  (Ver.  4.)  The  lion  roars  when  he  has  marked  his  prey,  aud  is
about  to  spring.  God  sees  the  sinful  nation  ripe  for  judgment.  He  sees  that  the  time'
for  sending  it  has  come.  His  roar  out  of  Zion  (ch.  i.  2)  is,  therefore,  the  preltide  to
striking  his  prey  forthwith.  "  The  threatenings  of  the  Word  and  providence  of  God
are  nut  bugbears  to  frighten  children  and  fools,  but  are  certain  inferences  from  the  sin
of  man  and  certain  presages  of  the  judgments  of  God"  (M.  Henry).  2.  When  Qod
reaches  forth  his  hand  there  is  something  to  take,  and  within  his  reach.  (Ver.  5.)  It
is  the  lighting  of  the  bird  on  the  trap  that  snaps  it.  If  there  were  no  trap  laid  no  bird
would  be  caught.  If  there  were  no  bird  in  the  trap  it  would  not  rise  from  the  ground.
Israel  is  the  bird,  and  God  is  the  Fowler,  and  his  judgment  is  the  snare,  and  the  lesson
of  all  is  that  she  is  already  in  God's  destroying  grasp.  3.  When  some  are  already
alarmed  it  shows  that  danger  to  all  is  real  and  dose.  (Ver.  6,  "  Is  a  trumpet  blown,"
etc.  ?)  The  prophet,  who  knew  what  was  coming,  was  alarmed,  and  those  like-minded
with  him.  The  note  of  alarm  was  already  ringing  over  the  land.  Signs  of  evil  will
not  show  themselves  until  the  evil  is  comparatively  at  hand.  So  surely  as  the  smoke
rises  the  fire  is  kindling.  4.  When  misfortune  falls  it  is  a  proof  that  Qod  has  been  at
work.  "  Does  misfortune  happen  in  the  city,"  etc.  ?  (ver.  6).  "  All  things  are  of  God,"  is
an  axiom  that  in  one  sense  or  other  covers  all  events,  whether  good  or  bad.  The
qualification  of  it  is  that  the  sin  of  any  of  them  is  exclusively  of  man.  God  "creates
evil "  (Isa.  ilv.  7) — the  evil  of  suffering — whilst  the  evil  of  sin  he  allows  us  to  create^
that  he  may  bring  out  of  it  greater  good.

in.  God  waens  his  pkophets  of  evil  befoee  it  comes.  (Ver.  7.)  The  prophet
is  a  negotiator,  hearing  the  truth  from  God,  and  handing  it  on  to  men.    God  does  not


44  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa  [oh.  in.  1— IS

destroy  men  nnwamed,  nor  wa.'n  them  but  through  his  accredited  messengers.  The
history  of  hit  judgments  illustrates  this.  Through  Noah  he  revealed  the  coming
deluge,  through  Lot  the  destruction  of  Sodom,  through  Joseph  the  famine  in  Egypt,
through  Moses  the  Egyptian  plagues,  through  Jonah  the  sentence  on  Nineyeh,  and
through  Christ  and  bis  apostles  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  "  Thus  God  has  ever
'warned  the  world  of  coming  judgments  in  order  that  it  may  not  incur  them  "  (Lange),
"  He  foretelleth  the  evil  to  come  that  he  may  not  be  coropelled  to  inflict  it "  (Pusey).

IV.  God'b  true  peophets  cannot  but  bpeak  his  message.  (Ver.  8.)  It  is  bis
will  that  they  should  prophesy.  He  tells  them  his  purposes  mainly  with  a  view  to
this.  To  prophesy  is  their  function  and  duty,  and  is  made  their  business.  They  are
moved  at  the  sight  of  coming  evil.  They  are  in  sympathy  with  the  Divine  compassion,
giving  a  last  chance  to  the  doomed;  and  so,  like  the  apostles,  they  "cannot  but  speak
the  things  they  have  seen  and  heard  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  16, 17 ;  Acts  iv.  19,  20).  "  Moses
was  not  excused  though  slow  of  speech,  nor  Isaiah  though  of  polluted  lips,  nor  Jeremiah
because  he  was  a  child.  Ezekiel  was  bidden  '  be  not  rebellious  like  that  rebellious
house ; '  and  when  Jeremiah  would  keep  silence  he  saith, '  His  Word  was  in  mine  heart
as  a  burning  fire,  shut  up  in  my  bones,  and  I  was  weary  with  forbearing,  and  I  could
not  stay ' "  (Pusey).  Taken  in  connection,  vers.  7  and  8  reveal  a  perfect  arrangement
for  making  known  God's  purpose  in  reference  to  sin.  God  anticipates  action  by  a
commvmication  to  his  prophets,  and  the  prophets  execute  orders,  and  hand  the
Gommuoication  on.

Ver.  2. — The  inevitable  punishment  of  Christian  tin.  "Ton  only  have  I  known  of
all  the  families  of  the  earth,  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  These
^words  are  at  once  an  accusation,  a  condemnation,  and  a  sentence.  What  God  had
done  for  Israel  in  vain  was  a  ground  and  the  measure  of  what  he  now  must  do  against
them.  Blessing  abused  is  but  the  faggot  feeding  the  fire  of  merited  curse.  They  had
given  themselves  up  to  wickedness,  and  the  fire-tongue  of  a  lofty  privilege  sits  above
every  sin,  revealing  its  demon-face.

I.  There  ib  a  gracious  sense  in  which  God  knows  men.  "  I  know  my  sheep ; "
"  I  never  knew  you."  These  sentences  mean  salvation  and  condemnation  respectively.
For  God  to  know  men  is  with  them  a  question  of  life  and  death.  This  knowledge  may
be :  1.  National.  It  was  so  with  IsraeL  "  You  only  have  1  known."  This  meant  that
God  loved  them  (Deut.  x.  15),  chose  them  (Deut.  vii.  6),  formally  acknowledged  them
as  his  people  (Deut.  xiv.  2),  and  gave  them  privileges — ^not  necessarily  saving  in  every
case — of  light  (Ps.  cxlvli.  19 ;  Rom.  iii.  2),  and  help  (Ps.  cxxxvi.  10 — 24),  and  fellow-
ship (Exod.  XX.  24;  Numb.  xiv.  14;  Deut.  iv.  7),  and  promise  (Rom.  ix.  4,  5),  answer-
ing to  this  visible  relation.  This  knowledge  may  also  be  :  2.  Personal.  Then  it
means,  in  addition  to  what  has  been  mentioned,  the  forth-putting  of  Divine  energy  in
them,  making  them  new  creatures  in  Christ,  and  so  "partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  "
(Gral.  vi.  15;  2  Pet.  i.  4).  God  brings  them  into  his  family  (Gal.  iii.  26)  by  this
spiritual  birth  (John  i.  13),  calls  them  sons  (1  John  iii.  1),  makes  them  co-heirs  with
Christ  (Rom.  viii.  17),  and  gives  them  all  family  privileges  and  graces,  chiefest  of  these
the  spirit  of  adoption,  by  which  we  cry, "  Abba,  Father  "  (Gal.  iv.  6).  Man,  in  fact,  is
by  nature  an  alien  and  a  stranger,  and  for  God  to  know  him  is  to  substitute  a  gracious
for  his  natural  relation.

II.  This  knowledge  is  a  special,  not  a  general,  affection.  "You  only."
There  are  gifts  of  God  that  are  indiscriminate  (Job  xxv.  3 ;  Matt.  v.  46).  Man  gets
them  as  man,  and  irrespective  of  personal  character.  But  spiritual  gifts  are  necessarily
confined  to  the  spiritual  circle.  It  is  evident  as  regards  God's  gracious  knowledge  of
men.  1.  That  it  rests  on  a  minority  of  the  race.  Israel  at  best  was  little  among  the
nations  of  the  earth.  In  comparison  with  the  Chaldean,  Medo-Persian,  Greek,  or
Roman  empires,  it  was  scarcely  worthy  of  being  named ;  and  a  dozen  peoples  bordered
Palestine  from  time  to  time,  any  one  of  which,  in  the  natural  course,  would  have  wiped
it  ofi'  the  earth.    Yet,  passing  by  the  many  and  the  mighty,  God  says  to  single,  feeble

Israel,  "  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  "  (Deut.  iv.  32 38).

And  this  action  is  of  a  piece  with  other  Divine  action  for  similar  purposes.  The  saints
are  now,  and  have  always  been,  a  "  little  flock."  It  is  the  few  who  go  in  at  the
"  strait  gate  "  of  the  kingdom.    Even  the  nominally  Christian  peoples  are  less  than


oiLin.  1— 15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  45

a  third  of  the  population  of  the  earth.  If  out  of  the  number  of  these  were  taken  the
actual  Christians,  the  true  believers  in  Christ,  the  saintly  company  would  assume
smaller  dimensions  still.  This  state  of  matters  will  no  doubt  be  reversed  before  the
dispensation  ends.  Christ  "in  all  things  shall  have  the  pre-eminence,"  and  the
minority  which  his  followers  compose  will,  during  the  millennial  era,  be  converted  into
a  vast  majority  (Isa.  xi.  9).  Meantime  God  looks  on  a  small  circle  of  transfigured
souls,  and  says,  "You  only  have  I  known."  2.  It  does  not  follow  human  probabilities.
If  any  single  nation  was  to  be  made  the  repository  of  revealed  truth,  and  the  teacher
of  the  other  nations,  we  should  have  expected  one  or  other  of  the  four  universal  empires
to  be  chosen  for  the  purpose,  rather  than  a  second  or  third  rate  power,  located  in  a
circumscribed  and  excentric  spot.  Then  the  typical  Jew  was,  like  his  ancestor  Jacob,
a  sordid  fellow,  deficient  in  the  more  heroic  qualities,  and,  from  the  standpoint  of  the
natural,  decidedly  inferior  to  his  brother  the  Edomite,  or  almost  any  neighbour  you
would  select.  The  greater  readiness  with  which  the  Gentiles  received  the  gospel,  when
it  came  to  them,  would  seem,  moreover,  to  indicate  that  they  would  have  responded
more  worthily  to  the  Divine  Old  Testament  culture  than  Israel  did,  if  it  had  pleased
God  to  bring  it  to  bear.  It  is  the  same  with  individuals.  Not  only  does  God  pass  by
the  rich  and  great  for  the  humble  poor  (Jas.  ii.  5;  1  Cor.  i.  26 — 28),  but  he  passes
by  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  gives  the  light  of  his  salvation  to  babes  (Matt.  xi.  25).
It  is  not  the  great  geniuses  of  society,  but  the  commonplace  average  men,  who  form  the
circle  of  the  saints.  The  reasons  for  this  are  adequate,  but  God  keeps  them  to  himself.
Obvious  to  reason  in  many  cases,  they  are  not  revealed,  because  in  many  others  they
would  be  above  it,  and  God  acts  without  reasons  given,  that  "  no  flesh  may  glory  in
his  presence."

III.  It  does  not  inevitablt  prevent  sin  m  the  object  op  it.  The  life  of  the
Hebrews  was  as  a  whole  above  the  moral  level  of  the  heathen  life  around  them.  But
still  it  was  far  from  pure.  If  we  subtracted  from  Jewish  history  all  that  arises  out  of
sin,  and  the  punishment  of  it,  comparatively  little  would  remain.  So  little  congenial
to  human  nature  is  God's  service,  and  so  congenial  the  service  of  sin,  that  Israel  was
perpetually  turning  aside  after  the  idols  of  the  heathen,  whilst  in  no  instance  did  the
heathen  ever  turn  from  their  idols  to  God  (Jer.  ii.  11).  And  not  only  does  outward
religious  privilege  fail  to  put  an  end  to  the  sinful  life,  it  is  to  some  extent  the  same  with
inward  religious  principle.  The  saint  remains  a  sinner  all  his  days.  Grace,  like  the
house  of  David,  is  getting  stronger  with  him,  and  corruption,  like  the  house  of  Saul,  is
getting  weaker  through  life.  But  it  is  still  with  him  as  with  the  apostle,  striving  after
perfection,  yet  burdened  with  a  feeling  of  the  surviving  power  of  sin  (Phil.  iii.  12 ;
Bom.  vii.  24).

IV.  It  does  make  the  punishment  of  sin  on  earth  certain.  "  Therefore  will
I  punish  you."  Sin  inside  the  kingdom  necessitates  punishment,  and  will  be  visited
with  it  promptly.  1.  Because  it  is  guiltiest  as  against  God.  More  has  been  done  to
prevent  it  than  in  other  cases.  It  is  sin  against  light  (Jas.  iv.  17 ;  Luke  xii.  47,  48),
against  love  ^2  Cor.  v.  14),  against  favours  (Ps.  ciii.  2),  against  restraining  grace
(i  John  iii.  9^.  In  proportion  to  the  strength  and  number  of  deterrent  influences
against  which  sin  is  committed  must  be  the  strength  of  our  sinful  bent,  and  so  the
guilt  of  our  wrong-doing.  2.  Because  it  is  most  hurtful  as  against  his  cause.  The  sin
of  the  wicked  is  natural.  It  is  to  be  expected  from  one  who  consults  lust,  and  serves
the  devil.  It  is  done,  moreover,  from  the  standpoint  of  opposition  to  God,  and  respon-
sibility for  it  is  thus  kept  outside  the  spiritual  circle.  God  and  his  cause  are  not
dishonoured  in  the  eyes  of  men  by  what  is  formally  done  against  them.  It  is  sin  by
the  professedly  righteous  that  brings  righteousness  into  disrepute.  Eeligion  is  charged
with  all  the  evil  that  is  done  in  its  name.  The  more  closely  identified  wrong-doing  is
with  the  Christian  name,  the  more  hurtful  is  it  to  the  Christian  cause.  Therefore
Christian  sin,  in  addition  to  the  general  reasons,  involves  punishment  for  reasons  peculiar
to  itaelf.  If  God  would  have  his  Church  a  tree  for  the  healing  of  the  nations,  he  must
lop  off'  every  unsound  and  rotten  branch.  3.  Because  it  is  most  incompatible  with  the
destiny  of  the  person  sinning.  The  sin  of  the  wicked  need  not  necessarily  be  punished
here.  It  will  be  amply  visited  on  him  throughout  eternity.  It  is  quite  in  the  line
of  the  man's  life-course  that  he  should  suffer  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire.  But  the
«in  of  the  righteous  presents  a  different  aspect.     Its  commission  is  the  contradictitn  of


i«  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  in.  1—16,

his  gracious  nature,  and  its  future  punishment  would  be  the  contradiction  of  hii
exalted  destiny.  It  is  vital  to  his  well-being  that  the  judgment,  inevitable  somewhere,
should  fall  here  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  30 — 33).  Only  thus  can  his  happy  immortality  be  safe-
guarded. The  present  destruction  of  his  flesh  conditions  the  saving  of  his  spirit  in  the
day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (1  Cor.  v.  5).

Ver.  3. — Communion  and  concord  inseparable.  "Do  two  walk  together  unless  they
have  agreed?"  The  special  reference  of  this  general  question  is  not  apparent.  But
the  scope  of  the  context  suggests  two  points  on  either  or  both  of  which  it  would  throw
light.  The  one  is  the  prophet's  claim  to  be  speaking  the  truth,  the  other  is  the  people's
claim  to  be  doing  the  right.  Between  his  words  and  their  works  there  was  utter
incompatibility.  Those  must  be  wrong  if  these  were  right,  and  vice  versa.  And  the
axiom  quoted  supplies  a  decisive  test.  Amos  walked  with  God — there  could  be  no
denying  that ;  took  his  side  and  sought  his  glory  amidst  prevailing  defection  and  dis-
obedience. Must  it  not  be  argued  from  this  that  he  was  at  one  with  God,  and  so  in  all
his  utterances  spoke  agreeably  to  his  will?  Israel,  on  the  other  hand,  had  clearly  not
agreed  with  God,  for  they  were  red-handed  in  rebellion  against  him.  Was  not  the
inference  from  this  resistless  that  they  could  not  walk  with  him,  here  by  &ith  or  here-
after by  sight  ?    Consider  here —

I.  The  walkino  with  God  that  is  thb  ideal  or  human  life.  "  Enoch  walked
with  God."  That  is  a  short  biography.  But  there  is  more  in  it,  more  important  in  its
character  and  more  adequately  expresgpd  than  in  many  an  octavo  volume.  "  They
shall  walk  with  me  in  white  "  is  a  summary  of  the  joy  and  glory  of  redeemed  spirits  on
high.  And  life  below  is  ideal  in  proportion  as  it  approximates  the  life  above.  To  walk
with  God  implies:  1.  That  we  walk  with  the  same  purpose  as  Ood.  The  raison  d'etre
of  things  is  God's  glory  first  (Rom.  li.  36 ;  Col.  i.  16),  the  good  of  his  people  next
(2  Cor.  iv.  15;  Eom.  viii.  28),  then  the  happiness  of  the  race  (1  Tim.  iv.  10;  GaL  vi.
10),  and  ultimately  the  well-being  of  the  planet  as  a  whole  (Ps.  xxxvi.  6 ;  Bom.  viii.
20,  21).  The  attainment  of  these  objects  in  this  order  is  God's  purpose  as  revealed  in
Scripture.  With  this  purpose  it  is  the  design  and  nature  of  religion  to  make  man  at
one.  By  creating  him  in  God's  image  he  is  endowed  with  a  spiritual  nature  which
exalts  God  (1  Cor.  x.  31),  loves  the  brethren  (1  John  iii.  4),  consults  the  interests  of
others  (Phil.  ii.  4),  and  regards  the  life  even  of  the  beasts  (Prcs?.  ii.  10).  In  proportion
as  the  godly  endorse  and  homologate  the  Divine  purpose  thus  are  they  in  the  image  of
Christ  (John  xii.  28;  xiii.  1,  etc.)  and  do  they  walk  with  God.  2.  That  we  walk  like
Ood.  "  The  Christian,"  says  Joseph  Cook,  "  is  a  man  who  has  changed  eyes  with
God."  Subtle  affinities  have  arisen  involving  a  marvellous  unity  of  thought  and  aim.
The  end  of  our  walking  is  God's  end,  and  naturally  his  way  becmes  our  way.  "  The
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him."  In  Christ, "  the  Image  of  the  invisible
God,"  it  became  an  open  secret  to  all  who  believe.  He  has  left  "us  an  example,"  and
there  are  no  relations  in  life  to  which  it  does  not  apply.  We  "  follow  his  steps,"  and
by  consequence  walk  like  God,  being  "  imitators  of  him  as  dear  children."  3.  That  we
walk  in  company  with  God.  The  ungodly  are  far  from  God,  and  of  set  purpose  keep
their  distance.  But  faith  brings  near  and  keeps  near  his  side.  The  humble,  contrite
heart,  which  is  the  home  of  faith,  is  also  the  temple  of  God  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  The  love
by  which  faith  works  is  his  welcome  and  feast  (Rev.  iii.  20).  The  believer  lives  in
God's  presence.  He  wallis  by  faith,  holding  on  as  it  were  by  the  Divine  band.  It
is  the  promise  and  the  thought  of  God's  presence  with  him  that  makes  the  journey
light  (Isa.  xliii.  2),  whilst  the  reality  of  it  is  the  guarantee  of  safety  and  ease.  God
with  us,  we  have  unfailing  provision,  unerring  guidance,  and  an  invincible  escort.  No
marvel  if  they  who  thus  travel  "  go  from  strength  to  strength."

II.  The  agreement  with  God  that  is  the  condition  of  walking  with  him.
Walking  with  God  is  not  an  occasional  act,  but  a  habit  of  life,  and  must  arise  out  of
an  established  relation.  1.  The  parties  must  both  be  willing.  Men  are  naturally  at
enmity  with  God,  and  so  averse  to  his  company.  They  know  not  and  desire  not  to
know  his  ways,  and  the  expression  of  this  feeling  is  the  "Depart  from  usl"  in  which
they  decline  the  establishment  of  spiritual  relations  (Job  xii.  14).  The  operation  of
grace,  however,  is  one  "  to  will  and  to  do  of  God's  good  pleasure,"  and  the  result  of  it
is  "  a  willing  people  in  the  day  of  God's  power."    They  -choose  God  (Josh.  ixiv.  16),


cam.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  «

desire  his  fellowship,  and  adopt  the  course  that  will  best  consist  with  its  enjoyment.
2.  They  must  have  arranged  it.  "  Unless  they  have  agreed."  Spiritual  relations  are
not  accidental  relations,  nor  such  as  men  may  drift  into  unconsciously.  There  are
understood  objects  to  be  intelligently  adopted.  There  are  explicit  terms  (Matt.  xvi.
24)  to  be  deliberately  accepted.  There  is  a  distinct  transaction  in  which  God  and  his
way  are  adopted,  and  made  our  life-King  and  life-programme  respectively  (Hos.  xiv.  2).
If  it  be  a  question  of  faith,  we  say,  "  Lord,  I  believe."  If  it  be  a  question  of  penitence,
vte  say,  "  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent."  If  it  be  a  question  of  allegiance,  we  declare,  "  I
will  be  for  the  Lord."  If  it  be  a  question  of  fellowship,  we  vow,  "I  will  walk  before
the  Lord  in  the  land  of  the  living."  Our  walking  with  God  is  not  only  with  consent,
but  by  arrangement,  duly  and  solemnly  subscribed.  3.  They  must  he  congenial  spirits.
Like  draws  to  like.  Companionship  with  God  bases  itself  in  conformity  to  him.  If
there  be  no  affinity  there  will  be  no  association.  If  this  fails,  association  will  be  broken
off.  Duty  must  be  our  choice,  or  it  will  never  be  begim ;  and  our  joy,  or  it  will  never
be  continued.  Walking  with  God  implies  a  previous  coming  to  him,  and  both  are
conditioned  by  a  spiritual  change  creating  us  in  the  Divine  image.  Hearts  have  begun
to  beat  in  unison  when  liands  are  clasped  for  life.

III.  The  bearino  of  this  maxim  on  the  case  in  hand.  The  two  whose  walk-
ing tcgether  is  in  question  are  Jehovah  and  the  prophet,  according  to  some;  Jehovah
and  the  nation,  according  to  others.  But  as  it  is  a  general  maxim,  it  may  be  legiti-
mately applied  to  both,  and  every  other  case  on  which  it  can  throw  light.  1.  The
words  of  a  teacher  who  walks  with  Ood  will  he  on  the  whole  agreeable  to  his  will.  The
authenticity  of  Amos's  message  was  called  in  question  by  many.  But  he  was  on  God's
side  in  this  controversy  with  Israel.  He  spoke  as  it  were  out  of  the  arms  of  the  Divine
fellowship.  The  truth  of  his  deliverance  was  therefore  a  foregone  conclusion.  With
every  religious  teacher  the  same  principle  holds.  Communion  with  God  gives  insight
into  truth  attainable  in  no  other  way.  It  conditions  that  "unction  from  the  Holy
One  "  by  which  "  we  know  all  things."  The  best  guarantee  of  orthodoxy  is  to  be  spiri-
tually minded.  "  The  anointing  "  by  Christ  in  the  work  of  grace,  among  other  benefits,
"  teacheth  of  all  things,  and  is  truth  "  (1  John  ii.  27).  Let  a  man  read  the  Bible,  so  to
•peak,  over  God's  shoulder,  and  the  thing  he  will  read  out  of  it  will  be  truth.  2.  A  life
o/iebelHon  cannot  possibly  he  a  walk  with  Ood.  The  prophet  foretold  to  Israel  a  final
rupture  of  visible  covenant  relations.  And  the  prophecy  was  along  the  lines  of  natural
fitness.  The  parties  were  already  alienated  in  heart  and  sympathy,  and  in  the  nature
of  things  formal  separation  must  follow.  To  walk  with  God  whilst  fighting  with  him
was  an  unworkable  arrangement.  The  men  who  try  it  are  men  whose  religious  life  is
failure.  When  hearts  go  apart  their  owners  go  after  them;  and  the  soul,  loveless
to-day,  will  be  godless  to-morrow.  Sinful  man  will  have  it  so,  and  a  holy  God  can
have  it  no  otherwise.  Alienation  leads  to  apostasy,  and  the  apostate  is  ipso  facto  an
outlaw.  Are  our  affections  given  to  Christ  in  self-surrender  and  love  and  happy
trust  ?  It  is  the  one  condition  of  walking  with  him  to  any  purpose  of  spiritual  effect.
Is  the  dedication  made  maintained  in  unswerving  true  allegiance  ?  See  to  that,  fur  the
beginning  of  estrangement  is  as  the  letting  out  of  water,  and  what  is  deflection  now
will  be  defection  in  the  next  stage.

Ver.  6. — Calamity  one  of  the  works  of  Ood.  It  is  not  sin,  but  suffering,  that  is  here
meant.  We  are  to  regard  temporal  calamities  as  the  warning  voice  of  Gd,  a  manifes-
tation of  his  character,  and  a  corrective  expression  of  his  displeasure.  God  maintains
his  controversy  with  Israel.  The  verses  before  contain  language  of  unimpeachable
equity,  ill-requited  kindness,  and  injured  honour.  On  every  ground  the  threatened
punishment  was  merited,  and  only  in  mercy  had  it  been  suspended  so  long.  There  is
a  natural  atheism  in  the  human  heart,  a  constantly  prevailing  tendency  to  forget  God.
This  tendency  is  most  powerful  in  prosperity,  and  must  often  be  counterworked  by  a
dispensation  of  adversity.  Not  that  Divine  judgments,  acting  on  human  corruption,
necessarily  lead  to  repentance.  But  in  God's  hand  they  have  often  been  overruled  to
this  effect,  and  it  is  in  this  reclaiming  and  reforming  capacity  that  they  are  alluded  to

In  this  text.  /t,  n  •

L  We  dibtinsotsh  the  agency  or  Jehovah  feom  chance.  "  Chance  is  a  word
muck  used,  and  little  understood.    When  wo  lay  that  an  event  has  happened  by


48  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  m.  1—15.

chance,  we  mean  either  that  it  had  no  cause,  which  is  atheism,  or  that  we  do  not  know
the  cause,  which  is  an  ahuse  of  language.  Chance,  in  fact,  is  nothing  but  a  term  ot
himian  ignorance.  Yet  the  use  of  the  word  implies  either  atheism,  denying  the  Dirine
existence,  or  naturalism,  denying  his  superintending  agency ;  the  two  coming  to  the
same  thing,  for  we  might  as  well  have  no  God  as  no  providence.  The  sentiment  of
our  text  is  the  refutation  of  both,  and  as  such  is  but  the  echo  of  all  Scripture.  "  All
things  are  of  God."  Not  creation  only,  but  providence,  which  is  as  wonderful  as  a
continuous  creation.  Not  great  events  only,  but  the  very  least,  without  any  one  of
which  the  whole  machinery  would  be  incapable  of  a  single  revolution.  How  beautifully
yet  powerfully  is  this  brought  out  by  Christ  in  his  illustration  from  the  sparrows
(Matt.  I.  29 — 31) !  If  a  sparrow  cannot  fall  to  the  ground  without  our  Father,  much
less  can  a  whole  city.  When  evil  is  in  a  city,  it  is  not  a  visitation  of  chance,  but  of
the  hand  vf  God,  under  which  it  has  come.

II.  The  Divine  agency  is  herb  distinguished  fbom  that  of  idols.  Something
to  worship  is  a  necessity  of  human  nature.  Hence  men,  when  they  forsake  the  true
God,  set  up  a  false  one  in  his  place.  The  existence  and  power  of  this  idol  they  believe
without  proof,  and  even  against  presumption.  Unconquerable  incredulity  in  reference
to  the  true  God  becomes  iriational  credulity  in  reference  to  the  false  ones.  Thus
atheism  is  more  a  question  of  the  heart  than  of  the  head.  Men  do  not  like  to  retain
God  in  their  knowledge  (Bom.  i.  23,  28),  and  so  discard  him  for  gods  of  their  own
devising.  This  fact  shows  polytheism  a  Ibrm  of  atheism.  And  it  was  demonstrably
60  with  the  Jews.  The  obverse  of  apostasy  with  them  was  always  idolatry ;  and  this
text  affirms  that  Jehovah,  whom  they  had  forsaken,  not  any  senseless  idol  which  they
had  chosen,  dominated  history  and  sent  good  and  evil  to  men  (see  Isa.  xli.  21 — 24 ;
Jer.  X.  3 — 16).  We  think  we  are  in  no  danger  of  making  their  mistake.  But  the
world,  in  its  ambition,  avarice,  or  pleasure,  may  take  away  our  hearts  from  God,  and
become  their  idol,  climbing  to  his  throne.  And  we  give  it  credit  often  for  what  Qoi
does  and  alone  can  do,  and  to  that  extent  misread  the  providential  events  in  which  Ckid
is  dealing  with  us.

III.  Divine  agency  is  to  be  distinguished  fkom  the  agency  of  second  oauseb.
The  deification  of  nature  is  a  common  practice.  Conventionally,  nature  is  a  kind  of
mystical  personification  of  some  unknown  existence,  and  to  which  the  omnipotence
denied  to  God  is  freely  attributed.  If  "  nature  "  does  a  thing,  it  is  assumed  that  Grod
has  no  hanil  in  it,  and  that  it  wants  no  explanation  further.  "  Nature  is  that  created
realm  of  being  or  substauce  which  has  an  acting,  a  going  on  or  process  from  within
itself,  under  and  by  its  own  laws  "  (Bushnell).  But  these  laws  are  just  "  the  actuating
power  ol  God."  They  are  not  powers  in  themselves,  but  only  the  rules  according  to
which  his  power  operates.  We  have  various  kinds  of  seasons  which  we  trace  to  various
causes  in  nature.  But  these  are  second  causes,  and  under  the  sovereign  control  of  the
First  Cause.  "  Can  the  heavens  give  showers  ?  art  not  thou  he,  0  Lord  our  God  ? ...  for
thou  hast  made  all  these  things  "  (Jer.  xiv.  22).  Air,  earth,  and  sea,  and  all  that  they
contain,  are  subject  to  him  (Ps.  civ.  4;  cxlviii.  8).  Prom  the  natural  cause  of  this  or
that  we  must  rise  to  him  who  makes  it  what  and  puts  it  where  it  is,  and  gives  it  a
commission  to  work.     "  All  things  are  of  God."

"  This  truth  philosophy,  though  eagle-eyed
In  nature's  tendencies,  oft  o'erlooks ;
And  liaving  found  his  instrument,  forgets
Or  disregards,  or,  more  presumptuous  still.
Denies  the  Power  that  wields  it."

The  same  principle  rules  events  in  which  men  are  agents,  "Men  are  in  God's  hand"
as  well  as  matter.  The  King  of  Assyria  was  simply  the  rod  with  which  God  struck
Israel  (Isa.  x.  5 — 16).  In  attributing  temporal  evils  to  God's  sovereign  control  of
tilings,  distinguish  between  sovereignty  and  caprice.  What  God  does  he  could  assign
the  best  of  reasons  for.  He  exercises  his  sovereignty  in  declining  to  do  so.  But  he
tells  us  that  the  great  general  cause  of  suffering  is  sin.  Evil  does  not  come  on  us  as
creatures,  but  as  sinners.  The  infliction  of  it  has  not  to  do  with  sovereignty,  but  with
equity.  All  good  is  from  God,  all  evil  from  the  sinner.  All  good  is  gratuitous,  all  evil
is  deserved.     All  evil  is  righteous  retribution,  all  good  is  free  and  sovereign  love.    Nor


OH.  in.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  49

is  suffering  destitute  of  a  large  benevolent  element.  On  the  contrary,  it  often  serves  a
merciful  purpose,  and  would  always  do  so  were  it  properly  received.  When  the  sun
of  prosperity  fails  to  soften,  God  casts  men  into  the  furnace  of  trial,  if  perchance  the
stronger  method  may  prevail.  If  there  be  evil  in  your  city,  then  consider  who  sends
it,  on  what  account,  and  for  what  purpose  j  so,  it  may  be,  you  will  "  turn  to  him  that
smiteth  you,"  as  he  means  you  should.  (From  a  sermon  by  Ralph  Wardlaw,  D.D.,
supplemented  and  condensed.^

Ver.  7. — The  hounds  that  hay  before  they  bite.  The  prophet  speaks  here  as  if  he
were  announcing  axiomatic  truth.  And  it  is  nothing  less.  It  might  be  argued  from
reason ;  it  is  historic  fact ;  and  it  is  a  prominent  Scripture  doctrine.

I.  Judgment  nbvbr  comes  withodt  warniko.  The  Deluge,  the  destruction  of
Sodom,  the  plagues  of  Egypt,  and  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  are  cases  in  point.  Sometimes
judgment  has  taken  people  unawares  (Matt.  xxiv.  39),  but  this  is  because  the  warning
has  been  disregarded  (Gen.  xix.  14 ;  vi.  3).  When  there  has  been  no  warning  the
judgment  has  been  provoked,  not  by  a  course  of  wickedness,  but  by  a  single  flagrant
transgression  in  connection  with  which  warning  was  but  of  the  question  (Exod.  xxxii.
27,  28 ;  Numb.  xxvi.  10 ;  Acts  xii.  23).  The  warning  of  coming  judgment  is :  1.
A  disclosure  of  sin.  To  allow  men  to  sin  unheeded,  and  to  find  it  satisfactory,  would
be  to  amnesty  evil-doing  and  practically  to  encourage  it.  To  erect  the  gallows  of
impending  judgment,  on  the  other  hand,  brings  into  sight  the  fact  of  sin,  and  emphasizes
its  demerit.  Next  to  execution,  the  sentence  of  death  is  a  revelation  to  the  criminal  of
the  enormity  of  his  crime.  It  is  a  mental  association  of  guilt  with  penalty,  and  so  a
measuring  of  its  moral  proportions.  It  is  also :  2.  A  deterrent  from  sin.  Judgment
executed  without  warning  loses  half  its  value.  The  fear  of  the  rod  is  a  wholesome
restrairjt  on  the  folly  of  the  child ;  greater  often  than  the  actual  blow,  because  it  operates
through  a  longer  period.  God's  moral  government  in  its  relation  to  sin  aims  at  cure
rather  than  mere  punishment,  at  prevention  rather  than  either.  His  blows  fall  only
after  his  threats  have  failed  to  move  (Prov.  i.  24,  etc. ;  Jer.  vi.  10,  11).  Accordingly :
3.  To  denounce  Judgment  sometimes  makes  it  unnecessary  to  inflict  it,  A  notable
instance  was  that  of  Nineveh.  If  her  repentance  were  more  common,  her  escape  would
be  more  common  also  (Matt.  xii.  41).  God  frights  with  the  thunder  of  his  threats,
that  he  may  not  be  compelled  to  smite  with  the  lightning  of  his  judgments.  He  makes
a  display  of  his  resistless  forces  that  the  rebels  may  yield  without  going  into  action.
"  Turn  ye,  turn  ye :  why  will  ye  die  ?  "  that  is  the  message  of  his  open  preparations  to
destroy.

II.  This  waeninq  reaches  men  theouoh  the  prophets.  On  his  way  to  the
establishment  of  personal  relations,  God  always  treats  with  men  through  mediators.
Covenants  are  made  with  representatives,  such  as  Adam,  Noah,  Abraham,  and  Christ.
Justifying  righteousness  is  negotiated  typically  through  a  priesthood,  and  antitypically
through  Jesus  Christ.  So  saving  knowledge  is  negotiated  through  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  by  the  instrumentality  of  inspired  men.  1.  This  was  the  only  feasible  way.  Not
every  man  is  fit  to  receive  a  revelation  direct  from  God.  To  do  so  implies  mental  and
moral  conditions  that  are  realized  in  but  a  small  percentage  of  men.  His  revelation
must  reach  many  through  a  third  party  in  any  case.  If  the  worse  qualified  must  be
spoken  to  through  the  better  qualified,  it  is  only  carrying  out  the  principle  to  speak  to
both  through  the  best  qualified  of  all,  i.e.  the  prophet  selected  by  God  himself.  The
Scripture  is  God's  revelation,  and  adequate  to  man's  need  (2  Tim.  iii.  15 — 17).  The
attempt  to  substitute  for  it  an  "inner  light,"  or  any  other  device,  is  to  substitute  our
own  nonentity  for  God's  reality.  2.  It  tends  to  call  faith  into  action.  God  wants  his
Word  believed.  And  he  wants  it  believed  in  a  certain  way  and  on  certain  grounds.
To  believe  what  we  see  is  not  the  faith  he  wants  (John  xx.  29),  nor  properly  faith  at
all.  "  Blessed  are  they  who  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed."  Only  such  believ-
ing is  intelligent  or  voluntary,  and  therefore  possessed  of  moral  qualities.  If  God
revealed  his  will  directly  to  each  individual,  bearing  it  in  resistlessly  on  liis  conscious-
ness, the  moral  discipline  involved  in  faith  would  be  lost  to  men.  3.  It  secures  a  record
of  GocTs  message  for  universal  use.  A  revelation  given  to  men  individually  would  be
only  for  the  individual,  and  for  the  time  then  being.  It  would  neither  be  common
property  nor  permanent  property.  And  it  is  worth  being  made  both.  God's  way  is  one

AHoa.  ■


60  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  in.  1—16.

in  all  ages.  He  ia  in  the  same  mind  about  sin,  and  deals  with  it  on  the  same  principles
always.  The  record  of  what  he  has  done  is  the  prophecy  of  what  in  similar  circum-
stances he  will  do.  The  prophet  wrote  so  much  of  his  message  as  had  permanent
interest,  and  the  aggregate  of  such  inspired  deliverances  is  the  Scripture,  which  is  "  a
light  in  a  dark  place  until  the  day  dawn."  It  is  not  a  revelation  for  an  individual
merely.  Having  served  its  turn  with  one,  it  is  no  less  available  for  others  in  endless
succession.

III.  God's  peophets  are  first  of  all  his  servants.  "  His  servants  the  propLets."
The  explanatory  words,  "  his  servants,"  widen  greatly  the  sentiment  of  the  claase.
1.  To  prophesy  under  Divine  direction  is  itself  an  act  of  service.  There  is  a  wide  sense
in  which  all  are  God's  sei-vants  who  carry  out  any  of  his  purposes.  Thus  Gyrus  and
Nebuchadnezzar  (Isa.  xlv.  1 ;  Jer.  xxv.  9)  are  styled  respectively  the  "anointed"  and
the  "  servant "  of  God,  because  they  were  designated  to  and  did  a  work  for  him.  This
was  a  purely  external  relation,  but  it  was  real.  All  the  prophets,  even  the  wicked
Balaam,  were  God's  servants  in  this  sense.  They  represented  his  interest.  They  went
his  errand.  They  carried  his  message.  They  laboured  to  accomplish  his  purpose.
Their  exercise  of  the  prophetic  office  was  service.  2.  Official  relations  have  their  basis
in  personal  relations.  Shepherds  and  sheep  alike  come  into  the  fold  by  the  Door,  Jesus
Christ  (John  x.  1 — 14).  All  come  in  to  the  effect  of  their  own  salvation  first,  and
being  in  fall  into  rank  as  gatherers-in  of  others.  First  faith,  and  then  works,  is  thus
the  spiritual  order ;  faith  establishing  personal  relations  with  Christ,  and  work,  among
other  things,  trying  to  get  others  to  do  likewise.  Hence  Church  officers  are  to  be
chosen  out  of  the  number  of  Church  members.  The  conditions  of  spiritual  work  are
spiritual  gifts,  and  the  condition  of  spiritual  gifts  is  to  be  in  the  spiritual  connection
(John  xiv.  6 ;  Bph.  iL  18).

Vers.  9 — 12. — The  prophet  gets  his  heavy  commission.  It  is  Jehovah  that  speaks.
He  addresses  the  prophets  (Keil),  or  the  heathen  (Lange),  or  the  heathen  through  the
prophets.  The  passage  is  a  summons  to  the  nations  to  appear  as  witnesses  of  Israel's
flagrant  sin,  and  her  dreadful  punishment.  There  are  many  articles  in  her  predicted
woe.  Not  least  of  these  is  condemnation  by  the  heathen,  who  for  less  heinous  sins
were  to  be  themselves  destroyed.  When  a  professed  follower  of  God  apostatizes  in
such  a  fashion  that  even  God's  enemies  cry  shame,  and  endures  a  corresponding
punishment  in  their  sight,  the  cup  of  his  iniquity  and  of  his  retribution  are  both  full.

I.  The  crime  charged.  There  are  many  counts  in  this  grave  indictment.  1.  The
confusion  of  sordid  money-seehing.  "  See  the  great  confusions  in  the  midst  thereof."
The  restlessness  of  greed,  the  fever  of  speculation,  the  wrangling  of  barter,  and  the
tumult  of  audacious  extortion  are  all  included  here.  The  mingling  of  excitement,
disorder,  and  noise  in  a  struggle  for  money,  suggest  a  scene  in  which  little  is  left  to
fancy  with  one  who  has  been  "  on  'Change."  2.  The  oppression  of  power  without
principle.  "  And  the  oppressed  in  the  heart  thereof."  From  fraud  to  oppression  is  but
a  single  step,  and  a  short  one.  It  is  simply  a  question  of  power.  The  swindler  would
steal  if  he  could.  The  thief  would  rob  with  violence  if  he  dare.  When  dishonesty,
moreover,  prevails  in  private  life,  a  system  of  public  plunder  is  only  a  question  of
opportunity.  3.  Wrong-doing  till  the  way  to  do  right  had  leen  forgotten.  "  They
know  not  to  do  right."  "In  the  nature  of  things  every  sin  against  light  draws  blood
on  the  spiritual  retina "  (Joseph  Cook).  Men  are  both  hardened  and  blinded  by  a
course  of  sin.  Evil  actions  repeated  become  habits,  and  evil  habits  indulged  in  work
themselves  into  the  very  texture  of  the  soul.  The  wrong  of  ill-doing  soon  ceases  to  be
felt,  which  naturally  leads  to  its  ceasing  to  be  seen  (Jer.  iv.  22 ;  cf.  Bom.  xvi.  19).
When  we  can  sin  without  conscience,  we  are  very  near  to  sinning  without  conscious-
ness. The  way  to  preserve  a  good  conscience,  a  conscience  that  knows  evil  and  con-
demns it,  is  to  respect  its  least  dictate.  "  Sow  an  act,  and  you  reap  a  habit ;  sow  a  habit,
and  you  reap  a  character ;  sow  a  character,  and  you  reap  a  destiny."  4.  Putting  by
plunder  in  store.  "  Who  store  up  violence  and  devastation  in  their  palaces."  Plunder
nas  n^t  even  the  poor  excuse  of  need.  It  is  practised  gratuitously,  as  without  limit.
The  poor  were  fleeced  and  impoverished,  that  the  sordid  rich  might  heap  up  enormous
and  superfluous  stores.  And  by  the  terms  there  was  stored  up  not  only  the  spoil  of
violence,  but  violence  itself.    Fari  passu,  ■with  the  accumulation  of  ill-gotten  gain  was


OH.  in.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOa  61

the  heaping  up  of  the  sin  of  their  unrighteous  getting,  whilst  in  heaping  up  gin  they
were  necessarily  treasuring  up  wrath  (Rom.  ii.  6).

II.  The  WITNESSES  SUMMONED.  "  Assemhle  upon  the  mountains,"  etc.  A  re  Terence  to
the  topography  of  Samaria  hrings  out  the  graphic  fitness  of  the  language  here.  The
city  was  built  on  a  hill,  surrounded  and  overlooked  by  mountains  higher  than  itself,
and  from  the  tops  of  which  the  nations  could  look  down  into  the  very  streets,  and
observe  the  daily  doings  of  the  inhabitants.  As  regards  these  we  notice :  1.  Abandon-
ment in  sin  is  a  sight  for  a  man's  worst  enemy  to  see.  The  certainty,  severity,  and
nearness  of  avenging  judgment  makes  sin,  from  even  the  low  utilitarian  stanrlpoint,
the  greatest  possible  evil.  The  enemy,  who  rejoices  in  our  ill,  can  find  no  such  occa-
sion of  malignant  joy  as  our  giving  ourselves  up  to  sin.  After  the  fact  that  it  offends
God,  the  strongest  argument  aiainst  sin  is  the  fact,  the  obverse  of  the  other,  that  it
pleases  the  devil  and  wicked  men.  2.  When  men  lose  the  sense  of  sin,  Oud  appeals  to
their  sense  of  sham£.  It  is  strange  that  the  sense  of  shame  should  survive  tlie  sense  ol
sin,  but  so  it  is.  We  fear  men  more  than  God.  We  are  not  ashamed  to  do  what  we
would  be  very  much  ashamed  to  acknowledge.  The  poet's  sarcasm  is  just,  that  in  the
matter  of  sin  our  care  is  "  not  to  leave  undone,  but  keep  unknown."  The  bitterness  of
punishment  is  greatly  aggravated  by  its  being  inflicted  in  the  presence  of  an  exulting
enemy.  Philistia  and  Egypt  were,  moreover,  the  enemies  whose  cognizance  of  their
way  and  end  Israel  would  most  feel  and  fear  (2  Sam.  i.  20).  To  this  last  shred  of  feel-
ing on  which  a  motive  could  lay  hold  Jehovah  here  appeals.  They  would  be  a  gazing-
stock  to  their  bitterest  enemies.  "  Like  the  woman  set  in  the  midst  amid  one  encircling
sea  of  accusing,  insulting  faces,  with  none  to  pity,  none  to  intercede,  none  to  show
mercy  to  them  who  had  showed  no  mercy.  Faint  image  of  the  shame  of  that  day
when  not  men's  deeds  only,  but  the  secrets  of  all  hearts,  shall  be  revealed,  and  they
shall  begin  'to  say  to  the  mountains.  Fall  on  us,  and  to  the  hills.  Cover  us'"  (Pusey).
3.  The  pupil  in  the  art  of  ill-doing  often  outdoes  the  master.  It  is  assumed  that  even
Egypt  and  Philistia  would  be  shocked  at  the  sight  of  the  wrong-doing  of  apostate
Israel,  and  so  become  witnesses  against  them.  Yet  Egypt  had  taught  them  "oppres-
sion," and  Philistia  had  given  them  many  a  lesson  in  "  violence  and  devastation."  The
art  of  wrong-doing  advances  with  rapid  strides  as  it  is  handed  on.  The  son  of  the
"  smart "  trader  is  a  swindler,  the  son  of  the  swindler  is  the  burglar,  the  son  of  the
burglar  is  the  robber-assassin.  The  pupil  of  the  religious  liberal  is  the  rationalist,  and
the  pupil  of  the  rationalist  is  the  atheist.  Begin  by  imitating  wicked  men,  and  you
will  end  by  outstripping  them  in  sin.

III.  The  sentence  pkonoonced.  This  ii  at  once  heavy  in  its  nature  and  explicit
in  its  details.  We  see  here  that :  1.  When  Ood'a  jvdgments  come  against  a  man  they
surround  him.  (Ver.  11, "  An  enemy,  and  that  round  about  the  land.")  The  impossi-
bility of  escaping  when  God  attacks  is  axiomatic.  Punishment  is  in  such  a  way
interwoven  with  sin  that  they  cannot  be  dissociated.  When  we  sin  against  God  we
sin  against  the  nature  of  things.  Physical,  rnental,  and  social  law  jump  each  with
moral  law,  are  broken  in  the  breach  of  it,  and  so  are  each  of  them  a  channel  to  guide
to  us  the  full  flood  of  retribution.  "  Though  hand  join  in  hand,  yet  shall  not  the
wicked  go  unpunished."  2.  When  Qod  strikes  a  sinner  he  strikes  him  on  the  seat  of  his
sin.  "  And  he  shall  bring  down,"  etc.  (ver.  11) ;  "  That  dwell  in  Samaria,"  etc.
(ver.  12).  The  strong  had  oppressed  and  pillaged  the  weak,  and  God's  hand  would
fall  on  their  strength.  In  the  palaces  the  spoil  of  violence  had  been  heaped  up,  and  the
palaces  should  be  the  special  prey  of  the  plunderer.  The  beds  and  couches  which  had
ministered  to  their  sinful  indulgence  would  be  carried  away  to  the  last  stick.  It  is  so
always.  The  punishment  of  drunkenness,  uncleanness,  pride,  theft,  lying,  comes  in
many  ways,  but  in  every  case  pre-eminently  through  the  lust  or  appetite  involved.
This  is  according  to  natural  laws,  but  is  none  the  less  the  arrangement  of  God.  He
has  put  latent  in  every  power  a  mystic  spark,  which,  if  the  power  be  abused,  becomes
A  retributive  fire  to  burn  the  breaker  of  his  Law.  3.  When  sin  is  adequately  punished
the  tinnei's  well-being  is  practically  destroyed.  "  Delivers  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion
two  shin-bones  and  an  ear-lappet,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  These  are  paltry  leavings,  not
worth  the  rescue.  And  such,  and  so  insignificant,  would  be  the  surviving  good  of
Israel,  when  God's  controversy  was  settled.  Where  the  scythe  of  God's  judgment
hu  passed  there  ia  little  left  for  the  gleaner.     The  detected  thief,  the  broken-down


59  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  m.  1—15.

•enaualist,  the  besotted  drunkard,  what  is  each  but  a  human  wreck  ?  The  kernel  of
life  is  wasted,  and  only  a  busk  remains.  No  wallflower  of  good  can  ever  grow  to  corer
these  wrecks  of  time.

Vers.  13 — ^15. — The  residue  of  IsraeFs  woe.  Those  who  had  been  called  to  witness
the  sin  of  Israel  are  now  summoned  to  hear  and  report  her  sentence.  In  connection
with  this  we  see  that —

L  Even  heathens  can  testify  against  apostate  Isbael  in  the  judoment.  To
testify  is  not  merely  to  convey  intelligence ;  it  contains  in  it  the  idea  of  protest,  t.«.
testifying  against.  1.  The  heathen  had  a  natural  sense  of  right  and  wrong.  Pau]
says  they  "show  the  work  of  the  law  written  in  their  hearts,"  and  "are  a  law  unto
themselves."  A.  rule  of  duty  is  included  in  the  constitution  of  their  nature.  They
know  right  from  wrong,  and  are  governed  by  a  sense  of  obligation.  They  could,  there-
fore, judge  the  conduct  of  Israel.  They  could  see  and  testify  that  it  did  not  come  up
to  even  their  own  imperfect  standard  of  right.  2.  They  had  heen  truer  to  their  standard
of  right  than  Israel  had.  Paul  tells  us  that  the  heathen  had  not  been  true  to  their
light  (Bom.  i.  21 — 28),  and  that  the  punishment  of  that  was  diminished  light.  But
they  had  been  truer,  on  the  whole,  than  Israel  had  been  to  hers.  Their  morality  was
not  so  far  below  Israel's  as  their  inferior  light  would  lead  us  to  expect.  Hence  the
assumption  that  they  would  be  shocked  at  Israel's  manifold  corruptions.  Moral  deterio-
ration is  measured,  not  so  much  by  the  absolute  amount  and  kind  of  wrong-doing  as  by
the  extent  to  which  it  falls  below  the  known  standard  of  right.  Other  things  being
equal,  he  is  relatively  the  best  man  who  most  closely  follows  his  light  (John  iii.  19 ;
Rom.  ii,  14).  2.  They  would  learn  something  for  themselves  from  this  witness-hearing.
Discrimination  would  see  that  Israel's  sin  was  not  a  result,  but  the  contradiction,  of
the  national  religion ;  that  it  was  an  evil  result  of  heathen  influence,  and  involving
the  heathen  more  or  less  in  its  guilt ;  that  Israel's  Qod  was  a  God  that  judgeth
righteously,  and  taketh  vengeance  on  evil-doers;  and  that  judgment,  beginning  at
God's  chosen  people,  would  not  miss  his  open  enemies.  The  very  act  of  testifying
against  Israel,  moreover,  would  involve  such  an  exercise  of  the  moral  sense,  in  refer-
ence to  their  sin,  as  could  not  fail  to  be  beneficial.

II.  Sin  is  punished  by  beinq  ketuened  on  the  sinneb'b  head.  "  When  I  visit
Israel's  transgression  upon  him."  The  sin  not  only  leads  to  the  punishment,  but  as  it
were  re-embodies  itself  in  it.  1.  The  memory  of  it  haunts  him.  When  sin  is  done  it  is
not  done  with.  Like  the  dead  bird  aroimd  the  Ancient  Mariner's  neck,  an  avenging
Providence  ties  the  memory  of  it  to  our  soul.  Like  the  crime  of  Eugene  Aram,  it
becomes  an  evil-haunting  memory,  to  dog  our  steps  for  ever.

"And  still  no  peace  for  the  restless  clay
Will  wave  or  mould  allow ;
The  horrid  thing  pursues  my  soul —
It  stands  before  me  now."

(Hood.)

2.  The  permanent  evil  consequences  of  it  keep  it  before  the  mefmory.  The  sins  of  youth  are
the  sowing  of  which  the  sutferings  of  manhood  and  age  are  the  harvest — a  harvest  too
constantly  and  painfully  reaped  to  allow  the  harvester  to  forget.  The  sins  of  one  man
are  the  fruitful  souice  of  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  many,  and  find  in  each  of  these  a
mentor  who  makes  it  impossible  to  forget.  In  addition  to  the  sinner  and  the  sinned
against,  wrong-doing  injures  those  whose  well-bting  depends  on  either.  It  is  thus  a
poison-tree  that  forks  and  branches  in  the  bearing  of  its  deadly  fruit.  While  the  evil
consequences  of  his  wrong-doing  are  around  him,  and  propagating  themselves  in  ever-
widening  circles,  the  sinner  apart  from  conscience  cannot  get  his  iniquities  out  of  sight.

3.  Not  seldom  the  punishment  is  a  resurrection  of  the  sin  itself.  Laban'a  trick  on
Jacob  was  a  repetition  of  Jacob's  trick  on  Isaac  (Gen.  xxix.  23 ;  xxvii.  15^27).  The
deaths  of  Haman  and  Jezebel  were  similarly  adjusted  punishments.  So  with  the
cutting  off  the  thumbs  and  great  toes  of  the  aich-mutilator  Adoni-bezek  (Judg.  i.  6,  7).
In  such  cases  the  sin  is  palpably  returned  in  retribution  on  the  sinner's  head.

ni.  Idol-worship  is  a  simclation  op  the  wobship  of  God.  "  The  altars  of  Bethel,
and  the  horns  of  the  altar."    Both  in  the  use  of  an  altar  and  in  the  form  of  the  altar


«B.  m.  1— U.]  THX  BOOK  or  AMOSL  U

used  the  idol-vronhip  set  up  by  Jeroboam  wu  •  plagiarism  from  the  worship  of
Jehovah.  1.  lHan  cannot  create  in  religton,  but  lie  can  itda^  He  can  form  no  idea  of
spiritual  thing*  apart  from  Divine  revelation  (1  Cor.  ii.  9).  At  the  same  time,  God's
revelation  of  spiritual  things  is  too  pure  for  his  taste.  The  result  is  that  he  compro-
mises the  matter  by  adopting  ready-made  ordinances,  and  loading  them  with  his  own
corrupt  spirit  and  meaning.  2.  Idolatrous  worship  seem*  leu  of  on  apostasy  in  prih
portion  as  it  retains  the  forms  of  true  worship.  The  devil  lets  man  down  into  idolatry
as  into  other  sin  by  easy  stages.  First  he  parts  with  the  spirit  of  true  worship,  whilst
retaining  the  form.  Then  he  parts  with  the  object  of  it,  corrupting  the  form.  Then
he  adopts  a  new  object,  and  adapts  to  its  worship  the  already  corrupted  form.  And  so
with  all  sin,  which  is  spiritual  idolatry.  Man  does  not  first  abandon  the  forms  of  god-
liness, and  then  the  practice  of  it.  fie  ^ves  up  the  substance  of  it  as  a  matter  of  taste,
and  tries  to  salve  his  conscience  for  this  by  adhering  to  its  forms  (2  Tim.  iii.  6).
3.  This  also  makes  it  more  plausible  and  insidUntt,  The  worship  set  up  in  Dan  and
Bethel  by  Jeroboam  was  not  idol-worship  pure  and  simple.  It  was  the  worship  of
God  by  means  of  idols,  and  in  forms  which  mimicked  the  worship  at  Jerusalem.
Heresy  at  the  outset  always  masquerades  in  the  guise  of  truth.  By  adopting  the
sheep's  clothing  the  wolf  gets  easy  access  to  the  fold.  It  is  only  after  he  has  entered,
and  the  danger  of  eviction  is  over,  that  his  true  character  is  assumed.

IV.  One  idol  bbeeds  hant.  "  The  altars  of  BetheL"  There  was  but  one  sacri-
ficial altar  in  connection  with  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  but  when  many  gods  were
invented,  many  altars  were  provided  to  correspond  to  them.  This  multiplication  of
idols  is  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that:  1.  Evil  naturcUh/  spreads.  One  sin  leads  to
more.  Covetousness  leads  to  theft,  dnukenness  to  nncleanness,  all  three  often  to
murder,  and  almost  every  sin  to  deceit  and  lying.  No  man  can  set  up  one  sinful  idol
and  say  hs  will  have  no  more.  It  will  bring  others  with  it  whether  he  will  or  no.  It
is  the  first  swallow  of  the  summer  of  evil-doing,  and  heralds  a  coming  flock.  2.  Idolatry
must  become  polytheism  in  the  attempt  to  meet  the  spiritual  wants  of  ?7ten,  God  is  an
infinite  Being,  and  so  can  meet  our  human  necessity  all  round.  But  an  idol  is  the
creation  of  a  finite  mind,  and  so  a  finite  thing.  It  is  to  meet  one  need  of  our  nature,
the  need  that  was  uppermost  in  the  consciousness  of  the  inventor.  But  a  different
need  will  be  uppermost  in  another  worshipper,  and  a  different  idol  will  be  wanted  to
meet  his  case.  Accordingly,  in  the  mythology  were  many  gods,  who  distributed  among
them  the  various  functions  necessary  to  complete  the  circle  of  human  good.  It  was,  in
fact,  an  attempt,  by  multiplying  deities  indefinitely,  to  provide  a  substitute  for  the
infinite  God  of  revelation.  3.  A  worship  that  is  all  error  is  more  logical  than  one  that
is  half  truth.  Everything  has  its  own  proper  form.  You  do  not  firni  an  eagle  in  the
form  of  a  dove,  nor  an  apple  in  the  form  of  a  plum,  nor  an  evil  principle  in  the  form  of
a  good  one.  If  such  a  form  is  artificially  put  round  it,  the  result  is  a  palpable  misfit.
Polytheism  is  the  nearest  approach  to  logical  idolatry,  and  in  proportion  as  it  is  self-
consistent  is  dangerous,  and  wins  its  way.

V.  Tbb  fibst  thing  judqhekt  does  aoaikst  thk  inoLAXEa  is  to  depbivk  hiu
OF  HIS  ooDS.  "  The  horns  of  the  altar  shall  be  cut  off,"  etc.  'i'his  would  put  an
effectual  stop  to  the  idol-worship.  We  thus  see  that ;  1.  Ood  wants  his  judgments
to  be  recognized.  He  never  punislies  men  incognito.  When  he  puts  forth  his  power
he  wants  men  to  see  that  it  is  his  (Ezod.  viL  6 ;  1  Kings  xx.  28 ;  Ezek.  vi.  7),  and
striking  the  very  seat  of  sin  inflicts  a  stroke  at  once  significant  and  effectual,  a  reve-
lation at  once  of  the  Divine  hand  and  power.  2.  He  wants  them  to  he  effective.  The
moral  effect  of  a  judgment  depends  very  much  on  our  knowing  whence  it  comes.  If
we  recognize  it  as  sent  by  God,  it  is  tenfold  more  impressive.  Now,  to  exercise  the
maximum  of  beneficial  influence  with  the  minimum  of  afflictive  visitation  is  ever  Qod'a
way  (Lam.  iii.  32,  33).  He  does  not  strike  an  aimless  or  a  needless  blow.  Each  stroke
is  meant  to  tell,  and  the  medicine  of  affliction  is  stopped  the  moment  the  patient  is
cured.  3.  Idolatry  is  at  the  root  of  all  other  sin.  It  is  the  complement  of  atheism,
which  is  radically  the  heart  departing  firom  G-od.  It  is  a  sublimated  self-worship,
makiijg  an  idol  of  our  own  mental  creation.  A  god  dethroned,  and  a  self  enthroned,  is
a  state  of  things  which  "contains  the  promise  and  potency  "  of  all  evil.  To  strike  at
Israel's  idi)latry  was  to  lay  the  axe  to  the  root  of  the  national  evil.  The  idols  abolished,
and  God  restored  to  the  national  heart,  its  life  would  he  again  a  consecrated  one.


M  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  m.  1—15.

VL  Man's  sKLF-nrotrLOENOB,  the  dearest  idol  hb  has,  wtll  bb  taken  fbom
HIM  ALONO  WITH  THB  BEST.  (Ver.  15,  "  And  I  will  smite,"  etc.)  Luxuries  long
enjoyed  become  necessities  of  life,  and  no  judgment  would  be  thorough  that  left  them
untouched.  Self-indulgence,  if  it  were  left,  would  soon  invent  a  new  idolatry  for  its
own  accommodation.  It  is  only  by  making  a  clean  sweep  of  the  idols  already  in
possession  that  God  can  get  his  place  in  the  sinner's  heart.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Sin  against  light  and  love.  This  language  of  reproach  and  threatening
was  addressed  to  Israel  and  Judah.  Tet  all  who  occupy  a  parallel  position  of  privilege,
and  who  are  guilty  of  similar  insensibility,  ingratitude,  and  apostasy,  are  subject  to
the  condemnation  and  the  penalty  pronounced  upon  the  favoured  but  sinful  descendants
of  IsraeL

I.  Uhparalleled  rAVOTJBS  ASB  beoounted.  As  a  matter  of  history,  Israel  had
been  treated  in  a  singular  manner,  with  unique  favour.  However  we  may  explain  the
fact,  a  fact  it  is  which  Is  here  recalled  to  the  memory  of  the  too  oblivious  Hebrews,
1.  Israel  had  been  treated  as  the  family  of  God.  The  heavenly  Father  had  cared  for,
provided  for,  and  protected  his  peculiar  family,  the  children  whom  he  had  adopted.  2.
Israel  had  been  brought  up  from  the  land  of  Egypt.  To  the  marvellous  deliverance
and  interposition  recorded  by  Moses,  to  the  equally  marvellous  guidance  and  guardian-
ship experienced  in  the  wilderness  of  wandering,  the  sacred  writers  frequeutly  refer.
This  is  not  surprising ;  for  never  was  a  more  signal  instance  of  Divine  compassion
than  that  afforded  in  the  earlier  passages  of  the  national  life  of  the  chosen  people.  3.
Israel  had  been  the  object  of  the  Divine  knowledge.  By  this  we  understand  (for  the
language  is  accommodated  to  our  human  weakness)  that  God  had  regarded  and  selected
Israel  in  his  inscrutable  wisdom  for  a  certain  purpose,  viz.  in  order  by  Israel  to  make
himself  known  to  mankind  at  large.  A  peculiar  honour  was  conferred  upon  the  Hebrew
nation,  not,  however,  for  any  excellence  or  worthiness  in  them,  but  for  reasons  larger
and  higher  than  any  which  were  generally  apprehended.

II.  Unparalleled  iniquities  abe  imputed.  Idolatry  was  charged  upon  those
who  had  been  distinguished  as  the  recipients  of  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  unity.
Immorality  of  various  kinds  was  rife  amongst  those  who  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  the
purest  moral  code  known  amongst  the  nations  of  mankind.  The  just  principle  was
applied,  "  To  whom  much  is  given  of  him  will  be  much  required."  And  the  applica-
tion of  this  principle  made  manifest  the  peculiar  guilt  of  Israel.  The  Word  of  the  Lord
by  his  prophet  was  therefore  righteously  severe;  other  nations  were  guilty  of  equal
enormities,  but  the  privileges  of  Israe.l  rendered  their  iniquities  more  reprehensible.

HI.  Unparalleled  ohastisbmbnt  is  threatened.  All  the  iniquities  of  Israel
were  to  be  visited  by  Divine  correction.  In  the  remainder  of  his  prophecies  Amos
enlarges  upon  this  theme.  Whether  we  consider  the  captivities  and  humiliations
undergone  by  the  favoured  nation  in  the  period  immediately  succeeding,  or  the  history
of  subsequent  centuries,  we  see  the  truth  of  this  prediction.  Much  more  apparent  is
it  when  we  look  at  the  national  life  of  Israel  as  a  whole ;  and,  connecting  the  earlier
apostasies  with  the  rejection  of  the  Messiah,  recognize  in  the  present  dispersion  of  the
tribes  the  fulfilment  of  a  Divine  purpose  and  the  inculcation  of  a  Divine  lesson. — T,

Ver.  3. — Earmonioas  followship.  These  words  have  passed  into  a  proverb,  which
iiact  is  in  itself  a  proof  that  they  aflcord  with  human  experience.

I.  Habmony  of  sentiment  and  purpose  alone  can  ensure  aorbbmbnt  in  lifb.
The  spiritual  is  a  key  to  the  outward  life.  And  this  holds  not  only  with  regard  to  the
individual,  but  with  regard  to  society.  Because  people  live  together  In  a  house,  they
are  not  necessarily  a  true  family;  because  they  meet  together  in  an  ecclesiastical
building,  they  are  not  therefore  a  true  congregation ;  because  they  occupy  the  same
territory,  they  are  not  therefore  a  true  nation.  There  must  be  inner  accord  in  order
that  fellowship  may  be  real.

II.  Want  or  habmony  ov  hkabt  will  bubbly  manifest  itsklf  m  life.  This
is  the  other  side  of  the  same  law.    The  strifes  of  society  are  an  indication  of  conflicting


OH,  ml— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  58

principles.     Even  Christ  came  to  send,  not  peace,  but  a  sword.    Where  there  la  no
agreement,  one  will  walk  in  this  road  and  another  in  that.     External  uniformity  is
.  of  little  value.     In  fact,  manifest  discord  may  be  of  service  in  revealing  the  want  of
Bpiritual  unity,  and  so  leading  to  repentance.

III.  In  tub  helation  between  Gtod  and  man  agreement  k  only  to  be  attained
BT  THE  confokmity  OF  man's  MIND  AND  WILL  TO  God's.  It  is  not  to  be  expected,
it  is  not  to  be  desired,  that  God's  purpose  should  bend  to  man's.  The  human  ignorance
must  accept  the  Divine  wisdom,  and  the  human  error  and  sin  must  embrace  the  Divine
grace  and  holiness.     Such  is  the  teaching  of  revelation,  of  the  Law,  and  of  the  gospel.

IV.  Where  there  is  want  of  harmont  between  God  and  man,  it  is  fob  man
TO  seek  the  reconciliation  and  unity  which  alone  can  BRiNa  about  man's
WELFARE.  If  these  blessings  were  not  offered,  there  would  be  room  to  doubt  thgir
accessibility.  But  the  revelation  of  God's  counsels  in  Scripture  assures  us  that  our
heavenly  Father  desires  that  his  children  should  be  at  one  with  him.: — ^T.

Ver.  6. — Warning  notes.  There  is  something  in  this  interrogatory  style  that  arrests
the  attention  and  excites  inquiry.  Combined  as  it  is  with  bold  figures  of  speech,  it
gives  both  vivacity  and  impressiveness  to  the  prophecies  of  the  herdsman  of  Tekoah.

I.  The  presence  of  calamity.  The  phrase,  "  evil  in  a  city,"  is  certainly  vague,
but  how  much  it  may  imply!  How  many  forms  of  misery  may  be  suggested  by  the
expression  I — e.g,  famine,  pestilence,  war,  riot,  and  faction,  all  are  evils,  and  evils  which
do  not  always  come  singly  to  a  community.

II.  The  moral  siaNiFioANOE  of  calamity.  The  suggestion  of  the  prophet  is  that
"  the  Lord  hath  done  it."  We  are  not  warranted  in  applying  the  test  of  our  opinions
to  events  permitted  by  Divine  proviJenoe.  It  is  foolish  to  profess  ourselves  able  to
interpret  all  the  events,  and  especially  all  the  calamities,  that  occur ;  to  see  God's
"judgments "  in  all  human  distresses.  Yet  no  devout  mind  can  question  that  there
is  a  very  important  sense  in  which,  when  evil  happens  to  a  city  or  a  country,  the  Lord
hath  done  it.  The  world  is  governed  by  moral  laws ;  but  the  Governor  is  the  supreme
Creator  of  all  things,  the  supreme  Disposer  of  all  events.  Disobedience  to  his  authority
and  ordinances  entails  suffering,  privation,  disaster.    Men  reap  as  they  sow.

in.  The  prophetic  warning  of  coming  calamity.  The  prophet  was  a  watchman,
as  Ezekiel  so  vigorously  shows  us,  whose  office  it  is  to  recognize  the  approach  of  ill,  and
to  give  the  people  timely  and  faithful  warning.  The  same  ofBce  is  still  fulfilled  by  those
who  being  dead  yet  speak,  whose  declarations  concerning  Divine  government  remain
for  the  instruction  of  all  generations.  The  Bible  abounds  with  admonitions  to  which
cities  and  nations  will  do  well  to  give  heed.  And  all  ministers  of  religion  are  bound
to  explain  to  the  people  the  principles  of  moral  rule  and  law,  of  moral  retribution,  of
repentance  and  reformation.

IV.  The  proper  effect  of  calamity.  The  immediate  result  is  that  described
n  the  text — fear,  trembling,  alarm.  But  the  remote  result,  that  chiefly  to  be  desired,
is  the  turning  of  men's  hearts  unto  the  Lord,  and  their  consequent  acceptance  and
forgiveness. — T.

Ver.  7. — ITie  revelation  of  secrets.  That  there  must  be  assumed  to  be  some  limita-
tion to  this  broad  statement  is  manifest.  It  is  not  intended  to  declare  that  God  mads
his  prophets  acquainted  with  all  his  counsels  and  intentions,  but  rather  that  revelation
and  inspiration  are  realities,  and  that  prophecy  is  a  Divine  ordinance.

I.  The  actions  of  God  are  the  result  of  deliberate  counsel  and  purpose.
This  way  of  representing  the  conduct  of  Divine  affairs  is  out  of  harmony  with  much
current  teachiug  of  our  time.  We  are  often  told  that  it  is  childish  to  conceive  of  God
as  personal,  as  thinking,  feeling,  and  acting.  But  so  far  from  such  representations  being
derogatory  to  the  Divine  dignity,  they  do,  in  fact,  enhance  our  conceptions  of  him.
Reason  and  will  are  the  lofty  attributes  of  mind ;  and  whilst  the  Eternal  is  not  bound
by -the  limitations  which  circumscribe  our  faculties,  these  faculties  are  the  finite
reflection  of  what  is  infinite  in  him.  It  is  the  glory  of  our_  Scriptures  that  they  reveal
to  US  a  God  who  commands,  not  a  blind  awe,  but  an  intelligent  veneration,  and  elicits
an  appreciative  and  grateful  love.

IL  The  counsels  and  purposes  of  God  are  bstkaled  to  th«  bympathxtio


6«  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  m.  1—15.

uiKos  OF  HIS  8EBTANTS  THE  PROPHETS.  The  mode  of  this  communication  is  eoncealed
from  U8 ;  it  may  have  been  but  partially  understood  even  by  the  prophets  themselves.
There  is  nothing  unreasonable  in  the  fellowshipof  mind  between  the  Creator  and  created
spirits.  The  human  consciousness  is  above  all  vehicles  surely  the  fittest  medium  tot
the  intercourse  between  the  Divine  and  the  finite.  God  has  his  own  servants  employed
in  his  household,  his  husbandry ;  and  he  chooses  his  own  agents  for  the  several  works
he  lias  for  them  to  do.  Among  his  servants  are  the  prophets — men  selected  and
qualified  to  speak  forth  his  mind  and  will  to  their  fellow-men.  Perhaps  we  are  too
restricted  in  the  view  we  commonly  take  of  the  prophetic  office.  We  know  thnt  there
were  schools  of  prophets  among  the  Hebrews,  and  that  there  was  an  order  of  prophets
in  the  primitive  Church,  There  were  cases  in  which  by  the  agency  of  prophets  new
truth  was  revealed,  but  there  were  also  cases  in  which  prophets  were  inspired  to
apprehend  and  republish  truth  already  familiar.  Prophets  in  this  second  sense  there
certainly  are  among  us  to  this  day.

III.  The  counsels  and  purposes  of  God  communicated  bt  the  prophets  demand
OUB  reverential  attention  and  cheerful  obedience.  When  the  Omniscient
declares  his  mind,  when  the  Omnipotent  unfolds  his  purpose,  by  the  agency  he  has
chosen,  the  revelation  is  first  made  by  the  Spirit  to  the  human  minister,  and  then
by  the  human  minister  to  his  fellow-men.  The  holiness  of  the  Divine  character  and
the  righteousness  of  the  Divine  government  are  thus  brought  effectively  before  the
minds  of  the  intelligent  and  responsible  sons  of  men.  The  secret  is  revealed,  not  simply
to  excite  wonder,  but  to  guide  conduct.  The  appropriate  attitude  of  those  privileged
with  a  revelation  so  precious  is  that  expressed  in  the  resolution,  "  All  the  words  which
the  Lord  hath  spoken  will  we  do." — T.

Ver.  10. — 77ie  corruption  of  conscience.  The  conception  of  Amos  is  remarkable  for
grandeur.  He  sees  in  prophetic  vision  the  approaching  siege  of  Samaria,  the  capital  of
the  northern  kingdom,  and  poetically  summons  the  Egyptians  and  Philistines  to  gather
themselves  together  upon  the  surrounding  hills,  and  to  witness  the  tumults  within  the
city,  the  assaults  from  without,  and  the  impending  ruin.  But  the  moral  significance
of  history,  in  the  prophet's  mind,  transcends  the  pictorial  interest;  and  in  this  verse  he
gives  utterance  to  a  profound  and  awful  truth  with  regard  to  human  nature.  Wrong*
doing  corrupts  the  conscience  and  interferes  with  a  correct  perception  of  right  and
goodness.

I.  It  is  a  law  of  human  natitrb  that  conduct  beacts  upon  characteb.  No
doubt  actions  are  the  expression  of  the  moral  nature,  the  moral  habits,  of  men.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  those  who  persevere  in  a  certain  course  of  conduct  are  by  that  very
fact  moulded  and  fashioned  and  even  transformed.  Thus  it  is  that  those  who  submit
to  circumstances  and  who  yield  to  influences  are  afi'ected  even  in  their  inmost  moral
nature  by  the  experience  they  pass  through.

II.  Passion  and  interkst  wakp  the  moral  judgment.  Nations  which,  like
Israel,  are  guilty  of  luxury  and  of  idolatry,  which  pillage  their  neighbours'  goods,  and  wage
unlawful  war,  involving  widespread  calamity,  thereby  blunt  their  sensibilities  to  right
and  wrong.  They  habituate  themselves  to  regard  all  questions  in  the  light  of  their
own  ambition,  or  their  own  aggrandizement  and  enrichment.  As  a  consequence  ttiey
are  tempted  to  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil.  Especially  are  they  liable  to  form  a  false
judgment  upon  their  own  conduct.

III.  Thus  wrono-doino  has  a  tbndenot  to  perpetuate  itself.  They  who  by
reason  of  abandoning  themselves  to  evil  courses  have  silenced  the  voice  of  conscience,
lose  the  moral  power  to  do  better.  Because  they  "  know  not  to  do  right,"  they  con-
tinue to  do  wrong.  They  reap  as  they  have  sown.  They  advance  upon  the  road  of
sin  by  the  momentum  derived  from  past  iniquity. — ^T.

Vers.  13 — 15. — Retribution  upon  the  altar  and  the  palace.  The  language  of  the
prophet  in  this  passage  is  severe  in  its  import  and  graphic  in  its  style.  He  foresees
the  approach  of  the  invaders,  the  powerlessness  of  Israel  to  resist  their  attack,  the
completeness  with  which  their  work  is  destined  to  be  done.  In  two  directions  espe-
cially the  blow  of  vengeance  is  seen  to  fall.

I.  Idot.atbt  is  punished  bt  the  destruction  of  idol  temples  and  altar*.


OH.  in.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  67

Departure  from  Jehovah  was  the  radical  offence  of  Israel.  Beside  the  great  altar  set
up  at  Bethel  by  Jeroboam,  where  the  golden  calves  were  worshipped,  there  seem  to
have  been  other  sacred  places,  which  were  polluted  by  idol-service  and  idol-sacrifice.
Heathenism  was  seen  to  encroach  upon  the  territory  consecrated  to  Jehovah.  Altars
were  reared  to  deities,  imaginary  indeed,  but  endowed  by  popular  superstition  with
characters  altogether  opposed  to  the  pure  and  perfect  character  of  the  Eternal  who  had
revealed  himself  to  the  ancestors  of  the  Hebrew  nation.  It  was  most  appropriate  that
retribution  should  fall  upon  the  centres  and- the  symbols  of  a  worship  so  debasing  as
that  which  had  been  substituted  for  the  service  of  Jehovah.  The  powerlessness  of  the
so-called  "  gods  "  to  protect  their  sanctuaries  and  their  altars  was  made  manifest ;  the
defeat  of  Baal  was  the  triumph  of  Jehovah.

II.   FbIDE  AKD  LUXUBT  are  FUBIBHED  BT  the  DESTBUOnON  OF  TEE  MANSIONS  AMD

PALACES  OF  THE  GREAT.  Whether  we  regard  these  "  summer  houses "  as  simply  the
ut)per  apartments,  or  as  country  villas  erected  in  rural  retreats,  the  prophetic  lesson  is
the  same.  Their  destruction,  and  the  destruction  of  the  sumptuous  residences  decorated
with  ornaments  of  ivory,  was  a  retribution  upon  those  who  esteemed  the  splendour  and
luzuriousness  of  their  abodes  more  dear  than  the  practice  of  virtue,  of  benevolence,  of
liety.  Ko  lesson  is  more  frequently  repeated  in  Scripture  than  the  lesson  that  the
udge  of  all  the  earth  delights  to  abase  the  proud,  whilst  he  exalts  the  lowly.  When
the  princes  of  Israel  beheld  their  sumptuous  dwellings  razed  to  the  ground,  and  when
they  themselves  passed  into  exile,  how  could  they  fail  to  recognize  the  hand  of  •
righteous  and  indignant  God?— 'T.


t


Vers.  2,  3. — A  spedMy  llest  people.  "  Tou  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of
the  earth :  therefore  I  wUl  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities.  Can  two  walk  together,
except  they  be  agreed?"  "  You  only  have  I  known,"  says  God,  "  of  all  the  families
of  the  earth."  What  does  this  mean  ?  It  does  not  mean  that  he  was  ignorant  of  ail
other  people.  God  knows  everything  connected  with  each  individual  of  all  generations.
Nor  does  it  mean  that  he  had  not  been  kind  to  other  people.  "  His  tender  mercies  are
over  all  the  works  of  his  hands."  But  by  the  expression,  "  I  have  known,"  he  means, "  I
have  bestowed  on  you  privileges  which  I  have  bestowed  on  no  other  people  "  (see  Bom.
ix.  4,  6).  Kow,  it  is  a  fact  that  some  men  are  far  more  highly  favour«i  by  Heaven  than
others.  Some  have  more  health,  some  more  riches,  some  more  intellect,  some  more
friendships,  some  more  means  of  spiritual  improvement.  We  offer  three  remarks  about
specially  favoured  people.

I.  They  are  oftentiues  the  greatest  sinners.  Who  of  all  the  people  on  the
face  of  the  earth  were  greater  sinners  than  the  Israelites  ?  Yet  they  were  specially
favoured  of  Heaven.  There  was  not  a  crime  they  did  not  commit ;  and  they  filled  up
the  measure  of  their  iniquity  by  crucifying  the  Son  of  God.  England  is  a  epecioMy
favoured  land,  but  where  is  there  more  moral  corruption?  The  fountain  of  moral
iniquity  is  as  deep,  as  full,  as  noxious,  as  active,  here  as  in  the  darkest  and  most  corrupt
parts  of  the  earth.  It  is  true  that  civilization  has  so  decorated  it  that  its  loathsomeness
is  to  some  extent  concealed ;  but  here  it  ia.  The  corpse  is  {tainted,  but  it  is  still  a
putrid  mass.

II.  Thet  are  exposed  to  bpeoxal  punishment.  "  Therefore  will  I  punish  you  for
all  your  iniquities."  Men  are  not  to  be  envied  simply  because  they  are  endowed  with
special  favours.  Those  very  endowments,  unless  they  are  faithfully  used,  only  augment
responsibility,  deepen  guilt,  and  ensure  a  more  terrible  retribution.  Where  much  has
been  given,  much  will  be  required.  "  It  will  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  aod  Gomorrah
in  the  day  of  judgment,"  etc.  "  Therefore  will  I  punish  you."  I  who  know  all  your
sins,  I  who  abhor  all  your  sins,  I  who  have  power  to  punish  you,  will  execute  vengeance.

III.  They  should,  like  all  people,  place  themselves  in  harmony  with  God.
"  Can  two  walk  together,  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  1.  Agreement  ivith  Ood  is  essential
to  the  viell-leing  of  all  intelligent  existences.  No  spirit  in  the  universe  can  be  happy
without  thorough  harmony  with  the  will  and  mind  of  God.  Heaven  is  happy  because
of  this  harmony ;  hell  is  miserable  because  of  antagonism  to  the  Divine  mind.  2.  Th*
condition  of  all  sinners  is  that  of  hostility  to  the  will  of  Ood.  Indeed,  enmity  to  God
1b  the  essence  of  sin.  What,  then,  is  the  conclusion  ?  Beconeiliation.  "  We  beseech
you  on  behalf  of  Chrift,  be  ye  reconciled  unto  God  "  (2  Cor.  v.  20).— D.  T.


68  THE  BOOK  OP   AMOS;  [oh.  ni.  1— IS

Vers.  4 — 6. — Retribution.  "  Will  a  lion  roar  in  the  forest,  when  he  hath  no  prey?"
etc.    These  verses  suggest  certain  remarks  on  retribution.

I.  Ebtribution  speinqs  out  of  the  NATtTRE  OP  THINGS.  The  lion  roars  in  the
forest  for  prey ;  the  young  lion  cries  in  his  den  from  au  instinct  of  nature.  They  are
hungry,  and  they  roar ;  they  crave  for  food,  and  they  cry  ;  this  is  natural.  The  lion
is  quiet  till  he  sees  his  prey,  but  roars  at  tlie  sight  of  it,  and  thereby  inspires  it  with
such  terror  that  it  is  deprived  of  the  power  of  escape.  In  like  manner  the  young  lion
which  has  been  weaned  and  is  just  beginning  to  hunt  for  prey,  will  lie  silent  in  the  den
till  it  is  brought  near,  when  the  smell  of  it  will  rouse  him  from  his  quiet.  Foiset,  in
his  travels,  states  that  the  lion  has  two  different  modes  of  hunting  his  prey.  When
not  very  hungry,  he  contents  himself  with  watching  behind  a  bush  for  the  animal
which  is  the  object  of  his  attack,  till  it  approaches ;  when  by  a  suddeu  leap  he  springs
at  it,  and  seldom  misses  his  aim.  But  if  he  is  famished  he  does  not  proceed  so  quietly ;
but,  impatient  and  full  of  rage,  he  leaves  his  den  and  fills  with  his  terrific  ruar  the
echoing  forest.  His  voice  inspires  all  beings  with  terror;  no  creature  deems  itself  safe
in  its  retreat;  all  flee  they  knuw  not  whither,  and  by  this  means  some  fall  into  his
fangs.  The  naturalness  of  punishment,  perhaps,  is  the  point  at  which  the  prophet
aims  in  the  similitude.  It  is  so  with  moral  retribution.  It  arises  from  the  constitu-
tion of  things.  Punishment  grows  out  of  vice.  Misery  follows  iniquity.  Every
sin  carries  with  it  its  own  penalty.  It  does  not  require  the  Almighty  to  inflict  any
positive  suffering  on  the  sinner.  He  has  only  to  leave  him  alone,  and  his  sins  will
find  him  out.

II.  Ebtribution  is  not  accidental,  but  abeangbd.  "  Can  a  bird  fall  in  a  snare
upon  the  earth,  where  no  gin  is  for  him  ?  shall  one  take  up  a  snare  from  the  earth,
and  have  taken  nothing  at  all?"  The  bird  is  not  taken  in  a  snare  by  chance.  The
fowler  has  been  there  and  made  preparation  for  its  entanglement  and  death.  Every
sinner  is  a  bird  that  must  be  caught ;  tlie  snare  is  laid  in  the  constitution  of  things.
Instruments  were  prepared  by  the  providence  of  God  for  the  capture  of  the  Israelites,
which  would  ceitainly  do  their  work.

III.  Ebtribution  always  sounds  a  timblt  alaru.  "  Shall  a  trumpet  be  blown
in  the  city,  and  the  people  not  be  afraid  ?  "  Heaven  does  not  punish  without  warnings.
Kature  warns,  providence  warns,  conscience  warns ;  there  is  no  sinful  soul  in  which
the  trumpet  of  alarm  does  not  sound.

IV.  Ebtribution,  however  it  combs,  is  always  Divine.  "  Shall  there  be  evil  in
a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ?  "  God  is  in  all.  He  has  established  the  con-
nection between  sin  and  suffering.  He  has  planned  and  laid  the  snare.  The  everlast-
ing destruction  with  which  the  sinner  is  punished  comes  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord
and  the  glory  of  his  power. — D.  T.

Vers.  7,  8. — The  irrepressibility  of  moral  truth,  "  Surely  the  Lord  God  will  do
nothing,  but  he  revealeth  his  secret  unto  his  servants  the  prophets,"  etc.  These  words
mean  that  although  punishment  for  the  guilty  Israelites  was  natural,  arranged,  and
withal  Divine,  yet  it  would  come  according  to  a  waruing  made  to  them  through  the
prophets,  and  which  these  would  feel  compelled  to  deliver.  The  words  suggest  two
remarks.

1.  God  has  made  a  special  revelation  to  his  servants.  "  He  revealeth  his
secret  unto  his  servants  the  prophets."  In  all  ages  God  has  selected  men  to  whom  he
has  made  communications  of  himself.  In  times  past  he  spake  unto  the  fathers  by  the
prophets.  In  truth,  he  makes  special  revelations  of  himself  to  all  true  men.  "  Shall
1  hide  from  Abraham  the  thing  that  I  do  ?  "  "  The  secrets  of  the  Lord  are  with  them
that  fear  him,  and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant."  God  has  given  to  all  men  a
general  revelation.  In  nature  without  and  within,  in  the  material .  domain,  and  in  the
spiritual.  But  he  makes  a  special  revelation  to  some.  The  Bible  is  indeed  a  special
revelation.  1.  Special  in  its  occasion.  It  is  made  on  account  of  the  abnormal  moral
conditi(jn  into  which  man  has  fallen— made  in  consequence  of  human  sin  and  its  dire
consequences.  Had  there  been  no  sin,  in  all  probability  we  should  have  had  no
written  revelation.  The  great  book  of  nature  would  have  sufficed.  2.  Special  in  its
doctrines.  The  grand  characteristic  truth  is  this — that  God  so  loved  men  as  sinners  that
be  gave  his  only  begotten  Son  for  their  redemption.    This  is  the  epitome  of  the  jospeL


OH.  HI.  1—16,]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  6»

I
n.  That  the  right  beoeftiok  of  this  special  bbyelation  necessitates  fbiaoh-
INO.  "  The  lion  bath  roared,  who  will  not  fear  ?  the  Lord  God  hath  spoken,  who
can  but  prophesy?  "  The  idea  is  that  the  men  who  have  rightly  taken  the  truth  into
them  can  no  more  conceal  it  than  men  can  avoid  terror  at  the  roar  of  the  lion.  There
are  some  truths  which  men  may  receive  and  feel  no  disposition  to  communicate,  such
as  the  truths  of  abstract  science,  which  have  no  relation  to  the  social  heart.  But
gospel  truths  have  such  a  relation  to  the  tendeiest  and  profoundest  affections  of  the  spirit,
that  their  genuine  recipients  find,  them  to  be  irrepressible.  They  feel  like  Jeremiah,
that  they  have  fire  shut  up  in  their  bones;  like  the  apostles  before  the  Sanhedrin,
"  We  cannot  but  speak  the  things  that  we  have  seen  and  heard ;  "  like  Paul,  "  Neces-
sity is  laid  upon  me  to  preach  the  gospel."  "  Who  can  but  prophesy  ?  "  None  but
those  who  have  not  received  the  truth.— D.  T.

Vers.  10, 11. — Bectitvde.  "  For  they  know  not  to  do  right,  saith  the  Lord,  who
store  up  violence  and  robbery  in  their  palaces,"  etc.  We  derive  from  this  passage
three  general  remarks.

L  That  thebe  is  an  eteenal  law  op  "  bight"  that  should  govebn  man  in  all
HIS  relations.  Bight,  as  a  sentiment,  is  one  of  the  deepest,  most  ineradicable,  and
operative  sentiments  in  humanity.  All  men  feel  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  right.
What  the  right  is,  is  a  subject  on  which  there  has  been  and  is  a  variety  of  opinion.
Bight  implies  a  standard,  and  men  diCTer  about  the  standard.  Some  say  the  law  of
your  country  is  the  staudard ;  some  say  public  sentiment  is  the  standard ;  some  say
temporal  expediency  is  the  standard.  All  these  are  fearfully  mistaken.  Philosophy
and  the  Bible  teach  that  there  is  but  one  standard — that  is  the  will  of  the  Creator.
That  will  he  reveals  in  many  ways — -in  nature,  in  history,  in  conscience,  in  Christ.
Conformity  to  that  will  is  right.  1.  The  law  of  right  should  govern  man  in  his  rela-
tions with  Ood.  That  law  says — Thank  the  kindest  Being  most,  love  the  best  Being
most,  reverence  the  greatest  Being  most.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  etc.
2.  The  law  of  right  should  govern  man  in  his  relation  to  hit  fdlow-men.  "  Whatso-
ever ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  unto  them."  This  law  of
right  is  immutable.  It  admits  of  no  modification.  It  is  universal.  It  is  binding
alike  on  all  moral  beings  in  the  universe.  It  is  benevolent.  It  seeks  the  happiness  of  all.
Earth  will  be  Paradise  again  when  the  will  of  God  is  done  here  "  as  it  is  in  heaven."

II.  That  a  practical  disregabd  op  this  law  leads  to  fraud  and  violence.
"  For  they  know  not  to  do  right,  saith  the  Lord,  who  store  up  violence  and  robbery  in
their  palaces."  The  magnates  of  Samaria  had  no  respect  for  the  practice  of  right,
hence  they  "  stored  up  violence  and  robbery  in  their  palaces."  Fraud  and  violence
are  the  tiuo  great  primary  crimes  in  all  social  Ufe.  By  the  former  men  are  deceived,
befooled,  rifled  of  their  rights,  and  disappointed  of  their  hopes  and  expectations.  Never
was  fraud  stronger  in  England  than  to-day — fraud  in  literature,  commerce,  religion,
legislation.  By  the  latter,  men  are  disabled,  wounded,  crushed,  murdered.  Can  the
history  of  the  world  furnish  more  terrible  manifestations  of  violence  than  we  have  had
in  the  wars  of  Christendom  in  this  age  ?  Why  this  fraud  and  violence  ?  Why  are
these  devils  let  loose  to  fill  the  world  with  lamentation  and  woe  ?  The  answer  is  in
the  text,  "  Men  know  not  to  do  right."    That  is,  they  do  not  practise  the  right.

III.  That  fraud  and  violesce  must  ultimately  meet  with  condign  punish-
ment. "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord  God;  An  adversary  there  shall  be  even  round
about  the  land ;  and  he  shall  bring  down  thy  strength  from  thee,  and  thy  palaces  shall
be  spoiled."  flow  was  this  realized  ?  "  Against  him  came  up  Shalmaneser  King  of
Assyria ;  and  Hoshea  became  his  servant,  and  gave  him  presents. ...  In  the  ninth  year
of  Hoshea  the  King  of  Assyria  took  Samaria,  and  carried  Israel  away  iuto  Assyria,  and
placed  them  in  Halah  and  in  Habor  by  the  river  of  Gozan,  and  in  the  cities  of  the
Medes"  (2  Kings  xvii.  3—6;  xviii.  9 — 11).  The  cheats  and  murderers  of  mankind
will,  as  sure  as  there  is  justice  in  the  world,  meet  with  a  terrible  doom.  "  Go  to  now
ye  rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come  upon  you.  Tour  riches
are  corrupted,  and  your  garments  are  moth-eaten.  Your  gold  and  silver  is  cankered ;
and  the  rust  of  them  shall  be  a  witness  azainst  you,  and  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it  were
fire.  Ye  have  heaped  treasure  together  for  the  last  days.  Behold,  the  hire  of  the
labourers  who  have  reaped  down  your  fields,  which  is  of  you  kept  back  by  fraud,


M  THE  BOOK  OF  AM03.  [oh.  iv.  1— U

orietb :  and  the  cries  of  them  which  have  reaped  are  entered  Into  the  ears  of  the  Lord
of  sabaoth.  Ye  have  liTed  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and  been  wanton;  ye  have
nourished  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day  of  slaughter.  Ye  have  condemned  and  killed  tha
just ;  and  he  doth  not  resist  you  (Jas.  v.  1 — 6),  "  Punishment  is  the  recoil  of  crime ;
and  the  strength  of  the  back-stroke  is  in  proportion  to  the  original  blow." — D.  T.

Vers.  13 — 15. — National  Judgmenti.  "  Hear  ye,  and  testify  in  the  house  of  Jacobs
saith  the  Lord  God,  the  God  of  nosts,"  etc.  The  same  persons  are  here  addressed  who
in  the  ninth  verse  were  summoned  from  Fhilistia  and  Egypt.  They  were  now  to
testify  to  the  facts  of  the  case,  that  it  might  be  seen  that  the  punishment  inflicted
upon  the  inhabitants  was  richly  deserved.  The  subject  of  the  words  is  national  judg-
ment, which  we  are  here  led  to  regard  in  three  aspects.

I.  In  bklation  to  the  tbub  pbofhetb.  "  Hear  ye,  and  testify  in  the  house  of
Jacob."  We  may  perhaps  regard  the  words  also  as  spoken  to  the  prophets.  Hear,
ye  prophets.  1.  The  prophets  were  to  make  themselves  acquainted  with  the  coming
Judgments.  They  were  to  be  watchmen  who  were  to  descry 'afar  the  coming  danger.
All  true  ministers  of  religion  should  by  earnest  study  acquaint  themselves  with  the
terrible  punishment  that  awaits  the  guilty  world.  2.  The  prophets  were  to  announce
the  coming  Judgment.  "  Hear  ye,  and  testify."  Their  work  is  to  sound  the  alarm,
to  blow  the  trumpet.  "  So  thou,  0  son  of  man,  I  have  set  thee  a  watchman  unto
the  house  of  Israel :  therefore  thou  shalt  hear  the  word  at  my  mouth,  and  warn  them
from  me  "  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  7).  One  of  the  chief  duties  of  a  true  minister  is  to  "  warn
everyman"(Col.  i.  28).

n.  In  relation  to  its  mobal  cause.  What  was  the  cause  of  these  threatened
Judgments?  Here  it  is.  "I  shall  visit  the  transgressions  of  Israel."  Judgments^do  not
come  on  men  as  a  matter  of  necessity ;  they  do  not  roll  on  man  like  the  billows  of
ocean  on  the  shore,  by  blind  force ;  nor  do  they  come  because  the  Governor  of  the
universe  is  malevolent,  and  has  pleasure  in  the  sufferings  of  his  creatures.  No;  he  is
love.  He  "  desireth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner."  They  come  because  of  sin.  The
sins  of  a  nation  draw  judgment  after  them  as  the  moon  draws  after  it  the  billows  that
beat  upon  the  shore.  Let  no  nation  hope  to  escape  judgments  until  it  gets  rid  of  sin.
Judgments  are  but  sins  ripened  into  a  harvest,  subterranean  fires  breaking  into
volcanoes.  Eternal  love  requires  for  the  order  and  happiness  of  the  universe  that  sins
and  sorrows,  transgressions  and  troubles,  should  be  inseparably  linked  together.

III.  In  relation  to  its  terrible  issues.  1.  There  is  the  deprivation  of  religiou*
inttitutions.  "  I  will  also  visit  the  altars  of  Bethel :  and  the  horns  of  the  altar  shall
be  cut  off,  and  fall  to  the  ground."  "  Signal  vengeance  was  to  be  taken  on  the  place
whence  all  the  evils  which  spread  through  the  ten  tribes  originated.  The  'horns'
were  four  projecting  points,  in  the  shape  of  horns,  at  the  corners  of  ancient  altars.
They  may  be  seen  in  the  representations  of  those  dug  up  by.  Belzoni  in  Egypt.  As
they  were  ornamental,  the  action  here  described  was  designed  to  express  the  contempt
in  which  the  altar  would  be  held  by  the  Assyrians."  Corrupt  punishment  for  a  nation's
trans'^^ressions  would  involve  the  ruin  of  religious  institutions.  2.  There  is  a  deprivation
of  all  their  conveniences  and  luxuries.  "  And  I  will  smite  the  winter  house  with  the
Bummer  house ;  and  the  houses  of  ivory  shall  perish,  and  the  great  houses  shall  have
an  end,  saith  the  Lord."  Eastern  monarchs  and  princes,  we  are  told,  have  summer
•8  well  as  winter  houses.  The  "  ivory  houses  "  do  not  mean  houses  composed  of  that
material,  but  richly  ornamented  dwelliuEcs.  These  were  to  be  destroyed.  "  The  pomp
or  pleasantness  of  men's  houses,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "will  be  so  far  from  fortifying
them  against  God's  judgments,  that  it  will  make  them  the  more  grievous  and  vexatious,
as  their  extravagance  about  them  will  be  put  to  the  score  of  their  sins  and  follies.
— D.T.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEB  IV.

Vers.  1 — 13. — §  2.   Second  address.     The
prophet  reproves  the  voluptuous  women  of


Samaria,  and  foretells  their  eaptimty  (vers.
1 — 3);  with  bitter  irony  he  desoHbes  (he
people's  devotion  to  idolatry  (vers.  4,  6);  he
shoim  how  ineorrigihle  they  have  proved  them-


OH.  IV.  1 — 13.]


THE   BOOK  OP  AMOS.


61


$elvetunder  Go^i  chaititementa  (vera.  6 — 11);
there/ore  they  must  expeet  further  puniehment,
if  10  ie  that  they  mUl  learn  to  fear  the  Lord
(rera.  12, 13).

Ver.  1. — The  very  women  are  leaders  in
fliBBoluteness.  and  oppression.  Ye  kine  of
Bashan.  Fat  and  well-liking,  snob  as  the
rich  pastuiee  of  Bashan  proiiuce.  Some
have  supposed  that  by  this  term  are  meant
the  luxurious  nobler  of  Samaria,  who  are
called  "cows"  as  being  effeminate  and
licentious.  This  is  possible;  but  such
grandees  would  be  called  rather  "bulls  of
Baslian,"  and  the  "masters"  mentioned
just  below  signify  more  naturally  these
women's  husbands  than  the  kings.  Pusey
notes  that  the  genders  in  the  sentence
are  interchanged.  "Hear  ye,"  "your  Lord,"
"  upon  you,"  "  they  shall  take  you,"  being
masculine;  "that  oppress,"  "that  crush,"
"that  say,"  "your  posterity,"  "ye  shall  go
out,"  "each  before  her,"  "ye  shall  cast,"
feminine.  Evidently  the  prophet  addresses
his  reproaches  to  the  luxurious  of  both  sexes,
though  he  begins  with  the  women.  The
land  of  Bashan  extended  from  Hermon  to
the  Jabbok,  including  Gaulonitis,  Auronitis,
Batanea,  and  Trachouitis.  It  was  always
fnmous  for  its  pasturage,  cattle,  and  oaks.
The  Vulgate  takes  the  term  as  metaphorical,
and  has,  vaeess  pingvei.  So  Symmachus,
p6is  eOrpoipoi,  which  translation  Jerome
adopts.  Uoontain  of  Samaria.  The  hill  of
Shomer,  on  which  Samaria  was  built  (see
note  on  ch  iii.  9).  Oppress  the  poor.  This
they  did  in  ministering,  or  getting  their
husbands  to  minister,  to  their  luxury  and
debauchery.  Apparently  they  urged  tlieir
husbands  to  violence  and  fraud  in  order  to
obtain  means  to  satisfy  their  extravagance.
A  bad  woman  is  thoroughly  unscrunnlous
(see  the  case  of  Ahab  and  Naboth,  1  Kings
xxi.  7,ete.).  Their  masters;  their  lords;  i.e.
husbands  (comp.  Gen.  xviii.  12 ;  1  Pet.  iii.
6).  Bring,  and  let  us  drink.  They  invite
their  husbands  to  supply  the  means  of
debauchery  and  to  join  in  their  revels.

Ver.  2. — By  Ms  holiness.  God  swears  by
his  holiness,  which  cannot  tolerate  iniquity,
and  which  they  had  profaned  (ch.  ii.  7;  comp.
ch.  vi.  8).  That  he  will  take  you  away,
"  That  one,  or  they,  shall  take  you  away ; "
the  enemy,  the  instrument  of  God's  ven-
geance, is  meant.  With  hooks;  tsinnoth;
Septuagint,  4v  Bn\ois:  Vulgate,  tn  contis.
The  translation, "  with  hooks,"  is  correct,  the
idea  being  that  the  people  shall  be  utterly
helpless  and  taken  for  destruction,  like  fish
caught  with  hooks  (Jer.  xvi.  16 ;  Hab.  i.  15).
Tour  posterity ;  aeharith(cii.a.  1);  better,
yoar  residue,  those  who  have  not  been  de-
stroyed previously.  The  Septuagiiit  and
the  Vulgate  give  quite  a  different  notion  to


the  passage.  The  former  (according  to  tha
Vatican  manuscript)  has,  Kai  Toiis  /xeff  u/uoiv
6IS  \40riTas  vvoKxiOfievovs  ifjL^aXovffiv  f/iwpot
Koi/iol,  "  And  fiery  destroyers  shall  cast  those
with  you  into  boiling  caldrons ; "  the  latter,
Jit  levdbunt  vos  in  contis,  et  reliquias  vestras
in  ollis  ferventibus.  (For  the  explanation
of  these  versions,  which  arise  from  mistakes
in  the  meanings  of  ambiguous  words,  see
Schegg  and  Knabenbauer.)

Ver.  3. — At  the  breaches  made  in  the  city
walls,  as  cattle  hurry  through  gaps  in  a
fence.  Thus  they  should  go  forth  when
Samaria  was  taken.  Every  cow  at  that
which  is  before  her;  better,  each  straight
before  her,  just  where  the  opening  offered
itself  (oomp.  Josh.  vi.  5,  20).  The  LXX.
inserts  yvfival,  "  naked."  And  ye  shall  cast
them  into  the  palace;  Septuagint,  Kat
imo^fit^iia^aBe  eis  rh  Spos  rh  'Po/i/iiiv  (^Pf /ifidy,
Alex.),  "And  ye  shall  be  cast  forth  into
the  mountain  Eomman;"  Vulgnte,  et  pro-
jiciemini  in  Armon.  The  Syriac  and  Arabic
Versions,  and  Aquila,  render,  "unto  Mount
Armon;"  the  Ghaldee  paraphrast,  "far
beyond  the  mountains  of  Armenia."  The
Hebrew  expression  haharmonah  occurs  no-
where else.  Our  version  takes  it  in  the
sense  of  armon,  "a  palace,"  intending
probably  a  palace  or  citadel  of  the  enemy,
which  certainly  ought  to  have  been  expressed.
Kimchi  renders,  "  Ye  shall  cast  yourselves
into  the  palace  of  the  king."  The  passage
is  probably  corrupt.  If  the  verb  is  taken  as
passive,  the  unusual  word  must  be  con-
sidered to  denote  the  place  of  banishment.
Thus,  "Ye  shall  be  cast  forth  into  Harmon."
Whether  Harmon  means  Armenia,  as  many
ancient  commentators  thought,  or  not,  cannot
be  determined.  Various  opinions  may  be
seen  in  Keil,  Schegg,  Trochon,  and  others ;
but  the  simplest  explanation  is  that  of  Orelli
and  Ewald,  viz.  that  each  fugitive  shall'
fling  away  her  idol  Bimmona  (the  wife  of
the  god  Bimmon,  2'  Kings  v.  18),  in  order
to  be  more  free  for  flight  (comp.  Isa.  ii.  20).

Ver.  4. — The  prophet  now  turns  to  Israel,
and  ironically  bids  them  exhibit  their  zeal
for  idolatry,  and  thus  increase  their  guilt.
Bethel;  as  the  chief  seat  of  idol-worsliip
(ch.  iii.  11).  At  Oilgal;  rather,  to  Oilgal,
"come  ye"  being  repeated  in  thought.
Gilgal  was  a  strong  position  in  the  plain  of
Jordan,  three  miles  east  of  Jericho,  taking
its  name  probably  from  the  stone  circles
erected  for  purposes  of  worship  in  very  early
times.  Joshua  (v.  9)  gave  a  new  meaning
to  the  old  name.  There  is  a  large  pool
of  water  in  this  neighbourhood  called  Jil-
julieh,  about  four  miles  from  the  Jordan,
which  is  doubtless  a  corruption  of  the  ancient
name  Gilgal.  It  seems  to  have  been  regarded
as  a  holy  place  in  Samuel'i  days  or  even
before  (see  Judg.  iii.  19;  :   Sam.  vil  16;


82


THE   BOOK   OF  AMOS.


[oh.  it.  1—18.


X.  8;  xL  14,  etc.;  ziii.  8,  eto.);  and  later
was  appropriated  to  false  worship,  though
we  have  no  information  as  to  the  date  of
this  declension.  Gilgal  and  Bethel  are
associated  together  in  idolatrous  worship
(oh.  V.  5  and  in  Hos.  iv.  15 ;  ix.  15 ;  lii.  11).
Bring  your  saorifices  every  morning.  They
were  careful  to  maintain  the  outward
semblance  of  the  regular  Levitical  worship,
even  beyond  the  letter  of  the  Law  in  some
respeots,  though  their  service  was  all  the
time  idolatry.  As  this  and  the  following
clause  are  still  ironical,  Amos  is  speaking,
not  of  the  daily  prescribed  sacrifice  (olah.
Numb,  xxviii.  3),  but  of  the  offerings  (x^cusK)
of  individual  Israelites  which  were  not
required  to  be  presented  every  day.  Your
tithes  after  three  years;  literally,  on  the
three  of  days ;  lishhsheth  yamim ;  Vulgate,
irihus  diebus;  Septuagint,  eis  r^v  TpnjfLipiaVf
"  every  third  day."  Eevised  Version, "  every
three  days."  So  Gesenius,  Kwald,  Keil,
Schegg,  Hitzig,  Baur.  The  prophet  bids
them  bring  their  tithes,  not  as  the  Law
ordered,  every  year  (Lev.  xxvii.  30),  or,  as
in  the  case  of  the  second  tithe,  every  three
years  (Deut.  xiv.  28 ;  xxvi.  12),  but,  by  an
ironical  exagj;eration,  "every  three  days."
Dr.  Pusey  defends  the  English  Version  on
the  ground  of  the  idiomatic  use  of  "  days"  for
one  circle  of  days,  i.e.  a  year  (Lev.  xxv.  29 ;
Judg.  ivii.  10 ;  1  Sam.  xxvii.  7).  But  tliis
loses  the  irony  which  is  so  marked  in  the
whole  passage.  Keil,  "If  ye  would  offer
slain  sacrifices  every  morning,  and  tithe
every  three  days,  ye  would  only  thereby
increase  your  apostasy  from  the  living  God.

Ver.  5. — Offer  a  saorifloe  of  thanksgiving
with  leaven;  more  definitely,  offer  by  burning
a  thank  offering  of  that  which  is  leavened.
This  is  an  alteration  of  the  prescribed  ritual
in  two  particulars.  The  Law  forbade  leaven
in  any  meat  offering  consumed  by  fire
(Lev.  ii.  11;  vii.  12);  and  if  it  allowed
cakes  of  leavened  bread  to  be  offered  on  one
occasion,  tliese  were  not  to  be  placed  on  the
altar  and  burned,  but  one  was  to  be  assigned
to  the  ofSciating  priest,  and  the  rest  eaten  at
the  sacrificial  meal  (Lev.  vii.  13,  14).  The
ironical  charge  to  the  Israelites  is  that  in
their  unlicensed  zeal  they  should  not  only
burn  on  the  altar  that  which  was  leuvened,
but,  with  the  idea  of  being  more  bountilul,
they  should  also  offer  by  fire  that  which
was  to  be  set  apart  for  otlier  uses.  The
Septuagint  Virsion  can  only  be  explained
by  considering  the  translators  to  have  had
a  different  reading,  ital  aveyvaiiray  e£oi
vifj-ov,  "and  they  read  the  Law  without."
Froclaim  .  .  .  publish.  Make  public  pro-
clamation that  free-wiU  offerings  are  to
be  made,  or  else,  like  the  Pharistei  (Matt.
vi.  2),  announce  with  ostentation  that  you
•re  about  to  offer.    The  essence  of  such


offerings  was  that  they  should  be  voluntary,
not  of  command  or  compulsion  (Lev.
xxii.  18,  etc.;  Deut.  xii.  6).  Septuagint,
Kai  iiriKaKfiriaiTo  inoKoylas,  "and  called  for
public  professions  "  (as  Deut.  xii.  6,  17, 18).
This  liketh  yon;  this  ye  love;  Septuagint,
"Froclaim  ye  that  the  children  of  Israel
loved  these  things."  Their  whole  heart
was  set  on  this  will-worship.

Ver.  6.— In  this  and  the  five  following
verses  God  sets  forth  instances  of  the
judgments  which  he  had  sent  at  various
times  to  correct  Israel;  viz.  famine, drought,
blight,  pestilence,  earthquake ;  but  all  had
been  in  vain.  Five  times  recurs  the  sad
refrain,  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me,
saith  the  Lord."  God's  unwearied  love  had
not  conquered  their  rebellion.  Cleaimess  of
teeth ;  Septuagint,  yo/ulifournhy  oSSyrny,
"  dulness  of  teeth  ; "  Vulgate,  ituporem
deniium.  It  is  not  "toothache"  that  is
meant,  but  famine,  as  is  seen  by  the  parallel
term,  want  of  bread;  as  Com.  ii  Lapide
says,  "  Gum  enim  in  fame  et  penuria  dentei
non  habent  quod  mordeant  et  mandant,
innocentes,sunt  et  mundi."  This  is  the  first
chastisement  mentioned.  It  was  threatened
in  the  Law  as  a  consequence  of  backsliding
(see  Lev.  xxvi. ;  Duut.  xxviii.  48,  57).  The
famines  to  which  Amos  alludes  are  not  r^
corded.  Plainly  they  were  not  fortuitous,
but  were  providential  inflictions,  in  accord-
ance  with  previous  warnings.  Yet  haye  ys
not  returned  nnto  me.  Pusey  notes  that  the
words  imply,  not  that  they  returned  not  at
all,  but  that  they  did  after  a  fashion  return,
but  not  so  as  to  reach  God,  their  repentance
being  a  half-repentance  and  their  worship  a
half-worship,  and  therefore  unacceptable.

Ver.  7. — The  second  punishment  is
drought,  as  predicted  (Lev.  xxvi.  19,  eto. ;
Deut.  xxviii.  23).  When  there  were  yet
three  months  to  the  harvest,  and  when  rain
was  most  necessary  to  swell  the  grain.  The
season  meant  is  in  February  and  March,
when  what  was  called  "tlie  latter  rain"
fell.  In  the  -south  of  Palestine  the  harvest
commenced  at  the  end  of  April,  but  in  the
northern  parts  it  was  some  weeks  later,  so
that  it  might  be  said  in  round  numbers  that
it  took  place  three  months  after  the  latter
rain.  I  caused  it  to  rain  upon  one  city.
That  they  might  not  attribute  this  drought
to  the  blind  laws  of  nature,  God  caused  it
to  be  of  a  partial  character,  giving  rain  to
one  city  while  he  withheld  it  from  another.
One  piece.  The  portion  of  ground  belonging
to  an  individual  is  so  called  (Deut.  xxxiii.  21 ;
Euth  ii.  S ;  iv.  3).

Ver.  S.^This  want  of  rain  produced  great
dearth  of  water  to  drink,  and  persons  had
to  go  long  distances  to  procure  supplies.
Wandered;  literally  trembled,  staggered,  as
spent  and  exhausted  by  thirst.     The  word


OH.  IT.  1 13.]


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


69


ii  used  in  Pb.  lix.  15 ;  cix.  10.  The  snpply
thus  ueed  was  Boon  exhausted,  and  brought
uo  permanent  lelief.

Ver.  9. — The  third  oliastisement  is  oc-
casioned by  blight  (Deut.  xxviii.  22)  and
palmerworm  (Deut.  zxviii.  39, 42).  Blasting;
the  scorching  east  wind  spoken  of  by  Isaiah
(ixvii.  8)  and  Ezekiel  (xvii.  10).  Vulgate,
tn  vento  urente ;  Septuagint,  ^i»  mpiffet,
"  with  parching; "  Aquila,  Synunachus,  and
Thendotiou,  aveiio<l>eopla.  Mildew ;  a  blight,
under  the  influence  of  which  the  ears  of
corn  turned  yellow  and  became  unfruitful.
"  Blasting  and  mildew "  are  mentioned
together  in  Moses'  curse  (Deut.  ixviii.  22)
and  in  Solomon's  dedication  prayer  (1  Kings
viii.  37;  comp.  Hag.  ii.  17).  The  LXX.
has,  4i'  Urepif,  "with  jaundice."  When
your  gardens  .  .  .  increased.  It  is  better
to  take  this  sentence  as  the  English  margin,
"  The  multitude  of  your  gardens  .  .  .  bath
the  palmerworm  deToured."  So  the  Vulgate,
MuUitudinem  hmtorum  tuorum  .  .  ,  comedit
eruca.  Gardens  included  orchards,  herbarits,
and  pleasure-grounds.  The  pahnerworm;
gazam;  Septuagint,  K(t/t7rt) :  Vulgate,  eruf^.
The  word  occurs  in  Joel  i.  1 ;  ii.  25,  and  is
taken  by  many  commentators  to  mean  some
kind  of  locust ;  but  it  is  more  probable  that
the  Greek  and  Latin  translators  are  right
in  regarding  it  as  "  a  caterpillar  "  (see  Smith,
'  Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  ii.  696,  etc. ;  '  Bible
Educator,'  iv.  293).  Amos  seems  to  be  re-
ferring to  the  visitation  in  Joel's  time,  if
wo  take  gazam  ("biter")  to  be  a  kind  of
locust.

Ver.  10. — The  fourth  visitation  is  pestilence
and  the  sword  (Lev.  xxvi.  25;  Deut.
xxviii.  60).  After  the  manner  of  Egypt.
In  the  manner  in  which  Egypt  is  stricken
(comp.  Isa.  X.  24,  2G ;  Ezek.  xx.  30).  There
is  here  no  reference  to  tlie  plague  of  Exod.
ix.  3,  etc.,  or  xii.  29.  The  allubion  is  to  the
plague  which  was  reckoned  to  be  epidemic
in  Egypt,*  and  to  other  loathsome  diseases
for  which  that  country  was  notorious  (see
Deut.  vii.  15;  xxviii.  27,  60)  Sir  G.
Wilkinson  notes  that  the  plague  used  to
occur  about  every  ten  years  ('Handbook,'
p.  7).  Your  young  men  have  I  slain  with
the  sword.  Pestilence  and  war  are  aUied
scourges  in  Lev.  xxvi.  25.  A  reference  may
here  be  made  to  the  wars  with  the  Syrians,
wherein  the  Israelites  suffered  heavy  losses
(2  Kings  vi.  2.5;  viii.  12;  xiii.  3,  7,  22).  And
have  taken  away  your  horses ;  rather,  together
with  your  captive  ttoraes,  still  under  the
regimen  of  "  I  have  slain."  The  destruction
of  men  and  horses  is  mentioned  in  2  Kings
xiii.  7.  The  stink  of  your  oamps.  These
wiburied  carcases  caused  pestilence  in  the
district.  Septuagint,  Ko!  ai'iiyaryoi'  iv  irvjiX
Tcts  irapeiM$o\lis  iv  Tp  ofrfg  ificiv,  or,  according
to  th)  Alexandrian  manuscript,  irapfn^oKks


ifuiv  iv  rp  ipyjj  fiov,  "  In  my  vrrath  against
yon  I  set  fire  to  your  camps."

Ver.  11. — The  fifth  visitation  is  the  earth-
quake (Deut.  xxix.  23).  I  have  over-
thrown. This  is  the  word  used  to  describe
the  destruction  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah
(Gen.  xix.  25;  Jer.  xx.  16),  and  it  seems
better  to  refer  the  occurrtnce  mentioned
to  some  such  convulsions  of  nature  which
caused  widespread  deetruction,  than,  as
Keil  and  others,  "  to  the  utter  confusion  of
the  state  by  which  Israel  was  brought  to
the  verge  of  ruin."  We  do  not  know  any-
thing about  the  particular  earthquake  to
which  the  prophet  alludes.  (For  an  exhaustive
catalogue  of  tlie  earthquakes  in  this  country,
see  Pusey's  notes  qn  this  verse.)  As  God
overthrew.  The  substitution  of  the  name
of  God  for  the  personal  pronoun,  when' the
Lord  himself  is  speaking,  is  not  uncommon
in  Hebrew.  Here  it  rather  takes  the  form
of  a  quotation  from  Genesis.  Ye  were  as  a
firebrand  plucked  out  of  the  burning  (Zech.
iii.  2,  where  see  note) — a  phrase  which
implies,  not  only  a  narrow  escape,  but  an
escape  accompanied  with  loss.  Tlie  "brand  "
not  wholly  consumed  is  yet  blackened  and
diminished  by  the  burning  (comp.  2  Kings
xiii.  5).

Ver.  12. — Therefore.  Because  all  previous
judgments  have  been  in  vain,  therefore  will
I  send  upon  them  something  more  terrible
still.  Thus.  God  says  not  how ;  he  leaves
the  nature  of  the  coming  chastisement
in  mysterious  unceitainty,  that  the  very
suspense  may  work  fear  and  repentance.
Because  I  will  do  this  (pointing  back  to
the  mysterious  "thus"  above)  unto  thea;
because  I  am  ready  to  bring  on  thee  still
heavier  punishment.  Prepare  to  meet  thy
God ;  Septuagint,  'Erotfid^ov  toB  iiriKoKetirBai
rhv  ®e6v  <rov, "  Prepare  to  call  upon  thy  God."
Make  ready  to  meet  thy  God  in  judgment,
turning  to  him  with  changed  heart,  if  per-
chance he  may  forgive  thee  and  withdraw
his  heavy  hand.  Another  explanation,
derived  from  Symmachus  and  adopted  by
&  Lapide,  Schegg,  and  otijers,  "  Pra3parare
ut  adverseris  Deo  tuo" — an  ironical  en-
couragement to  them  to  withstand  God^
deprives  the  following  verse  of  its  suitability
to  the  context.  For  the  prophet  would
hardly  invite  them  to  this  contest  by
expatiating  upon  God's  almightiness.

Ver.  13. — The  prophet  enforces  his  threats
by  declaring  God's  power  and  omniscience.
He  that  formeth  the  mountains;  ISoii  e-yii
ffTsfiiav  PpovTiiv,  "I  am  he  that  strengtlieneth
thunder"  (Septuagint,  leading  differently).
The  mountains  are  mentioned  as  the  moat
solid  and  everlasting  of  his  works ;  the  wind,
■  as  the  subtlest  and  most  immaterial  of
created  things.  Seolareth  onto  man  what
is  his  thought ;  t.e.  man's  thought ;  reveals


«4


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[oh.  it.  1 — 13.


Bftn  to  bimself,  ihows  that  he  knows  man's
thought  before  man  puts  it  into  words.  Thig
he  does  sometimes  by  the  stings  of  conscience,
lometimei  by  inspiring  his  prophets  to
declare  men's  secret  motives  and  the  real
state  of  their  heart  (see  Jer.  zvii.  9,  10 ;  and
comp.  1  John  iii.  20).  Vulgate,  Annuntiani
homini  eloqaium  »uum,  where  eloquium  is
equivalent  to  eogitatio.  The  LX.X.,  with
•ome  change  of  letters,  has,  imajyihXav  eis
h.vBpdmovs  rhv  Xpitrrhv  avrov,  *'  prodaiming
nnto  *  men  his  Christ " — a  reading  which
■upports  the  misinterpretation  of  "  his
thought"  as  meaning  God's  thought,  Christ
being  regarded  as  the  Aiyos  of  Ood.
Many  of  the  Fathers  have  seen  here  a
prophecy  of  the  Messiah.  See  Tirinus
and  Com.  k  Lapide  on  this  verse.  That
maketh  the  morning  darkness,  Eeil,  after
Calvin,  takes  these  words  as  asyndeton  for
"the  morning  dawn  and  darkness."  8o
the  Septuaginti  vawi'  tptfor  col  t/iix^v't


"  making  morning  and  gloom."  This  would
be  simply  a  further  instance  of  God's
creative  power.  The  Vulgate  gives, /octens
matutinam  nebulamf  and  it  seems  probable
(comp.  oh.  V.  8;  viii.  9)  that  the  clause
means  that  the  Lord  turns  the  davrn  into
darkness.  This  may  refer  to  the  action  of
clouds  or  an  eclipse;  or  it  may  be  said
metaphorically  of  prosperity  and  adversity.
Treadeth  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth.
An  anthropomorphic  representation  of  the
might  and  majesty  of  Ood,  who  governs
all  things,  and  has  the  loftiest  in  perfect
subjection  (comp.  Dent.  xsxiL  13;  xxxiii.
29;  Job  ix.  8;  Micah  i,  3).  The  Lord,
Jehovah,  the  eternal,  self-existent,  covenant
God,  is  he  who  in  these  things  manifests
himself,  and  therefore  his  threats  are  not
to  be  despised  (oh.  v.  8).  In  the  prophet's
view  the  laws  and  powers  of  nature  have
their  scope  in  execnting  Ghxi'i  oommands.


HOMILETIOS.

Vera.  1—3. — Th*  woe*  of  tht  women  at  ease.  By  •  eontemptuouB  and  striking
figure,  the  women  of  Samaria  are  styled  the  "  kine  of  Bashan."  They  were  as  kine,
unmindful  of  the  past,  unheeding  of  the  future,  their  attention  limited  to  the  present,
and  living  in  it  only  the  life  of  sense.  They  were  as  Bashan's  kine,  wandering  in
richest  pastures,  overfed,  indulged,  and  pampered,  and  therefore  waxed  voluptuous  and
wanton.     In  explanation  of  the  special  reference  to  them,  observe —

I.  That  the  womek  of  a.  nation  abb  always  uore  ob  less  besfonsible  fob  its
BINS.  This  appears  from  the  fact  that :  1.  l%ey  reflect  the  national  character.  Soft,
and  easily  receptive  of  Influence,  whether  good  or  bad,  the  female  character  is,  to  a
greater  extent  than  the  male,  a  compound  tincture  of  the  prevailing  qualities  of  the
land  and  time.  It  is  natural  that,  as  reflecting  the  national  sin,  the  women  will  be
obnoxious  to  national  punishment,  2.  They  form  the  nationai  character.  They  have
earliest,  most  constant,  and  most  affectionate  access  to  the  young.  They  influence
character  at  its  softest  and  most  pliant  stage,  and  they  approach  it,  moreover,  on  its
softest  side.  Reflecting  national  character  so  truly,  and  impressing  this  so  inevitably
On  the  rising  generation,  it  is  through  them  chiefly  that  good  or  evil  becomes  hereditary
In  society.  •

"O  woman,  nature  made  the*
To  temper  man,"

The  "  tempering "  ii  oftener  for  good  than  ill,  converting  into  poroelain  the  common
clay,  purifying  and  ennobling  all  she  comes  near.

"  Woman's  empire,  holier,  more  refined.
Moulds,  moves,  and  sways  the  fallen  yet  God-breathed  mind."

But  if  she  reigns  as  the  devil's  vicegerent,  if  the  influences  that  go  forth  from  her  tend
to  the  enthronement  of  corruption  and  wrong,  she  must  be  deposed  as  a  matter  of  policy,
and  punished  as  a  matter  of  justice  (Isa.  liL  16 — 2i;  xxxii.  9 — 13).

II.  A  COURSE   that   involves  evil   is  as  OmLTT   BEFOBE   OoD   AS  A  COUBSE   THAT

INFLICTS  IT.  The  evil  a  woman  does  outside  her  family  circle  is  largely  indirect.  Of
the  women  of  Israel  it  appears  that :  1.  2%ey  were  self-indulgent  at  the  necessary
txpens*  of  the  poor.  "Which  oppress  the  humble,  which  crush  the  needy."  This
would  sometimes  be  done  directly,  but  generally  through  the  agency  of  the  men.  A
luxurious  mistress  often  makes  a  hard  and  oppressive  master.  Her  extravagant  demands
must  be  met  by  an  increased  income,  and  that  is  only  too  likely  to  be  sought  in  exactions


«H.rr.l— 13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  65

from  the  dependent  poor.  Let  it  be  In  overcharged  dues  or  in  underpaid  work,  in  every
case  the  luxury  that  forces  on  the  demand  is  responsible  for  the  evils  of  the  enforced
supply.  "Those  at  ease  often  know  not  that  their  luxuries  are  continually  watered  by
the  tears  of  the  poor  .  ,  .  but  Qod  counts  wilful  ignorance  no  excuse  "  (Pusey).  Hood's
stania,  addressad  to  men,  is  doubly  pertinent  to  women.

"  O  men  with  sisters  dear  I

O  men  with  mothers  and  wives  I
It  is  not  linen  you're  wearing  out.
But  human  creatures'  lives."

The  self-indulgence  of  the  women  of  Israel  meant  really  the  grinding  of  the  poor,  out
of  whose  poverty  "  their  lords  "  were'  driven  to  wring  the  means  of  carrying  on  their
shameful  excesses.  2.  They  eneowraged  their  husbandt  in  aelf-dndulgence.  "  Bring,
and  let  us  drink."  This  was  a  doubling  of  the  evil.  They  not  only  did  wrong,  but
tempted  others  to  do  it.  They  wasted  much,  and  procured  the  wasting  of  more.  They
were  at  pains  to  increase  the  number  of  harpies  who  would  gorge  themselves  on  the
hard  earnings  of  the  poor.  3.  This  toas  not  an  isolated  act,  but  a  habit.  "  Oppress  "
is  equivalent  to  "  are  continually  oppressing."  Luxury  had  settled  into  a  chronic  social
evil.  The  demand  for  fuel  to  feed  the  fire  of  indulgence  was  coDstant.  It  was  a  cancer
eating  out  the  well-being  of  society  continually,  and  devouring,  generation  after
generation,  the  inheritance  of  the  poor.  The  evil  of  it  smelled  rank  to  Heaven,  and  tha
guilt  of  it  clamoured  for  punishment.

III.  Gton's  OCTBAOED  PEBKEOnOKS  ABB  THE  GUABANTIIB  OF  TBK  BINKEB'b  PmOSH-

MENT.  "  The  Lord  Jehovah  hath  sworn  by  his  holiness."  The  occasions  of  God's
action  are  often  supplied  by  men,  but  the  grounds  of  it  are  in  himself — in  the  perfections
of  his  character  and  the  purposes  of  his  will.  1.  Holiness  is  Ood^s  characteristic
quality.  There  is  a  universal  ascription  of  it  to  him  in  Scripture  (Exor).  xv.  11 ;  Isa.
vi  1 — 3 ;  IviL  15 ;  Hab.  i.  13).  Absolutely  his  "  name  is  holy ; "  relatively  he  is  tha
"  Holy  One  of  Israel."  This  holiness  is  la  infinite  contrariety  to  all  that  is  morally
impure.  It  characterizes  all  his  other  perfections,  and  is,  in  this  aspect,  not  so  much  a
distinct  attribute  as  the  blending  together  of  them  all.  Administratively,  he  swears
by  his  holiness,  and  sits  upon  the  throne  of  his  holiness  (Ps.  Ixzxix.  35 ;  slvii.  8) ;
believers  are  the  people  of  his  holiness,  and  heaven  the  habitation  of  his  holiness  (Isa.
IxiiL  18, 15) ;  whilst  a  synonym  for  the  consecrated  life  is  "  holiness  to  the  Lord."  2.
Ood?t  holiness  was  the  quality  specially  profaned.  (Oh.  ii.  7.)  It  was  to  profane  his
holy  Name  that  they  had  sinned.  The  perfection  specially  sinned  against  is  naturally
the  one  to  be  vindicated.  "  He  pledges  his  own  holiness  that  he  will  avenge  their
unholiness "  (Pusey).  Jealous  of  all  his  perfections,  the  one  our  conduct  tends  to
obscure  or  hurt  is  the  one  God  will  most  emphatically  illustrate  and  glorify.  8.
Holiness  is  the  quality  that  makes  punishment  of  sin  inevitable.  It  is  the  recoil  of
God's  infinitely  pure  nature  from  moral  evU.  It  is  the  expression  and  sum  of  an
essential  and  external  antagonism  to  it.  It  is  incompatible  with  impurity  as  li<!ht  is
with  darkness,  and  its  necessary  and  natural  actiontoward  it  is  destructive.  Funda-
mentally it  is  because  God  is  holy  that  he  punishes,  and  must  punish,  sin.

IV.  The  binneb's  punishment  when  it  combs  will  match  and  square  with  hh
SIN.  (Vers.  2,  3.)  Here  the  dovetailing  of  retribution  with  crime  is  very  complete.
There  would  be :  1.  Depm-taiUm  from  luxurious  scenes.  "  I  will  take  you  away."
The  Indulgences  become  habitual  would  be  violently  interrupted.  The  luxurious  and
vicious  tastes,  developed  into  tremendous  strength  by  long-continued  sensuality,  would
be  deprived  of  their  gratification.  Instead  of  the  high  living,  become  by  long  enjoy-
ment a  thing  of  course,  and  a  necessity  of  their  life,  they  would  have  the  coarse  and
scanty  fare  of  slaves.  To  visit  with  want  and  bondage,  when  habits  of  rule  and  luxury
have  "become  a  second  nature,  is  a  judgment  bitterly  felt.  2.  This  in  a  violent  and
painful  manner.  "  With  hooks."  The  figure  is  drawn  from  fishing.  The  drawing
out  of  the  fish  by  means  of  a  hook  is  always  painful,  and  is  rendered  doubly  so  by  its
resistance.  So  with  the  soft  and  delicately  nurtured  women  of  Samaria  in  the  hands
of  a  rough  and  brutal  soldiery.  They  would  suffer  as  a  fish  transfixed  by  a  barbed  hook,
and  theS  former  luxury  would  be  in  a  sense  its  own  avenger.  3.  This  to  the  last  one.
"And  your  hut  one  with  fish-hooks."    Not  one  should  escape.    God's  judgments  ara

AMOS.  '


66  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  nr.  1—13.

particular.  He  does  not  visit  people  in  the  mass,  but  individuals.  Not  a  cow  but
would  feel  the  cut  of  the  drover's  whip,  and  experience  the  famine-pangs  of  the  scanty
pasture.  4.  This  in  connection  with  their  own  lusts  as  auxiliaries.  The  hook  that
draws  out  the  fiiih  has  been  baited  for  it,  and  voluntarily  strallowed,  though  under  a
wrong  inpiessiun.  In  heathen  luxury  and  dissolution  the  Hebrew  women  found  a  bait
which  they  swallowed  greedily.  Now  they  should  find  that,  with  the  bait,  they  had
swallowed  also  a  cruel  hook,  which  would  draw  them  away  to  suffer  evils  worse  than
they  had  themselves  inflicted.  "  And  be  cast  away  to  Harman  "  (Authorized  Version,
"  into  the  palace  "),  i.e.  probably  Armenia  (see  Pusey).  Here,  being  used  to  minister  to
heathenish  luxury  and  lust,  they  would  be,  victims  in  the  matter  in  which  they  had
been  so  long  the  victimizers  of  others.  There  is  a  nameless  cruelty  in  debauchery,
which  only  the  victims  of  it  know.  This,  with  the  added  burden  of  heathen  horrors,
the  delicate  and  pampered  Israelitish  women  woald  now  suffer.  Their  punishment  would
rise  upon  them  in  farnilinr  shape,  the  resurrection  of  their  own  sin.  5.  The  bovine
stolidity  of  their  prosperous  days  would  make  them  helpless  as  driven  cattle  in  the  day
of  calamity.  "  In  the  wall  ye  shall  go  out  every  one  before  her,"  i.e.  "  as  a  herd  of  cows
go  one  after  another  through  a  gap  in  the  fence  "  (Pusey).  The  level  of  intelligence
goes  down  with  the  level  of  morality.  The  penalty  of  living  the  brutes'  life  of  sense  is
a  weakening  of  the  heavenly  gift  of  reason,  by  which  we  are  distinguished  from  them.

Vers.  4,  5. — Corruption  and  religiosity  in  unholy  alliance.  Here  the  prophet  turns
from  the  women  of  Israel,  and  addresses  the  people  at  large.  His  language  is  that  of
strong  irony.  What  he  bids  the  people  do  is  the  thing  he  knows  they  have  been  doing
and  will  go  on  doing,  notwithstanding  the  imminence  of  the  punishment  he  predicts.
He  means,  by  a  sarcastic  co-ordination  of  their  acts  of  hollow  worship  with  tbose  of
their  sin-stained  lives,  to  bring  them  to  see  themselves  as  God  and  others  saw  them.

L  Mob  All  oobkuption  and  a  zeal  fob  eelioious  fobms  mat  exist  togetheb.
(Ver.  4.)  Here  it  would  seem  as  if  the  multiplication  of  transgressions  and  of  obser-
vances -^eat  pari  passu  together.  1.  The  observance  of  religious  forms  involves  nothing
in  the  way  of  spirituality.  Taste  is  wanted,  and  feeling  and  judgment,  but  that  is
all.  Enjoyment  in  the  formal  acts  of  worship  may  be  an  testheticism  which  is
altogether  apart  from  spirituality.  The  sensuous  delight  in  music,  oratory,  attitu-
dinizing, millinery,  upholstery,  and  other  ecclesiastical  impedimenta  is  just  as  abundant
and  as  much  at  home  in  the  theatre  as  in  the  church,  and  is  the  same  non-spiritual
thing  wherever  found.  2.  Worship  may  even  be  made  so  sensuous  as  to  become  the
minister  of  luxury.  Other  things  being  equal,  the  largest  congregations  gather  where
the  adjuncts  of  worship  are  most  elaborate  and  most  gorgeous.  Many  confessedly
attend  the  house  of  God  exclusively  for  the  music  and  singing,  never  waiting  fo  hear
the  gospel  preached,  or  consenting  to  do  so  only  for  appearance'  sake.  And  the  thing
is  perfectly  intelligible.  A  musical  and  ornate  service  is  decenter  than  a  music-hall,  and
pleasanter  than  their  own  room,  and  makes  an  agreeable  break  in  their  idle  Sunday
afternoon.  So  far  from  such  an  observance  involving  or  tending  to  produce  spirituality
of  feeling,  it  leaves  this  out  in  the  cold,  and  makes  its  appeal  entirely  to  sense.  It  has
no  more  bearing  on  the  religious  life  than  theatre-going,  or  club-going,  or  race-going,  or
any  other  mode  of  raising  the  sensational  wind.  3.  External  religious  observance  quieti
the  conscience,  and  so  smooths  the  path  of  the  self-indulgent.  Even  after  the  sinful  life
has  far  advanced,  his  conscience  gives  the  sinner  trouble.  Failing  to  prevent  the  sin,
it  suggests  the  performance  of  some  compensatory  work.  To  sin,  and  then  do  penance,
is  easier  than  to  crucify  the  flesh  and  be  sei  arate  from  sin.  And  one  of  the  i  ommonest
salves  for  an  accusing  conscience  is  diligence  in  the  externals  of  religious  observance.
It  looks  and  feels  like  worship,  and  it  makes  no  demands  on  the  religious  faculty.
Sather,  by  substituting  an  emotional  exercise  for  one  of  the  conscience  and  heart,  it
deadens  the  moral  sense,  and  lulls  the  transgressor  into  a  dangerous  complacency.

II.  Men  who  best  in  fobmb  are  pbonb  to  mttltiplv  them.  This  is  a  logical
necessity.  If  the  form  be  everything,  then  the  more  of  it  the  better.  Besides,  the
sensation  produced  by  observing  it  gets  stale  after  a  time,  and,  in  order  to  keep  it  at
its  first  strength  and  freshness,  there  must  be  a  continual  increase  of  the  dose.  Israel
illustrated  this  principle  in  two  degrees.  1.  They  were  particular  about  ceremonial
observances.     They  ofiered  the  slain  sacrifices,  the  praise  offerings,  the  free  offeringt,


OH.rr.  1— 13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  «T

and  the  tithes  at  their  appoiDted  times.  In  additioa  to  the  annual  tithe  they  also  gaya
a  second  tithe  erery  three  years  (Dent.  ziv.  23  ;  xxvi.  12).  This  was  keeping  np  to
the  very  letter  of  the  Law.  A  Pharisee  in  later  times  could  not  tiave  syren  more  cir-
cumstantial obedience  to  it  than  they  did.  When  the  opus  operatum  is  made  the  whole
of  a  religious  ordinance,  it  is  sure  to  be  circumstantially  observed ;  and  the  rule  is  that
the  more  completely  the  spirit  is  lost  sight  of,  the  more  .elaborately  is  the  letter  observed.
To  the  exhaustive  observance  of  ordinances  by  Israel,  according  to  our  text,  there  was
one  significant  exception.  This  was  the  omission  of  the  sin  offering  and  the  trespass
offering.  They  hail  no  consciousness  of  sin.  They  deported  themselves  as  men  who
had  praise  to  offer  and  gifts  to  bestow,  but  no  sin  to  he  atoned  or  to  confess.  To  the
formalist  an  adequate  idea  of  sin  is  impossible,  and  in  his  worship  the  question  is  not
raised.  2.  They  went  heyond  the  letter  of  Divine  requirement.  In  addition  to  the
morning  sacrifice  required  by  the  Law,  they  offered  dain  sacrifices  (so  the  Hebrew)
every  day.  Then,  not  content  with  burning  unleavened  cakes  on  the  altar  as  a  praise
offering,  they  burned  also  the  leavened  cakes  which  were  to  be  eaten  at  the  sacrificial
meal  (see  Keil,  in  loc.).  As  to  the  free  offerings,  they  carried  the  provision  for  having
them  made  beyond  the  command  by  having  them  cried.  Thus,  so  far  as  forms  went,
the  idol-loving,  corrupt,  rebellious  people  were  almost  exemplary  worshippers — went
further,  indeed,  than  true  worshippers  had  always  felt  called  upon  to  so.  "It  is  k
characteristic  of  idolatry  and  schism  to  profess  extraordinary  zeal  for  G-od's  worship,
and  go  beyond  the  letter  and  spirit  of  his  Law  by  arbitrary  will-worship  and  self-
idolizing  fanaticism "  (Lange).  To  compensate  for  the  utter  absence  of  the  spirit,  the
letter  is  made  to  do  double  and  vicarious  duty.

III.  Too  M0OH  ATTENTION  TO  THE  EXTBBNAL  FOBM  01'  AN  OBDINANCB  TENDS  TO  THE

VIOLATION  or  THE  SPIRIT  OF  IT.  On  the  one  hand,  the  spirit  gets  lost  sight  of  through
inattention,  and  on  the  other  hand,  the  inventive  faculty  introduces  practices  incon-
Bistent  with  it.  1.  In  their  anxiety  to  offer  more  than  was  required  Israel  offered  a  thing
that  was  forbidden.  To  "  kindle  praise  offerings  of  that  which  is  leavened  "  was  contrary
to  Levitical  law.  The  leavened  bread  of  the  praise  offering,  which  they  burned  along
with  the  unleavened  cakes  and  oil,  was  not  to  be  burned,  but  eaten  (Lev.  ii.  11 ;  vii.
12—14).  The  human  mind  cannot  add  to  a  Divine  ordinance  anything  in  oUaraoter.
The  addendum  will  either  obscure  or  traverse  the  religious  rite  to  which  it  is  attached.
.God's  ordinances,  like  his  oracles,  can  only  be  added  to  under  a  heavy  penalty — the
penalty  of  mistaken  action  arising  out  of  erroneous  thought.  2.  They  destroyed  the
essentially  spontaneous  character  of  the  free-will  offerings  by  endeavouring  to  make
them  practically  compulsory.  These  offerings  must  be  made  of  the  nffeier'a  free  will
(Lev.  xxii.  19).  Made  under  compulsion,  moral  or  otherwise,  they  lost  their  spon-
taneous character,  and  might  as  well  not  have  been  made  at  all.  And  what  but
compulsion  was  it  to  "  proclaim  and  publish,"  or  literally  to  "  call  out "  for  them  ?
God's  ordinance  can  be  safely  and  rightly  observed  only  in  God's  way.  In  such  a
matter  human  invention,  if  it  interferes,  is  sure  to  err.  Hence  the  so  emphatic  and
frequent  warnings  in  Scripture  against  "  the  commandments  and  ordinances  of  men."
3.  This  amateur  tinkering  of  Divine  institutiont  is  very  agreeable  to  human  nature.
"  For  so  ye  love  it."  Unspiritual  men  love  the  forms  of  religion  if  they  serve  as  a
means  of  escape  from  its  realities.  They  love  them  more  still  if,  by  observing  them,
they  can  seem  to  accomplish  a  salvation  by  works.  They  love  them  most  of  all  when
they  are  partially  of  their  own  invention.  Almost  all  human  ordinances  in  religion  are
the  expression  of  man's  love  of  his  own  intellectual  progeny.

IV.  The  MULTIPLICATION  OF  ACTS  OF  WILL-WORSHIP  IS  ONLY  THE  MULTIPLICATION  OF

BIN.  The  close  association  of  the  words  "  transgression  "  and  ".sacrifice"  would  indicate
that  the  sacrifice  itself  was  sinful.  1.  It  was  not  meant  to  please  God,  being  an  act  of
pure  self-will.  That  which  will  please  God  must  be  meant  to  please  him.  A  formal
religious  act,  if  done  for  our  own  pleasure,  and  not  as  an  act  of  service  to  God,
is  valueless  (Col.  iL  20—23).  Will-worship  is  self- worship.  It  is  only  an  insidious
way  of  "  satisfying  the  flesh."  It  is  a  thing  by  which  God  is  not  honoureH,  but
dethroned,  and  by  which  man  is  prejudiced  with  God  and  not  commended  (Isa.  ii.  11).
2.  It  was  not  fitted  to  please  him,  being  observed  in  a  manner  contrary  to  his  wUl.  God's
ordinances  had  been  altered.  The  alteration  of  form  in  every  case  had  been  a  violation
of  the  spirit.     The  ordinances  were  no  longer  God's,  but  something  different  from  and


68  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [ch.  rr.  1— IflL

incoDsistenl  with  tbe  thing  he  had  appointed.  The  observance  of  them  was  not  service,
but  disobedience  and  rebellion.  For  the  Nadabs  and  Abihus  who  offer  strange  fire
before  the  Lord  there  is  reserved  the  fire  of  his  wrath  and  not  the  light  of  liig  favour.
8.  It  wa$  reeking  with  the  wickedness  with  which  it  was  deliberately  mixed  up.
"  Multiply  transgression ;  and  bring  your  sacrifices."  The  "  obedience  "  to  himself
which  "is  better  than  sacrifice"  was  entirely  wanting.  The  "mercy"  to  men  which
he  will  have  "  and  not  sacrifice  "  had  been  desiderated  in  vain.  With  one  hand  they
piled  high  the  o£fering,  and  with  the  other  piled  higher  still  the  trespass.  And  in  so
doing  they  piled  the  mountain  of  a  moral  impossibility  between  them  and  acceptance.
The  form  of  worship,  in  combination  with  the  reality  of  sin,  is  a  spiritual  monstrosity
which,  as  an  offering  to  God,  may  not  be  so  much  as  named.  God  will  take  no  gift
from  a  sin-stained  hand  (Isa.  i.  15).  "  If  we  regard  iniquity  in  our  heart,  the  Lord  will
not  hear  us  "  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18).  If  we  lift  up  unclean  hands  in  worship,  he  will  not  accept
(1  Tim.  ii.  8).  Let  us  "  wash  our  hands  in  innocence  "  when  we  go  to  the  "  holy
altar."  With  clouds  of  sin  hovering  over  our  sanctuary  service  no  dews  of  Divine
favour  can  ever  fall.

Vers.  6 — 13, — Judgment  the  Divine  retort  to  human  sin.  This  is  the  sad  history  of
God's  vain  contendings  with  an  incorrigible  nation.  In  ch.  iii.  is  an  account  of  the
mercies  by  which  he  at  first  had  tried  to  draw  them.  All  that  had  failed  utterly.
They  met  privilege  with  inappreciation,  friendship  with  rebuff,  and  favour  with
incredible  disregard.  Then  he  had  changed  his  tactics.  They  would  not  be  drawn,
perhaps  they  might  be  driven.  The  experiment  was  worth  the  making,  and  the  record
of  it  is  in  these  verses.

I.  The  yabied  visitations  of  Jehovah,  "  So  then  God  had  but  one  gift  which
he  could  bestow,  one  only  out  of  the  rich  storehouse  of  his  mercies,  since  all  besides
were  abused — chastisement "  (Pusey).  This  he  sent :  1.  In  diverse  forms.  He
reduced  them  by  famine,  which  often  acts  as  a  moral  depletive,  by  cutting  off  its  supply
from  lust.  He  plagued  them  with  pestilence — a  visitation  that  strikes  terror  into  the
boldest  hearts.  He  slew  them  with  the  sword  of  their  enemies — a  fate  which  has  terrors
peculiaily  its  own.  He  swallowed  them  up  in  earthquakes — the  most  portentous  and
awful  of  earthly  phenomena.  2.  In  increasing  severity.  Famine  is  direful,  but  it  is
directed  primarily  against  the  means  of  life.  Pestilence  is  ghastlier,  for  it  is  directed
against  the  life  itself.  The  sword  is  more  terrible  than  either,  for  it  takes  the  life
with  circumstances  of  cruelty,  which  are  an  added  horror.  The  earthquake  is  the
most  terror-moving  of  all,  for  it  summons  the  overwhelming  forces  of  nature  to  our
destruction.  3.  With  differentiating  circumstances  in  different  cases.  There  was
nothing  humdrum  in  tbe  visitations,  no  pitching  them  on  the  dead  level  of  backneyism
or  prescription.  (1)  T%e  drought  came  three  months  he/ore  harvest.  This  was  a  most
unseasonable  and  fatal  time.  It  was  in  February,  just  when  the  latter  rain  was  due.
The  seed  would  be  brairded,  or  just  in  the  stage  in  which  rain  was  the  one  thing
absolutely  essential  to  life  and  growth.  Drought  at  this  season  "  is  utterly  ruinous  to
the  hopes  of  the  farmer.  A  little  earlier  or  a  little  later  would  not  be  so  fatal,  but
drought  three  months  before  harvest  is  entirely  destructive  "  ('  The  Land  and  the  Book '),
(2)  It  came  on  one  place  and  not  on  another.  Ordinarily  the  showers  fall  impartially.
They  water  the  fields  of  the  just  and  the  unjust  alike  (Matt.  v.  45).  They  refresh  the
wilderness  where  no  man  is,  as  abundantly  as  the  cultivated  land,  with  its  teeming
population  (Job  xxxviii.  26).  When  they  become  eclectic,  falling  on  one  city  or  field
and  not  on  another,  the  feature  reveals  miraculous  intervention.  When,  as  probably
in  this  case  (see  Prov.  iii.  33),  the  watered  fields  or  cities  are  those  of  the  righteous,  the
adjustment  is  eloquent  of  the  moral  government  of  a  God  who  hates  sin  (Isa.  Ixv.  13).
On  the  artificially  irrigated  gardens,  where  drought  would  not  readily  tell,  he  sent
blasting,  mildew,  and  worms  (ver.  9).  In  the  repertory  of  nature  he  found  an  instru-
ment of  destruction  suited  to  every  possible  case,  and  in  tbe  allocation  of  these  wag
revealed  his  omnipotent  and  resourceful  hand.  The  overthrow  of  "  some  "  when  others
•scaped  (ver.  11)  was  a  providence  burdened  with  the  same  lesson.  (3)  The  cause  and
its  effect  are  set  dose  together  for  identification.  "  The  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not
withered,"  etc.  The  nearer  results  are  to  their  causes  the  easier  it  is  to  see  the  con-
nection between  them.     God,  both  in  the  visitation  and  the  record  of  it,  pointedljr


OH.IV.  1— 13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AM03.  «9

associates  the  drought  with  the  sin,  and  the  withering  with  the  drought,  and  thus  puts  his
signature  and  endorsement  on  his  disciplinary  work.  4.  In  minute  correspondence  t»
prophetic  warningt.  They  were  plagued  with  pestilence  "  after  the  manner  of  Egypt "
(ver.  10).  This  Moses  had  circumstantially  announced  would  he  the  result  of  disobeying
the  Law  revealed  on  Sinai  (Deut.  xxviii.  27,  60),  whilst  immunity  from  it  was  promised
in  connection  with  fealty  and  obedience  (Deut.  vii.  15).  Then,  with  blood-curdling
explicitnesB  (vera.  6,  7, 10),  famine,  pestilence,  the  sword,  and  desolation  (Lev.  xxvi.
23—33),  blasting,  mildew,  drought,  and  locusts  (ver.  9 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  21 — 26,  38,
42),  and,  to  crown  all,  destruction  and  ruin,  as  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  (Deut.  xiix.  22
— 28),  are  piled  (ver.  11),  Ossa  on  Pelion,  in  prophetic  intimation  to  Israel  to  be  "  upon
thee  for  a  sign  and  for  a  wonder,  and  upon  thy  seed  for  ever "  (Deut.  xxviii.  46).
In  all  this  the  work  of  identifying  national  judgments,  as  from  a  pledge-keeping  and
sin-avenging  Jehovah,  is  made  easy  to  all  but  the  wilfully  blind.

II.  Theib  meagre  besuIiTS.  Judgments  fell  thick  and  wide  in  five  varieties  of
terror-moving  severity  and  appositeness,  and  five  times  the  prophet,  gleaning  vainly
after  the  scythes  of  God  for  a  grain  of  good  result,  can  but  repeat  the  sadly  reproachfiu
refrain,  "Yet  ye  have  not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord."  1.  The  sinner  reftuet  te
believe  that  his  affliction  is  pwnishment.  He  attributes  it  to  accident,  or  bad  manage-
ment, or  natural  causes,  or  the  malice  of  others,  as  the  case  may  be.  While  unconscious
of  his  sin,  he  is  necessarily  blind  to  the  significance  of  his  sufi^ering,  and  until  he  sees
this  he  cannot  profit  by  it.  If  men  would  "hear  the  rod  and  who  hath  appointed  it"
they  would  have  realized  a  primary  condition  of  improvement  under  it.  2.  Suffering
is  not  in  itself  purifying.  A  bad  man  it  often  makes  worse.  He  wants  to  "  curse  God
and  die."  Even  if  the  hardening  stops  short  of  this,  he  is  frequently  soured  and
embittered.  Suffering,  to  be  beneficial,  must  not  go  alone.  It  prepares  for  other
measures.  It  makes  men  more  amenable  to  moral  influence,  but  if  no  such  influence
be  brought  to  bear  in  connection  with  it,  it  is  no  more  fitted  of  itself  to  purify  the
character  than  ploughing  is  to  fertilize  the  desert  sand.  "  Bray  a  fool  in  a  mortar,  yet
will  not  his  folly  depart  from  him,"  3.  2%e  love  of  sin  is  stronger  than  the  fea/r  of
mffering.  Courses,  which  all  observation  and  experience  declare  to  be  ruinous  to
health  and  happiness,  are  entered  on  deliberately  by  millions.  Even  the  physical  evil
consequences  of  the  early  steps  in  sinful  indulgence,  which  are  soon  felt,  do  not  arrest
the  evil-doer  in  his  way.  By  the  confirmed  sinner  hell  itself  is  practically,  if  not  con-
sciously, preferred  to  refoimation.  Only  what  weakens  the  love  of  sin  secures  the
successful  application  of  suffering  for  its  removal.  The  operation  of  one  or  other  of
these  principles,  or  the  concurrence  of  them  all,  no  doubt  accounted  for  Israel's  per-
sistent sinning  even  in  the  fire.

III.  The  last  besobt  to  which  God  will  now  betake  hiuself.  "Therefore
thus  will  I  do  unto  thee."  The  terror  of  these  words  is  in  nothing  lessened  by  their
vagueness.  It  is  evident  rather :  1.  That  the  thing  menaced  would  in  point  of  severity
lean  advance  upon  all  that  had  yet  leen  done.  Only  thus  would  there  be  any  use  in
adopting  it.  After  expostulation  the  rod,  and  after  the  rod  a  sword — that  is  the  logical
order  of  corrective  measures.  "  Sin  no  more,  lest  a  worse  tiing  come  upon  thee,"
was  a  foreshadowing  of  God's  consistent  policy.  2.  It  would  involve  being  brought  face
to  face  with  Qod.  "Because  I  will .  .  .  prepare"  (ver.  12).  The  kind  or  occasion  of
the  meeting  with  God  is  not  explained.  It  is,  therefore,  to  be  taken  to  include  all  modes
and  occasions,  whether  in  life,  at  death,  or  at  the  final  judgment.  And  the  thought
of  it  is  one  of  terror  to  the  ungodly,  under  whatever  circumstances.  They  can  face  his
judgments ;  God  is  not  in  them,  unless  in  figurative  sense.  They  can  face  his  prophets ;
God  is  not  in  them,  unless  in  a  spiritual  sense.  But  to  face  God  literally  was,  even  to
a  pious  Jew,  like  facing  death  (Exod,  xxxiii.  20 ;  Judg.  xiii.  22) ;  whilst  to  the  impious
it  must  have  been  the  embodiment  of  all  terror.  It  is  from  the  "  presence  of  the  Lord '
that  the  wicked  in  the  judgment  call  upon  the  hills  to  hide  them.  That,  of  all
things  in  the  universe,  is  an  ordeal  they  cannot  face.  3.  It  is  left  umdeflned  that  it
may  seem  the  more  terrible.  We  have  here  the  eloquence  of  silence.  The  terror  of  the
threat  is  enhanced  by  its  vagueness.  Familiarity  breeds  contempt.  If  a  thing,  how-
ever bad,  is  exactly  defined,  we  can  familiarize  ourselves  with  the  thought  of  it  in  time,
«nd  brace  our  courage  up  to  meet  it.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,"  but
•ur  idea  of  it,  meantime,  has  an  element  of  enlargement  in  its  very  indefinitenass.    God


70  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  r».  1— la

says  vaguely  "  Thus,"  and  stops  short,  that  imagination  may  fill  up  the  blank.    His
lilence  is  charged  with  deeper  meaning  than  any  wordg  could  carry.

IV.  One  final  appeal  bbpoeb  thb  bteokb  fallb.  "  Prepare,"  etc.  1.  Look  for
a  meeting  with  Ood.  It  is  inevitable.  It  is  at  hand.  The  fact  must  be  faced.  No
good,  but  harm,  can  come  out  of  the  attempt  to  escape  or  blink  it  (2  Cor.  v.  10 ;  Ps.
cxzxix.  7 — 12).  2.  Prepare  for  it.  This  is  a  word  of  hope.  Meeting  with  God  is
inevitable;  but  it  need  not  necessarily  be  injurious.  Preparation  for  it  is  possible,
being  enjoined,  and  would  avail  something  if  it  were  made.  "  God  never  in  this  life
bids  people  or  individuals  prepare  to  meet  him  without  a  purpose  of  good  to  those  who
do  prepare"  (Pusey).  3.  Do  this  because  of  irrwending  Judgments.  "Because  I  will
do  this  unto  thee."  We  might  suppose  that  if  God  was  going  to  destroy,  the  prepara-
tion to  meet  him  would  be  too  late.  But  that  does  not  follow.  When  Nineveh  was
wicked  God  expressed  his  purpose  to  destroy  it,  but  when  it  became  penitent  he  spared
it.  Hezekiah,  prayerless  in  the  particular  matter,  was  bidden  prepare  to  die;  but
Hezekiah,  praying  for  more  life,  was  spared  fifteen  years  (Isa.  xxzviii.  1,  6).  What
God  will  do  to  us,  so  far  as  it  comes  within  our  cognizance,  is  conditioned  by  what  we
will  do  to  him.  Until  the  judgment  has  actually  fallen,  the  threat  of  it  is  a  message
of  mercy.  A  sentence  of  destruction  itself  is  •  call  to  repentance,  and  so  has  woven
into  it  a  thread  of  hope.     "  Because  I  will  do  this  unto  thee,  prepare."

Ver.  11. — Burning,  yet  not  turning.  From  Moses  to  Amos  was  about  seven  hundred
years.  It  is  a  long  time  with  men  and  the  works  of  men.  But  it  is  little  in  the  two
eternities  through  which  the  purposes  of  God  extend.  There  were  prophecies  which
it  had  taken  all  this  period  to  mature ;  courses  of  treatment  for  the  cure  of  sin  pursued
through  all  the  interval,  and  whose  last  measure  had  not  yet  been  taken.  One  of  these
finds  record  here.  A  new  event  looks  out  at  us  in  the  guise  of  an  ancient  prophecy
(Deut.  xxix.  22 — 24).  What  seven  centuries  before  had  been  conceived  in  the  womb
of  time  is  here  "  delivered  upon  the  mellowing  of  occasion."

I.  God's  judgments  a  fieb.  "  Plucked  out  of  the  burning."  A  commentary  on
this  figure  is  the  association  by  Isaiah  of  "  the  spirit  of  judgment "  and  "  the  spirit  of
burning"  (Isa.  iv.  4).  Like  a  fire:  1.  Judgments  are  painful.  The  sensation  of
burning  is  about  the  most  painful  we  know.  Too  severe  for  capital  punishment,  too
cruel  even  for  prisoners  of  war,  death  by  burning  has  been  generally  reserved  for
the  martyred  saints.  This  intensest  form  of  physical  pain  is  a  fitting  symbol  of  the
efiects  of  God's  inflictions.  What  he  sends  is  the  greatest  of  its  kind.  If  it  be
pleasure  it  is  ideal — a  pleasure  at  his  right  hand  for  evermore.  If  it  be  pain  it  is
phenomenal — a  torment  whose  smoke  asoendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever.  2.  They  are  con-
tvming.  What  fire  feeds  on  it  destroys.  Where  the  flames  have  passed  no  organic
matter  remains.  So  with  God's  judgments.  They  are  the  mills  of  God  which  "  grind
exceeding  small."  That  on  which  they  must  fall  "  they  destroy  and  consume  unto
the  end."  They  are  nothing  if  not  adequate  to  their  purpose.  3.  They  are  purifying.
By  burning  out  what  is  inflammable  they  leave  what  is  incombustible  behind,  unmixed
and  pure.  This  idea  of  refining  is  often  associated  with  the  fires  of  judgment  (Zech.
ziii.  9 ;  Mai.  iii.  2,  3).  They  seize  on  the  dross  of  evil,  and  burn  it  out  of  the  mass.
When  their  work  is  done  there  is  only  the  fine  gold  of  a  pure  nature  in  the  crucible.
4.  They  are  irresistible.  Fuel,  in  contact  with  fire,  can  do  nothing  but  bum.  If  the
flame  is  to  be  quenched  it  must  be  done  by  some  extra  agency.  To  be  as  "  tow "  or
"  stubble "  in  the  flames  (Isa.  i.  31 ;  Neh.  i.  10)  is  the  strongest  possible  figure  for
helplessness  under  the  avenging  stroke  of  God.  Men  cannot  prevent  it,  cannot  avoid
it,  cannot  arrest  it,  cannot  in  any  degree  reduce  its  force.  When  he  works  "  who
shall  let  it"?  When  his  day  burns  as  an  oven,  who  shall  withstand  the  fire  (Isa.
xliii.  13;  Mai.  iv.  1)?

II.  SiNNBEB  ABB  THB  BBANDS  ON  WHICH  IT  FEEDS.  "  Yc  Were  as  a  firebrand."  There
are  certain  steps  which  lead  up  to  burning,  whether  literal  or  figurative.  The  brand
was :  1.  Withered.  It  is  not  on  the  sappy  growing  branch  that  the  fire  seizes.  Before,
In  the  natural  course,  it  reaches  the  flames,  a  preliminary  process  has  been  finished.
Its  leaf  yellows  and  falls,  its  bark  shrivels,  its  sap  dries  up.  Then  it  ii  mere  tinder,
and  fit  for  nothing  but  the  fire.  So  sin  withers  and  kills  the  branches  of  the  tree
ef  human  character.    It  dries  up  the  sap  of  spiritual  life,  and  so  turns  sere  the  lea/


oh.it.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF   A-MOS.  71

of  profession,  and  destroys  the  fruit  of  well-doing.  In  a  little  no  function  of  life  is
possible,  and  all  its  uses  are  lost.  To  cut  it  down  is  all  the  husbandman  can  do,  and
to  burn  it  follows  in  the  natural  course.  2.  Brought  to  the  flames.  There  are  no
prairie  fires  in  God's  domain.  What  is  burned  is  first  prepared,  and  then  bound  in
bundles  (Matt.  xiii.  30)  and  then  set  fire  to.  There  is  no  accident  anywhere.  The
man  by  his  ill-doing  makes  himself  tinder,  and  God  in  his  providence  uses  him  for  the
only  purpose  he  suits.  3.  Combustible.  Fire  seeks  out  and  feeds  on  what  is  most
inflammable.  There  is  an  affinity  between  the  two  tilings  that  does  not  fail  to  bring
them  together.  So  with  God's  avenging  fires  and  the  fuel  they  consume.  'The
Vultures  of  his  judgments  spy  out,  and  alight  upon  the  carrion  of  the  sinner's  lusts.
Every  transgression  of  the  written  Law  is  a  transgression  also  of  the  unwritten  law
of  the  nature  of  things,  and  brings  punishment  on  and  through  the  instrument  of
the  sin.

III.  The  BiTBNiNa  that  soathkb  without  consuming.  "  Plucked  out  of  the  burn-
ing." This  language  implies :  1.  A  narrow  escape.  The  brand  had  been  in  the  fire,
and  actually  alight.  A  little  while  and  it  would  have  been  inextinguishable.  The
fires  of  judgment  had  been  around  Israel,  and  around  her  close  and  loi.g.  If  she  had
been  in  them  but  a  little  longer  she  could  not  have  come  out  alive.  The  narrowness
of  her  escape  was  a  fact  charged  with  the  double  influence  of  fear  as  to  what  might
have  been,  and  gratitude  for  what  actually  was.  2.  An  escape  with  a  certain  amount
of  injury.  The  brand  that  has  been  alight  has  suffered.  Its  fair  suiface  has  been
scathed  and  charred.  It  can  never  be  its  original  self  again.  Such  a  thing  was  Israel.
"  Once  it  had  been  green,  fresh,  fragrant,  with  leaf  or  flower ;  now  scorched,  charred,
blackened,  all  but  consumed.  In  itself  it  was  fit  for  nothing  but  to  b6  cast  back
into  the  fire  whence  it  had  been  rescued.  Man  would  so  deal  with  it,  a  re-creation
alone  could  restore  it.  Slight  emblem  of  a  soul  whose  freshness  sin  hath  withered,  then
God's  severe  judgment  had  half  consumed ;  in  itself  meet  only  for  the  everlasting  fire,
from  which  yet  God  withdraws  it "  (Pusey).  3.  An  escape  managed  for  an  important
purpose.  God  tries  all  means  before  going  to  extremities.  He  threatens,  menaces,  sets
fire  to,  and  scorches,  yet  after  all  delays  to  consume.  (1)  This  gives  the  sinner  a  final
opportunity  of  reconsidering  his  relation  to  sin.  It  is  possible  that  a  last  chance  of
reformation  may  be  embraced  for  the  very  reason  that  it  is  the  last  one.  The  prospect
of  death  is  a  new  factor  in  the  problem  of  a  man's  relation  to  the  Prince  of  life,  and  is
likely  to  modify  the  solution.  (2)  It  gives  him  a  chance  of  viewing  sin  in  the  light  of
its  effects.  The  charred  brand  knows  the  taste  of  the  fire.  The  ultimate  like  the
immediate  punishment  of  sin  is  burning  (Mark  ix.  43,  44).  The  plagued  sinner  has
tasted  the  firstfruits  of  his  terrible  retribution.  He  can  argue  from  it  what  the  harvest
will  be.    This  is  all  in  favour  of  his  profiting  under  the  dispensation.

IV.  The  nature  that  will  consume  bepobe  it  will  melt.  Israel  had  not
repented,  and  was  not  going  to  repent.  Eesoued  from  the  flame  in  unspeakable  mercy
for  a  season,  the  brand  would  have  to  be  thrust  in  again  and  burned.  This  uncon-
querable hardness  was  that:  X.  Of  a  nature  that  had  strayed.  The  hardest  sinner  is
the  apostate.  He  sins  against  light,  against  favours  received,  against  experience
enjoyed,  against  gracious  influences  felt.  To  have  beaten  down,  and  sinned  in  spite  of
all  these  deterrents,  argues  a  hardness  and  determination  that  the  stranger  to  gracious
influences  has  not  had  an  opportunity  of  acquiring.  Paul  tells  us  that  those  who  have
BO  sinned  cannot  be  "  renewed  to  repentance "  (Heb.  vi.  4 — 6).  2.  Of  a  nature  that
had  been  hardened  by  punishment.  There  is  a  degree  of  induration  in  the  back  that
has  experienced  the  lash.  The  brand  put  into  the  fire  and  taken  out  again  is  hardened
by  the  process.  The  criminal  often  leaves  the  prison  more  callous  than  he  entered  it.
So  with  the  subjects  of  Divine  judgment.  If  they  are  not  melted  by  it  they  are
indurated.  Hatred  to  God  and  love  to  the  sin  are  intensified,  rebelliousness  is  stirred  up,
self-will  is  put  on  its  mettle,  and  so  moral  insensibility  is  increased  by  the  process  of
resistance.  8.  Of  a  nature  in  which  sin  is  supreme.  In  most  natures  there  is  a
struggle  between  good  and  evil.  It  is  largely  a  question  of  circumstances,  which  will
preponderate  at  any  given  time.  Temptation  is  resisted  sometimes,  and  sometimes
yielded  to,  according  to  our  mood  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  brought  to  bear.
This  indicates  a  state  of  war  between  the  law  in  the  members  and  the  law  in  the  mind,
victory  inclining  to  Israel  or  to  Amalek  as  the  hands  of  conscience  are  upheld.     But


72  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  nr.  1—13.

when  a  man  siiiB  mvariably,  under  whatever  pressure  of  temptation,  and  when  there
is  no  temptation  at  all — sins  in  spite  of  all  conceivable  deterrent  circumstances — the
case  is  diiferent.  He  says  to  evil,  "  Be  thou  my  good."  His  moral  nature  is  inverted.
He  will  not  mould  into  a  vessel  of  mercy  now.  He  is  "a  vessel  of  wrath  and  fitted  for
destruction."

Ver.  12. — The  great  preparation.  "Therefore  thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,  O  Israel,"
etc.  Here  an  important  duty  fathers  itself  on  a  stupendous  fact.  An  omnipotent  God
ia  in  judgment  with  sinful  Israel.  His  wrath  has  expressed  itself  in  holt  after  bolt
of  judgment  already  hurled.  But  these  measures  are  far  from  embodying  all  his
punitive  resources.  In  the  failure  of  these  to  bring  repentance  there  are  woes
unnamed,  because  unutterable,  still  in  store.  If  Israel,  then,  would  have  the  heaviest
artillery  of  retribution  kept  out  of  action,  they  had  need  bestir  themselves  in  the
matter  of  a  duty  the  further  neglect  of  which  must  precipitate  disaster.

I.  God  and  men  livinq  apabt.  The  enjoyment  of  God's  presence  was  paradise
(Gen.  iii.  8),  and  will  be  heaven  (1  Thess.  iv.  17) ;  that  privilege  lost  is  death  (Gen.
iii.  24),  and  will  be  hell  (Luke  xvL  26).  1,  The  wicked  neither  have  Ood't  presence
nor  desire  it,  "God  drove  out  the  man,"  when  he  became  a  sinner;  and  all  men,
as  sinners,  are  "afar  off."  Purity  and  impurity  are  incompatible,  and  there  can
be  no  fellowship  between  them.  Righteousness  and  unrighteousness  are  antagonistic,
and  cannot  come  together  without  coming  into  collision.  Man's  instinctive  conscious-
ness of  this  led  him  to  anticipate  expulsion  from  God's  presence  by  trying  to  run  away
(Gen.  iii.  8).  The  separation  between  God  and  the  sinner  is  thus  by  consent,  and
in  the  naturie  of  the  case,  and  so  inevitable  during  the  status  quo.  2.  The  righteous
enjoy  it  in  the  imperfect  measure  in  which  they  desire  it.  The  need  of  Divine  fellow-
ship, universal  with  men,  becomes  conscious  when  they  become  spiritual  (Ps.  zlii.  2).
As  supply  everywhere  meets  demand  (Phil.  iv.  19),  and  measures  it,  the  drawing  near
of  God  is  synchronous  with  the  springing  of  desire  for  it  (Matt.  v.  6),  as  well  as
proportioned  to  its  strength  (Bev.  zxi.  3^.  To  each  of  us  God  comes  when  we  desire
him,  and  as  we  desire  him.  If  the  presence  be  intermittent  or  incognizable,  it  is
because  appreciation  is  inadequate,  and  the  longing  for  it  irregular  or  weak  (Isa.  Ivii.
15 ;  xliii.  22).  3.  To  desire  it  perfectly  and  possess  it  fully  is  heaven.  "  Heaven  is
endless  longing  accompanied  with  an  endless  fruition"  (Maclaren).  In  it  there  is
perfection  of  the  faculties  which  commune  with  God.  There  is  perfection  of  opportunity
for  their  exercise.  Accordingly,  there  is  perfect  attainment  of  the  normal  result.  We
are  "  with  Christ,"  and  "  know  even  as  also  we  are  known."

n.  Gebtain  occasions  on  which  thet  NEVEBTHELE8S  UEET.  The  wlcked  fear
God  (Rom.  viii.  16)  and  hate  him  (Bom.  viii.  7),  would  be  miserable  in  his  presence
(Rev.  vi.  16),  and  so  do  all  they  can  to  keep  away  from  It  (Job  xxii.  17 ;  xxi.  14).
But :  1.  They  Tneet  him  in  the  dispensations  of  providence.  He  is  their  King.  He
rules  their  life.  AU  the  events  in  it  are  of  his  disposing.  He  is  where  he  operates,
and  so  in  each  operation  of  which  they  are  the  subjects  they  meet  him.  Especially
does  he  come  to  them  in  his  judgments,  which  they  are  provoking  every  day.
Misfortune,  sickness,  death, — these  in  their  order,  for  a  widening  circle,  and  at  ever
closer  quarters,  are  occasions  of  meeting  God  which  none  would  choose,  yet  none  can
shun.  2.  They  meet  him  in  the  influences  of  hit  grace.  "  No  one's  salvation  is  so
desperate,  no  one  is  so  stained  with  every  kind  of  sin,  but  that  God  cometh  to  him
by  holy  inspirations  to  bring  back  the  wanderer  to  himself"  (Jerome,  in  Pusey).  The
strivings  of  the  Spirit  are  unnoticed  often,  and  resisted  often  (Luke  xix.  44;  Acts  vii.
61),  and  so  are  in  the  end  withdrawn  (Gen.  vi.  3);  but,  so  far  as  we  know,  they  are
universal.  As  truly  as  he  met  the  Prophet  Balaam  in  the  way  does  God  meet  men
in  the  exercise  of  constraining  or  restraining  grace.  3.  They  shall  meet  him  in  the
judgment-day.  "  Before  him  shall  be  gathered  all  nations."  This  meeting  is  sure,  and
will  be  unutterably  momentous.  All  other  meetings  are  preliminary  and  preparatory
to  it.  It  will  gather  up  and  declare  and  finally  administer  their  cumulative  results.
The  wicked  shall  be  finally  banished  from  God's  presence,  and  the  righteous  be  finally
admitted  to  it;  and  so  for  each  it  shall  be  the  gieat  meeting  and  the  last  meeting,

III.  The  pbbparation  needed  fob  buck  encountebs.  Israel  was  evidently
deficient  in  this ;  not  expecting  the  meeting  and  not  furnished  for  it.     In  making  it


OH.  IV.  1— 13.J  THE   BOOK  OF   AMOS.  IS


we  must :  1.  Frepare  a  character.  To  meet  God  satisfactorily  men  must  be  like  him.
To  see  him  on  the  one  hand,  or  relish  him  on  the  other,  or  be  capable  in  any  sense
of  holding  communion  with  him,  a  man  must  be  pure  (Matt.  v.  8 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  14).  He
must  bring  to  the  meeting  a  character  in  sympathy  with  God's,  if  he  would  bring
a  blessing  away.  2.  Prepare  a  case.  Man  before  God  is  a  criminal,  guilty,  con-
demned, and  sentenced.  He  wants  all  this  reversed,  and  he  must  be  able  to  show
reason  before  it  can  be  done.  And  what  are  the  elements  essential  to  his  case?
Clearly  the  penalty  he  was  under  must  have  been  exhaustively  endured  (1  Pet.  ii.
24)  ;  the  Law  he  is  under  must  have  been  perfectly  obeyed  (Isa.  xlii.  21) ;  both  these
things  must  have  been  done  with  the  approval  and  by  the  appointment  of  God  (Heb.
V.  4,  5) ;  and  the  man  must  be  intelligently  resting  his  case  on  these  facts.  In  other
words,  there  must  be  Divine  vicarious  obedience  and  death,  divinely  recognized,  and
rested  in  by  faith.  Any  appearance  before  God  apart  from  these  must  end  in  con-
fusion. 3.  Prepare  an  advocate.  Man  cannot  plead  his  own  case.  He  has  no  locus
ttandi.  He  can  approach  God  only  through  a  mediator  (1  John  ii.  1).  This  mediator,
to  be  admissible,  must  have  Divine  recognition  (Isa.  xlii.  1 ;  Heb.  v.  4,  5) ;.  to  be
efficient,  must  have  Divine  power  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  19;  Matt,  xxviii.  18);  and  to  be
available,  must  have  Divine  sovereign  love  for  men  (Eph.  v.  2).  These  conditions
meet,  and  meet  only,  and  always  met,  in  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  one  Advocate  of
every  dispensation.  Access  into  the  antitypical  holiest  of  all  has  been  one  thing  and
by  one  way  always  (Heb.  ix.  8;  x.  19 — 22).  It  is  and  was  .and  shall  be  only
spiritual  and  through  the  Son  of  God.  4.  Prepare  at  once.  To  Israel  a  meeting
in  judgment  had  been  long  foreshadowed,  and  was  now  overdue.  It  might  be  any
time,  and  must  be  soon.  A  surprise — and  in  like  circumstances  it  is  the  same  with
all — was  probable,  and  would  be  disastrous  (Eev.  iii.  3).  To  prepare  immediately  was,
therefore,  a  duty  as  urgent  as  it  was  clear  (Matt.  xxiv.  44).  It  is  ill  beginning  to  dig
a  well  when  the  house  of  lite  is  already  on  fire.

IV.  The  conbidebations  that  move  us  to  peepabb.  In  the  context  these  are
written  large.  There  is :  1.  An  implied  promise.  "  It  has-  hope  in  it  to  be  bidden
to  prepare"  (Pusey).  The  person  so  enjoined  is  not  yet  given  up.  The  menaced
doom  is  not  yet  inevitable.  The  way  in  which  God  shall  be  met,  and  go  the  result
of  the  meeting,  is  still  capable  of  being  modified.  Every  call  to  action  is  an  implicit
promise  of  the  result  to  which  it  naturally  leads.  There  is  also:  2.  An  explicit
threat.  "Thus  will  I  do  unto  thee."  There  is  a  vagueness  here  that  is  far  more
terrible  than  the  most  explicit  denunciation.  A  series  of  woes  already  sent  has  just
been  named.  But  there  is  a  woe  that  is  unutterable  in  reserve,  and  already  on  its
way.  This,  because  words  are  too  weak  to  express  it,  is  left  to  the  imagination  to
picture.  "Thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,"  he  says,  and  attempts  to  particularize  no
further,  where  the  sentiment  is  too  terrible  for  words.  And  so  it  is  with  the  woe
in  store  for  all  the  impenitent  wicked.  It  cannot  be  literally  defined,  and  so  is
suggested  by  figures  such  as  "  the  blackness  of  darkness  "  (Jude  13),  "  the  worm  that
dieth  not,  and  the  fire  that  is  not  quenched  "  (Mark  ix.  48).  But,  however  figuratively
represented,  the  woe  is  real,  is  prepared,  is  being  kept  in  store,  is  incomparably  great,
and  shall  fall  as  God  is  true.  3.  Whither  we  are  prepared  or  not,  the  meeting  with
Ood  must  come.  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  There
is  a  needs  be  in  the  case.  The  purpose  of  God  must  be  fully  carried  out  in  issuing
all  the  matters  that  go  down  unsettled  to  the  grave.  The  righteousness  of  God  must
conclusively  be  vindicated  in  meting  out  to  all  rewards  according  to  their  works.
The  truth  of  the  Divine  Word,  pledged  in  promise  and  in  threat,  must  be  established
for  ever  in  the  answering  of  event  to  explicit  prediction.  The  meeting  may  be
a  joy  to  UB  or  a  shame,  as  we  choose  to  have  it;  but  it  must  be  a  fact.  4.  A  feeling
of  unreadiness  is  a  necessary  step  to  preparation.  The  measure  of  a  sinner's  fancied
readiness  to  face  his  Maker  is  the  measure  of  his  ignorance  as  to  what  real  fitness
implies.  The  man  who  has  been  brought  to  say,  "  I  dare  not  face  God,"  has  made
one  step  in  advance.  He  is  disillusionized.  His  eyes  are  open  and  his  conscience
awake.  Self-deception  and  false  security  are  at  an  end  (Rev.  iii.  17, 18).  The  hrst
■tep  toward  grappling  with  the  facts  has  been  taken  when  once  we  have  fairly  faced
them.  Bealize  that  you  are  sinners,  and  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  will
find  appreciation  and  an  open  door.


74  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS,  [oh.  iv.  1—13.

Ver.  13. — Tht  Ood  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  Qod-always  acts  in  character.  From
the  thing  he  is  may  he  inferred  the  quality  of  the  thing  he  will  do.  We  see  him
here —

I.  As  BEVEALGD  BY  HIS  NAMES,  Each  Divine  name  and  title  is  a  Divine  revelation  ;
gets  forth  some  one  of  God's  incomparable  perfections.  1.  Jehovah.  "The  Being;"  "the
Living  One."  In  contradistinction  to  idols,  having  real  existence.  In  contradistinction
to  created  things,  having  eternal  existence.  In  contradistinction  to  all  outside  himself,
having  necessary  existence.  Jehovah  is  the  true  God  and  alone  claiming  faith,  the
self-existent  God  and  alone  givin:;  life,  the  eternal  God  and  alone  conferring  immor-
tality. 2.  God.  "The  Adorable  One."  The  Sum  of  all  excellence.  The  Object  of  all
worship.  The  Inspirer  of  all  veneration.  The  Being  who  at  once  deserves  and  com-
mands the  heart's  whole  allegiance  and  devotion.  3.  0/  hosts.  "  God  of  the  armies."
The  hosts  are  the  heavenly  bodies  (Gen.  ii.  1 ;  Deut.  iv.  19),  the  angels  (Josh.  v.  14,
16;  1  Kings  xxii.  19;  Fs.  ciii.  21;  cxlviii.  2),  and  men  (Exod.  xii.  41).  All  these
he  made,  owns,  keeps,  controls,  and  uses.  He  is  the  universal  Sovereign,  and  "  doeth
according  to  his  will "  everywhere,  always,  and  without  appeal.  Such  a  Being  it  is  no
light  thing  to  meet.    Just  as  it  is  done  will  utter  ruin  or  absolute  safety  result.

II.  As  REVEALED  BY  HIS  WORKS.  The  worker  puts  something  of  himself  into  his
work — the  author  into  his  book,  the  painter  into  his  picture,  the  mechanic  into  his
machine.  And  so  with  God  (Pa.  xix.  1).  1.  Ee  produces  physical  phenomena.  Three
kinds  are  enumerated:  (1)  solid  matter,  "the  mountains;"  (2)  gaseous  matter,  "the
wind ; "  (3)  ethereal  matter,  "  dawn,  darkness."  Matter  in  all  forms  is  the  creature  of
God.  Its  mutations  are  the  doing  of  his  power.  Its  elements  are  the  instruments  of
his  hand.  He  does  to  it  and  by  it  what  his  own  moral  excellence  prompts.  And
thus  it  reveals  him.    We

"  View  great  Nature's  open  eye,
And  see  within  it  trembling  lie
The  portrait  of  the  Deity."

2.  He  reveals  mental  phenomena.  "Maketh  known  to  man  what  is  his  [man's]
thought."  The  power  of  introspection  is  peculiar  to  man  of  earthly  creatures.  He
takes  cognizance  of  what  passes  in  his  own  mind ;  reads  his  thoughts,  and  analyzes
the  process  of  thinking.  This  is  among  the  highest  exercises  of  reason.  It  is  a
revelation  of  its  marvellous  powers,  and  so  of  the  wisdom  and  power  of  him  by  whom
the  faculty  was  bestowed.  If  a  man's  thoughts  are  open  to  himself,  much  more  are
they  to  God.  The  mind  can  do  all  this ;  what  cannot  the  Maker  of  it  do  (Jer.  xvii.
9,  10)  ?  3.  He  rules  moral  phenomena.  "  Goeth  over  the  high  places  of  the  earth."
The  "  high  places "  are  the  exalted  people.  All  these  he  rules.  The  highest  do  his
bidding.  From  prince  to  peasant  all  are  but  clay  in  the  Potter's  hands.  Who,  then,
shall  strive  with  him?  What  can  avail  against  his  transcendent  might?  All
natural  forces,  all  creaturely  existences,  are  but  tools  in  his  hand,  and  ministers  that
do  his  will.    This  is  the  God  we  must  meet,  and  to  meet  whom  we  may  well  prepare.

HOMILIES  BY   VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  4,  6. — Hypocrisy.  The  rhetorical  fervour  of  the  prophet  leads  him  in  this
passage  to  address  himself  to  the  guilty  nobles  of  Israel  in  terms  of  bitter  irony.  That
descendants  of  Abraham  should  have  forsaken  Jehovah,  should  have  set  up  altars
to  a  golden  calf,  or  to  deities  of  their  heathen  neighbours, — this  cuts  the  prophet
to  the  heart.    But  that,  even  whilst  acting  thus,  they  should  retain  some  of  their

ancient  observances,  should  profess  any  reverence  lor  the  precepts  of  the  Law  of  God

this  is  the  most  cruel  wound.  Hence  this  language  of  irony,  the  severity  of  which  it
apparent  to  every  reader.

I.  It  is  htpooribt  outwabdlt  to  beverbnoe  the  obdinanoes  of  God  whils'/

BEALLT  BEBVINO  God'b  ENEMIES.     Sacrifices,  tithes,  leaven,  offerings all  of  which  are

mentioned  in  this  passage — were  prescribed  in  the  Mosaic  Law.  The  sin  of  the
Israelites  lay  here.  All  the  time  that  they  were  attending  to  these  observances  they
were  worshipping  idols,  and  breaking  the  first  and  second  commandments  of  the  ten.
Virtually,  all  men  who  profess  Christianity,  and  yet  love  the  sinful  practices  and


OH.  IV.  1— 13.J  THK   BOOK   Off   AMOS.  75

pleasures  of  the  world,  are  guilty  of  this  sin.    It  is  hypocrisy,  which  is  worse  than  aa
open  defiance  of  the  Divine  anthority.

II.  Htpocbist  seems  to  ueet  a  need  of  defbayed  and  sinful  natubeb.  "  Thiff
liketh  you ; "  "  So  ye  love  to  have  it ; " — such  is  the  reflection  of  Amos  upon  this  evil
conduct  Men  dj  not  "  like  "  to  break  off  the  associations  of  the  past ;  they  do  not
"  like  "  to  turn  their  back  upon  the  principles  they  have  formerly  professed ;  they  do
not  "  like "  to  forfeit  the  apparent  advantages  of  conformity  to  the  requirements  of
religion.  Yet,  at  the  same  time,  they  are  not  willing  to  forsake  the  pleasures  of  sin,
to  deny  self,  to  take  up  the  cross.

III.  Htpocbisy  mat  deceive  sooiett,  and  may  even  deoeivb  the  htpocbite,
BUT  IT  CANNOT  DECEIVE  GoD.  The  conscious  aim  of  the  hypocritical  is  often  to
impress  their  companions  with  the  belief  of  their  goodness.  But  in  many  cases  men
actually  persuade  themselves  of  their  own  piety,  whilst  their  life  is  in  flagrant  contra-
diction to  the  assumption.  Let  it  never  be  forgotten  that  God  "  searcheth  the  heart,
and  trieth  the  reins  of  the  children  of  men ; "  that  his  scrutinizing  gaze  cannot  be
averted,  nor  his  righteous  judgment  avoided.  Those  who  multiply  insincere  obser-
vances really  "multiply  transgression."  And  multiplied  transgressions  surely  involve
multiplied  penalties.

Application.  Bethel  and  Gilgal  are  not  the  only  spots  on  earth  where  hypocrisy
has  been  practised.  The  question  of  all  importance  for  every  professed  worshipper  to
put  to  himself  is  this — Is  there  harmony  between  the  language  which  I  use  in  devotion
and  the  thoughts  and  desires  of  my  heart,  the  actions  and  habits  of  my  life  ? — T.

Vers.  6 — 11. — National  calamities  are  Divine  chastisements.  Graphic  and  morally
impressive  is  the  catalogue  of  Divine  judgments  which  the  inspired  prophet  here
draws  up  and  puts  upon  record  for  the  admonition  of  future  ages.

I.  Of  what  these  calamities  consist.  They  are  thus  enumerated  in  the  several
verses.  1.  Famine.  2.  Drought.  3.  Blight.  4.  Pestilence.  5.  War.  6.  Destruc-
tion. Alas  I  from  the  beginnings  of  human  history  such  have  been  the  sad  and  weary
experiences  of  the  nations.  Some  of  these  ills  appear  to  be  beyond  human  control;
others  of  them  are  more  or  less  attributable  to  human  ignorance,' to  human  neglect,
to  unbridled  lust  and  passion.  The  peculiarity  of  their  treatment  in  the  books  of
Scripture  is  not  in  their  description,  but  in  the  connection  shown  to  exist  between
them  and  the  moral  life  and  probation  of  man,  and  the  righteous  government  of  God.

II.  Fob  what  intent  these  calamities  webe  inflicted.  They  are  not  here
regarded  simply  as  events;  even  the  philosophical  historian  does  not  regard  them
thus.  1.  They  convince  the  observant  and  pious  mind  of  the  concern  of  God  in
human  affairs,  and  of  God's  indignation  with  human  sin.  Certain  philosophers
imagined  the  great  rulers  of  the  universe  to  be  indifferent  to  all  the  affairs  of  men.
The  Scriptures  teach  us  that  nothing  escapes  Divine  observation,  that  nothing  eludes
Divine  justice,  God's  censure,  or  approval.  2.  They  induce,  in  the  case  of  the  right-minded,
repentance  and  reformation.  When  God's  judgments  are  abroad,  the  inhabitants  of
the  earth  will  learn  righteousness.  If  events  teach  men  that  "the  way  of  transgressors
is  bard,"  they  may  also  teach  them  that  "  whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth,  and
Bcourgeth  every  child  whom  he  receiveth."  "  Before  I  was  afflicted,"  said  the  psalmist,
"  I  went  astray  ;  but  now  have  I  kept  thy  Word."

III.  In  what  spibit  these  calamities  a  be  beceiveo.  1.  There  can  be  no  question
that,  in  many  instances,  they  are  the  occasion  of  hardening  of  the  heart.  As  in  the
case  of  Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt,  afflictions  may  increase  insensibility  and  rebellious-
ness. 2.  There  are  cases  in  which  chastisements  of  the  kind  here  described  produce
national  humiliation  and  repentance.  Such  was  the  case  with  Nineveh,  even  when
Jonah  preached  and  foretold  the  city's  doom;  the  people  repented  even  before  the
calamity  came,  and  so  averted  it.  And  there  were  instances  in  the  history  of  stiff-
necked  Israel  where  chastisement  led  to  general  abasement  and  repentance.  3.  There
are  cases  in  which  calamity  fails  to  produce  a  general  reformation,  but  is  nevertheless
the  means  of  effecting  in  individuals  a  genuine  repentance  and  a  sincere  conversion
unto  God.— T.

y«r.  6. — Obduracy  rtproaehti.    There  is  a  mingling  of  severity  and  pathoi  In  this


76  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  iv.  1— la

language  of  JehoTah  addressed  to  Israel.  The  repetition  of  the  reproach  adds  to  itf
effectiveness  and  solemnity.  As  one  calamity  after  another  is  described,  and  as  all  are
represented  as  chastisements  inflicted  by  Divine  righteousness,  the  touching  words  are
added,  "Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord."

L  The  wanderings  implied.  In  order  that  there  may  be  a  return  to  God,  there
must  first  have  been  a  departure  from  God.  Such  had  certainly  been  the  case  with
Israel.  The  people  and  their  rulers  had  alike  done  wickedly  in  departing  from  their
covenant  God.  They  had  mingled  with  the  worship  of  Jehovah  practices  superstitious
and  idolatrous.  They  had  broken  the  Divine  laws  of  morality,  and  that  in  a  flagrant
and  shameful  manner.

II.  The  summons  and  invitation  to  betubn  which  had  been  addbesbed  by
God  to  Israel.  Dealing  with  sinful  men,  a  benevolent  God  has  not  been  content
simply  to  reveal  truth  and  to  inculcate  holiness.  He  has  ever  addressed  the  children
of  men  as  those  who  have  disregarded  the  truth  and  disobeyed  the  Law.  Revelation  is
full  of  declarations  of  Divine  mercy  and  promises  of  Divine  forgiveness.

III.  The  chastisements  which  were  intended  to  produce  bepentancb  and
befoemation.  Words  proving  insufBcient,-  they  were  followed  by  acts.  It  is  dan-
gerous for  us  confidently  to  interpret  the  plans  of  Divine  providence.  Yet  God  most
high  is  the  supreme  Euler  of  the  nations,  and  in  his  own  Word  his  "  dealings  "  with
the  nations  are  interpreted  with  uneiring  justice  and  truth.  The  several  disasters
recounted  in  this  passage  as  having' befallen  Israel  are  declared  to  have  been  of  the
nature  of  chastisements  designed  to  awaken  reflection  and  to  call  to  penitence  and  to
newness  of  life.  "  The  voice  of  the  rod  "  is  a  voice  sometimes  effectual,  and  always
morally  authoritative.

IV.  The  inattention  of  Iseael  to  the  summons  and  to  the  chastisements.
It  is  amazing  to  learn  that  not  only  the  messages  of  prophets  and  authorized  heralds,
but  even  the  "judgments"  of  the  righteous  Ruler,  failed  to  produce  the  intended
effect.  Yet  so  it  was,  and  those  who  had  beeu  often  reproved  hardened  their  neck.
In  this  Israel  was  an  example  of  that  obduracy  which  may  be  discovered  in  all  ages
and  in  all  communities.  The  power  of  man  to  resist  the  appeals  and  the  entreaties,
the  commands  and  the  chastisements,  of  a  righteous  God,  is  one  of  the  most  surprising
and  awful  facts  of  the  moral  universe.

V.  The  pathetic  bepboaoh.  He  whose  power  could  smite  and  destroy  the  rebel-
lious speaks  as  if  himself  wounded  and  distressed  by  the  persieverance  in  rebellion  of
those  he  governs.  It  seems  as  if  Omniscience  were  astonished  and  appalled  at  human
obstinacy  and  obduracy.  Hence  the  expostulation,  the  reproach  addressed  to  the
impenitent  and  rebellious,  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me." — ^T.

Ver.  11. — The  brand  snatched  from  the  hurning.  Amongst  the  methods  employed
by  the  Divine  Ruler  to  bring  Israel  to  repentance  was  some  calamity,  some  "judg-
ment," which  overtook  certain  of  the  cities  of  the  land.  It  may  be  doubtful  whether
we  are  to  understand  that  those  cities  were,  like  Sodom,  struck  by  lightning  and
partially  consumed  by  fire  from  heaven ;  or  were  attacked  and  given  to  the  flames  by
an  invading,  hostile  force;  or  were  overtaken  by  some  disaster  figuratively  described
in  this  pictorial  language.  In  any  case,  the  circumstances  are  naturally  suggestive  of
reflections  upon  the  methods  and  purposes  of  God's  treatment  of  sinful  men.

I.  A  BTRIKINO  picture  OF  PUNISHMENT  FOB  SIN,  Like  a  city  given  to  the  flames,
like  a  brand  flung  upon  the  blazing  fire,  is  the  roan,  the  community,  that,  on  acccfimt
of  disobedience  and  rebelliousness,  is  abandoned  for  a  time  and  for  a  purpose  to  the
ravages  of  aiBiction  and  calamity.  How  often  has  a  sinful,  proud,  luxurious,  oppres-
sive nation  been  consigned  to  this  baptism  of  fire  I  How  often  has  the  wilful  and  obdurate
nature  been  made  to  endure  the  keen  and  purifying  flames !  The  connection  between
sin  and  suffering  does  indeed  abound  in  mysteries ;  yet  it  is  a  reality  not  to  be  denied.

II.  A  BTBIKINO  PIOTUBE  OF  THE  DANOEB  OF  DBSTEUOTION  TO  WHICH  THE  IMPENI-
TENT AND  SINFUL  ABE  EXPOSED.  Fire  may  purify  the  gold  from  dross,  but  it  may
consume  and  utterly  destroy  the  chaff.  Some  nations  exposed  to  the  flames  of  war
and  calamity  have  perished  and  disappeared.  Some  individual  lives  seem,  at  all
events,  to  have  vanished  in  the  flames  of  Divine  judgment.  The  peril  is  imminent
and  undeniable.


OH.  IV.  1—13.]  THE   BOOK  OF  AMOS.  77

III.  A  BTBIKINO  PiOTUBx  OF  DiTiNB  DELIVEBANOE.  As  the  brand  is  plucked,
snatched  from  the  burning,  so  that,  although  bearing  the  traces  of  fire  upon  il,  it  is
not  consumed,  even  so  did  it  happen  to  Israel  that  Divine  mercy  saved,  if  not  the  com-
munity, yet  many  individuals,  from  destruction.  Where,  indeed,  ia  the  soul,  saved
from  spiritual  death,  of  which  it  may  not  be  said,  "  Here  is  a  brand  plucked  from  the
burning"?  And  there  are  instances  of  salvation  in  which  the  similitude  is  peculiarly
appropriate.  There  are  those  whose  sins  have,  by  reason  of  enormity  and  repetition,
deserved  and  received  no  ordinary  punishment  in  this  life.  And  amongst  such  there
are  not  a  few  whom  the  pity,  the  wisdom,  and  the  power  of  our  Saviour-God  have
preserved  from  destruction,  and  who  abide  living  witnesses  to  his  delivering  might  and
grace.

Application.  Here  is  encouragement  for  those  who  labour  for  the  conversion  and
salvation  of  the  degraded  and  debased.  Even  such,  though  nigh  unto  burning,  may
be  plucked  by  Divine  mercy  from  the  flames  of  judgment. — T.

Ver.  12. — "Prepare  to  meet  thy  Ood."  Forbearance  has  its  limits,  and  probation  is
not  for  ever.  Discipline  itself  is  temporary,  and,  when  the  purposes  of  God  concerning
men  are  fulfilled,  will  come  to  an  end.  There  is  a  time  for  preparation,  and  then  after
that  comes  the  time  for  reckoning  and  for  recompense.

I.  The  pebsons  directed  to  prepare  for  this  meeting.  1.  Especially  the  dis-
obedient, the  threatened,  the  chastened.  The  previous  verses  make  it  evident  that  it
was  to  these  that  the  admonition  was  particularly  addressed.  The  people  of  Israel,  as
a  whole,  had  departed  from  God,  and  had  been  censured  and  chastened  by  God.  It
seems  to  have  been  in  consequence  of  their  impenitence  and  obduracy  that  they  were
addressed  in  the  solemn  language  of  the  text.  2.  Yet  the  appeal  has  surely  reference
to  such  as  were  learning  the  lessons  so  powerfully  though  so  painfully  inculcated  by
Divine  providence.  There  were  individuals  disposed  to  profit  by  the  awful  dispensa-
tions that  were  befalling  the  nation,  and  by  the  faithful  admonitions  addressed  by
inspired  prophets.

II.  The  event  desobibbd  as  a  meeting  with  God.  1.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed
that  there  is  ever  a  time  when  God  is  not  in  immediate  contact  with  his  creatures.
We  meet  him  at  every  turn,  we  meet  him  at  every  moment.  His  eye  is  ever  upon  us,
his  hand  is  ever  over  us.  "  Whither  shall  we  flee  from  his  presence  ?  "  To  the  pious
soul  this  thought  is  grateful,  congenial,  welcome.  To  the  irreligious  soul  this  thought
should  be  pr<Suctive  of  sincere  humiliation  and  penitence.  2.  There  are,  however,
occasions  appointed  by  the  providence  of  God  upon  which  the  sons  of  men  are  con-
strained, manifestly  and  unmistakably,  to  meet  their  God.  Nations  meet  God  in
national  crises,  in  solemn  conjunctures  of  incident,  of  probation,  of  destiny.  Indi-
viduals meet  God  in  critical  events  in  human  life,  in  remarkable  experiences  of  the
inevitable  incidence  of  the  moral  law  of  God.  3.  All  Scripture  declares  that  there  is
a  future  judgment,  when  all  the  intelligent  and  accountable  shall  be  summoned  into
the  Divine  presence  and  before  the  Divine  tribunal.  "After  death  the  judgment;"
"  Then  shall  every  man  give  account  of  himself  to  God."  We  are  directed  to  keep
this  day  of  account  before  our  view,  and  to  live  in  prospect  of  it.

III.  The  peepabation  herb  enjoined.  1.  In  character  it  must  be  thorough  and
sincere.  Nothing  hypocritical  or  superficial  can  suflSce.  For  the  meeting  anticipated
is  with  him  who  is  the  Searcher  of  all  hearts.  2.  In  nature  it  must  consist  of  true  repen-
tance and  true  faith.  A  turning  of  the  heart  from  evil,  and  a  turning  unto  God, — these
are  essential.  Unfeigned  repentance  and  cordial  faith  are  indispensable.  3.  In  manifes-
tation it  must  be  in  conformity  with  Divine  requirements.  If  thou  vvouldst  meet  God
with  holy  confidence,  then  must  thou  "  do  justly,  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with
thy  God."— T.

Ver.  13. — The  majesty  of  Ood.  This  and  several  other  passages  in  this  book  of
prophecy  prove  to  us  that  Amos  was  a  man  who  lived  much  in  commimion  with
nature  and  nature's  God.  A  herdsman  and  a  gatherer  of  figs,  he  passed  his  earlier
years,  not  in  towns,  in  palaces,  in  libraries,  in  schools,  in  the  temple,  but  beneath  the
open  sky,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  solemnity,  the  grandeur,  the  sublimity,  of  the
works  of  the  Eternal.     He  had  climbed  the  mountains  of  Judasa,  had  gazeid  upon


70  TUK   BOOK.   OJf   AMOS.  [oh,  rr,  1— 1».

the  ragged  ranges  that  closed  In  the  Dead  Bea,  had  scanned  the  desert  ot  the  (outh,
and  had  delighted  himself  in  the  blue  waters  of  the  Mediterranean.  He  had  out-
watched  the  stars  and  greeted  the  glorious  dawn ;  he  had  bowed  his  head  before  the
tempest,  and  heard  the  voice  of  the  Almighty  in  the  thimder's  crash.  He  had  read
the  scroll  which  unfolds  itself  to  every  observant  eye ;  he  had  listened  to  the  language
best  heard  in  solitude  and  seclusion.  His  meditations  concerning  Ood  as  known,  not
by  the  book  of  the  law,  but  by  the  book  of  nature,  relate  to —

I.  God's  cbeative  power.  This  he  doubtless  recognized  wherever  he  turned,  by
day  and  by  night,  in  the  peaceful  plain  and  upon  the  awful  hills.  He  here  refers  to
two  instances  of  the  Maker's  might,  two  proofs  of  his  incomparable  majesty.  "  He
formeth  the  mountains"  The  stability  and  the  immensity  of  the  mountains  have  ever
possessed  a  charm  and  an  inspiration  for  the  sensitive  and  thoughtful  student  of  nature.
Little  as  Amos  could  have  known  of  those  processes  by  which  the  enduring  hills  have
been  fashioned,  he  was  capable  of  appreciating  their  testimony  to  the  Creator,  and
probably  of  recognizing  their  symbolism  of  Divine  attributes.  The  tuind  is  a  phe-
nomenon which  has  always  impressed  the  observer  of  God's  works.  Its  immense
power  and  its  inscrutable  mystery,  its  tenderness  as  it  breathes  through  the  forests  at
eventide,  its  awfulness  when  it  roars  upon  the  mountains,  when  it  lashes  into  fury  the
mighty  waves  of  the  sea,  are  suggestive  of  the  manifold  operations  of  the  all-compre-
hending Deity.  And  our  Lord  himself  has  reminded  us  of  its  symbolical  significance
as  setting  forth  the  wonderful,  varied,  and  inexplicable  manifestations  of  the  presence
and  the  working  of  the  Divine  Spirit.

IL  God's  spiritual  insight.  When  the  i^rophet  describes  Ood  as  "  declaring  unto
man  what  is  his  thought,"  the  language  has  sometimes  been  taken  to  refer  to  the
Divine  thought  revealed  to  man ;  but  it  probably  is  to  be  interpreted  of  that  omniscient
energy  by  virtue  of  which  the  Eternal  penetrates  the  spiiitual  nature  of  men  and
reads  their  thoughts  afar  off.  That  the  creating  Spirit  is  thus  in  perpetual  and  inti-
mate' contact  with  those  created  spirits  into  which  he  has  breathed  the  breath  of  life,
and  which  he  has  fashioned  in  his  own  likeness :  this  is  reasonable  enough.  Yet  the
enunciation  of  this  unquestionable  truth  should  have  two  effects  upon  us.  It  should
enhance  our  conception  of  God's  majesty,  and  so  call  forth  our  adoration  and  our
praise  ;  and  it  should  make  us  concerned  as  to  the  moral  quality  of  the  thoughts  of
our  minds,  which  the  omniscient  and  holy  God  must  surely  estimate  with  justice,  and
by  a  standard  infinitely  lofty  and  pure.

III.  God's  PEOvmENTiAii  rule.  If  we  take  literally  the  language,  "  That  maketh
the  morning  darkness,  and  treadeth  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth,"  then  these
clauses  are  additional  acknowledgments  of  the  Creator's  power  and  wisdom  as  displayed
in  nature.  But  coming  after  the  preceding  clause,  which  refers  to  men's  thoughts,
they  seem  to  invite  another  interpretation.  God's  presence  is  to  be  recognized  in  the
order  of  the  world,  in  the  tokens  of  moral  government,  in  the  workings  of  retributive
law — in  a  word,  in  the  facts  which  are  justly  deemed  providential.

IV.  God's  glorious  Name.  To  the  Hebrew  mind  there  was  a  very  close  connection
between  the  nature  and  attributes  and  the  Name  of  the  Divine  Buler  and  Lord.  He
was  Jehovah,  i.e.  the  Self-existing  and  Eternal,  whose  Being  accounts  for  all  being  beside.
He  was  the  Lord  of  hosts,  i.e.  supreme  over  all  powers,  posst- ssed  of  all  might,  ordering
all  natvu-es  and  all  processes  according  to  his  own  wisdom.  The  angelic  hosts  of  unseen
ministers  and  warriors,  the  armies  of  Israel  and  of  the  nations,  the  innumerable  forcei
that  obey  the  Divine  behests  and  bring  to  pass  the  Divine  purposes, — all  these  are
beneath  the  cognizance  and  the  sway  of  the  Eternal,  all  these  are  ever  executing  his
authoritative  commandments  and  establishing  his  universal  and  everlasting  kingdom.
In  the  presence  of  a  Being  so  glorious,  so  mighty,  so  holy,  what  power  attaches  to  the
monition  of  Scripture,  "  Stand  in  awe,  and  sin  not"  1 — T.

Ver.  12. — "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  Ood."  The  threats  which  precede  this  summons
are  very  indefinite.  Designedly  so ;  for  the  prophet  wished  to  arouse  a  general  fore-
boding of  retribution  amongst  the  careless  people,  which  would  have  its  fulfilment  in
national  disastei's,  but  its  final  consummation  in  another  world.  Such  indefinitenesf
also  makes  it  possible  to  apply  his  words  to  men  of  every  age  and  country.  All
responsible  beings  must  at  last  meet  their  God,  and  may  wisely  be  urged  to  "  prepare."


CH.  IV.  1— 13.J  TUB   BOOK  OF   AMO».  76

From  the  time  of  man's  fall  the  all-merciful  Father  has  been  calling  men  to  return
from  their  evil  ways.  Adam  was  encouraged  to  hope  in  his  mercy.  The  antediluvians
were  faithfully  warned  through  Noah,  the  preacher  of  righteousness.  Israel  was  con-
stantly being  exhorted  by  the  inspired  prophets.  John  the  Baptist  had  as  the  burden
of  his  preaching  this  same  word  "  prepare ; "  and  it  has  come  ringing  down  the  centuries
to  make  itself  heard  among  us  also.

I.  The  judouent  fobetold.  It  is  clear  that  the  reference  is  to  a  summons  to  the
tribunal  of  God,  the  Judge  of  quick  and  dead.  There  is  s  sense  in  which  we  may  meet
God  in  the  study  of  his  wonderful  works  in  nature;  in  the  strange  and  sometimes
startling  events  of  his  providence ;  in  the  pages  of  his  Word ;  in  earnest  supplication
at  his  footstool.  But  another  special  and  more  solemn  o'ccasion  is  alluded  to  in  our
text — even  that  day  when  the  great  white  throne  will  be  set,  and  every  man  will  have
to  give  an  account  of  all  the  deeds  dune  in  the  body,  whether  good  or  bad.  1.  That
judgment  is  certain  to  come.  Even  nature  seems  to  point  onward  to  some  crisis  in  the
future  of  our  race.  Conscience  warns  us  that  sin  cannot  always  go  unpunished,  for
the  world  is  governed  by  a  God  of  righteousness.  Scripture  constantly  affirms  that  he
has  appointed  a  day  in  the  which  he  will  judge  the  world  by  that  Man  whom  he  has
ordained.  2.  It  is  quite  uncertain  when  it  will  come.  "  Of  that  day  and  of  that  hour
knoweth  no  man."  It  will  come  suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  as  a  thief  in  the  night.
Death  will  end  our  time  of  probation,  and  no  one  knows  where  and  when  it  may  meet
him.  Therefore  "prepare  to  meet  thy  God."  3.  When  it  comes  the  trial  will  t*
thorough  and  final.  All  actions,  together  with  their  motives,  are  under  the  Divine
cognizance,  ^one  will  escape  his  notice.  No  false  excuses  will  avail ;  and,  on  the
other  hand,  no  mere  errors  will  be  condemned  as  if  they  were  willul  sins.  The  good
will  be  severed  from  the  evil,  as  our  Lord  teaches  us  in  the  parables  of  the  drag-net
and  the  tares  of  the  field.

II.  The  PKEPABATioN  NEEDED.  We  should  not  be  urged  to  "  prepare  "  unless  by
nature  we  were  unpre[jared.  It  is  merciful  of  our  Judge  to  give  us  warning,  counsel,
and  opportunity.  He  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but  would  rather  that  he
should  repent  and  live.  Had  it  not  been  possible  for  us  to  make  ready,  had  he  wished
ns  only  to  hurry  onward  to  a  certain  doom,  we  should  not  have  heard  this  exhortation.
But  he  gives  us  forewarning  in  many  ways,  and  at  certain  seasons  with  peculiar  force;
e.g.  when  death  enters  our  family,  or  some  accident  befalls  ourselves.  1.  We  need  lelf-
examination.  "Know  thyself"  was  the  advice  of  a  heathen  philosopher;  but  it  is
worth  heeding  by  us  all.  We  want  the  illumination  of  God's  Spirit  and  the  instruction
of  God's  Word  to  aid  us.  "The  candle  of  the  Lord"  must  throw  its  rays  into  the
recesses  of  our  hearts.  2.  We  need  confession  and  repentance.  "If  we  confess  oiur
sins,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteous-
ness." 3.  We  need  faith  in  the  atonement  of  Jesus.  It  is  said  of  all  sinners  who  safely
pass  the  great  tribunal  and  enter  into  the  heavenly  world,  "  They  have  washed  their
robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."

III.  The  bbabons  ubgbd.  These  appear  in  the  next  verse.  1.  God  is  omnipotent.
"He  formeth  the  mountains."  The  mightiest  cannot  resist  him;  the  most  subtle
will  not  escape  him.  2.  Ood  is  omniscient.  "  He  declareth  unto  man  what  is  his
thought."  He  is  the  Searcher  of  hearts  (Ps.  cxxxix.  2;  Jer.  xvii.  10).  Nothing
eludes  his  notice.  There  is  warning  in  this  thought  for  the  wicked;  and  there  is
comfort  for  the  righteous,  because  these  may  reflect  that  their  unspoken  prayers,  and
their  secret  self-denials,  and  their  unfulfilled  purposes,  are  all  recognized  by  him.  They
are  represented  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  xxv.  37—40)  as  being  surprised  at  reward  coming
for  acts  which  they  thought  little  of  or  had  quite  forgotten.  "  God  is  not  unfaithful
to  forget  your  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love."

Apply  the  words  of  the  exhortation  to  the  careless. — A.  B.

Vers.  4,  5. Worship  abounding  with  abounding  sin.    "Come  to  Bethel,  and  trani-

gress;  at  Gilgal  multiply  transgression;  and  bring  your  sacrifices  every  morning,"  etc.
"  The  language  of  these  verses,"  says  Henderson,  "  is  that  of  the  keenest  irony.  The
Israelites  were  addicted  to  the  worship  of  the  golden  calf,  and  to  that  of  jdols,  whereby
they  contracted  guilt  before  Jehovah,  and  exposed  themselves  to  his  judgments;  at
the  same  time,  they  hypocritically  professed  to  keep  up  the  observance  of  certain  feasts


80  THE  BOOK  OF   AMOS.  [oh.  iv.  1—13.

which  had  been  appointed  by  Moses."  The  subject  that  the  text  teaches  is— abounding
worship  tuith  abounding  sin.  The  sins  of  Israel,  the  frauds,  Tiolences,  and  nameless
iniquities,  are  referred  to  in  the  preceding  chapters.  Crimes  ran  riot  amongst  them  at  '
this  period;  and  yet  how  religious  they  seemed  to  bel  "Amos  has  described  how
zealously  the  people  of  Israel  went  on  pilgrimage  to  Bethel  and  Gilgal  and  Beersheba,
those  places  of  sacred  associations;  with  what  superabundant  diligence  they  offered
sacrifice  and  paid  tithes ;  how  they  would  rather  do  too  much  than  too  little,  so  that
they  even  burnt  upon  the  altar  a  portion  of  the  leavened  loaves  of  the  praise  offering,
which  were  only  intended  for  the  sacrificial  meals,  although  none  but  unleavened  bread
was  allowed  to  be  offered ;  and,  lastly,  how  in  their  pure  zeal  for  multiplying  the  works
of  piety,  they  so  completely  mistook  their  nature  as  to  summon  by  a  public  proclamation
to  the  presentation  of  free-will  offerings,  the  very  peculiarity  of  which  consisted  in  the
fact  that  they  had  no  other  prompting  than  the  will  of  the  oGFerer"  (Delitzsch).  We
offer  two  remarks  on  this  subject.

I.  Abounding  worship  often  iuplies  aboundino  bin.  This  is  the  case  when  the
worship  is:  1.  Selfish.  More  than  half  the  worship  of  England  is  purely  selfish.
Men  crowd  churches,  attend  to  religious  ceremonies,  and  contribute  to  religious  insti-
tutions purely  with  the  idea  of  avoiding  hell  and  getting  to  a  happier  world  than  this.
They  do  not  serve  God  for  naught.  Selfishness,  which  is  bad  everywhere,  is  never
worse  than  when  engaged  in  religion.  2.  Formal.  When  religion  is  attended  to  as  a
matter  of  form,  when  sentiments  are  expressed  without  conviction,  services  rendered
without  self-sacrifice,  the  insincerity  is  an  Insult  to  Omniscience.  "  God  is  a  Spirit,
and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  Abounding
worship  is  no  proof  of  abounding  virtue  and  abounding  godliness.  Often,  alas  I  the
more  worship  in  a  community,  the  more  corruption.

II.  AtKJunding  worship  often  bpbings  from  aboundino  sin.  It  may  spring  from :
1.  A  desire  to  conceal  sin.  Sin  is  an  ugly  thing;  it  is  hideous  to  the  eye  of  conscience.
Hence  efforts  on  all  hands  to  conceal.  Nations  endeavour  to  conceal  the  terrible
abominations  of  infernal  wars  by  employing  the  ministers  of  religion  in  connection
with  their  fiendish  work.  The  greatest  villains  have  often  sought  to  conceal  their
villanies  by  worship.  2.  A  desire  to  compensate  for  evils.  Great  brewers  build
churches  and  endow  religious  institutions  in  order  to  compensate  in  some  measure  for
the  enormous  evil  connected  with  their  damning  trade.  3.  A  desire  to  appear  good.
The  more  corrupt  a  man  is,  the  stronger  his  desire  to  appear  otherwise ;  the  more  devil
in  a  man,  the  more  anxious  he  is  to  look  like  an  angel.

Conclusion.  Do  not  judge  the  character  of  a  nation  by  the  number  of  its  churches,
the  multitude  of  its  worshippers,  or  the  amount  of  its  coutributionB,  or  efforts  to
proselytize  men  to  its  faith. — D.  T.

Vers.  6 — 11. — QocPs  government  of  the  world  a  chastising  government.  "  And  I  also
have  given  you  cleanness  of  teeth  in  all  your  cities,  and  want  of  bread  in  all  your
places,"  etc.  In  these  verses  the  Almighty  describes  the  various  corrective  measures
which  he  had  employed  for  effecting;  a  moral  reformation  in  the  character  of  the
Israelites.  At  the  end  of  each  chastising  measure  which  he  describes,  he  marks  their
obstinate  impenitence  with  the  expression,  "Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me."  As
if  he  had  said,  "  The  grand  end  of  all  my  dealings  is  to  bring  you  in  sympathy,  heart,
and  life  back  to  me."  The  subject  of  the  verses  is  this — God's  government  of  the  world
is  a  chastising  government ;  and  three  remarks  are  here  suggested.

I.  The  chastisements  employed  are  often  ovbrwhelminqlt  terripio.  1.  He
sometimes  employs  Hind  nature.  Here  \8  famine.  "I  also  have  given  you  cleanness
of  teeth  in  all  your  cities,  and  want  of  bread  in  all  your  places."  The  transgresson
under  the  Law  God  had  threatened  with  famine  (Deut.  xxviii.  48).  The  Divine
government  has  often  employed  famine  as  a  ruthless  and  resistless  messenger  to
chasten  mankind.  In  the  days  of  Elisha  the  demon  wielded  his  black  sceptre  for
seven  long  years  (2  Kings  viii.  1).  The  second  is  drought.  "I  have  withholden  th«
rain  from  you,  when  there  were  yet  three  months  to  the  harvest :  and  I  caused  it  to
rain  upon  one  city,  and  caused  it  not  to  rain  upon  another  city :  one  piece  was  rained
npon,  and  the  piece  whereupon  it  rained  not  withered.  So  two  or  three  cities  wandered
unto  one  city,  to  drink  water ;  but  they  were  not  satisfied."     Rain — ^indispensable  ta


UH.  If.  I— 18.J  THE   BOOK  OF   AMOS.  81


the  life  of  the  world — comes  not  by  accident  or  blind  necessity,  but  by  the  Divine  will.
"He  watereth  the  hills  from  his  chambers."  To  show  that  the  rain  is  entirely  at  the
disposal  of  the  Almighty,  it  came  upon  one  field  and  one  city,  and  not  upon  another.
Hence  the  inhabitants  of  the  places  where  it  rained  not  had  to  go  great  distances  for
water,  and  yet  "  were  not  satisfied."  This  is  a  terrible  chastisement.  The  third  is
blight,  "  I  have  smitten  you  with  blasting  and  mildew :  when  your  gardens,  and  your
vineyards,  and  your  fig  trees,  and  your  olive  trees  increased,  the  palmerworm  devoured
them."  A  malignant  atmosphere  combined  with  devouring  reptiles  to  destroy  the
produce  of  the  land.  The  fourth  is  pestUenee  and  the  sword.  "  I  have  sent  among
you  the  pestilence  after  the  manner  of  Egypt :  your  young  men  have  I  slain  with  the
sword,  and  have  taken  away  your  horses ;  and  I  have  made  the  stink  of  your  camps  to
come  up  unto  your  nostrils."  The  allusion,  perhaps,  is  to  the  pestilence  with  which
God  visited  Egypt  (Exod.  ix.).  The  pestilence  is  Gkid's  destroying  angel.  Thus  by
blind  nature  Q-od  has  often  chastised  mankind.  He  makes  the  stars  in  their  courses
fight  against  Sisera.  Nature  is  a  rod  in  his  chastening  hand ;  and  what  s  rod  it  isl
At  his  pleasure,  by  a  touch,  he  can  wake  tempests  that  shall  shake  the  globe,  earth-
quakes that  shall  engulf  cities,  etc.  Yes,  whatever  materialistic  scientists  may  say,
nature  is  nothing  more  than  a  rod  in  the  hand  of  its  Maker.  The  fifth  is  fire.  "  I
have  overthrown  some  of  you,  as  God  overthrew  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  and  ye  were  as
a  firebrand  plucked  out  of  the  burning."  2.  He  sometimes  employs  human  wickedness.
The  sword  is  mentioned  here.  "  Your  young  men  have  I  slain  with  the  sword."  War,
unlike  famine,  drought,  pestilence,  and  fire,  is  human,  devilish.  It  is  the  work  of
free  agents,  under  the  influence  of  infernal  evil.  But  God  employs  it;  he  does  not
originate  it,  he  does  not  sanction  it,  he  does  not  inspire  it;  but  he  permits  it  and
controls  it  for  purposes  of  chastisement.  Thus  all  things  are  at  the  use  of  his  chastising
government — matter  and  mind,  angels  and  fiends,  heaven  and  hell,

II.  The  chastisements  employed  are  ever  debiqned  fob  moral  bestobation.  After
each  judgment  described  we  have  the  words,  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me,  saith
the  Lord."  "  Yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord."  "  Yet  have  ye  not
returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord."  This  is  the  burden  and  design  of  the  whole.
Note :  1.  Men  are  alienated  from  the  Lord.  They  are  estranged  in  thought,  sympathy,
and  purpose.  Like  the  prodigal,  they  are  in  a  far  country,  away  from  their  Father.  2.
Their  alienation  is  the  cause  of  all  their  misery.  Estrangement  from  God  means
distance,  not  only  from  virtue,  but  from  freedom,  light,  progress,  dignity,  blessedness.
Hence  the  benevolence  of  all  these  chastisements.  They  are  to  restore  souls.  "  Lo  I
all  these  things  worketh  God  oftentimes  with  man,  to  bring  him  back  from  the  pit,
that  he  may  be  enlightened  with  the  light  of  the  living"  ^ob.  xxxiiL  29,  30).  To
every  unconverted  man  God  can  say, "  I  have  chastised  you  in  this  way  and  in  that  way,
on  this  occasion  and  on  that,  but  'yet  have  ye  not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord.

III.  The  chastisements  employed  often  fail  m  theib  qbano  desioit.  "  Yet  have
ye  not  returned  unto  me,  saith  the  Lord."  This  show"  -.'^  the  force  of  human
depravity,  and  (2)  the  force  of  human  freedom.  Almigk  goodness  does  not  force
us  into  goodness.  Almighty  love  does  not  dragoon  us  into  goodness.  He  treats  us  ai
free  agents  and  responsible  beings. — D.  T.

Vers.  12, 13. — Preparation /or  meeting  Qod.  "Therefore  thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,
O  Israel :  and  because  I  will  do  this  unto  thee,  prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  0  Israel,"  etc.
"All  the  means  that  had  been  employed  to  reform  the  Israelites  having  proved
ineffectual,  they  are  here  summoned  to  prepare  for  the  final  judgment,  which  was  to
put  an  end  to  their  national  existence.  To  this  judgment  reference  is  emphatically
made  in  the  terms  ns,  'thus;*  and  nm,  'this.'  There  is  a  brief  resumption  of  the
sentence  delivered  in  vers.  2  and  3."    We  raise  three  observations  from  these  words.

I.  Man  must  have  a  consoioits  meetino  with  God.  "Prepare  to  meet  thy
God."  "  I  shall  see  God,"  says  Job :  "  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  not  another."
Yes,  we  shall  all  see  Qod.  All  men  ought  ever  and  everywhere  to  see  him,  for  he  is
the  great  Object  in  the  horizon,  nearer  to  them  infinitely  than  aught  besides.  But
they  do  not.  Their  spiritual  eye  is  so  closed  that  they  see  him  not;  they  are  utterly
unconscious  of  his  presence.  But  see  him  they  must  one  day.  All  must  be  brought
into  conscious  contact  with  him,  and  in  his  presence  they  will  feel  the  greatest  things

AMOft  9


82


TUE   BOOK   OF  AMOB.


[oh.  t.  1—27.


In  the  universe  melt  into  nothing.  The  atheist  who  denies  his  existence  shall  see  God ;
the  worldling  who  ignores  his  existence  shall  see  God  j  the  theologian  who  misrepre-
sents his  existence  shall  see  God.     We  must  all  see  God.

II.  This  conscious  meeting  with  God  requires  on  cub  part  frbfabation.  1.
To  meet  him,  reconciliation  is  needed.  Practically  we  are  at  enmity  with  him.  How
shall  an  enemy  stand  in  his  presence?  Who  does  not  feel  uneasy  and  even  distressed
when  he  confronts  a  man  he  hates,  although  the  man  may  have  so  disposition  and  no
power  whatever  to  injure  him?  How  will  the  soul  with  enmity  in  its  heart  then
confront  him?  "I  beseech  you  then  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled  to  God."  2.
To  meet  him,  moral  purity  is  necessary.  How  will  a  consciously  corrupt  soul  feel  in
the  presence  of  absolute  holiness  ?  How  are  the  flames  of  hell  kindled  ?  By  the  rayi
of  Divine  holiness  falling  on  corrupt  spirits.

"  Eternal  Light,  eternal  Light,
How  pure  the  soul  miut  be,
When,  placed  within  thy  searching  sight,
It  Bhiinks  not,  but  with  calm  delight
Can-  live  and  look  on  thee  I "

IIL  The  peooedubb  or  God  is  an  argument  fob  this  pbepabation.  1.  His
procedure  is  terribly  Judicial.  "Therefore  thus  will  I  do  unto  thee,  0  Israel:  and
because  I  will  do  this  unto  thee,  prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  O  Israel."  He  was
approaching  the  sinner  in  judgment,  moving  towards  him  judicially.  He  was  coming
towards  the  Israelites  as  an  Avenger.  And  so  he  is  ever  coming  towards  wicked  men.
Prepare,  therefore,  to  meet  him.  He  is  coming  as  a  Judge — slowly  it  may  be,  but  surely
and  terribly.  2.  His  procedure  is  overwhelmingly  grand.  "  Lo,  he  that  formeth  the
mountains,  and  createth  the  wind,  and  declareth  unto  man  what  is  his  thought,  that
maketh  the  morning  darkness,  and  treadeth  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth.  The
Lord,  The  God  of  hosts,  is  his  Name."  This  magnificent  description  of  Jehovah  is  given
in  order  to  urge  the  call  to  preparation.

Conclusion.  The  one  mighty,  loud,  unceasing  voice  of  God  to  man  through  all
nature,  history,  and  special  revelation  is,  "  Prepare  to  meet  thy  Chid."— D.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTBB  V.


Vei.  1— oh.  vi.  14.— §  3.  Third  addrett :  the
prophet  nttera  a  lamentaiion  over  the  faU  of
I$rad.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  He  calls  her  to  repent-
ance, while  be  shows  wherein  she  has  de-
clined from  the  right  way.  To  make  this
plain,  he  contrasts  God's  power  and  majesty
with  the  people's  iniquity,  instances  of
which  he  gives  (vers,  i — 12).  The  only
condition  of  safety  ii  amendment  (vers.  13 —
IS) ;  and  as  they  refuse  to  reform,  they  shall
hare  cause  to  lament  (vers.  16, 17).  This
threat  is  enforced  by  the  two  emphatic
"woes'*  that  follow,  the  first  of  which
demonstrates  the  baselessness  of  their  trust
in  their  covenant  relation  to  God  (vers.  18 —
27) ;  the  leoond  denounces  the  careless  lives
of  the  chiefs,  who,  revelling  in  luxury,  be-
lieved not  in  the  coming  judgment  (oh.  vi-
1 — 6).  Therefore  they  shall  go  into  captivity,
and  the  kingdom  shall  be  utterly  overthron-n
(ven.  7 — 11),  because  they  act  iniqnitously
and  are  lalf-oonfident  (vers.  12 — H).


Ver.  1. — Hear  ye  this  word.  To  show  the
certainty  of  the  judgment  and  his  own  feel-
ing about  it,  the  prophet  utters  his  prophecy
in  the  form  of  a  dirge  (hinah,  2  Sam.  i.  17 ;
2  Chron.  xxxv.  25).  Which  I  take  np
against  you ;  or,  which  I  raise  over  you,  aa
if  the  end  had  come.  0  honse  of  Israel;
in  the  vocative.  The  Vulgate  has,  Domut
lirael  ceddit ;  so  the  LXX.  But  the  pre-
sent Hebrew  text  is  most  suitable,  making
the  dirge  begin  at  ver.  2.  The  ten  tribes
are  addressed  as  in  ver.  6.

Ver.  2.— The  virgin  of  Israel;  i.e.  the
virgin  Israel ;  so  called,  not  as  having  been
pure  and  faithful  to  God,  but  as  tenderly
treated  and  guarded  from  enemies  (comp.
Isa.  xxiii.  12;  xlvii.  1;  Jer.  xiv.  17).  It
fallen  (comp.  2  Sam.  i.  19);  she  shall  no
more  rise.  This  is  apparently  a  oontradio-
tion  to  the  promise  of  restoration  elsewhere
expressed,  but  is  to  be  explained  either  as
referring  exclusively  to  the  ten  tribes,  very
few  of  whom  returned  from  exile,  and  to  the
kingdom  of  Israel,  which  was  never  re-
established; or,  as  Pseudo-Buflnus  sayi,
"  Ita  debemuB  aoeipere,  quod  lugentis  affeotn
oumulatius  eestimavit  illata  disorimina,
sioque  funditui  appellaase  deletos,  quos  ei


OH.  T.  1—27.]


THK    BOOK    OF   AMOS.


83


majon  yideret  parte  contritos."  Forsaken
upon  her  land;  better,  she  thaU  be  dathed
upon  her  own  land;  her  own  soil  shall  wit-
ness her  ruin — that  soil  which  was  ''  virgin,"
unconquered,  and  her  own  possession.

Ver.  3. — ^The  vindication  of  the  prophet's
lament.  The  city  that  went  out  by  a  thou-
sand, Septuagint  and  Vulgate, "  from  which
went  forth  thousands,"  or,  "  a  thousand ; "
i.e.  which  could  send  out  a  thousand  warriors
to  the  flght.  In  such  a  city  only  a  tenth  of
the  inhabitants  shall  remain ;  and  this  shall
happen  to  small  cities  as  well  as  great.

Ver.  4. — The  more  formal  proof  that  Israel
has  merited  her  punishment  here  begins.
In  calling  her  to  repentance  the  prophet
contrasts  God's  requirements  with  her  actual
conduct.  Seek  ye  me,  and  ye  shall  live.
Two  imperatives :  "  Seek  me,  and  (so)  live ; "
duty  and  its  reward.  "  Seek  me  in  the
appointed  way,  and  ye  shall  be  saved  from
destruction  "  (comp.  Gen,  xlii.  18).

Ver.  5. — Bethel- .  .  .  GilgaL  The  scenes
of  idolatrous  worship,  where  was  no  true
seeking  of  God  (see  note  on  ch.  ir.  4).
Seersheha.  A  spot  about  fifty  miles  south-
south-west  of  Jerusalem,  the  site  of  which
has  never  been  lost,  and  is  marked  to  this
day  by  seven  much-frequented  wells.  A«
being  one  of  the  holy  places  celebrated  in
the  history  of  the  patriarchs  (Gen.  xxi.  31,
83 ;  zxvi.  23,  etc. ;  xlvi.  1),  it  bad  l^ecome  a
shrine  of  idolatrous  worship,  to  which  the
Israelites  resorted,  though  it  lay  far  out  of
their  territory  (comp.  ch.  viii.  14),  Oilgal
shall  surely  go  into  captivity.  There  is  in
the  Hebrew  a  play  on  the  words  here  and
in  the  fuUowing  clause  (Hag-gilgal  gahh
yigleh),  which  commentators  have  paralleled
with  such  expressions  as.  Capita  capietur,
Cremona  cremabitur,  Paris  pA-ira,  "  London
is  undone."  Or,  taking  Joshua's  explanation
of  the  name,  we  may  say, "  Boll-town  shall  be
tolled  away."  Bethel  shall  come  to  nought.
As  Bethel,  "  House  of  God,"  had  become
Bethaven,  "  House  of  vanity  "  (see  Hos.  iv.
15),  as  being  the  temple  of  an  idol  (comp.
1  Cor.  viii.  4),  so  the  prophet,  with  allusion
to  this,  says  that  "Bethel  shall  become
aven" — vanity,  nothingness,  itself.  No
mention  is  made  of  the  fate  of  Beersheba,
because  Amos  has  in  view  only  the  ten
tribes,  and  the  destiny  of  places  beyond
their  territory  is  not  here  the  object  of  hii
prediction ;  and  indeed,  when  Israel  was
ruined,  Beersheba  escaped  unharmed,

Ver.  6. — Break  out  like  fire.  God  is  called
"  a  consuming  fire  "  (Dent.  iv.  24 ;  Heb,  xii.
29 ;  comp.  Jer.  iv.  4).  And  devour  it ;  Sep-
tuagint,  'Onus  /i^  kvaKi/uliji  i>s  nSp  i  oJkos
'la<rii<^,  Kal  KoToc/xivp  alirSy,  "  Lest  the  house
ot  Joseph  blaze  as  fire,  and  he  devour
him ; "  Vulgate,  JVe  forte  eomburatur  tri
ignii  d(mu$  Joseph,  et  devordhtt.      But   it


ia  best  to  take  the  last  member  of  the  sen-
tence thus:  "and  it  (the  fire)  devour."
The  house  of  Joseph,  Ephraim,  (.e.  the
kingdom  of  Israel,  of  which  Ephraim  was
the  distinguishing  tribe.  In  Bethel ;  or,  for
Bethel.  The  LXX.,  paraphrasing,  has,  t^
oiKef  'lirpaiih,  "  for  the  house  of  Israel."

Ver.  7. — "The  prophet  brings  out  the  con-
trast between  Israel's  moral  corruption  and
God's  omnipotence.  Ye  who  torn  judgment
to  wormwood,  Aa  Jerome  puts  it, "  Conver-
terunt  dulcedinem  judicii  in  absinthii  ama-
ritudinem,"  "  They  turned  the  sweetness  of
judgment  into  the  bitterness  of  absinth"
(comp,  ch.  vi.  12).  Who  make  judgment
the  occasion  of  the  bitterest  injustice.  There
is  no  syntactical  connection  between  this
verse  and  the  last,  but  virtually  we  may
append  it  to  "seek  the  Lord."  It  would
sound  in  people's  ears  as  a  reminiscence
of  Dent.  zxix.  18,  20,  The  LXX.  reads,
i  iroLay  fit  Srlios  xpliia,  "  that  executeth
judgment  in  the  height,"  referring  the  sen-
tence to  the  Lord,  or  else  taking  laanah,
"  wormwood,"  in  a  metaphorical  sense,  at
elsewhere  they  translate  it  by  cu/iyKii,  iriKpia,
oSivri  (Dent.  xxix.  18;  Prov.  v.  4;  Jer.  ix.
15;  xxiii.  15).  The  name  "wormwood"  is
applied  to  all  the  plants  of  the  genus  that
grew  in  Palestine  the  taste  of  which  was
proverbially  bitter.  And  leave  off  righteous-
ness in  the  earth ;  rather,  east  down
righieousnese  to  the  earth  (as  Isa,  xxviii.  2),
despis*  it  and  trample  it  underfoot  (comp.
Dan.  viii.  12).  This  is  Israel's  practice;
and  yet  God,  as  the  next  verse  shows,  is
almighty,  and  has  power  to  punish.  Sight-
eoutneit  includes  all  transactions  between
man  and  man.  The  LXX.  (stUl  referring
the  subject  to  the  Lord),  xal  biKatoirvvijv  cis
yrjv  le-iiKei/,  "  and  he  established  righteous-
ness on  earth."

Ver.  8. — Striking  instances  are  given  of
God's  creative  power  and  omnipotence.  Seek
him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars.  "Seek
him"  is  not  in  the  Hebrew.  "He  that
maketh,"  etc.,  is  in  direct  antithesis  to  "  ye
who  turn,"  etc.  (ver.  7).  The  seven  stars;
Hebrew,  kimah,  "the  heap,"  the  constella-
tion of  the  Pleiades  (Job  ix.  9  ;  xxxviii.  31).
The  Septuagint  here  has,  6  ttolSv  irivra,  but
in  Job  has  vK^iis.  The  Vulgate  gives,  faei-
emtem  Arcturum.  Symmachus  and  Theodo-
tion  give  vKeMa  in  the  present  passage.
The  identification  of  this  term  is  discussed
in  the  'Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  ii.  891.
The  observation  of  this  most  remarkable
cluster  among  the  heavenly  bodies  would  be
natural  to  the  pastoral  life  of  Amos.  And
Orion  ;  Hebrew,  IcetU,  "  foolish,"  a  rebel,
the  name  being  applied  to  Nimrod,  whose
representation  was  found  by  the  Easterns
in  this  constellation.  Some  render  hetU,
"  gate ; "  others  connect  it  with  the  Arable


84


THE   BOOK   OF  AM08.


[cH.  T.  1—27.


$6hail,  equivalent  to  Siiini,  or  Oanopas.
The  Septuagint  here  has,  koI  ^cTairKeuct^aii',
"  and  onanging,"  which  looks  as  if  the  trans-
lator was  not  familiar  with  the  Hebrew  word,
and  aabstituted  something  in  its  place.  .  It
reads  'npiavos  in  Job  zxxviii.  31.  Tnrneth
the  shadow  ot  death  into  the  morning.
"  The  shadow  of  death,"  the  depth  of  dark-
ness. This  and  the  following  clause  do  not
simply  state  that  the  regular  interchange
of  day  and  night  is  in  God's  hands,  but
rather  notify  that  God  is  a  moral  GoverBor
of  the  world.  He  saves  men  from  (the
utmost  dangers,  from  the  darkness  of  sin
and  from  the  night  of  ignorance;  and,  on
the  other  hand,  be  sends  calamity  on  those
that  offend  his  Law  (comp.  oh.  iv.  13),
Uaketh  the  day  dark  with  night ;  literally,
as  the  Septuagint,  rifiipav  eh  cukto  <rvaKo-
■rdCaiv,  "daikeneth  day  into  night."  That
calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  etc  As
judgments  are  the  prophet's  theme,  this
expression  cannot  be  an  intimation  of  Hie
working  of  the  natural  law  by  which  the
moisture  taken  up  from  the  sea  as  cloud
returns  upon  the  earth  as  rain  (comp.  ch.
iz.  6).  Bather  it  is  an  allusion  to  the  Flood
and  similar  catastrophes,  which  are  proofs
of  God's  judicial  government  of  the  uni-
verse, when  "  he  maketh  the  creature  his
weapon  for  the  revenge  of  his  enemies"
(Wlsd.  V.  17).  The  Lord  is  his  Name.
Jehovah,  the  self-existent  God,  doeth  all
these  marvellous  things,  and  men  presume  to
scout  his  Law  and  think  to  be  unpunished
(oh,  iv.  13).

Ver.  9. — That  strengtheneth,  etc.  Trans-
late, Thai  caueeth  destruction  to  flash  forth
upon  the  $tr<Sng,  so  that  destruction  cometh
upon  the  fortress.  Tiie  idea  is  that  God,  as
with  a  lightning-flash,  smites  the  strongest
man,  and  no  fortress  is  a  refuge  from
him.  Septuagint,  'O  Suu/iiSv  avvTpiiifi.'bi)  iirX
\ax<iv,  "  Who  divideth  destmction  unto
•trength.'"  The  Vulgate,  taking  the  Hebrew
verb  \)alag  in  the  sense  of  lighting  up  the
countenance,  renders.  Qui  sxAridei  vaxtitattm
super  rohustum,  which  means  that  the  Lord
smiles  while  he  brings  desolation  on  the
mighty — a  figurative  expression  denoting
his  anger  at  man's  pride,  and  the  ease  with
which  he  punishes.  We  may  add  that
Bosenmiiller  agrees  with  the  Authorized
Version  in  the  first  clause :  "Who  strength-
eneth the  weak  against  the  strong,  and
giveth  the  plunderers  power  over  the  for-
tresses of  the  strong."

Vers.  10— 12.— The  prophet  gives  further
Initanoes  of  the  people's  corruption.

Ver.  10.— Him  that  rehuketh  in  the  gate
(Isa.  xxix.  21).  The  gate  of  Eastern  cities
was  the  place  of  public  resort  (Prov.  i.  21),
either  for  business  (Deut.  ixv.  7),  or  the  ad-


ministration of  justice  (2  Sam.  xv.  2),  or  for
gossip.  So  "  he  that  rehuketh  in  the  gate  "
may  be  a  judge,  or  a  chief,  or  a  prophet
(Jer.  xvii.  19 ;  ilx.  2),  It  seems  better  to
take  the  words  thus  than  to  join  "  in  the
gate  "  to  "  they  hate,"  with  the  meaning  that
those  who  resort  to  the  gate — ^kings,  chiefs
judges — hate  the  prophet's  reproof,  for  the
following  verses  show  tljat  Amos  is  referring
chiefly  to  judicial  proceedings,  and  not  to
his  own  mission.  Uprightly;  literally,
perfectly;  Vulgate,  perfecte;  i.e.  without
reserve,  keeping  nothing  back.

Ver.  11. — Therefore.  Because  ye  refuse
reproof,  and  oppress  the  poor.  Tour  tread-
ing is  npon  the  poor ;  ye  trample  upon.  The
Hebrew  word  6o«/te«  ia  found  nowhere  else,
and  is  variously  explained.  Septuagint,
KareKoMKtCoy,  "  smote  with  the  fists ;  "  so
the  Syriao ;  Vulgate,  diripiebatis,  with
which  the  Chaldee  agrees.  Keil,  Sohegg,
and  most  modern  conmientators  explain  the
word,  by  a  slight  dialectical  variation,  as
(Mjuivaleut  to  coneulcare.  Burdens  of  wheat ;
rather,  tribute,  exactions  of  wheat,  or  pre-
sents like  enforced  "  benevolences."  They
exacted  such  gifts  before  they  would  do
justice  to  the  poor.  Or  it  may  refer  to
interest  for  money  or  victuals  lent,  which
took  the  form  of  presents  in  order  to
evade  the  Law  (Excd.  xxii.  25  ;  Ley.  xxv.
37;  Deut.  xxiii.  19).  Septuagint,  Sapa
EK\cKT(t:  Vulgate,  priedam  eUctam,  the
Hebrew  word  bar  meaning  either  "  wheat "
or  "  elect."  Hewn  stone.  Houses  thus  built
were  a  mark  of  luxury  and  wealth,  sun-
dried  brick  being  the  usual  material  em-
ployed (comp.  Isa.  ix.  10 ;  Ezek.  xii.  5,  7).
Ye  shall  not  dwell  in  them.  This  is  the
punishment  of  their  evil  doings,  according
to  the  threat  in  Deut.  xxviii.  SO,  89.  The
people  shall  bo  t«uiished  and  the  land
desolated  (Micah  vL  15;  Zeph.  i.  13).

Ver.  12. — Your  punishmont  is  richly  de-
•erved,  for  "I  know  how  many  are  your
transgressions  and  how  mighty  are  your
sins,"  especially,  as  it  follows,  your  sins  of
oppression  and  injustice.  They  afflict  the
just.  The  constrijction  is  continuous:
"afflicters  of  the  just."  flbstesyusd' (Vul-
gate); KaTairaToGi/T6s  SiKotoi',  "trampling
down  the  just"  (Septuagint);  comp.  Wisd.
ii.  12—15.  They  take  a  bribe.  The  trans-
lation of  Icopher  as  "  bribe "  is  justified,
perhaps,  by  1  Sam.  xii.  8 ;  but  the  woid  is
elsewhere  used  for  "  ransom,"  redemption-
money  paid  to  escape  the  consequences  of
crime  (Prov.  vi.  35),  in  direct  opposition  to
the  Law  in  Numb.  xxxv.  31,  which  forbade
any  ransom  to  be  taken  for  the  life  of  a
murderer.  The  Septuagint  has,  Aa{Uj3(ii«i'Tf  v
iXKiyiiora,  "  taking  wares ;  "  the  Vulgate
(with  which  the  Syriac  agrees),  aecipientei
munus.    Turn  aside  the  poor  in  the  gate  from


CH.  ▼.  1 — 27.]


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOa


theii  right;  or,  hoie  down  the  needy  in  the  gate,
i.e.  in  the  place  of  judgment  (see  note  on  ver.
10).  Vulgate,  pauperet  deprimentee  in  porta  ;
Septuagint,  vevTjras  kv  ir^Xais  ^K/rXd'ovref,
"  turning  aside  the  poor  in  the  gates."  The
crime  specified  is  tliat  of  wresting  judgment
in  the  case  of  the  poor,  or  not  giving  the
poor  man  justice  unless  he  could  pay  for  it
(com  p.  Exod.  xxiii.  6;  Deut.  xvi.  19).

Ver.  13. — Even  while  he  speaks,  the  pro-
phet feels  that  his  reproof  is  useless  (comp.
Jer.  vii.  27,  etc. ;  Hos.  iv.  1,  17).  ti  that
time ;  at  tueh  a  time  as  this,  the  man  who
acts  wisely  holds  his  peace,  because  it  is  a
time  of  moral  corruption  and  of  personal
danger.  Bat  the  prophet  cannot  restrain
his  call  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxiii.  3,  etc.).  In
Mioah  ii.  8  the  "evil  time"  ia  one  of
calamity.

Ver.  14. — ^He  repeats  his  loving  summons
to  repentance,  as  in  vers.  4,  6,  showing  that
their  only  hope  of  safety  lay  in  amendment
of  life  (comp.  Zeph.  ii.  3).  Seek  good,  and
not  eviL  tJse  that  diligence  and  zeal  in
pursuing  what  is  good  which  you  have
hitherto  shown  in  the  pursuit  of  evil.  The
Lord,  the  God  of  hosts,  shall  he  with  yon,
as  ye  have  spoken;  or,  at  ye  say.  The
Israelites  fancied  that,  owing  to  their
covenant  relation  to  Ood,  he  would  be
always  with  them  and  ready  to  help  them
under  any  circumstances.  Their  prosperity
under  Jeroboam  II.,  as  Oalmet  remarks,
seemed  an  argument  in  their  favour,  proving
that  Ood  blessed  them,  and  that  they  had
no  cause  for  fear  (comp.  Jer.  vii.  4,  etc. ;
Micah  iii.  11;  Matt.  iii.  9;  John  viii  39).
But  really  God's  help  and  favour  were  con-
ditioned by  their  obedience.

Ver.  15. — Reverse  your  former  conduct,
undo  what  ye  have  done  (ver.  10).  This
verse  emphasizes  the  preceding ;  hating  and
loving  are  more  real  and  hearty  than  mere
seeking.  The  LXX.  makes  this  clause  to
be  what  the  people  said,  *Ov  rpiiroy  tlirart,
Ite/xiaiiicaiiti'  rh  irovnpli,  Kal  iiyair^aaiiei'  ret
Ka\i,  "  As  ye  said,  We  have  hated  evil,  and
loved  good."  Establish  judgment  Main-
tain justice  in  your,  tribunals  (in  contrast
to  ver.  7);  then  it  may  be  that  the  Lord
will  have  mercy  on  yon  or  some  of  you.
The  remnant  of  Joseph;  implying  that
only  a  few  of  them  will  be  saved  after  this
heavy  chastisement,  which  points  to  the
final  ruin  of  their  city  and  nation.  The
prophet  speaks  of  the  "  remnant  of  Joseph  "
instead  of  Ephraim,  to  remind  them  of  their
forefather,  who  received  the  patriarchal
blessing  of  Jacob,  for  whose  sake  this  rem-
nant should  be  spared  (comp.  Isa.  vi.  13;
X.  21,  etc. ;  Joel  ii  S2 ;  Bom.  xi.  4,  etc).

Vers.  16,  17.— The  retribution  for  their
incorrigible   iniquity  ia   here   announced.


For  "  they  that  would  not  be  reformed  by
that  correction,  wherein  he  dallied  with
them,  shall  feel  •  judgment  worthy  of  God"
(Wifld.  xii.  26).

Ver.  16. — Therefore.  The  prophet  retumi
to  what  was  said  in  ver.  13  about  the  use-
lessness  of  reproof;  vers,  14  and  15  being  a
kind  of  parenthetical  exhortation  which  his
love  for  his  nation  forced  from  him.  "  Jeho-
vah, the  God  of  hosts,  the  Lord,"  Adonai,
saith  what  follows,  these  solemn  titles  being
used  to  add  solemnity,  certainty,  and  weight
to  the  announcement  Wailbig ;  mitped,
"the  death-wail."  Streeti;  broad  places;
irKareiais  (Septuagint)  ;  plateis  (Vulgate).
Highways ;_ the  narrower  streets;  iSois  (Sep-
tuagint) ;  tn  cunotis  quasforis  sunt  (Vulgate).
Everywhere  in  town  and  country  shall  the
wail  be  heard.  Alas!  alasl  hot  hot  Thii
is  the  death-wail  (comp.  Jer.  xxii.  18),  which
should  sound  abroad  when  Samaria  was
besieged  and  taken.  They  shall  call  the
husbandman  to  mourning.  The  husband-
man shall  be  called  from  his  labour  in  the
fields  to  mourn  for  a  calamity  in  his  house.
Fusey  thinks  the  mourning  is  for  his  ocoa<
pation  gone,  his  tillage  now  only  furnishing
food  for  the  enemy ;  but  the  context  involve!
the  notion  of  death.  And  snoh  as  are  skil-
fnl  of  lamentation  to  wailing;  literally,
proclaim  wailing  to  such,  etc.  These  are
the  hired  mourners,  both  male  and  female,
who  sang  mournful  songs  at  deaths  (comp.
2  Ohron.  xxxv.  25;  Jer.  ix.  17;  Matt  ix.
23).

Ver.  17, — ^Vineyards,  The  place  of  mirth
and  gladness,  that,  says  St  Jerome,  "  nbi
quondam  fuit  materia  leetitisa,  sit  origo
laorymamm"  (Isa.  ivi,  10).  I  will  pass
through  thee.  A  terrible  echo  of  the  last
plague  of  Egypt  (Exod.  xii.  12),  when  God
will  not  "  pass  over  "  thee  as  he  did  then,
but  treat  thee  as  Egypt,  and  "  pass  through  "
to  smite  and  punish  (Nah,  i,  12).

Vers.  18 — 27. — The  prophet  enforces  the
threat  by  denouncing  woe  on  those  that  trust
to  their  covenant  relation  to  God,  expecting
the  day  when  he  would  punish  the  heathen
for  their  aakes,  and  thinking  that  external,
heartless  worship  was  acceptable  to  him.

Ver,  18. — The  day  of  the  lord.  Any  crisis
in  the  nation's  history  is  so  called,  when  God
interposes  to  punish  and  correct.  To  oul
minds  it  looks  forward  to  the  final  judg-
ment. It  is  often  mentioned  by  the  prophets
(fi.g.  laa.  ii,  12;  xiii,  6,  9;  Joel  ii.  1,  11;
iii.  18 ;  Zeph.  i.  7, 14)  as  a  time  when  the
heathen  should  be  judged,  all  the  enemies
of  Israel  defeated,  and  when  Israel  herself
was  exalted  to  the  highest  pitch  of  pros-
perity and  dominion.    Without  any  regard


THE   BOOK  OP  AMOS.


[oh.  t.  1—27.


to  tho  moral  condition  affixed  to  the  realiza-
tion of  tbese  expectationg  (see  Joel  ii.  32),
the  people  "  desired  "  the  appearance  of  this
day,  thus  foolishly  confirming  themselves  in
their  sinful  life  and  false  security.  Some
think  scoffers  are  intended,  hut  the  context
shows  that  the  persons  signified  are  sincere
but  mistaken  believers  in  the  safety  of
Israel's  covenant  position.  To  what  end  is
it  for  you  t  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  darkness ;
Why  would  ye  have  the  day  of  the  Lord  f  It
ti  darkneis.  Why  do  ye,  such  as  ye  are,
want  this  day  to  come  ?  Ye  know  not  what
ye  ask.  It  will  be  the  very  contrary  to
your  expectations ;  It  will  be  darkness,  and
not  light,  tribulation  and  misery,  not  joy
and  triumph  for  you  (comp.  Mioah  vii.  8).

Ver.  19. — Amos  explains  the  dangers  of
this  jndgment-day  by  illustrations  drawn
from  pastoral  life,  equivalent  to  the  rushing
from  Charybdis  into  Scylla.  Every  place
is  full  of  danger — the  open  country,  the
shelter  of  the  hoose.  Jerome  applies  the
passage  to  tli  e  fate  of  the  kingdom  in  general :
"  Fugientlbus  vobis  a  facie  Nabuohodonosor
leonis  occurrent  Medi,  Persse,  demum  An-
tiochns  Epiphanes,  qui  moretur  in  templo
et  voB  instar  colubrl  mordeat,  nequaquam
foris  in  Baby  lone,  sed  intra  terminos  terras
sanctse."

Ver.  20.— Tlie  character  of  the  day  of  the
Lord  is  enforced  with  reiterated  earnestness
(ver.  18)  by  an  appeal  to  the  conscience  of
the  hearers.  Do  you  not  feel  in  your  inmost
hearts  that  in  the  case  of  such  guilt  as  yours
the  Lord  can  visit  but  to  punish?

Ver.  21. — Outward,  formal  worship  will
not  avert  the  threatened  danger  or  secure
the  favour  of  God  in  the  day  of  visitation.
Your  feast  days  (chaggim) ;  your  feasts  ;  your
counterfeit  worship,  the  worship  of  the  true
God  under  an  idol  symbol  (compare  God's
repudiation  of  merely  formal  worship  in
Isa.  i.  11 — 15).  I  will  not  smell;  ou  /<),
oa^pavBai  ivaias  (Septuagint).  No  sweet
savour  ascends  to  God  from  such  sacrifices ;
so  the  phrase  is  equivalent  to  "  I  will  not
accept,"  "  I  will  take  no  delight  in  "  (comp.
Gen.  viii.  21;  Exod.  xxix.  18;  Lev.  xxvi.
31).  Solemn  assemblies ;  iravityipeiriy  (Sep-
tuagint) ;  atsaroth ;  the  convocations  for  the
keeping  of  the  great  festivals.

Ver.  22. — They  maintained  the  formal
ritual  of  the  Mosaic  worship  in  their  idola-
try. The  various  offerings  are  here  enume-
rated. Burnt  offerings;  dfi.oKavTii/iaTa(Exoi.
xxix.  38,  4'2  ;  Numb,  xxviii.  9—11).  Meat
offerings ;  Sva-ias  (Septuagint)  :  raunera
(Vulgate);  Exod.  xxix.  40,  4) ;  Le^.  u.  l.
Feaoe  offerings  of  your  fat  beasts^  itutji-
plovi  tTuptwiias  v/iuf,  "your  gran>l  peace
offerings "  (Septuagint) ;  tiota  pfinguiwn
veitrorum  (Vulgate) ;  Lev.  iii.  I,  «tc

Ver.  2S.— The  noiss  of  thy  sonni.     Theii


psalms  and  hymns  of  praise  wet«  mere  noise
in  God's  ear,  and  wearied  him  (Isa.  i.  11 ;
xxiv.  8;  Ezek.  xxvi.  18).  Viols  (oh.  vi.  5);
hpyivav  (Septuagint).  The  nefceZ,  usually
translated  "psaltery,"  was  a  kind  of  liarp.
Josephus  ('Ant,,'  vii.  12.  8)  describes  it  as
having  twelve  strings,  played  by  the  fingers.
Music,  both  instrumental  and  vocal,  was
used  in  the  temple-worship  (see  1  Chron.
xvi.  42 ;  xxiii.  5  ;  and  xxv.).

Ver.  24. — But  let  judgment  run  down  as
waters ;  let  judgment  roll  on  ;  Septuagint,
KaJ  KuXiirS^ireToi  i>s  SSap  Kpl/ia,  '.'  and  judg-
ment shall  roll  along  as  water ;  "  Et  revela-
hitur  quasi  aqua  judicium  (Vulgate).  This
verse  has  been  explained  in  difterent  ways.
Hitzig,  Keil,  with  many  ancient  cnmmenta-
tors,  find  in  it  a  threat  of  chastiseuiaut,  "  the
flooding  of  the  land  with  judgment  anr^  the
punitive  righteousness  of  God."  Pusey,  Pro-
fessor Gandell,  and  others  consider  it  to  be  a
call  to  amendment.  "  He  bids  them  let  judg-
ment, which  had  hitherto  been  perverted  in
its  course,  roll  on  like  a  mighty  tide  of  waters,
sweeping  before  it  all  hindrances,"  filling
the  whole  land  with  righteousness.  Schegg
makes  it  to  be  a  promise  of  the  itoming  of
the  day  of  the  Lord,  that  is,  the  revelation
of  Messiah.  But  such  a  promise  in  this
position  is  very  forced  and  unnatural.  The
second  interpretation  seems  most  suitable.
In  the  midst  of  the  denunciation  of  men's
formal  worship,  the  prophet  announces  their
duty  in  the  present  crisis,  attention  to  which
could  alone  win  God's  favour.  Judgment
and  righteousness,  long  neglected  and  for-
gotten, should  permeate  the  land  like  re-
freshing streams  of  water — a  simile  of  special
signification  to  an  inhabitant  of  an  Eastern
country,  where  the  neighbourhood  of  a
perennial  stream  was  as  delightful  as  it  was
unusual.  Uighty  (ethan) ;  &$aTos, "  impass-
able "  (Septuagint) ;  fortis  (Vulgate).  The
word  may  mean  "  strong,"  or  "  perennial."
"  Whence  the  seventh  month,  just  before  the
early  rain,  was  called  the  month  Ethanim,
i.e.  the  month  of  the  perennial  streams,  when
they  alone  flowed  "  (Pusey).

Ver.  25. — Ye  have  always  been  idolaters,
corrupters  of  pure  worship.  Your  service  in
the  wilderness,  when  you  were  little  exposed
to  external  influence,  was  no  more  true  and
faitliful  than  that  which  you  offer  now;
that  was  as  unacceptable  as  this.  Have  ye
offered  unto  me  1  Did  ye  offer  unto  me  f  The
answer  expected  is  "  No ; "  i.e.  you  did  not
so  really,  because  your  worship  was  mixed
with  falsehood,  and  was  not  offered  simply
and  genuinely  to  me.  It  is  certain,  too,  that
during  the  sojourn  in  the  wilderness  sacri-
ficial worship  fell  greatly  into  desuetude,
as  we  know  that  the  rite  of  circumcision
was  suspended  (Josh,  v.  5 — 7),  the  Passover
was  not  duly  celebrated,  and  Joshua  urged


OH.  T.  1—27.]


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOa


87


the  people  to  pnt  away  the  stnnge  gods
from  among  them  (zxiv.  23).  Moses,  too,
doubtless  with  a  yiew  to  existing  practices,
wamsthem  against  worshipping  the  heavenly
bodies  (Deut.  iv  19),  and  offering  sacrifice
unto  devils  («etnro),  "  after  whom  they  had
gone  a-whoring  "  (Lev.  ivli.  7).  The  pro-
phets, too,  allude  to  the  idolatry  practised
in  the  desert  (see  Ezek.  ix.  7 — 26 ;  Hos.  ix.
10).  But  to  argue  (as  some  neologians  do)
from  this  passage  of  Amos  that  the  Israelites
during  those  forty  years  knew  nothing  of
Jehovah,  or  that  Amos  himself  denies  that
they  offered  him  any  worship,  is  absurd,
■eemg  tliat  the  prophet  presupposes  the
fact,  and  blames  them  for  corrupting  the
Divine  service  and  mingling  the  prescribed
and  enacted  ritual  with  idolatrous  accre-
tions. Sacrifices;  slain,  bloody  sacrifices.
Offerings ;  bloodless  sacrifices,  meal  offerings,
Ver.  26. — This  verse  has  occasioned  great
perplexity  to  commentators.  The  connection
with  the  context,  the  meaning  of  some  of
the  terms,  and  whether  the  reference  is  to

EEkst,  present,  or  future,  are  questions  which
ave  roused  much  controversy.  We  need
not  here  recapitulate  the  various  opinions
which  have  been  held.  It  will  be  sufficient
to  state  what  seems  to  be  the  simplest  and
most  probable  explanation  of  the  passage.
But  we  must  not  omit  to  mention  first  the
explanation  adopted  by  Ewald,  Schrader,
Farrar,  Konig,  and  others,  viz.  that  this
verse  refers  to  the  punitive  deportation
which  was  to  be  the  people's  lot,  when  they
should  take  their  shrines  and  images  with
them  into  captivity.  "So  shall  ye  take
(into  exile)  Sakkuth  your  king,"  etc.  But
the  punishment  is  foretold  in  ver.  27;  and
this  verse  contrasts  their  idol-worship  with
the  neglected  worship  of  Jehovah  (ver.  25).
Bat  ye  have  borne ;  and  ye  bare ;  /ca!  ave\i-
Pere  (Septuagint) ;  et  portastis  (Vulgate).
Ye  offered  me  no  pure  worship  in  the  wilder-
ness, seeing  that  ye  took  false  gods  with
you,  and  joined  their  worship  with,  or  sub-
Etuted  it  for,  mine.  The  tabernacle  of  yonx
Uolooh ;  tV  CKriv^v  To5  Mo\6x  (Septua-
gint) ;  tabernaeulum  Moloch  veetro  (Vulgate).
The  Hebrew  word  rendered  "  tabernacle "
(likkutK),  which  is  found  nowhere  else,  hai
been  variously  explained.  Aquila  gives
trvirKieuriiois :  Theodotion, "  vision,"  reading
the  whole  sentence  thus:  Kal  iipare  tjik
Spwrtv  Tov  ficuri\4as  (ifjuSVf  itfutipufftv  etS^\t»v
i/iiv,  Hurrpor  roS  Beovv/iSv,  Many  moderns
render,  "stake,"  "column,"  or  "shrine."
Others  suppose  it  to  be  equivalent  to  Sak-
kuth, an  Assyrian  name  for  Molech  (or
Adar) ;  but  this  is  very  uncertain  (see
« Studien  und  Kritiken,'  1874,  p.  387),  and
the  parallelism  requires  the  word  to  be  an
appellative  and  not  a  proper  name.  It
most  probably  means  "snrine,"  a  portable


shrine,  like  those  spoken  of  in  Acts  xix.  24
in  connection  with  the  worship  of  Diana.
The  Syriao  and  Arabic  versions  call  it
"  tent,  and  thus  the  reproach  stands  forth
emphatically  that,  instead  of,  or  in  conjunc-
tion with,  the  true  tabernacle,  they  bore
aloft,  as  if  proud  of  their  apostasy,  the
tabernacle  of  a  false  god.  Such  shrines
were  used  by  the  Egyptians,  according  to
Herodotus  (li.  63,  where  see  Eawliuson's
note)  and  Diod.  Sic.  (i,  97).  Many  such
may  be  seen  in  the  Egyptian  room  of  the
British  Museum.  Eeil  quotes  Drumann,
'On  the  Bosetta  Inscription,'  p.  211
"These  were  small  chapels,  general!
gilded  and  ornamented  with  flowers  and
in  other  ways,  intended  to  hold  a  small
idol  when  processions  were  made,  and  to  be
carried  or  driven  about  with  it."  Hence  we
must  look  to  Egypt  as  the  source  of  this
idolatry.  Llolooh,  though  sanctioned  by
the  LXX,  and  St.  Stephen  (Acts  vii.  13),  is
a  mistranslation.  De  Bossi,  indeed,  men-
tions that  one  Hebrew  manuscript  gives
Moloch,  but  the  received  reading  is  Malke-
hem,  which  is  confirmed  by  Symmachus  and
Theodotion,  who  have  tov  0a<ri\cais  i/iav,
and  by  the  Syriac.  The  translation,  there-
fore, should  run,  "  Ye  took  up  the  shrine  of
your  king,"  t.e.  of  him  whom  ye  made  your
king  in  the  place  of  Jehovah,  meaning  some
stellar  divinity.  And  Chiun  your  images ;
Kol  rh  IkffTpov  TOV  6eov  (ifioSv  ^Pattpdif,  "  and
the  star  of  your  god  Bsphan  "  (Septuagint) ;
et  imaginem  idolorum  vettrorum;  Uterally,
the  kiyyun  of  your  inuiget.  The  parallelism
again  requires  us  to  take  this  unknown
word  as  au  appellative;  and  according  to
its  probable  derivation,  its  meaning  is  "  pe-
destal," or  "  framework,"  that  on  which  the
image  stood.  The  Greek  rendering  is,  as
Keil  thinks,  owing  to  a  false  reading  of  the
unpointed  text,  in  old  Hebrew  kaph  and
reeh  being  easily  confounded,  and  vau  and
pe.  Theodotion  considered  the  word  a
common  noun,  translating  it  by  &fiLaipai<riv,
It  is  probably  a  mere  coincidence  that  in
some  Assyrian  inscriptions  the  name  Kairan
occurs  as  that  of  a  deity,  who  is  identified
with  Saturn;  that  the  Egyptians  (from
whom  the  Israelites  must  have  derived  the
notion)  ever  acknowledged  such  a  deity  is
quite  unproved.  St,  Stephen  merely  quotes
the  Textus  Beeeptus  of  his  day,  which  was
close  enough  to  the  original  for  his  argument.
The  star  of  your  god.  These  words  are  in
loose  apposition  with  the  preceding,  and
are  equivalent  to  "your  star-god,"  or  the
star  whom  ye  worship  as  god.  Whether
some  particular  star  is  meant,  or  whether
the  sun  is  the  deity  signified,  cannot  be
determined,  although  the  universal  preva-
lence of  the  worship  of  sun-gods  in  Egypt
make*  the  latter  supposition  very  probable.


^


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.


[oh.  v.  1—27,


St.  Stephen  puts  the  dn  in  a  general  form :
"God  gave  them  np  to  eerve  the  host  of
heaven  "  (Acts  vii.  42 ;  comp.  Deut.  iv.  19 ;
xvlL  8).  Which  ye  made  to  yonrselTes.
This  wa«  the  crime,  eelf-will,  desertion  of
the  appointed  way  for  devices  of  their  own
invention,

Ver.  27. — Therefore.  The  consequence
of  their  contiDued  alienation  from  God  should
be  deportation  to  a  foreign  land,  beyond
Bamaaciu,  far  away  from  the  confines  of


the  conntiT  ouce  their  own  posseuion
(2  Sam.  Tiii.  6),  thns  dimly  denoting  As-
syria, at  that  time  not  hostile,  but  known
in  tiie  time  of  Tiglath-Pileser  L  (see  the
accomplisliment,  2  Kings  zv.  29;  zvii.  6).
St  Stephen  says  (Acts  vii.  43),  "beyond
Babylon ; "  "  Magis  enim,"  observes  Jerome,
"  intelligentiam  qnam  verbnm  posuit ;  "
and  he  is  probably  blending  other  prophecies
with  that  of  Anos,  t.g.  Jet.  zx.  i.


HOMILETI08.

Vers.  1 — 8.— TfroeT*  elegy.  It  is  poor  work  singing  the  things  that  might  have  been.
It  means  aweet  dreams  dispelled,  fair  hopes  blighted,  and  human  lives  in  ruins.  Yet
such  is  the  prophet's  task  in  this  passage — writing  Israel's  elegy  among  the  graves  of
her  dead  millions.  He  had  been  denouncing  nameless  woes  against  the  rebellious
people.  Here  he  changes  his  tone  to  that  of  a  mournful  spectator  of  accomplished  ills.
In  imagination  he  throws  himself  forward  out  of  the  sinful  present  into  the  calamitous
future,  and  in  accommodation  to  the  change  of  scene  bis  denunciation  becomes  a  dirge.
It  is  a  natural  transition,  and  at  the  same  time  a  new  form  of  appeal.  When  ears
become  inattentive,  the  skilled  musician  will  vary  his  tune.     We  have  here —

I.  A  BBOEEN  IDEAL.  The  things  that  might  have  been  with  Israel  were  far  enough
from  existing  facts.  The  Israel  of  God's  ideal  was :  1.  A  holy  people.  (Exod.  xix.  6 ;
Deut.  zxviii.  9.)  Theoretically  they  were,  as  the  word  "  holy  "  means  (Deut,  vii.  6),
a  people  separated  from  meu  and  sin  and  set  apart  to  God.  But  the  fair  ideal  of  their
national  life  remained  an  ideal  and  nothing  more.  The  reality  never  reached  it,  never
approached  it.  They  connected  themselves  freely  with  heathen  men  and  heathenish
sin.  They  at  times  outdid  the  nations  (ch.  ii.  6—9)  in  avarice,  injustice,  spoiling  the
poor,  abominable  rites,  and  every  nameless  infamy,  2.  An  unconquered  people.  .  This
is  the  force  of  the  expression  "  virgin  (of)  Israel."  God  was  to  champion  their  cause,
and  to  fight  for  them  as  his  loyal  people  (Deut.  i.  30,  etc.).  If,  and  so  long  as  he  did
so,  they  would  be  invincible.  But  they  never  claimed  bis  help  on  the  appointed  terms.
His  promise  was  doubted  (Deut.  i.  32)  and  its  conditions  disregarded,  with  the  inevi-
table result  that  it  failed  of  fulfilment  in  many  a  critical  time.  Israel,  theoretically
"  the  unconquered,"  was  practically  the  often  vanquished,  the  twice  carried  captive,  the
soon-to-be-destroyed.  God's  help  comes  surely,  but  comes  only  where  there  is  attention
to  the  conditions  on  which  it  is  offered  and  given.  3.  A  prosperous  people.  Palestine,
their  national  inheritance,  was  the  very  garden  of  the  earth ;  unique  in  the  combination
of  the  highest  agricultural  capacities,  with  the  finest  commercial  situation.  The
prosperity  of  an  industrious,  peaceful  nation  in  it  was,  so  far  as  favourable  circumstances
went,  a  foregone  conclusion.  But  war  had  devastated,  and  mildew  blighted,  and
drought  laid  bare  its  fertile  fields.  God  saw  his  gifts  abused  and  made  the  ministers
of  sin,  and  he  was  driven  to  destroy  these  in  their  hands.  When  temporal  good  begins
to  be  made  the  occasion  of  moral  evil,  our  tenure  of  it  will  soon  end,  4,  A  hc^ppy
people.  A  people  prosperous,  strong,  and  pure,  could  not  but  be  happy  as  well  (Ps,
cxliv.  16).  And  such  was  Israel  in  the  Divine  ideal  (Deut.  xxxiii.  29).  But  the
actual  misery  experienced  was  as  complete  as  the  theoretical  happiness  revealed.
Happiness  is  nowhere  so  impossible,  misery  nowhere  so  intense,  as  with  a  people  who
have  fallen  beneath  themselves.  In  proportion  as  the  former  might  have  been,  will
the  latter  be.

II.  Ak  antioipattve  DmoE.  Prescient  of  coming  evil,  the  prophet's  lamentation
becomes  a  funeral  song.  1.  A  nation  made  shipwreck  is  a  sight  for  tears.  It  is  th«
destruction  of  magnificent  possibilities  of  good.  It  is  the  falling  of  a  tremendous
reality  of  evil.  It  is  the  rum  of  most  precious  interests  on  a  gigantic  scale.  If  one
soul  lost  is  the  occasion  of  grief  to  pure  spirits  and  a  travailing  Saviour,  what  must  the
calMnity  be  when  multiplied  a  millionfold  ?  2,  When,  the  wieked/all  the  truest  mowners


OH.T.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  89

ar^^righteout,  Kot  tlie  heathen  who  had  seduced  them,  not  the  remnant  of  apostate
Iirael  that  might  escape,  but  the  prophet  of  God,  who  had  kept  himself  unspotted  in  the
midst  of  national  corruption,  was  the  tearful  mourner  by  the  ruined  nation's  grave.  The
wicked  are  too  selfish  to  care  for  any  sorrows  but  their  own.  They  are  as  the  wolves,
which  would  make  a  prey  of  the  dead  one's  remains,  rather  than  any  mourning  for  his  fall.
Ood  and  the  Gh>d-like  alone  truly  mourn  when  the  wicked  perish.  3.  A  prophetic  sight
tf  Ml  <nm  epitaph  ought  to  stay  the  hand  of  the  suicide.  Men  supposed  to  be  dead
have  lived  to  read  their  own  obituary  notice.  It  has  enabled  them  to  see  themselves
for  once  as  others  see  them.  And  it  ought  to  have  a  practical  influence  for  good.
Israel,  reading  beforehand  the  inscription  on  their  own  tomb,  might  have  been  warned
away,  if  anything  could  have  warned  them,  from  the  course  in  which  they  were
rushing  on.  It  showed  them  what  was  coming,  and  how  it  was  being  brought  on,  and
how  it  looked,  whether  as  a  morality  or  a  policy,  in  enlightened  eyes.  An  adequate
idea  of  nn  must  include  its  end  and  issues  and  place  in  history,  and  this  it  was  in
Israel's  power  to  learn  from  Amos's  prophetic  wail.

in.  An  nrsFiBED  commektaby.  An  act  of  God  is  an  expression  of  his  way.  Tha
way  of  God  is  a  revelation  of  his  purpose.  All  three  are  along  the  lines  of  the  just  and
fitting.  Now :  1.  Adequate  punishment  means  practical  extermination.  Sin  is  an
infinite  crime,  merits  an  infinite  punishment,  and  failing  this  will  receive  a  punishment
exhaustive  of  the  criminal's  good.  The  proverbial  question,  "  Wherefore  doth  a  living
man  complain?''  (Lam.  iii.  39),  is  an  understatement  of  the  case.  While  a  field,  or
a  blessing^  or  a  living  man  remained,  Israel  had  not  been  punished  as  it  deserved.
When  body  and  soul  have  been  both  destroyed,  there  will  still  be  no  more  than  justice
done.  If  our  sin  have  not  its  punisliment  in  Christ,  then  that  punishment  must  be
utter  destruction,  2.  When  wrath  smites  many,  mercy  spares  a  remnant.  Nine-tenths
were  to  be  destroyed.  The  thousand  should  become  a  hundred,  and  the  hundred  ten.
Neither  the  strength  of  the  great  nor  the  insignificance  of  the  small  should  avail  them
for  escape.  With  perfect  impartiality,  all  should  be  made  to  suffer  proportionally.
Yet  dedmation  was  to  stop  short  of  utter  extinction.  A  tenth  part  (see  Isa.  i.  9 ;  vi.
13)  should  be  spared.  This  less  guilty  remnant,  taught  and  chastened  by  the  judgments
which  swept  away  the  bulk  of  the  nation,  might  form  the  nucleus  of  a  new  and  better
Israel.  When  judgment  has  destroyed  the  "  bread  to  the  eater,"  mercy  often  steps  in
and  saves  a  "  seed  to  the  sower."  There  is  seldom  a  deluge  without  its  ark  and  its
Noah  family,  the  conditions  and  materials  of  a  fresh  start  for  the  reduced.  3.  Israd
decimated  is  Israel  still.  The  remnant  would  retain  the  national  name,  and  with  it  the
covenant  relation  and  privileges  to  which  the  name  referred  (Gen.  xxxii.  28).  Toward
the  Gentile  Church,  for  its  sin  "  oast  down  but  not  destroyed,"  the  same  gracious  policy
was  announced  (Isa.  liv.  7 — ^10).  While  a  Mephibosheth  remains  the  royal  line  of
God's  anointed  is  not  extinct.  Chastisement  maljes  a  chaos  only  to  bring  out  of  it  the
young  world  of  a  new  life  and  a  new  hope  (Ps.  Izzxix.  30 — 33).

Vers.  4 — 6. — 2%«  seeking  that  is  life.  This  passage  contains  at  once  a  vindication
3f  the  coming  destruction  on  Israel,  and  a  last  offer  of  escape.  All  past  evil  had  been
justly  incurred  by  departure  fi:om  God.  All  coming  evil  might  yet  be  avoided  by
return  to  him.  "  Seek  ye  me  "  was  the  direction  on  their  treatment  of  which  the
whole  issue  turned.

I.  Even  the  foredoomed  abb  not  abandoned  of  God.  The  antediluvians  were
preached  to  for  a  century  after  their  destruction  was  denoonced.  So  Jerusalem  got
a  Pentecost,  and  the  ordinances  of  a  Christian  Church  for  forty  years  after  Christ  had
pronounced  her  doom  (Matt,  xxiii.  37 — 39).  1.  Ood^s  threatenings  are  in  a  eertai»
sense  conditionai  on  men's  conduct.  They  are  addressed  to  men  in  their  character  or
circumstances  at  the  time  they  are  uttered.  If  and  when  the  character  or  circum-
stances cease  to  exist,  the  threatenings  cea^e  to  apply.  It  was  so  in  the  case  of
Hezekiah  (Isa.  xxxviiu  1,  5),  and  also  of  Nineveh  (Jonah  iii.  4,  10).  God  in  such
cases  does  not  change,  but  the  circumstances  do,  and  his  modes  of  treatment  cba]^;e
accordingly.  2.  They  are  denned  to  turn  msn,  not  to  plunge  them  in  dapair.  All
life  is  disciplinary.  Each  event  and  experience  is  fitted,  and  meant,  to  exercise  a  moral
influence.  Being,  moreover,  controlled  by  a  holy  God,  the  moral  influence  of  each  must
be  in  the  direction  of  right.    It  is  so  with  blessings  and  the  promise  of  them  (Bota.  ii.


90  THE   BOOK   OF   AMOS.  [on.  v.  1—27,

4 ;  Isa.  i,  19).  It  is  bo  also  with  judgments  and  the  threat  of  them  (Isa.  xxvi  9 ;  Luke
ziii.  3,  6).  God  takes  pleasure  in  the  soul's  turning  (Ezek.  zviii.  23,  32),  and  all  hii
dealings  with  it  aim  at  and  tend  to  this  result.  Therefore,  until  judgment  actually
falls,  the  threat  of  it  is  kept  as  a  deterrent  before  the  sinner's  eyes.  3.  Individuals
may  turn  after  national  repentance  has  become  hopeless.  Language  addressed  to  a
nation  is  really  meant  for  the  in<Hviduals  composing  it ;  and  as  individuals  they  would
be  influenced  by  it.  No  general  forsakins;  of  sin  was  probable  in  Israel.  Still,  some
might  turn,  as  many  did  in  Jerusalem,  and  were  saved  after  the  destruct  on  of  the  city
as  a  whole  was  foretold;  and,  so  long  as  this  was  possible,  the  means  fitted  to  turn
would  not  be  withdrawn.  God's  expostulations  will  go  forth  to  glean  in  comers  even
when  the  prospects  of  a  harvest  are  blighted.

n.  Thbbe  is  a  seeking  in  connection  with  which  it  is  lifb  to  find.  To  Israel
here  and  to  all  men  everywhere  the  great  object  of  search  is  God,  not  mere  good  (Ps.
xlii.  2) ;  and  God  for  himself,  not  for  his  gifts.  1.  This  seeking  implies  previous  non-
possession.  God  is  neither  the  property  of  the  wicked  nor  his  possession.  Sin  made
separation  between  them,  and  a  severing  of  all  previously  existing  ties.  Man  abandoned
God,  and  God  drove  out  man.  Now  he  is  "  without  God,"  is  "enmity  against  God,"
bids  God  depart  from  him,  says  in  his  heart,  "  No  God."  It  is  only  by  the  saint,  and
after  seeking,  that  it  can  be  said,  "  I  have  found  him  whom  my  soul  loveth."  "  This
God  is  our  God  for  ever  and  ever."  Grace  it  is  that  knits  again  the  ties  broken  by
sin,  and  restores  man  and  God  to  a  condition  of  mutual  love  and  possession  and  indwell-
ing. 2.  It  is  a  guest  with  the  whole  heart  and  strength.  The  essence  of  seeking  God
is  to  desire  him.  And  to  desire  hira  really  is  to  desire  him  heartily.  Not  to  desire  him
with  other  things.  Not  to  desire  him  more  than  other  things.  Not  to  desire  him  weakly.
Not  even  to  desire  him  strongly.  But  to  desire  him  wholly,  supremely,  and  intensely.
Seeking  God  is  heart-seeking,  or  it  is  nothing.  Heart-seeking  is  truly  such  when  it  is
seeking  with  the  whole  heart.  Therefore  only  to  such  seeking  is  there  a  promise  of
finding  (Jer.  xxix.  13 ;  xxiv.  7).  God  cannot  be  had  till  he  is  adequately  wanted,  and
to  be  wanted  adequately  is  to  be  wanted  supremely.  3.  Iti»  synonymous  with  finding.
In  God's  world  everywhere  supply  meets  and  measures  demand.  Plant,  animal,  and
man,  each  finds  on  earth,  in  climate,  habitat,  covering,  and  food,  exactly  the  thing  it
needs.  There  is  no  want  for  which  there  is  not  full  and  fitting  provision.  So  in  the
ipiritual  sphere.  "Blessed  are  they  that  do  hunger  and  thirst,"  etc.  Over  against
every  need  of  the  soul  is  a  Divine  supply.  That  need  become  conscious,  means  help
waiting;  that  need  expressed,  means  help  already  on  the  way.  Spiritual  good  is
obtainnd  on  the  simple  condition  of  its  being  truly  desired.  4.  To  find  Ood  is  to  find
all  good  which  inheres  in  him.  God  is  himself  the  greatest  GK)od ;  he  is,  moreover,  the
Sum,  and  therefore  the  Source,  of  all  good.  There  is  certain  good  which  he  uncondition-
ally bestows  on  all,  even  the  ungodly.  But  it  is  good  of  the  lower  kinds,  and  which
ministers  to  the  lower  needs.  All  spiritual  good,  and  all  temporal  good  that  has  any
spiritual  aspect,  God  gives  only  with  and  in  Jesus  Christ  (Eom.  viii.  32 ;  Matt.  vi.  33).
The  planets  attend  the  sun  and  follow  where  he  leads.  So  on  Christ,  as  God's  unspeak-
able Gift,  the  other  lesser  gifts  wait.  We  have  them  when  we  grasp  him.  6.  This
good,  summed  up  in  one  word,  is  life.  Life  is  a  general  term  for  the  highest  good  (Ps.
XXX.  5 ;  cxxxiii.  3).  It  is  physical  life,  the  prevention  or  withdrawal  of  destroying
judgments.  It  is  judicial  life,  or  the  reversal  of  the  death-sentence  on  the  soul,  and
the  [irivilege  for  it  of  living.  It  is  spiritual  life,  being  quickened  once  for  all  out  of
the  death  in  sin,  being  made  alive  and  kept  alive.  It  is  everlasting  life,  the  out-
blooming  in  eternity  of  the  flower  of  soul-life  planted  on  earth.

III.  This  is  not  the  seeking  to  which  men  naturally  turn.  It  was  under
pretence  of  greater  convenience  that  Jeroboam's  calves  were  set  up  in  Dan  and  Bethel.
But  Beersheba  was  fifty  miles  south  of  Jerusalem,  and  Gilgal  was  on  the  other  side  of
Jordan,  and  so  most  inconvenient  of  access.  That  Israel  preferred  them  to  Jerusalem
was  proof  that  they  preferred  idolatrous  rites  to  the  worship  of  God  (see  Pusey).
1.  Idols  are  man's  own  invention,  and  there/ore  the  egoist's  choice.  There  is  self-
sufficiency  verging  on  self-worship  in  all  sin.  Man  puts  his  own  opinion  and  will
and  work  above  God's.  An  idol  is  his  own  creation,  and  for  that  reason,  if  for  no
other,  is  preferred  to  God.  It  is  a  subtle  form  of  self-worship,  and  so  inevitably
preferred  to  any  other.     2.  I%ey  are  credited  with  qualities  congenial  to  his  natur*-


OH.  T.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS  91

A  man  impresses  himself  on  his  work,  virtually  puts  himself  into  it.  It  reflects  hia
genius  and  bis  moral  character.  The  idol  a  man  makes  is  thus  substantially  a  repeti-
tion of  himself,  and  therefore  congenial  to  him  all  round.  Made  by  his  hand,  it  is  after
his  heart,  which  the  God  of  heaven  is  very  far  from  being.  3.  The  fall  into  idol-
worship  is  broken  hy  the  retention  in  it  of  a  flavouring  of  the  warship  of  Ood.  Bethel
and  Beersheba,  its  shrines,  were  spots  where  the  Divine  presence  had  of  old  been  richly
manifested.  Its  rites  mimicked,  to  some  extent,  the  national  worship  of  God.  It  was
added  on  at  first  to  Divine  worship,  not  substituted  for  it.  Satan  lets  men  down  into
idolatry  by  easy  stages.  It  begins  in  the  sanctuary.  It  appears  at  first  in  the  likeness
of  a  better  thing.  Then,  when  men  have  become  sufficiently  familiar  with  it  and
degraded  by  it  to  bear  the  sight,  it  puts  on  its  natural  shape,  and  is  idol- worship  pure
and  simple.

IV.  In  the  bbbkino  of  the  natubal  heabt  success  must  mean  disabtbb.  By
a  play  upon  words,  Gilgal,  "  the  Great  Boiling,"  is  to  be  rolled  away ;  and  Bethel,  styled
elsewhere  "  Bethaven,"  shall  become  "  aven,"  or  vanity.  1.  An  idol  is  a  figment,  and
the  worship  of  it  can  only  result  in  deception  and  loss.  It  is  not  a  thing,  but  only  the
image  of  a  thing.  It  is  the  image,  moreover,  not  of  a  real,  but  of  an  imaginary  thing.
It  is,  therefore,  "  nothing,"  and  "  a  thing  of  nought "  (1  Cor.  viii.  4),  and  out  of  nothing
nothing  can  come.  To  worship  it  is  delusion,  to  trust  it  inevitable  disappointment.
2.  Good's  infinite  power  and  his  wrath  are  against  them  that  forsake  him.  The
idolater  pits  idol  impotence  against  Divine  omnipotence,  with  the  inevitable  result  of
discomfiture  and  destruction.  There  are  idols  of  the  heart  the  service  of  which  is  no
less  ruinous.  They  group  themselves  under  the  heading  "  world,"  and  the  love  of
them  is  incompatible  with  the  love  of  God,  and  so  "  Anathema "  (1  John  ii.  15 ;
1  Cor.  xvi.  22).

Vers,  7 — 13. — The  contract  presaging  the  conflict.  -Judgment  is  coming.  Warning
has  been  given.  Duty,  and  the  prevailing  derelictions  of  it,  have  been  pointed  out.
Here  God's  perfections  and  Israel's  iniquities  are  set  in  juxtaposition,  and  the  colloca-
tion is  suggestive.  Such  incompatibility  must  lead  to  collision.  It  is  by  God's
character  and  ours  that  our  mutual  relations  and  attitudes  are  shaped.    We  see  here —

I.  God  revealing  himself.  (Vers.  8, 9.)  God's  work  is  an  important  revelation  of
himself.  He  has  written  all  over  it  the  glorious  lineaments  of  his  character.  Each
part  of  it  reflects  some  feature,  and  in  the  whole  we  see  his  face.  Here  he  shows
himself:  1.  In  the  sphere  of  creation.  "  He  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion."  This
is  a  pregnant  thought.  Alcyone,  one  of  the  seven  stars,  or  Pleiades,  is  the  central  orb  of
the  heavens,  round  which  the  others  move.  It  is  as  it  were  the  heart  of  the  material
universe ;  and  the  Creator  of  it  is  by  implication  the  Creator  of  all.  In  this  fact  speak
the  power  and  wisdom  of  the  Great  Uncaused,  who  is  the  Cause  not  only  of  all  effects,
but  of  all  causes  as  well.  2.  In  the  sphere  of  providence.  "And  turneth  the  shadow,"
etc.  (vers.  8,  9).  We  have  here  three  classes  of  operations.  The  first  was  illustrated
in  the  miraculous  light  that  shone  around  Paul  at  his  conversion,  is  seen  daily  in  the
rise  of  the  morning  sun,  and  appears  in  the  turning  of  the  night  of  adversity  into  the
day  of  prosperity.  The  second  was  seen  in  the  three  hours'  miraculous  darkness  at  the
Crucifixion,  is  seen  in  the  gathering  shades  of  every  night,  and  in  the  darkening  down
into  adverse  circumstances  of  many  a  life-day.  The  third  was  seen  in  the  Deluge,  is  seen
in  every  shower  of  rain,  and  will  be  seen  in  future  widespread  judgments  on  the  wicked.
Ver.  9,  "Who  causeth  desolations  to  flash  on  the  strong,"  et<j.  God's  judgments  are  bold,
as  singling  out  the  strong  and  the  fortress ;  swift,  as  coming  on  them  like  the  lightning's
flash ;  sweeping,  as  involving  them  in  utter  destruction.  3.  In  the  sphere  of  redemp-
tion. God  scatters  spiritual  night.  He  illuminates  the  darkness  of  the  soul.  He
makes  men  light  in  the  Lord.  He  gives  them  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light.
He  also  judicially  blinds,  by  leaving  impenitent  souls  to  the  natural  effects  of  wrong-
doing ;  and  he  casts  into  outer  darkness  at  last.  In  all  these  things  we  behold  power —
power  here  as  goodness,  power  there  as  severity ;  but  power  everywhere  as  resistless
and  Divine.

II.  IsEAEL  bevbalino  hebsblf.  (Ver.  12.)  This  is  a  sad  apocalypse.  In  many
transgressions  and  great  sins  Israel's  many-s-ided  and  deep  corruption  comes  out
Particulars  aio:  1.  As  unjust.     Injustice  is  a  natural  form  for  th*  sin,  which  is  at


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  v.  1—27.


bottom  selfishness,  to  take.  It  was  a  specially  prevalent  form,  moreover,  among  th«
Hebrew  people.  From  Jacob  down  the  sordid  race  has  cheated  the  strong  and  imposed
on  the  weak.  Action  is  in  a  sense  the  fruit  of  character,  and  answers  to  the  tree.
God's  grace  is  to  convert  the  thorn  into  the  fir  tree,  and  the  briar  into  the  myrtle  tree ;
but  man's  sin  works  the  converse  process,  and  changes  the  sweet  "tree  of  righteous-
ness "  into  bitter  wormwood.  Casting  "  righteousness  down  to  earth  "is  another  aspect
of  the  same  charge.  Bighteousness  ought  to  rule.  Its  proper  place  Is  the  throne  of
human  life.  But  Israel  had  dethroned  and  cast  it  down  to  the  earth,  and  set  injustice,
a  usurper,  in  its  place.  2.  As  oppressive.  (Vers.  11, 12.)  The  oppression  suffered  by
Israel  had  done  nothing  to  produce  detestation  of  the  thing.  What  other  nations  had
inflicted  on  them  in  this  way,  they  were  only  too  ready  to  inflict,  with  interest,  on  each
other  as  they  had  opportunity.  Humiliation  does  not  always  prepare  for  exaltation,
nor  poverty  for  wealth,  nor  the  endurance  of  injustice  for  power.  The  freed  slave  will
often  make  the  very  worst  master,  and  the  erewhile  victim  of  wrong  the  most  out-
rageous inflictor  of  it  (Prov.  xix.  10;  xxx.  22,  23).  3.  As  venal.  "Who  take  a
bribe."  They  did  injustice,  not  only  in  their  private,  but  in  their  public,  capacity.
They  not  only  plundered  the  public  themselves,  but  made  a  profit  by  helping  others  to
do  the  same.  A  dishonest  man  will  make  a  corrupt  magistrate.  He  will  use  for  his
own  aggrandizement  whatever  power  he  gains.  4.  As  impious.  (Vers.  10,  12.)  As
cowardice  appeared  in  oppressing  the  poor,  so  did  impiety  in  oppressing  the  righteous.
Much  of  what  the  righteous  suffer  is  due  to  the  hatred  of  righteousness  by  the  wicked.
They  hate  the  thing  itself,  they  hate  it  as  a  standing  rebuke  to  their  own  ways,  and
their  antipathy  invariably  exhibits  itself  as  it  has  occasion.

III.  Thbie  fdture  relations  cleab  w  the  light  op  both.  Given  what  God  ig
and  what  Israel  is,  and  the  Divine  course  of  treatment  may  easily  be  aoticipated.  1.
Ood  will  disappoint  their  schemes  of  self-aggrandizement.  (Ver.  11.)  Theif  labour
and  pains  and  sin  would  prove  in-  the  end  to  have  been  thrown  away.  Their  ill-gotten
gains  would  never  be  enjoyed.  The  vineyards  and  houses,  in  which  they  had  invested
them,  would,  after  haviug  been  acquired  at  great  pains,  be  lost  again  before  they  had
even  begun  to  be  used.  Gain  gotten  by  injustice  is  seldom  abiding,  and  never
remunerative.  ,  The  one  condition  of  getting  satisfaction  out  of  earthly  good  is  to
acquire  it  according  to  the  will  of  God.  2.  He  will  leave  them  unrehuked.  (Ver.  13.)
The  prophets  and  the  wise  would  both  be  silent.  This  would  be  a  great  calamity.  It
would  be  followed  by  an  increase  of  sin,  involving  in  turn  an  aggravation  of  punish-
ment. It  would  mean  abandonment  to  fate ;  for  when  God  ceases  to  strive,  a  man's
doom  is  sealed.  It  is  the  Physician  discontinuing  his  treatment  because  the  hand  of
death  is  on  the  patient.  The  sinner  sins  conviction  away,  and  then  congratulates
himself  on  the  discovery  of  peace.  But  it  is  only  God  saying, "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  his
idols :  let  him  alone."    It  is  the  one  spiritual  case  that  is  utterly  desperate.

Ver.  13. — "  A  time  to  he  silent."  "  Therefore  the  prudent  shall  keep  silence  in  that
time ;  for  it  is  an  evil  time."  These  words  describe  an  evil  time,  and  specify  one  of  its
most  evil  features.  It  is  a  time  of  culminating  wickedness,  of  imminent  destruction,
and,  as  related  to  both,  of  Divine  non-intervention.  "  There  is  a  time  to  keep  silence  "
(Eccles.  iii.  7)  as  well  as  "  a  time  to  speak."  And  that  time,  as  pointed  out  by  charac-
teristic features,  was  at  hand  in  this  case.  Israel,  which  in  vain  had  been  pled  with
and  plagued,  would  then  be  severelj'  left  alone.  Her  victims  would  suffer  in  silence.
Her  prophets  would  cease  to  expostulate.  God,  iu  judgment,  would  cease  to  strive  for
her  restraint  or  turning.  In  an  awful  and  unnatural  calm  she  would  pass  the  moments
before  there  broke  on  her  the  storm  of  doom.  And  the  dawning  of  this  "  dies  ires  "
was  almost  come.  As  to  the  particular  characteristic  of  this  day,  note  that  God's
servants  are  silent—

I.  When  there  is  nothino  that  can  be  said  to  the  pubposb.  This  will  often
happen.  Seasonable  speech  is  a  valuable  thing.  But  men  are  not  infallible,  and
occasions  are  often  puzzling,  and  the  right  thing  to  say  is  hard  to  find.  1.  Silence  it
§omeHta3S  the  resource  of  feeling  too  deep  for  words.  There  are  unspeakable  things.
•'  Speech  is  but  broken  light  on  the  depth  of  the  unspoken."  The  finest  thoughts,  the
deepest  feelings,  are  unuttered  often  because  they  cannot  be  expressed  in  woi'£.  As  •
noted  Shakespearian  character  says —


OH.T.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  93

"  Silence  is  the  perfeotest  herald  of  joy :
I  were  bat  little  happy  if  I  could  say  how  maob.'*

And  the  sentiment  is  not  lucommon.  "  Does  the  wind  write  what  it  sings  in  those
sounding  leaves  above  our  heads?  Does  the  sea  write  the  moaning  of  its  surge?
Nothing  is  fine  that  is  written ;  the  divinest  in  man's  heart  never  issues  forth.  The
instrument  is  flesh,  the  note  is  fire.  What  would  you  have?  Between  what  one  feels
and  what  one  expresses,  there  is  the  same  space  as  between  the  soul  and  the  twenty-
four  letters  of  the  alphabet ;  that  is  to  say,  the  Infinite.  Can  you  on  a  rosewood  flute
give  forth  the  harmony  of  the  spheres?"  (Raflaelle).  2.  Silence  i$  often  more
impressive  than  any  speech,

"The  silence  of  pure  innocence
Persuades,  when  speaking  fails."

So  also  do  the  silence  of  deep-  feeling  and  of  strong  passion,  uttering  "  speech  In  their
dumbness,  language  in  their  very  gesture."  Christ  but  looked  on  the  recreant  Peter
after  his  miserable  desertion  and  denial.  Tet  that  silent  look,  as  the  denied  One  passed
him  in  the  hall,  was  eloquent  of  wounded  love,  and  cut  the  denier  more  keenly  than
any  words.  No  word  was  uttered  on  the  cross  where  the  dying  thief  was  brought  to
faith.  The  God-like  fortitude,  the  ineffable  meekness  of  the  Saviour,  suffering  silently
the  devilish  malice  of  sin, — it  was  that  broke  his  heart  and  won  his  free  allegiance.  In
this  dumbness  was  speech  to  the  power  of  which  articulate  speech  admits  of  no  com-
parison. The  gift  of  being  "  eloquently  silent "  is  one  that  is  not  unworthy  of  more
general  cultivation.  To  Israel  the  sudden  silence  of  the  prophets,  after  centuries  of
expostulation,  would  tell  its  own  startling  tale.  It  would  indicate  discouragement  and
disgust,  and  duplicate  to  their  minds  the  "let  him  alone"  (Hos.  iv.  17)  of  Divine
desertion  at  a  similar  crisis.  And  this  unequivocal  proof  that  they  are  given  up  might
bring  the  tardy  repent^pce  which  all  else  had  failed  to  stir.  When  communications  are
broken  off,  the  dream  of  a  lasting  peace  is  over.  The  patient  will  believe  that  death  is
at  hand  when  tlie  physician  turns  away  and  refuses  to  prescribe.  3.  Silence  is  always
better  than  haphazard  speech.  When  a  man  knows  not  what  to  say  he  should  guard
against  saying  he  knows  not  what.  "  Silence,  when  nothing  need  be  said,  is  the
eloquence  of  discretion."  Peter  would  have  escaped  some  blunders  and  rebukes  if  he
had  followed  this  rule.  But  it  was  when  "  he  wist  not  what  to  say  "  (Mark  ix.  6)  that
he  was  given  to  saying  most.  Such  speech  is  more  likely  to  be  inappropriate  than
silence,  and  being  inappropriate  there  are  many  more  ways  in  which  it  can  work  evil.
Hence  the  numerous  Scripture  references  to  the  tongue,  the  power  of  it,  the  difficulty  of
governing  it,  and  the  danger  of  it  if  unruly.  Indeed,  so  Uable  are  men  to  err  and  so
specially  liable  to  err  in  speech  as  compared  with  overt  act,  that  the  proper  government
of  the  tongue  is  made  the  highest  religious  act  (Jas.  ill.  2).

11.  When  it  is  evident  that  speech  must  bb  unavailino.  There  are  many  such
cases.  1.  Sometimes  men  will  refuse  to  listen.  The  Jews  did  in  the  beginning  of  the
gospel.  Faithfully  and  firmly  Stephen  pressed  the  truth  home ;  but  they  "  stopped
their  ears,  and  ran  upon  him  "  (Acts  vii.  57).  Here  was  a  case  for  silence.  Speech,
had  it  been  possible,  would  have  been  unheeded.  Those  men,  with  murder  in  their
hearts,  and  their  fingers  in  their  ears,  would  listen  to  no  words.  With  Israel  now
things  had  come  to  a  like  pass.  Their  ears  were  stopped,  and  their  hearts  within  them
were  set  to  do  iniquity.  For  such  a  state  of  matters  the  appropriate  measure  is  the
silence  which  the  prophet  predicts.  And  all  God's  servants,  in  the  exercise  of  their
enlightened  judgment,  will  do  likewise  in  a  like  case.  When  men  will  not  hear,  they
will  refuse  to  waste  on  them  unregarded  speech.  Bawling  into  an  ear  that  is  deaf  or
stopped  is  effort  thrown  away,  and  unworthy  of  common  sense  (Matt.  x.  14;  Mark  vi.
11).  2.  Sometimes  evil  has  gone  so  far  that  words  can  he  of  no  avail.  God's  Spirit  will
not  always  strive.  With  the  antediluvians  by  Noah's  preaching  he  strove  above  a
century,  but  when  iniquity  reached  a  certain  stage  he  ceased,  and  his  ultima  ratio  was
the  Deluge.  He  strove  with  Saul  for  years,  but  when  insensibility  and  hardness  became
confirmed,  communications  were  Jbroken  off ;  and  whether  by  dreams,  or  by  Urim,  or
by  prophets,  God  spoke  no  more  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  6).  He  strove  with  Israel  during  the
ministry  of  our  Lord,  but  they  would  not  listen  to  his  word,  and  at  last  he  was  silent,
md  the  doomed  people  were  left  to  die  (Luke  xix.  42).    God  ceases  to  speak  whep


94  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [CH.  v.  1—37.

he  Is  ready  to  itrike,  Expostnlatton  would  be  an  'anachronism  when  execution  is
imminent.  The  point  at  which  he  will  give  np  the  persistent  wrong-doer  and  with-
draw all  deterrent  measures  none  can  fix.  But  there  is  such  a  poin^  and,  to  each  of
the  ungodly,  the  danger  of  passing^  it  (Pror.  i.  26).  Every  hour  we  continue  in
rebellion  is  cutting  down  our  chance  of  being  longer  striven  with.  Those  who  speak
for  God  to  men  are  sometimes  conscious  that  the  time  to  be  silent  has  come.  The
sinner  seems  to  have  reached  a  final  fixity.  In  the  nature  of  things  be  cannot  be
expected  now  to  change.  Paul  at  a  certain  stage  concluded  the  Jew  to  be  incorrigible,
and  turned  deliberately  to  the  Gentile  (Acts  xiii.  iff).  And  like  Paul,  when  it  becomes
clear  that  further  dealing  with  men  must  be  barren  of  result,  the  servant  of  Christ  will
transfer  his  strength  from  the  hopeless  to  some  hopeful  form  of  effort.

IIL  When  it  is  just  as  lieelt  to  no  rabm  as  good.  This  is  no  remote  contin-
gency. Such  times  are  cropping  up  continually.  Under  certain  circumstances  speech :
1.  Mat/ do  harm  to  men,  Thetruthof  God  and  the  sinful  heart  are  uncongeniaL  Men
love  the  darkness  and  hate  the  light.  The  truth  forbidding  all  lust  is  actually  through
the  corruption  of  our  nature  the  occasion  of  stirring  it  up  (Bom.  viL  7—9).  This,  of
course,  is  no  reason  for  withholding  it  or  suppressing  our  testimony  to  it.  But  there
are  circumstances  and  moods  in  which  this  tendency  attains  its  maximum  of  strength,
and  it  will  then  be  prudent  to  keep  silence  "  even  from  good,"  It  is  as  "  fishers  of
men  "  that  we  speak  the  truth,  and  we  must  justify  our  claim  to  the  title  by  presenting
the  truth  in  the  time  and  way  in  which  it  is  most  likely  to  telL  If  we  "  testify  "  at
random,  and  uniformly,  in  all  companies  and  on  all  occasions,  we  shall  oftener  harm
than  help  the  people  whom  we  wish  to  serve.  2.  It  may  do  harm  to  the  truth.  There
ia  such  a  thing  as  "  casting  pearls  before  swine"  (Matt.  vii.  6)  to  no  better  purpose
than  the  prostitution  of  sacred  things  The  difference  between  truth  profaned  and
necessarily  inoperative,  and  the  same  truth  listened  to  and  the  power  of  God,  is  often
the  difference  between  the  untimely  presentation  of  it  and  the  ^mely.  To  force  it  on
men  when  they  are  out  of  humour  and  will  not  give  it  a  fair  hearing  is  only  to  bring  it
into  contempt — to  lessen  its  dignity  in  the  eyes  of  others,  and  diminish  its  chance  of
winning  their  acceptance.  The  truth  is  meant  to  sanctify  and  save,  and  we  must  be
careful  to  do  nothing  that  would  place  it  at  a  disadvantage  in  the  work.  3.  It  may
do  harm  to  ourselves  without  any  compensating  advantage.  "  He  that  reproveth  a
scorner  getteth  himself  shame" — ^the  shame  of  aggravating  the  case  and  bringing  needless
evil  on  himself.  No  Scottish  Covenanter  was  called  on  to  enter  the  camp  and  preach
the  gospel  of  good  will  and  peace  to  the  bloodthirsty  troopers  of  Claverhouse  or  Dalziel.
The  thing  would  have  been  good  in  itself,  and  was  deeply  needed,  but  to  attempt  it
meant  not  merely  failure,  but  death.  If  there  was  no  one  else  to  do  it,  this  work  must
be  left  undone.  There  is  room  for  judgment  and  discretion  in  timing  and  planning
the  work  of  winning  souls.  The  most  acceptable  service  and  the  most  useful  we  can
give  to  God  is  our  "  reasonable  service."  We  are  not  to  "  count  our  lives  dear  to  us  "
in  comparison  with  bis  work  ;  but  it  must  appear  that  the  work  demands  the  sacrifice,
and  will  benefit  by  it,  before  we  are  at  liberty  to  give  up  the  life  which  we  hold  in
trust  for  God.  Pearls  are  to  be  withheld  from  swine  for  this  among  other  reasons,
"lest  they  turn  again  and  rend  you."  The  characters  of  the  "  time  to  keep  silence"
deserve  attention  no  less  than  those  of  the  "  time  to  speak,"  and  he  has  mastered  both
who  rightly  divides  the  Word  of  life.

1.  Silence  is  sometimes  a  Divine  form  of  appeal.  2.  In  that  case  it  is  probably  the
last  appeal.    3.  Disregarded,  it  is  the  lull  before  the  storm.

Vers.  14, 16. — ITie  nation  with  which  God  will  dweU.,  The  opening  words  of  this
passage  imply  a  history,  Israel  "  not  only  did  evil,  but  they  sought  it  out  and  the
occasions  of  it "  (Pusey).  They  gave  evil  their  special  attention,  never  failing  to  do  it
when  they  had  opportunity,  and  seeking  opportunities  when  none  presented  themselves.
In  fact,  they  did  it  with  an  amount  of  method  and  pains  which  they  are  now  called
upon  to  direct  into  a  new  channel,  and  apply  tc  the  doing  of  good.

L   ThB  PBB8ENCB   OF  GOD  WITH  MEN  18   THE  OHIBFEBT   BXPBESSION   OF  HIS   FAVOUB.

It  was  the  original,  and  remains  the  normal  condition  of  human  life.  1.  It  is  the
restoration  of  acceptance.  Separation  from  God  is  penal.  God  "  drove  out  the  man,"
and  we  remain  "afar  off"  because  of  sin  committed.    He  will  dwell  with  us  again


OB  V.  1—27.]  THB  BOOK  OiT  AMOSJ.  96

only  when  onr  sin  is  pot  away.  The  king  will  not  consort  with  rebels  as  such.  He
will  meet  them  only  as  subjects  and  friends.  The  condition  of  access  to  his  presence
is  the  equitable  recovery  of  his  forfeited  favour.  In  the  promise  to  dwell  with  Israel
was  the  implied  promise  to  restore  them  to  his  favour.  2.  It  is  the  restoration  of
God-likeness.  "What  communion  hath  light  with  darkness?"  None.  The  two
things  are  essentially  antagonistic,  and  fellowship  between  them  is  impossible.
Accordingly,  Adam  left  God's  presence  and  hid  even  before  he  was  driven  out  of  the
garden.  In  losing  the  Divine  likeness  he  had  lost  all  relish  or  fitness  for  the  Divine
presence.  The  one  could  be  recovered  only  with  the  other.  Born  from  above,  and
made  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  we  are  in  afSnity  with  God,  and  come  with  relish
to  his  presence.  3.  It  is  the  restoration  of  happiness.  "  In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of
joy."  Sin  means  loss  on  the  one  side  and  infliction  on  the  other.  Its  guilt  separates  from
God,  with  the  result  that  our  being  is  incomplete.  Its  corruption  introduces  disorder
among  our  own  powers,  and  disease  in  each,  and  so  unrest  and  misery  become  inevitable
(Isa.  xlviii.  22 ;  Ivii.  20).  In  reunion  with  God  these  two  occasions  of  unhappiness
are  removed.  By  regeneration  the  old  nature  is  crucified,  and  the  new  one  is  set  by
faith  in  union  with  God,  where  it  has  spiritnal  completeness,  and  so  its  ideal  of  a
happy  state.  Hence  the  Christian's  aspiration  is  summed  up  in  one  idea — to  "be  with
Christ,  which  is  far  better."

II.  Israel  had  a  thbobetioal  Divine  presence  with  them  which  was  not
NOW  in  fact  enjoyed.  (Exod.  xxix.  45,  46.)  It  is  implied  in  God's  offer  to  be  with
them  under  certain  circumsiances,  that  he  was  not  with  them  then.  1.  He  was  not
toith  them  in  worship.  God's  presence  at  the  Jewish  national  worship  was  pledged
(Exod.  XX.  24).  But  the  worship  must  be  his  worship,  conducted  according  to  his
appointment.  This  it  now  was  not.  Where  not  positively  idolatrous  or  profane,  the
worship  of  Israel  was  utterly  formal  and  hollow.  In  such  worship  the  Divine  presence
is  not  desired  and  is  not  enjoyed  (Isa.  i.  13 — 15).  The  worship  must  be  real,  the
heart  contrite,  in  which  God  promises  to  be  present.  Israel  failed  of  God's  promised
presence  by  failing  to  claim  it  on  the  appointed  terms.  2.  He  was  not  with  them  in
war.  For  centuries  he  had  been  (Judg.  vi.  16),  and  victory  attended  their  arms  (Josh.
xxiv.  12,  18  i  1  Chron.  xvii.  21).  Nothing  could  withstand  them.  The  nations  of
Canaan,  in  whose  sight  they  had  felt  as  grasshoppers,  were  subdued  before  them.  And
God  had  explicitly  connected  their  victories  with  his  presence  and  help  (Exod.  xvii.
11,  14 ;  Ps.  xliv.  1 — 3).  But  there  came  a  time  of  which  the  psalmist  had  to  say,
"  Thou  hast  cast  off  and  put  us  to  shame,  and  goest  not  forth  with  our  armies  "  (Ps.
xliv.  9).  The  conditions  on  which  the  Divine  promise  of  help  in  the  field  was  sus-
pended were  violated  or  ignored,  and  God  left  them  to  fight  with  the  arm  they  pre-
ferred to  his.  3.  He  was  not  with  them  in  their  daily  walk.  They  did  not  seek  him
nor  want  him,  nor  were  they  fit  to  be  near  him.  The  graces  to  which  his  presence  is
congruous,  the  means  by  which  his  presence  is  secured,  were  all  absent,  and  so  they
were  a  nation  given  up  of  God  and  forsaken  (Isa.  ii.  6 ;  Jer.  vii.  29).  He  no  longer
dwelt  with  them,  nor  met  them,  nor  directed  them,  nor  spoke  to  them.  He  became,
as  he  does  to  all  under  like  conditions,  "  a  God  afar  off,  and  not  a  God  near  at  hand;  "
and  the  journey  of  their  national  existence,  begun  in  such  goodly  company,  was  left  to
be  finished  alone.

III.  To    MAKE    THE    THEORY    OF    Qod'b    PBBSBNOB    FACT,    THB    THKOBY    OF    IsBABL'S

SEPARATION  MUST  ALSO  BE  FACT.  God's  withdrawal  was  the  natural  reply  to  Israel's
forsaking.  His  resumption  of  relations  would  synchronize  with  their  return  to
righteousness.  1.  Evil  must  he  rejected.  This  duty  is  laid  down  in  three  degrees.  It
is  not  to  be  sought,  nor  done,  nor  loved.  It  had  been  all  three.  It  could  cease  to  be
the  one  only  by  ceasing  to  be  the  others  also.  The  seeking  implies  that  the  love  and
the  doing  have  gone  before.  The  love  guarantees  that  the  doing  and  seeking  shall
follow  in  due  course.  The  way  to  break  off  from  evil  is  to  be  utterly  separate.  The
least  link  of  connection  will  develop  into  a  mighty  chain.  2.  Oood  must  be  chosen.
This  is  dutiful.  Duty  has  a  positive  side  still  more  important  than  its  negative  one.
Mere  avoidance  of  what  is  wrong  would  be  a  colourless  thing.  God's  Law  is  not  merely
a  system  of  restrictions,  but  a  system  of  comm  mds.  There  must  be  actual  doing  of
what  is  right,  with  a  knowledge  that  it  i.  righ  ,  and  because  it  is  right.  And  this  is
BO  more  dutiful  than  natural.     The  qualities  tliat  turn  away  from  evil  turn  instinc-


be  THE   BUOK   OK   AM08.  [.««•  ▼•  1— 21

tively  to  good.  Indeed,  the  two  things  are  so  antagonUtio  that  the  lore  <tf  the  one
and  the  hatred  of  the  other  are  only  different  aspects  of  the  same  feeling.  And  in  this
choosing  of  Gbd,  again,  there  are  three  phases  or  degrees  answering  to  those  in  the
avoidance  of  sin.  It  is  to  be  loved,  as  the  fairest  and  most  amiable  thing  on  earth.  It
is  to  be  done,  as  the  only  thing  that  is  fitting  and  right.  It  is  to  be  songht,  as  a  thing
important  and  desirable  in  the  highest  possible  degree.  3.  Justice  must.te  done.
"  Established  in  the  gate."  Unjust  judgment  was  a  prevalent  and  crying  evil.  The
Jewish  character  was  prone  to  it,  and  the  experience  of  it  at  the  hands  "of  strangers
only  strengthened  the  tendency.  Perversion  of  justice  is  one  of  the  most  constant
elements  iu  natural  corruption  everywhere.  A  corrupt  man  makes  a  dishonest  trader,
an  unjust  judge,  and  an  oppressive  master.  Fair  and  upright  dealing  between  man
and  man  has  no  natural  basis,  unless  in  the  fear  of  God.  The  fear  of  Grod,  on  the  other
hand,  will  naturally  co-ordinate  itself  with  regard  for  man.  The  man  who"doef  justly
and  loves  mercy  "  is  one  who  "  walks  humbly  with  God."

IT.  What  God  does  fob  Isbael  he  does  fob  theu  as  BEOia  "the  beunakt
OF  Joseph."  This  form  of  expression  is  significant,  1.  The  remnant.  This  implies
weeding  out  by  previous  judgment.  Israel  had  sinned  long,  and  in  punishment  bad
been  almost  decimated.  This  was  necessary  as  a  matter  of  justice.  Until  it  had  been
done  they  could  not  be  saved.  Sinners,  individually  and  collectively,  must  receive  for
the  wrong  they  have  done.  God's  original  promises  were  made  to  Israel  as  a  nation,
and  not  to  individuals,  and  the  nation  in  his  eye  was  the  remnant  left  after  his  Judg-
ments had  run  their  course.  To  this  remnant  hope  of  deliverance  is  here  held  out  as  a
brand  plucked  from  the  fire;  a  thiug  on  which,  justice  having  been  vindicated,  mercy
may  now,  and  not  till  now,  be  shown.  2.  I%e  remnant  of  Joseph.  This  means  Israel
as  the  covenant  people.  Joseph  was  Israel's  favourite,  "  the  man  that  was  separate
from  his  brethren,"  and  the  recipient  of  the  promise  (Gen.  xlviii.  4)  given  to  Abraham
(Gen.  xvii.  8)  and  repeated  to  Isaac  and  Jacob.  Accordingly,  the  "remnant  of
Joseph  "  is  equivalent  to  the  "  renmant  according  to  the  election  of  grace  "  (Bom.  xL
5).  God  never  forgets  his  covenant,  never  fails  to  give  its  promised  blessings,  never
gives  them  to  the  covenant  people,  but  as  covenanted  mercies.  On  the  broad  ground
of  creaturehood  his  general  mercies  are  distributed,  but  special  mercies  are  on  the
narrower  basis  of  a  spiritual  relation.  All  wherein  we  are  made  to  differ  from  others  is
the  gift  of  a  God  in  covenant,  and  the  story  of  providence  is  at  bottom  the  story  of
grace  (Rom.  viii.  32,  28).

Vers.  16, 17. — The  track  of  the  destroyer.  Each  name  of  God  is  a  guarantor  of  his
action.  It  expresses  a  character,  or  relation,  or  operation,  in  which  he  thereby  reveals
himself.  The  multiplication  of  his  names  and  titles  here  is  a  cumulative  argument  for
the  sureness  of  the  matter  revealed.  He  who  is  God  of  hosts  or  the  Omnipotent  One,
Lord  or  the  Absolute  One,  and  Jehovah  or  the  Self-existent  One,  is  the  Being  with
whom  to  decide  is  to  act,  and  to  will  is  to  accomplish.  Of  the  deliverance  so  empha-
sized observe —

I.  The  hobaIi  ceetainty  that  the  waeninq  to  an  apostate  wiLt  be  tain.
The  possibility  of  a  happy  end,  by  the  grace  of  God,  to  Israel's  sin  and  troubles  is  held
out  in  the  previous  verse.  Yet  here  the  falling  of  the  judgments  denounced  is  assumed
to  be  inevitable.  Paul  declares  that  it  is  impossible  to  restore  to  repentance  those  who
might  fall  away  from  a  high  degree  of  spiritual  attainment.  The  apostate  is  a  hopeless
case :  1.  Because  he  loves  sin  more  than  other  men.  They  love  it  knowing  nothing
better,  but  he  does  so  with  experimental  knowledge  of  the  way  of  peace.  He  loves  it
under  a  less  impulse  than  they,  and  in  the  face  of  stronger  deterrents  than  they,  and
must  therefore  love  it  more  than  they.  The  fuel  that  kindles  with  the  least  fire,  and
burns  in  spite  of  most  water,  is  clearly  the  most  inflammable.  2.  Because  he  is  harder
than  other  men.  The  strain  is  proportioned  to  the  wrench.  All  sin  hardens,  and
hardens  in  proportion  as  we  are  active  and  resolute  in  it.  Sinning  against  more  light,
and  more  deterrent  influence  than  others,  the  apostate's  sin  involves  a  more  decided  act
of  will,  and  so  a  more  violently  hardening  effect.  The  more  firmly  the  branding-iron
vs  applied,  the  more  deeply  it  scars.  The  more  violently  the  moral  sense  is  sinned
acrainst,  the  more  the  organ  is  indurated  and  injured.  8.  Because  his  day  of  grace  vriU
••e  shorter  than  that  of  other  men.    The  only  chance  of  men's  turning  at  all  is  God's


OH.  V.  1— 27.J  THE   BOOK  OF   AMOS.  97

striTing  with  them.  This  he  does  with  all  men  during  a  longer  or  shorter  period.  In
the  case  of  the  antediluvians  the  striving  was  for  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  (Gen.
vi.  3).  In  the  case  of  Jerusalem  it  was  three  years  (Matt,  xziii.  39).  In  the  case  of
Saul,  King  of  Israel,  it  was  till  within  about  seven  years  of  his  death  (1  Sam.  xviii.  12).
In  the  case  of  many  it  is  during  the  entire  life  (Matt.  xx.  6 — 9).  Thus  each  man  has
his  day  of  grace,  during  which  God  strives  with  him  to  bring  him  to  repentance.  In
the  nature  of  the  case  the  day  of  grace  for  the  apostate  must  be  far  advanced.  He  has
been  more  and  longer  striven  with  than  other  men,  and  so  is  presumably  nearer  the
limit  beyond  which  the  process  does  not  go.

II,   A  THREAT  THE  OBVEBSB  OF  A  CONDITIONAL  PBOHISB.      "  Por  I  will  paSS  through

the  midst  of  thee ; "  i.e.  as  elsewhere  (Exod,  xii.  12)  in  judgment.  The  language  is  a
threat.  God,  so  far  from  dwelling  with  them,  as  under  other  circumstances  he  wat
ready  to  do  (ver.  14),  would  pass  through  them  in  wrath  and  destroying  power.
Underlying  the  announcement  of  this  alternative  is  the  fact :  1.  That  compromise  it
impossffile  with  Ood.  He  will  save  or  he  will  destroy.  There  is  no  half-way  house
between  the  good  of  his  promise  and  the  evil  of  his  threat.  He  can  yield  nothing  and
abate  nothing  of  either.  He  will  come  as  a  Friend  to  abide  and  bless  unspeakably,  or
he  will  pass  through  as  an  invading  Foe,  making  desolation  in  his  track.  2.  That  the
incentive  to  r^entance  must  he  double-edged.  There  are  people  who  must  be  led,  and
others  who  must  be  driven.  "  The  mercies  of  God  "  are  the  strongest  motive  power
with  some  minds,  whilst  "  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  "  are  most  potent  with  others.  The
Divine  machinery  of  impulsion,  to  be  perfect  in  itself  and  for  its  purpose,  must  include
both.  Hence  men  are  plied  with  each  in  turn  and  often  with  both  together  (John  iii.
36)  in  connection  vrith  the  salvation  which  they  ultimately  embrace.  Israel's  case
would  not  be  abandoned  as  hopeless  until  both  menace  and  promise  had  made  their
contribution  to  the  work  of  its  persuasion.

m.  Cbeation  LANOUI8HINO  WHEN  THE  Cbeatob  fbownb.  The  Connection  between
man  and  the  creation  is  very  close.  The  judgment  on  Israel  would  mean  evil :  1.  In
the  fields.  They  would  not  be  fertile  as  heretofore.  Their  crops  would  fail  to  grow,  or
be  blighted  before  they  could  be  gathered  (ch.  iv.  7).  Enemies  would  devastate  the
country  and  destroy  the  fruit  of  the  ground.  Bapacious  officials  would  confiscate  the
earnings  of  honest  industry.  In  each  calamity,  much  more  in  all  together,  was  enough
to  quench  the  joy  of  harvest,  and  cause  the  husbandman  to  mourn.  2.  In  the  vine-
yards. The  whole  food  of  the  people,  the  com,  the  wine  together,  would  be  swept
away.  The  grape-gathering  was  a  proverbial  occasion  of  joy  (Isa.  xvi.  10).  But  with
no  vintage  to  gather,  or  no  chance  to  gather  it  for  the  lawful  owner,  the  "  vintage
Bhouting"  would  cease,  and  for  the  usual  singing  in  the  vineyards  would  be  substituted
a  universal  wail.  3.  In  the  streets.  "  God  made  the  country,  and  man  made  the  town."
And  the  human  depends'on  the  Divine.  Trade  and  commerce  draw  from  agriculture
their  chief  materials,  and  so  when  it  fails  they  fail  with  it.  When  the  husbandman
has  cause  to  weep  there  can  be  no  dry  eye  in  the  community.  The  wail  that  begini
in  the  fields,  and  spreads  through  the  vineyards,  will  rise  to  a  mighty  roar  when  it
reaches  the  streets,  where  the  sufferers  herd  and  lament  together.

IV.  The  lamentation  symptomatic  of  a  obbat  disastbb.  1.  This  is  universal.
In  all  "  streets  and  vineyards,"  etc.  The  judgment  affecting  all  classes  in  the  com-
munity, all  should  mourn.  2.  It  is  in  concert.  Men  would  caJl  their  fellows  to  lamen-
tation. Not  as  individuals  merely,  but  as  a  community,  they  sinned  and  suffer,  and  so
as  a  community  they  should  wail.  3.  It  is  worked  up.  "And  lamentation  to  those
skilled  in  lamenting."  The  mourning  would  not  be  left  to  take  any  form  that  hap-
pened. It  would  be  appointed  and  organized,  and  then  observed  according  to  pro-
gramme. All  this  implies  an  intelligent  and  vivid  idea  of  the  significance  of  the
occasion.  God's  judgments,  however  long  despised,  will  make  themselves  to  be  under-
stood and  respected  at  last.  In  hell  there  is  no  misappreciation  of  the  nature  and
strength  of  Divine  retribution;  and  on  earth  appreciation  comes  infallibly  with
experience.

Vers.  18 — ^20. — The  day  of  the  Lord  the  night  of  the  impenitent.  Divine  judgments
will  be  as  sharp  as  they  are  sure.  Sent  in  wrath,  proportioned  to  guilt,  falling  on  the
vulnerable  points,  they  are  the  least  desirable  of  all  imaginable  things.    The  rerr


98  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  t.  1—27.

thought  of  them  should  be  sobering,  and  the  sure  prospect  of  them  overwhelming.
'N'ow,  the  Ecoffer  is  the  worst  type  of  sinner,  and  will,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  be  the
greatest  sufferer  when  judgment  comes.  He  is  at  the  same  time  the  most  utterly
blinded  character,  and  therefore  likely  to  be  taken  most  violently  by  surprise.  How
he  shall  be  so,  and  to  what  extent,  is  made  in  these  verses  to  appear.

I.  "  The  day  of  the  Lobd."  This  is  a  common  expression  in  the  prophets,  and  its
meaning  is  well  defined.  It  is  applied :  1.  To  iht  day  of  active  Divine  intervention  on
earth.  (Job  i.  15  ;  ii.  1 ;  Isa.  ii.  12  j  Jer.  xlvi.  10  ;  Chad.  15.)  There  are  periods  which
God  signalizes  by  special  doings.  Long  quiescent,  he  becomes  conspicuously  active.
He  intervenes  in  human  affairs  with  unusual  emphasis.  Judgments  often  menaced  are
sent.  Sinners  long  borne  with  are  punished.  The  godly,  for  a  time  imposed  on,  are
delivered.  Abuses,  the  growth  of  centuries,  are  dealt  with  on  their  merits,  and  swept
away.  Such  a  period  is  called  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  because  it  is  the  time  of  obvious
and  special  Divine  activity.  God  not  only  strikes,  but  shows  his  hand.  2.  To  the  day
of  final  judgment.  All  others  foreshadow,  lead  up  to,  culminate  and  lose  themselves  in
this.  "  The  day  of  the  Lord  had  already  become  the  name  for  every  day  of  judgment,
leading  on  to  the  last  day  "  (Pusey).  This  is  the  day  of  the  Lord  in  a  unique  sense.
It  is  unique  as  regards  universality.  It  will  see  dealt  with,  not  individuals  merely,  or
nations  even,  but  the  entire  race  (Matt.  xxv.  31).  It  is  unique  in  the  matter  of
thoroughness.  There  will  be  inquisition  as  to  each  person,  and  as  to  every  act  of  each
(2  Cor.  V.  10).  It  is  unique  also  in  the  matter  of  finality.  Questions  already  dealt
with  by  temporal  judgments  will  be  reopened  to  be  settled  once  for  all.  Its  sentence
will  be  final,  and  its  adjudication  of  rewards  and  punishments  for  all  eternity  (Matt.
xxv.  46).

II.  Its  BiaNiFiOANOE  to  the  wioeed.    This  is  explicitly  and  minutely  defined  as :

1.  Evil.  "  Darkness,  and  not  light."  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  Sin  means  wrath,
and  wrath  means  infliction.  Between  a  righteous  God  and  all  unrighteousness  there
must  exist  an  infinite  antagonism.  Between  his  Law  and  such  there  is  an  essential
incompatibility.  Therefore  his  action  towards  them  must  be  adverse,  his  judgment  on
them  that  of  condemnation.  It  is  a  result  of  God's  purity,  of  the  majesty  of  law,  of
the  needs  of  moral  government,  that "  with  the  froward  he  shall  show  himself  froward."

2.  Only  evil.  "  And  no  brightness  in  it."  The  dispensation  of  forbearance,  the  time
for  any  measure  or  kind  of  good,  is  over.  While  any  hope  of  reformation  remained,
judgment  was  mingled  with  mercy.  But  when  this  is  hopeless,  and  the  question  is
only  one  of  punishing  the  reprobate,  the  exercise  of  goodness  would  be  an  anachronism,
and  only  severity  can  be  meted  out.  3.  Evil  playing  into  the  hands  of  evil.  "  As  if  a
man  fleeth  before  the  lion,  and  the  bear  meets  Mm."  Divine  punitive  measures  are
various  and  complete.  They  surround  us.  They  hem  us  in  on  every  side.  They
form  as  it  were  a  circle  of  fire  round  us.  They  are  not  to  be  evaded  or  escaped  (Jer.
xi.  11 ;  Eom.  ii.  3 ;  Heb.  ii.  3).  In  running  away  from  one,  we  only  run  into  the  jaws
of  another.  If  it  is  not  the  lion's  tooth,  then  in  any  case  it  will  he  the  bear's  claws.
If  health  escape,  property  will  suffer.  If  both  escape,  the  good  name  will  be  tarnished.
If  all  three  escape,  conscience  will  be  wounded  and  happiness  destroyed.  If  earthly
evil  consequences  do  not  reach  us,  there  are  eternal  fires  kindled  against  which  there
will  be  no  appeal.  4.  Evil  in  the  arms  of  good.  "  And  rests  his  hand  upon  the  wall,
and  the  snake  bite  him."  The  wall,  a  ready  support  for  the  feeble  or  weary  to  lean
on,  may  furnish  in  its  chinks  a  hiding-place  for  the  venomous  snake.  So  with  all
human  refuges  in  God's  day  of  visitation.  They  will  fail  us.  Their  help  will  not  be
available,  or  it  will  not  be  sufficient,  or  it  will  involve  some  other  evil  as  great  as  the
one  it  will  relieve.  "  The  staff  of  bruised  reed  "  (Isa.  xxxvi.  6)  is  the  fitting  emblem  of
all  fancied  helps  in  the  day  of  God's  wrath.  Even  the  likeliest  will  be  found  wanting
in  the  very  matter  in  which  it  promises  most.

III.  Theib  foolish  desire  fob  it.  "  Woe  to  those  who  desire  the  day  of  Jehovah  1 "
The  sinner's  desiring  the  day  of  vengeance  on  his  sins  may  mean:  1.  Misapprehension.
Israel  did  not  realize  the  enormity  of  their  sin.  They  did  not  see  that  the  threatened
judgments  were  for  themselves  and  on  account  of  it.  They  trusted  to  their  position  as
"  Israel  after  the  flesh "  to  secure  them  the  immunity  that  only  belonged  to  Israel
after  the  Spirit.  And  so  their  idea  of  the  day  of  God  was  a  time  when  their  enemies
would  b«  destroyed,  and  they  themselves  delivered  and  exalted.     With  all  the  wicked.


OH.  T,  1—27.]  THE   BOOK   OF   AMOS.  99

the  eye  for  the  sins  of  otheri  is  bo  much  keener  than  the  eye  for  their  own,  that
coming  good  ia  unconsciously  allocated  to  themselves  and  coming  evil  to  others,  and
so  Divine  judgments  desired  which  can  only  destroy  them  when  they  come.  2.
Bravado.  The  prophets  who  foretold  the  coming  of  God's  day  rehuked  the  people's
sin  on  account  of  which  it  was  to  come.  Put  on  their  mettle  by  the  rebuke,  many
would  affect  to  ridicule  the  prophecy.  Like  others  (Jer.  xvii.  15 ;  2  Pet.  iii.  3, 4),  they
would  say,  with  an  affectation  of  unbelief  "You  are  trying  to  frighten  us  with  a
bugbear.  Let  your  talked-of  judgment  fall,  and  then  we  will  believe  it."  The  delay
of  God's  judgment,  which  means  that  when  it  comes  it  shall  be  the  more  terrible,
is  often  taken  as  meaning  that  it  is  not  coming  at  all  (Ezek.  xii.  22,  27).  3.  Vindic-
tiveness.  Some  wohld  deem  themselves  less  criminal  than  others — their  enemies,  it  may
be,  and  oppressors.  On  these  they  would  expect  the  heaviest  strokes  to  fall,  and  to
bring  this  about  they  would  suffer  more  or  less  themselves.  There  are  Samsons
among  sinners  who  would  run  the  risk  of  perishing  themselves  in  order  to  secure  the
destruction  of  others.  To  all  three  classes  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  darkness,  and  no
brightness  in  it."  Evil  will  come  none  the  less  surely  because  it  is  good  that  is
expected,  and  it  will  come  all  the  more  sharply  on  those  who  to  their  other  sin  have
added  malice  against  men  and  mockery  of  God.

Vers.  21 — 23. — 77ie  autograph  of  the  unreal.  Wicked  Israel,  strange  to  say,  was
worshipping  Israel  still.  Theirs  was  sanctimoniouB  sinning.  It  was  done  more  or
less  in  a  religious  connection.  It  was  accompanied,  and  attempted  to  be  covered,  by
an  unstinted  dressing  of  pietistic  cant.  But  it  only  smelled  the  more  rank  to  Heaven.
Unreal  worship  is  no  mitigation,  but  only  an  aggravation,  of  the  guilt  of  unholy  living,

I.  Insinceeitt  is  often  bckdpulous  about  all  the  circumstantials  of  worship.
This  is  natural.  It  builds  on  the  form  as  a  substitute  for  the  spirit,  and  on  the  obser-
vance of  the  ordinance  thus  as  a  substitute  for  a  godly  life.  Going  through  religious
forms  costs  nothing  in  the  way  of  crucifying  the  flesh.  Accordingly,  the  scrupulosity
of  Israel  seemed  to  be  great  in  proportion  to  their  hypocrisy.  1.  I%ey  kept  the  feaitt.
"  Feasts  "  (ver.  21)  means  the  annual  feasts.  There  is  no  hint  that  these,  or  any  of
them,  were  neglected  or  overlooked.  The  routine  of  celebration  went  mechanically  on.
They  were  observed  without  purpose  and  without  heart,  but  they  were  observed,  2.
They  performed  the  acts  of  worship.  "The  assemblies"  (ver,  21)  were  probably  the
meetings  for  worship  (Lev.  xxiii.  36)  appointed  to  be  held  at  the  feasts.  These  as  a
class,  no  exception  to  which  is  indicated,  are  spoken  of  as  having  been  held.  "Then
'  songs,'  no  doubt  of  Zion,  and  inspired  by  God,  were  duly  sung,  and  the  accompaniment
played  on  harps — instruments  almost  exclusively  consecrated  to  the  service  of  God "
(Pusey).  3.  They  offered  the  usual  gifts.  The  "burnt  offering,"  the  "meat  offering,"
and  the  "  peace  offering,"  which  are  all  voluntary  offerings,  were  regularly  made,  so
far  as  appears.  They  were  made,  moreover,  with  fatlings — beasts  the  best  of  their  kind,
and  such  as  the  Law  prescribed.  So  far,  therefore,  as  form  went,  their  worship  was
scrupulously  correct.  And  the  same  is  generally  true  of  hollow  and  unspiritual
worship.  Being  purely  formal,  it  will  seem  excellent  in  proportion  as  it  is  elaborate.
The  absence  of  the  spirit  is  attempted  to  be  compensated  for  by  the  exaltation  of  the
letter.  Worship  can  no  more  be  appraised  by  its  fulness,  and  fairness  of  outward  form,
than  the  dietary  value  of  a  fruit  by  its  size  and  colour.

II.  Insincerity  is  oharacteristio  no  less  in  what  it  omits  than  in  what  it
OBSERVES.  No  mention  is  made  of  the  "  sin  offering  "  or  the  "  trespass  offering."  Yet
these  were  both  compulsory,  whereas  the  three  observed  were  optional.  Hence  it
appears  that :  1.  To  the  formalist  that  is  least  acceptable  which  is  most  Divine.  He  has
no  true  respect  for  God's  authority.  He  is  a  self-pleaser  first  of  all  and  most  of  all,  and
will  find  the  ordinance  most  acceptable  into  the  observance  of  which  there  enters  most
of  his  own  will  and  least  of  God's.  On  this  principle  the  optional  in  worship  will  be
preferred  to  the  prescribed  (Isa.  i.  12),  and  the  unauthorized  to  either  (Mark  vii.  9).
The  illustration  of  this  in  the  countless  vagaries  of  the  Eomanistand  Rituajist  is  easy  to
trace.  Practical  attention  to  the  various  details  of  worship  by  the  unspiritual  almost
seems  to  be  inversely  as  their  Divine  authority,  2.  To  the  formalist  that  is  most
distasteful  which  most  closely  connects  him  with  his  sin.  The  sin  offering  was  an
«cknowledgm«nt,  and  involved  a  remembrance,  of  guilt.    This  is  distastsful  to  the


100  THE  BOOK  OF  AM08.  [oh.  v.  1—27.

natural  heart.  Give  a  sinful  man  hii  way,  and  the  last  matter  he  will  face  will  be  hii
own  sinfulness.  Allow  a  formalist  discretion  in  worship,  and  the  ordinance  that  most
articulately  speaks  of  sin  will  be  the  one  least  observed.  Singing  will  be  preferred  to
praying,  a  form  of  prayer  will  be  preferred  to  the  directness  of  spontaneous  utterance,
and  preaching,  which  most  distinctly  brings  face  to  face  with  personal  responsibility
and  duty,  will  be  almost  crowded  out.  Worship,  in  fact,  in  proportion  as  it  becomes
formal,  becomes  impersonal  and  indirect.

III.  SuoH  HOLLOW  woBSHip  IS  UTTEBLT  OFFENSIVE  TO  GoD.  The  degrees  of  Divine
disapprobation  run  up  a  graduated  scale.  "  I  will  not  accept ; "  "I  will  not  take
pleasure  in ; "  "I  will  not  regard ; "  "  I  hate ; "  "I  despise."  In  all  'such  worship  the
moral  element,  the  first  element  of  acceptability,  is  altogether  wanting.  The  thing  is
not  meant  for  worship,  and  cannot  be  treated  as  such.  It  ia  not  observed  according  to
God's  will,  nor  as  God's  appointment  at  all,  but  as  our  own  invention  or  choice.  It
is  not  aimed  at  the  God-glorifying,  soul-saving  objects  prescribed  in  Scripture.  Gone
through  without  interest  or  heart,  done  for  fashion,  or  freak,  or  gain,  it  honours  neither
God  nor  his  command,  whilst  it  calls  into  play  no  grace  of  the  religious  life  whatever.
It  is  a  mere  performance,  not  only  destitute  of  moral  value,  but  distasteful  to  God,  and
in  gratuitous  violation  of  his  Law.  Hence  the  vocabulary  of  condemnation  is  exhausted
on  it  (Isa.  i.  11 — 16)  as  the  meanest  and  most  hateful  thing  in  the  whole  spiritual
connection.

Ver,  24, — Beal  calamity  waiting  upon  unreal  service.  "  The  meaning  of  this  verse
is  not, '  Let  justice  and  righteousness  take  the  place  of  your  sacrifices.'  .  .  .  The  verse
threatens  the  flooding  of  the  land  with  judgment  and  the  punitive  righteousness  of
God  "  (Keil).     Adopting  this  interpretation,  we  observe—

I.  That  which  is  eejected  "  is  high  unto  chesino."  Hollow  service  has  been
sitting  for  its  portrait,  and  the  picture  is  striking.  Now  we  have  the  Divine  appraise-
ment revealed  in  the  action  to  be  taken  forthwith.  Instead  of  approval  there  is  con-
demnation. Instead  of  reward  there  is  punishment.  Instead  of  profit  resulting  there
is  loss  on  every  issue.  1.  It  deeerves  this.  Want  of  conformity  to  law  is  a  sufficient
ground  of  condemnation.  Positive  transgression  of  law  is  groimd  more  decided  stilL
Wilful  mockery  of  the  Lawgiver  is  most  deeply  criminal  of  all.  All  these  elements
pertained  to  Israel's  sham  observances,  and,  together,  they  constitute  an  indictment  on
which  the  criminal's  conviction  is  inevitable.  2.  It  requires  it.  QroA'a  moral  govern-
ment must  show  itself  strong  and  just,  and  in  order  to  this,  sin,  and  all  sin,  must  be
visited  with  his  avenging  stroke.  Especially  must  this  be  done  in  the  sphere  of
"  things  whereby  God  maketh  himself  known,"  The  thing  whose  function  it  is  to
make  him  known  must  do  so  in  the  glorious  character  he  bears.

II.  The  judgments  that  enoulf  are  bighteousness.  This  could  be  argued,  and
is  here  affirmed.  1.  They  express  righteousness.  They  are  deserved.  They  are  all
deserved.  They  are  deserved  in  the  proportions  in  which  they  come.  If  they  did  not
come,  the  moral  balance  of  things  would  be  disturbed.  If  they  came  in  less  decided
form,  this  balance  would  be  only  half  adjusted.  They  are  "  righteous  judgments  "  in
the  fullest  and  highest  sense.  2.  ITiey  accomplish  righteousness.  They  are  sent  in  the
interests  of  it.  They  fall  on  the  unrighteous.  They  are  designed  and  fitted  to  lead  to
their  reformation  (Isa.  xxvi.  9),  Sometimes  the  righteous  suffer  from  them  also.  In
that  case  their  tendency  is  on  the  one  hand  to  promote  the  righteousness  of  the  sufferer,
and  on  the  other  to  emphasize  the  evil  of  imrighteousness  in  any  section  of  a  com-
munity, and  so  prevent  it.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Divine  judgments  have  often  wrought
righteousness  both  in  individuals  (2  Chron.  xzxiii.  11 — 16)  and  communities  (Isa.  xliii.
21).  Even  in  eternity  they  bulk  largely,  in  the  thought  of  the  redeemed,  among  the
helpful  experiences  of  earth  (Bev.  vii.  14).

III.  When  judgment  in  biohtbodsness  comes,  it  combs  like  a  flood.  There  are
two  ideas  here.  The  first  is :  1.  Let  judgment  roll  on  like  water.  In  this :  (1)  It  wiU
be  deep  (Ps.  xxxvi.  6),  swallowing  up  all  its  victims.  (2)  It  will  be  sudden,  taking
the  evil-doers  by  surprise  (Luke  xvii.  20 — 31).  (3)  It  will  be  irresistible,  sweeping
before  it  every  opposing  object  (Ps,  xc.  5).  (4)  It  will  be  destroymg,  leaving  no  living
thing  in  its  track.  (6)  It  will  be  ultimately  fertilizing,  leaving  behind  it  the  rich  ooze
of  an  abiding  lesson.    2.  And  righteousness  ike  an  inexhaustible  ttream.    Judgment


CH.  T.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOa  101

U  the  act  of  which  righteousness  is  the  principle.  God's  righteousness,  whether  in
iiimself  or  in  his  judginents,  is  like  an  inexhaustible  stream.  (1)  It  is  perennial.  The
righteousness  of  God's  judgments  is  a  constant  quantity.  It  never  intermits.  Each  is
righteous  and  all  are  righteousness.  (3)  It  it  pure.  Righteousness  in  God  is  neces-
sarily BO.  There  is  no  foreign  ingredient,  no  cloud  of  mixture  in  it  whatever.  It  is
righteous  through  and  through.  "  There  is,"  there  can  be,  "  no  imrighteousness  in
him."  (3)  It  is  cleansing.  It  purifies  all  it  touches;  the  person  it  is  laved  on,  the
city  it  passes  through.  (4)  It  is  irrigating.  It  waters  the  fields  of  human  life.  It
makes  the  graces,  like  the  grass,  to  grow  in  the  desert,  and  withering  things  revive.
The  righteousness  of  God,  like  water-streams,  is  rich  in  every  element  of  blessing  for
time,  and  is  a  benefactor  for  eternity  as  well.

Vers.  25 — 27. — Trusting  in  idols  that  cannot  save.  In  these  words,  God's  case
against  Israel  just  announced  is  strengthened.  Their  services  now  were  hollow  and
insincere ;  their  sacrifices  formal  acts  in  which  the  heart  had  no  part.  This,  in  itself,
was  ground  of  punishment  even  to  destruction.  But  it  is  only  a  portion  of  the  iniquity
chargeable  against  them.  In  the  wilderness  the  course  had  been  already  entered  on.
Appointed  ordinances  had  been  neglected.  Idolatrous  ordinances  had  been  introduced.
As  now  they  were  going  on,  so  they  had  long  ago  begun.  There  was  a  diuturnity  in
their  wrong-doing  which  made  the  fall  of  destroying  judgments  a  foregone  conclusion.
We  see  here —

I.  IsBAEii's  PRESENT  JUDGED  IN  THE  LIGHT  OF  ITS  PAST.  What  Israel  in  Amos's  time
was  and  should  receive  was  affected  by  what  Israel  had  been  and  done  in  the  desert
of  sin.  This  is  according  to  principles  universally  received.  1.  Every  nation  is  heli
responsible  for  its  oiim  entire  past.  The  England  of  to-day  not  only  owns  responsi-
bility for,  but  is  striving  nobly  to  make  compensation  for,  errors  of  the  England  of
three  hundred  years  ago.  The  prophet-killing  Israel  of  our  Lord's  time  are  declared
responsible  for  all  the  martyr-blood  shed  from  that  of  Abel  down  (Matt,  xxiii.  35).
The  logic  of  this  is  unassailable.  The  national  identity  remains  unbroken.  The
national  policy  remains  unchanged.  The  national  life  maintains  its  continuity.  And
so  among  its  heirlooms  is  the  inherited  responsibility  for  the  sins  of  other  days.  2.
A  nation  is  further  responsible  for  its  past,  in  that  the  present  takes  its  tone  from  it.
A  certain  proportion  of  almost  every  evil  is  hereditary.  From  the  past  generations  we
inherit  evil  qualities  and  learn  evil  ways.  The  father's  vices  reappear  in  the  child.
The  present  is  the  child  of  the  jiast,  iiegotten  In  its  likeness,  and  liable  as  such  for  tha
evil  it  has  taken  up  and  perpetuates.  3.  The  life  of  a  nation,  like  that  of  an  indi-
vidual, can  be  Judged  of  only  as  a  whole.  If  a  nation  from  its  birth  to  its  death  be  one
thing,  so  is  a  nation's  life.  Now,  the  glory  of  God's  dealing  is  its  perfect  equity,
arising  out  of  its  exhaustive  induction  of  facts.  He  leaves  nothing  out  of  account,  no
smallest  word,  no  slightest  desire,  no  most  trifling  act.  His  verdict  in  each  case  is
based  on  the  entire  lite  of  the  {jarty  in  court.  The  method  is  fair.  No  other  method
would  be  fair.  Each  part  is  modified  by  its  relation  to  all  the  others,  and  cannot  be
fairly  judged  unless  in  connection  with  them.

II.  That  past  pbbsistbntly  unfaithful.  The  interrogative  form  of  ver.  25  is
equivalent  to  a  strong  negation.  1.  I%ey  had  neglected  sacrifice  in  the  wilderness.
"Have  ye  offered  me  sacrifices  and  gifts  in  the  desert  forty  years?"  Typifying  the
atonement  of  Christ,  through  which  men  draw  near  to  God,  sacrifice  was  the  funda-
mental exercise  of  Old  Testament  worship.  This  was  not  abandoned  by  the  priests
(Numb.  xvi.  46),  but  it  was,  like  circumcision  (Josh.  v.  5),  neglected  by  the  people,
and  superseded  by  sacrifices  to  idols  (Deut.  xxxii.  17 ;  Ezek.  xx.  16).  In  this  neglect
or  perversion  were  included  the  voluntary  gifts  (offerings)  as  well  as  the  prescribed
sacrifices.  Thus  early  adopted,  and  long  persisted  in,  was  Israel's  rebellious  way.
Emphasizing  the  pronoun,  God  says  in  effect  of  the  whole  run  of  Jewish  national
history,  "  Ye  either  offered  no  sacrifice  at  all,  or  none  to  7n«."  2.  Thy  were  at  pain*
to  make,  and  carry,  idolatrous  appliances  with  them.  "But  ye  have  borne  the
tabernacle  of  your  Moloch."  Divinely  appointed  sacrifice  they  found  too  burdensome
to  be  followed.  Of  Divine  worship  in  each  of  its  ordinances  they  said, "  What  a  weariness
is  it  1 "  But  they  thought  it  no  trouble  to  make  and  carry  about  portable  shrines  and
pedestals  for  use  in  the  worship  of  heathen  idols.    A  man  will  do  for  his  idol  what  he


lOa  TUB  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  t.  1—27.

will  not  do  for  God.  Be  it  idol  lust,  or  habit,  or  opinion,  he  loves  it  more,  and  is  more
like  it,  and  so  finds  its  service  more  congenial.  The  God  of  the  legalist  is  not  the  God
of  Scripture,  but  a  God  of  his  own  devising,  and  so  he  serves  him  laboriously  in
works  of  self-righteousness,  whilst  stubbornly  declining  the  far  easier  call  of  the  true
God  to  simple  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  in  following  his  affinities  thus  that
Israel  was  ever  found  joined  to  his  idols,  and  alien  to  the  God  of  heaven,  3.  This  idolatry
they  had  derived  from  Egypt.  "  It  was  no  doubt  to  these  Egyptian  sun-gods  that
the  star-god  which  the  Israelites  carried  about  with  them  belonged"  (Keil).  They
were  not  seduced  into  idolatry  merely  by  the  nations  among  whom  they  passed.  They
did  not  wait  for  that.  They  tired  of  Jehovah's  service,  and  sought  out  false  gods  for
themselves.  They  were  bent  on  baring  idols,  come  whence  they  would.  Failing
others,  they  adopted,  in  their  blind  and  besotted  perverseness,  those  of  Egypt  itself.
Their  return  to  Jehovah  for  deliverance  was  desertion,  and  the  lesson  learned  under
idolatrous  Egypt's  savage  oppression  was  to  adopt  the  idol-worship  that  produced  it.
This  is  eloquent  of  the  godlessness  of  the  corrupt  heart.  Nothing  can  disgust  it  with
idols,  nothing  can  attach  it  to  God.  It  hates  him  always,  and  embraces,  or  geeks,  or
makes  occasions  of  abandoumg  his  worship.  4.  IsraeVs  worship  of  idols  involved  the
serving  of  them.  "  The  booth  of  your  king."  Every  man's  god  is  his  king.  Worship
is  the  highest  act  of  service.  When  it  is  rendered,  the  other  and  lower  acts  necessarily
follow ;  when  it  is  abandoned,  they  logically  and  actually  cease.  A.  new  idol  in  the
heart  means  a  new  sovereign  over  the  life.

III.  The  DiviNB  potjishmbnt  to  be  adjusted  to  the  bin.  This  it  always  is,  but
in  the  present  case  the  correspondence  is  specially  obvious.  1.  ITiey  shovM  go  into
captivity.  God  often  punishes  sins  against  himself  by  human  instrumentality,  gene-
rally that  of  the  wicked  (2  Sam.  zxiv.  13 ;  Ps.  cix.  6).  The  severity  of  such  punish-
ment is  guaranteed  by  the  native  cruelty  of  the  human  heart.  As  the  conqueror  and
owner  of  the  vanquished  and  enslaved,  the  wicked  puts  on  his  worst  character,  and  his
treatment  becomes  punishment  corresponding  to  the  worst  sin  of  idolatry.  2.  Their
captivity  should  he  among  idolaters.  The  rod  of  God's  anger  in  this  case  was  to  be  the
Assyrian  (Isa.  x.  5).  In  captivity  with  him,  Israel  would  find  out  what  kind  of  masters
idolatry  makes  of  its  votaries.  This  would  disenchant  them,  if  anything  could.  The
test  of  the  god  we  worship  is  the  practical  one  of  the  character  of  his  service.  When
our  idol  lusts  become  our  masters,  we  know  them  as  they  really  are.  The  drunkard
has  attained  to  a  knowledge  of  the  drink-appetite  that  would  be  a  wholesome  revela-
tion to  those  who  are  just  beginning  to  indulge.  3.  They  should  die  as  slaves  in  the  land
out  of  which  their  progenitor  had  at  first  heen  called.  "  I  will  carry  you  beyond
Damascus."  Stephen  (Acts  viL  42,  43)  quotes  this  "beyond  Babylon."  In  either
case  the  neighbourhood  of  Ur  of  the  Chaldees  would  be  referred  to.  This,  which  had
been  the  crtidle  of  the  cation,  would  be  its  grave.  There,  where  their  godly  ancestor
had  been  a  prince,  the  idolatrous  nation  would  be  slaves  (Josh.  xziv.  14,  3) ;  his  faith,
and  the  promises  to  it,  having  been  lost  together.

lY.  God's  threats  emphasized  bt  his  Naue.  This  says  what  he  is,  and  so  indicates
bow  he  will  act.  1.  He  is  Jehovah,  the  Sdf-existent  One.  "  He  cannot  but  be,  and  he
is,  the  Source  of  all  being ;  the  unchangeable,  infinite,  eternal  Essence."  As  Jehovah,
he  originates  all  things  (ver.  8 ;  ch.  ix.  6 ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  2),  controls  all  things  (Ps.  x.
16 ;  xcix.  1),  fills  and  possesses  all  things,  and  "  nothing  is  too  hard  lor  him  "  (Jer.  xxxii.
27).  2.  He  is  Lord  of  hosts.  "  The  Lord  of  the  heavenly  hosts,  for  whose  worship
they  forsook  God ;  the  Lord  of  the  hosts  on  earth,  whose  ministry  he  employs  to  punish
those  who  rebel  against  him.  All  creatures  in  heaven  and  earth  are,  as  he  says  of  the
holy  angels, '  ministers  of  his  that  do  his  pleasure ' "  (Pusey).  "  Jehovah,"  the  great
First  Cause,  "  QkA  of  hosts,"  the  Controller  of  all  second  causes  whatever,  there  is  that
in  the  Name  of  God  which  guarantees  the  execution,  literal  and  exhaustive,  of  all  hii
threat!.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBS.

Ver.  4. — "  Beek  the  Lord"    Man  is  by  nature  a  seeker.    He  dedres  good,  of  ono
kind  or  aaother,  and  what  he  desires  he  makes  the  object  of  hit  quest,  more  or  leae


<JH.T.l— 27.]  THE   BOOK  OF  AMOS.  103


diligent  and  persevering.  Hence  the  restlessness,  the  energy,  the  effort,  so  distinctive
of  human  life.  Religion  does  not  destroy  or  repress  natural  characteristics ;  it  hallows
and  dignifies  them.     Beligion  gives  to  human  search  a  just  direction  and  noble  aim.

I.  The  beasons  in  man's  natdeb  and  oibcumstanoeb  which  SHonLD  lead  him
TO  SEEK  THE  LoBD.  1.  Man  is  BO  constituted  that  he  cannot  find  a  Ml  satisfaction
in  any  earthly  and  created  good.  He  returns  from  every  such  endeavour  with  the
complaint,  "All  is  vanity."  "  Our  heart,"  said  St.  Augustine — "our  heart  is  restless
till  it  rests  in  thee."  2.  Especially  do  all  human  religions  prove  their  insuEBciency.
Israel  was  learning  this  by  bitter  experience.  "  Seek  not  Bethel,"  etc.,  was  the  admoni-
tion of  the  prophet  to  those  who  had  been  in  the  habit  of  resorting  to  idol-ihrines.
The  gods  of  the  heathen  were  known  to  the  Jews  as  "  vanities."

II.  The  beasons  to  be  found  in  God  why  he  should  bnoaqe  the  sebkino
P0WEB8  of  man.  1.  His  own  proper  excellence  is  such  that  the  soul  that  gains  even
a  glimpse  of  it  may  well  devote  to  the  pursuit  of  Divine  knowledge  and  favour  all
powers  and  all  opportunities.  2.  God  alone  is  able  to  succour  and  to  save  those  who
set  their  affection  and  desire  upon  him.  3.  God  condescends  to  invite  the  children  of  men
to  seek  him.  By  the  mouth  of  the  prophet  he  gives  an  express  command  and  invita-
tion. We  may  be  assured  that  this  language  is  sincere  and  trustworthy.  4.  There  is
an  express  promise  of  incomparable  preciousness  addressed  to  such  as  are  ready  to
respond  to  the  heavenly  call.  "  Ye  shall  live,"  is  the  authoritative  assurance.  By  this
we  may  understand  that  seekers  after  God  shall  be  delivered  from  destruction,  that
they  shall  be  made  partakers  of  the  Divine  life,  in  all  its  spiritual  energy  and
happiness.

III.  The  methods  ih  which  God  mat  be  bouoht  and  found.  1.  Observe  whert
he  is  to  be  found :  (.e.  in  his  holy  Word ;  in  his  blessed  Son,  by  whom  in  this  Christian
dispensation  he  has  revealed  himself  unto  us,  and  who  has  said,  "  No  man  cometh  unto
the  Father,  but  by  me."  2.  Consider  how  he  is  to  be  found :  i.e.  by  penitence,  in
humility,  through  faith,  with  prayer ;  in  a  word,  by  the  exercises  special  to  the  spiritual
nature.  3.  Notice  when  he  is  to  be  found :  i.e.  now.  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may
be  found,  call  ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near." — T.

Vers.  7 — ^9. — The  Lord  of  the  universe.  The  herdsman  of  Tekoah  was  a  true  poet.
His  eyes  were  open  to  the  beauty  and  to  the  i^plendour  of  nature ;  and  his  heart  felt
the  presence  of  the  Unseen  and  Eternal  in  all  the  works  of  his  hands,  in  all  his  provi-
dential arrangements.  More  than  this,  the  moral  character  and  rule  of  the  Omnipotent
were  very  present  and  very  real  to  him ;  he  felt  the  force  of  the  appeal  made  to  the
spiritual  nature  of  man,  and  calling  for  a  life  of  religious  faith,  of  practical  obedience.
There  is  nothing  strained  or  unnatural  in  the  striking  conjunction  in  this  passage  of
poetic  sensibility  with  ethical  and  religious  exhortation.

L  A  bbpbesentation  of  Divine  geeatness  and  globt.  1.  Seen  in  the  creation
of  the  starry  host.  The  Pleiades  and  Orion  are  mentioned  as  two  of  the  most  noticeable
and  most  splendid  of  the  constellations  of  the  midnight  sky.  2.  In  the  alternations
of  day  and  night,  in  sunrise  and  sunset,  in  storm  and  in  eclipse.  3.  In  the  grandeur
of  the  sea,  in  the  torrents  of  raia,  in  the  floods  which  pour  their  waters  over  the  earth ;
in  a  word,  in  all  the  processes  of  nature,  4.  In  the  providential  interpositions  and  the
righteous  rule  of  the  Most  High,  who  does  according  to  his  will  among  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth.

II,  An  infebenot  as  to  human  conduct.  The  poet-prophet  is  more  than  a  mirror
to  reflect  the  visible  splendour,  the  awful  forces  of  the  universe.  To  him  nature  has
a  voice  of  authority,  appealing  to  the  understanding  and  to  the  conscience  of  the  sons
of  men.  There  is  a  summons  to  the  unrighteous  and  the  irreligious  to  forsake  their
ways  and  to  choose  a  better  path.  This  summons  will  take  a  different  form  according
to  the  character,  the  moral  development,  of  those  addressed.  1.  There  is  what  may  be
called  the  Unuer  view — a  God  so  great  will  not  suffer  iniquity  to  triutaph,  or  injustice
and  disobedience  to  go  unpunished.  All  are  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty ;  and  he
w4iose  power  is  so  evidently  revealed  in  the  heavens  above  and  on  the  earth  beneath
will  not  fail  to  assert  his  authority  over  all  the  creatures  of  his  power.  Although
wickedness  may  prosper  for  a  season,  the  law  of  righteousness  shall  be  maintained  and
vindicated.    2.  There  is  a  higher  view — not  inconsistent  with  the  othnr.  but  presenting


104  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  t.  1—27

itself  to  natures  moT«  morally  cultivated  and  advanced.  Oreat  as  Ood  appe&n  ii
nature,  our  conceptions  of  his  ezcelleoce  are  enhanced  when  we  reflect  upon  hii
glorious  attributes  and  his  righteous  reigu.  The  eternal  law  of  righteousness
administered  by  Omnipotence  demands  our  lowly  reverence,  deserres  our  grateful
obedience. — ^T.

Vers.  14, 15.— The  great  alternative.  The  coincidence  between  religion  and  morality
is  brought  very  strikingly  before  us  in  such  passages  as  these.  How  different  are  such
appeals  as  these,  made  by  the  prophet  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  from  the  requirements
of  merely  formal  religion  1  The  highest  conception  of  good  is  revealed,  the  noblest
standard  of  right  is  exhibited ;  and  all  the  sanctions  furnished  by  the  authority  and  the
loving-kindness  of  the  Eternal  are  brought  to  bear  upon  human  nature  to  induce  to
consecration  and  obedience.

I.  Man's  katcbe  and  position  bendeb  necessabt  a  uobal  ohoick.  1.  Man's
emotional  nature  impels  him  to  adopt  an  object  of  supreme  love.  Human  affection
may  be  diffused  or  it  may  be  concentrated,  it  may  be  languid  or  it  may  be  intense.
But  in  any  case  it  exists  and  acts  as  a  principle  of  the  moral  life.  2.  Man's  voluntary
and  practical  nature  requires  an  object  of  supreme  quest  and  endeavour.  We  seek
what  we  love,  we  avoid  what  we  hate.

II.  The  gbbat  altebnative  which  fbesents  itself  to  man  is  the  choiob
BETWEEN  GOOD  AND  EVIL.  This  is  a  real  and  not  a  fictitious  or  conventional  distinc-
tion. It  would  bo  as  reasonable  to  deny  the  distinction  between  straight  and  crooked,
between  light  and  darkness,  as  that  between  moral  good  and  moral  evil.  The  distinc-
tion is  vital  and  etema),  connected  with  the  "  nature  of  things,"  with  the  attributes
and  character  of  God,  with  the  constitution  of  man.  The  choice  between  pleasure  and
pain,  between  worldly  prosperity  and  adversity,  is  as  nothing  compared  with  this
choice.  The  appeals  of  revelation,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  Bible,  urge  men
to  choose  the  good  in  preference  to  the  evil.  There  are  doubtless  inducements  to
another  choice ;  but  this  remains  the  choice  enforced  by  reason,  by  conscience,  by  Ood.

III.  However  it  may   be   eepbesented   otherwise,  the   fact  is  that  the

FBACTICAL  FBBFERENCE  OF  GOOD    C0NDCCE8    TO    UAN's    WELFARE,       The   inducements

offered  to  adopt  a  life  of  selfishness  and  of  pleasure  are  many  and  powerful ;  there  are
"  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season."  The  way  of  virtue  and  religion  is  a  steep  and  rugged
path.  Yet  it  yields  a  deep  and  pure  satisfaction  not  to  be  found  in  the  ways,  the  broad
and  primrose  paths,  of  sin.  We  are  not  called  upon  to  balance  pleasures.  The  voice
of  right,  of  God,  is  authoritative,  and  demands  obedience  without  hesitation  or  calcula-
tion. Yet  God  promises  such  as  listen  to  and  obey  his  voice  that  he  wiU  "  be  with  "
them,  that  he  will  be  " gracious  unto"  them,  and  that  they  shall  " live." — ^T.

Vers.  21 — 23. — Ceremonialism  disdainM.  Although  the  Jewish  religion  prescribed,
as  is  evident  especially  from  the  Book  of  Leviticus,  innumerable  observances,  elaborate
ritual,  frequent  and  costly  sacrifices,  still  nowhere  are  there  to  be  found  more  dis-
claimers, more  denunciations,  of  a  merely  ritual  and  ceremonial  piety  than  in  the
Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament.  This  is  but  one  of  many  declarations  that  the  true
and  living  God  will  not  accept  any  tribute  of  the  hands  which  may  be  offered  in  lieu
of  the  homage  of  the  heart.

I.  The  outwabd  manifestations  of  religion  which  God  rejects.  1.  Sacred
assemblies  are  displeasing  to  him.  He  does,  indeed,  love  the  gates  of  Zion  more  than
all  the  dwellings  of  Jacob  ;  yet  the  prophet  is  inspired  to  declare  that  God  hates  and
despises  the  gatherings  of  his  own  people.  2.  Solemn  festivals  are  equally  distasteful.
These,  indeed,  have  been  prescribed  in  the  Law ;  they  are  commemorative  of  great
mercies,  great  deliverances ;  their  neglect  or  omission  is  viewed  with  displeasure.  Yet
here  Goil  is  indignant  that  these  feasts  should  be  celebrated.  3.  The  same  detestation
is  extended  to  the  burnt  offerings,  meat  offerings,  and  peace  offerings,  which  the
Hebrews  were  instructed  on  proper  occasions  to  present  to  their  Divine  King.  4.
More  remarkable  still,  sacred  songs  and  strains  of  music  are  as  discord  in  the  ear  of
God.  The  very  psalms  in  which  the  Divine  attributes  are  celebrated  and  the  Divine
gifts  acknowledged  are  no  longer  acceptable  to  him  who  inhabiteth  the  praises  of  IsraeL

II.  The  grounds  trpoN  which  God  rejects  the   outvibd  manifest atdnb  of


CH.T.  1—27.1  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  106


BELioiON.  1.  Not  because  they  are  themselves  aa  inappropriate  tribute  of  rebgious
emotion  and  religious  consecration.  2.  But  because  they  are  not  expressive  of  sincere
jsrorsbip,  gratitude,  confidence,  and  love.  "  This  people,"  saith  the  Searcher  of  hearts,
"  draweth  nigh  unto  me  with  their  lips,  but  their  heart  is  far  from  me."  And  our  Lord
Christ  has  taught  us  that  "  God  i»  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship
him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  3.  And  because  ceremonial  observances  may  be,  and
in  the  cases  in  question  are,  consistent  with  an  idolatrous  and  wicked  life.  The  very
men  who  were  punctilious  in  these  ceremonies  and  sacrifices  were  tampering  with  the
idolatry  of  surrounding  peoples,  and  were  acting  with  injustice  and  selfishness  iu  the
ordinary  relationships  of  life.  4.  Because,  further,  these  manifestations  are  as  a  matter
of  fact  substituted  for  those  feelings  and  purposes  which  they  are  intended  to  promote.
In  fact,  seeming  religiousness  hides  the  absence  of  real  religion,  so  that  this  absence  is
sometimM  unnoticed  by  the  apparent  but  heartless  and  formal  worshipper. — T.

Ver.  24. — 2%e  river  of  righteoumes$.  Whilst  the  holy  King  and  Judge  rejects  the
mere  service  of  the  lip  and  of  the  band,  when  unaccompanied  by  genuine  piety,  he
desires  above  all  things  the  prevalence  of  those  practical  principles  of  rectitude  which
are  the  secret,  hidden  power  of  an  upright  and  acceptable  life.  In  a  very  bold  and
beautiful  metaphor  the  Divine  wish  and  pleasure  are  declared.  Let  the  hypocritical
festivals,  the  unmeaning  sacrifices,  the  hollow  songs,  be  swept  away,  and  let  the  river
of  righteousness  roll  through  the  land,  and  God  shall  be  pleased,  and  his  people  shall
be  blessed.

I.  Its  DiyiKE  souboe.  The  fountain  of  rectitude  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  arrange-
ments of  human  society,  in  the  laws  of  hvmian  device,  in  the  expediency  which  aims
at  human  pleasures.  We  are  to  look  up  to  the  hills,  to  the  heavens,  for  its  source.
It  wells  from  the  eternal  constitution  of  the  moral  universe,  from  the  very  nature,
from  the  glorious  government,  of  the  Eternal.

II.  Its  vast  volume.  There  is  no  community  of  men,  there  is  no  social  relationship,
in  which  righteousness  may  not  be  exempliSed.  Even  the  heathen  philosophers  could
■ay  great  things  of  justice.

"  Nor  morning  star,  nor  evening  star,  so  fair  t "

Ardent  religionists  sometimes  lose  sight  of  this  principle  and  its  necessity,  thinking
justice  too  sublunary  and  commonplace  to  be  deserving  of  their  attention.  Such  a
practice  is  not  sanctioned  by  Scripture,  which  from  beginning  to  end  lays  stress  upoa
the  faithful  and  honourable  discharge  of  human  duty,  as  between  man  and  man,  in  all
the  varied  relationships  of  life.

III.  Its  miohty  onsBKNT.  There  is  a  power  in  righteousness  which  only  the
morally  blind  can  overlook,  which  commands  the  homage  of  the  observant  and  the
thoughtful.  For  whilst  it  is  not  the  kind  of  power  that  the  worldly  cannot  but  see,
and  the  vulgar  cannot  but  admire,  it  is  nevertheless  power — enduring,  effective,
undoubted  power.  The  state  is  strong  in  which  justice  is  administered,  in  which  a
high  standard  of  uprightness  is  maintained  in  social  and  public  life;  whilst  injustice,
insincerity,  oppression,  corruption,  and  deceit  are  detrimental  to  the  true  interests  of
any  community.

IV.  Its  peeennial  flow.  A  river  differs  from  a  cistern,  a  reservoir,  in  this — that
it  does  not  run  dry,  that  it  is  not  exhausted,  that  it  flows  on  from  age  to  age.  And
the  righteousness  that  the  eternal  King  desires  to  see  prevail  in  human  society  is  an
ever-flowing  stream.  Kot  like  the  mountain-torrent,  which  is  dried  up  in  summer
heat ;  but  like  the  vast  river,  which  is  fed  from  the  everlasting  hills,  and  is  replenished
by  many  a  tributary  stream,  is  the  course  of  Divine  righteousness  upon  earth.  Not
in  one  nation,  in  one  age,  in  one  dispensation  only,  but  in  every  time  and  place  does
this  river  of  righteousness  flow  for  the  welfare  of  mankind.

V.  Its  BENEFICENT  BESULTS.  From  insincere  religious  observances  no  good  can
come;  but  from  justice,  from  a  proper  discharge  of  duty,  from  right  principles,  wa
may  look  for  every  good.  God  is  pleased  that  his  attribute  becomes  his  creature's  law.
And  righteousness  exalts  nations  and  establishes  throoes. — ^T.

Vers.  25,  26. — A  divided  homage  rejected.    The  continuity  of  Israel'i  national  life  ii


lOe  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  t.  1—27

here  asBumed.  Amos  addressed  the  same  people  that  was  brought  by  Moses  out  of
Egypt,  that  was  led  by  Joshua  into  CaDaan.  The  same  temptations  were  followed  by
the  same  falls ;  in  fact,  until  after  the  Captiyity,  the  chosen  nation  was  ever  liable  to*
relapse  into  partial  and  temporary  idolatry.  This  was  especially  the  case  with  the
northern  kingdom,  which  had  not  the  benefit  of  the  temple  services,  sacrifices,  and
priesthood.  The  peculiarity  of  the  case  was  the  attempt  to  combine  two  systems  of
religion  so  inconsistent  as  the  worship  of  Jehovah  and  the  worship  of  the  false  deities
of  the  neighbouring  nations.  Yet  this  attempt  is  substantially  one  which  is  renewed
by  some  in  every  generation,  even  under  this  spiritual  and  Christian  dispensation.
Displeasing  as  was  the  conduct  of  Israel  in  the  view  of  a  holy  and  "jealous"  God,
equally  offensive  is  every  endeavour  to  serve  two  masters,  to  divide  the  allegiance  and
devotion  of  the  heart.

I.  The  fact  that  hen  do  attempt  to  divide  theib  homage  and  wobship.
This  is  no  doubt  an  evidence  of  human  inconsistency  and  instability ;  but  it  is  not  to
be  denied  that  our  nature  frequently  exhibits  these  qualities.  On  the  one  hand,
education,  the  voice  of  conscience,  the  aspirations  of  better  moments,  the  influence  of
pious  friends,  tend  to  retain  the  heart  beneath  the  sway  of  true  religion.  On  the  other
hand,  the  example  of  the  pleasure-seeking  and  the  worldly,  the  baser  impulses  of  our
nat\u:e,  the  suggestions  of  our  spiritual  adversary,  all  draw  our  hearts  towards  an
inferior  good,  towards  an  ignoble  choice.  Hence  many  are  found  neither  renouncing
God  nor  rejecting  the  allurements  of  a  sinful  world.

II.  The  gbounds  upon  which  the  Sitpbeme  bejeots  the  divided  homage  and
WOBSHIP  WHICH  ABE  SOMETIMES  OFFERED.  1.  God's  just  claim  is  to  the  wholc  nature
and  the  whole  life  of  his  intelligent  creatures.  The  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh
cannot  consent  to  share  his  rightful  possession  with  any  rival,  any  pretender,  be  ho
who  he  may.  2.  The  nature  of  man  is  such  that  he  can  only  give  religious  reverence
and  service  that  shall  be  worthy  of  the  name  to  one  Lord.  Christ  has  emphatically
pronounced  upon  the  case  in  his  words, "  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  3.  The
moral  degradation  and  disaster  involved  in  the  endeavour  are  palpable.  There  is
inconsistency,  nay,  there  is  opposition,  between  the  two  services.  A  riven  heart  is  a
wretched  heart.  Hypocrisy  is  a  sandy  foundation  upon  which  to  build  the  character
find  life ;  upon  this  no  secure  and  stable  edifice  can  possibly  be  reared.

III.  The  cegenot  of  the  altebnativb  consequently  pbesented  to  evebt  mobai>
HATUBE.  It  is  the  alternative  which  Joshua  urged  upon  the  Israelites :  "  Choose  jo
this  day  whom  ye  will  serve."  It  is  the  alternative  which  Elijah  urged  upon  a  later
generation :  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  [between  the  two  sides]  ?  If
Jehovah  be  God,  serve  him ;  but  if  Baal,  then  serve  him." — T.

Ver.  4. — Seeking  the  Lord.  "  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  unto  the  house  of  Israel,
Seek  ye  me,  and  ye  shall  live."  It  is  impossible  to  read  this  chapter  without  noticing
the  tenderness  of  the  prophet,  his  compassion  and  pitifulness,  his  yearning  wish  to
help  and  save.  This  feeling  is  the  more  remarkable  because  Amos  belonged  to  the
tribe  of  Judah,  and  felt  thus  towards  the  neighbouring  and  hostile  kingdom  of  Israel.
Such  pity  is  ever  a  sign  of  Divine  inspiration.  .  Thus  Isaiah  (xxii.  4)  says,  "  Look
away  from  me ;  I  will  weep  bitterly,  labour  not  to  comfort  me,  because  of  the  spoiling
of  the  daughter  of  my  people,"  etc.  Samuel,  too,  after  Saul  the  king  had  proved
himself  so  headstrong  and  wilful  that  nothing  could  save  him,  although  he  went  down
to  his  own  house  and,  in  accordance  with  Divine  command,  saw  him  no  more,  never-
theless mourned  for  Saul  to  the  day  of  his  death.  And,  loltiest  of  all,  Christ  Jesus
Btood  on  the  Mount  of  Olives,  and  as  he  beheld  the  city  which  had  rejected  him,  he
wept  over  it,  saying,  "0  Jerusalem,"  etc.  I  It  was  in  this  spirit  that  Amos  wrote  the
passage  before  us,  and  thrice  repeated  the  message  in  our  text.  Meditation  on  this
subject  gives  us  some  thoughts  :  1.  On  the  loss  of  Ood.  2.  On  the  search  for  Ood.
S.  On  life  in  Ood.

I.  The  loss  of  God.  The  exhortation  to  "seek"  him  implies  that  he  has  been
lost  sight  of  by  his  creatures.  This  is  brought  about  by  various  influences.  1.  By
intellectual  temptations.  These  vary  in  different  ages.  In  the  time  of  Amos  the  study
of  God's  works  led  to  superstition,  while  in  these  days  it  leads  many  to  scepticism.
Then  the  stars  were  believed  to  affect  human  destiny  (ver.  8) ;  each  season  had  its


OH.  V.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  107

own  deity;  every  element  obeyed  some  nnseen  being.  The  polytheist  would  havo
joined  heartily  with  the  Jew  in  saying,  "  The  fool  hath  laid  in  his  heart,  There  is  no
God."  In  our  day,  on  the  contrary,  folly  is  suppoaed  to  lie  in  the  otlier  direction,
namely,  in  the  heart  of  him  who  believes  in  that  which  is  beyond  sensuous  per-
ception and  purely  intellectual  research.  Science,  which  has  driven  fairies  from  the
woods,  elves  from  the  mountaini,  and  nymphs  from  the  sea,  is  now  supposed  to  be
almost  prepared  to  drive  God  from  his  universe.  Articles  in  our  magazines,  addresses
in  our  halls,  speak  with  such  ill-disguised  contempt  of  religiotis  men  that  their
language  is,  "  The  fool  hath  said  in  his  heart.  There  m  a  God."  But  the  world  never
wanted  God  more.  Men  are  not  satisfied  with  knowing,  and  some  who  see  no  evidence
for  a  futuie  heaven  are  bitterly  asking — Is  life  worth  living ?  Amidst  the  miseries  of
civilized  society,  and  the  wrangling  of  sects,  many  a  one  seccetly  says,  "  My  heart  and
my  flesh  cry  out  for  the  living  God  I "  In  an  age  when  men  believed  in  gods  who  had
no  personal  love  or  righteousness,  they  wanted  to  know  the  heavenly  Father ;  and  in
this  age,  when  scepticism  has  swept  the  world  bare  of  some  of  its  old  creeds,  we  do
well  to  hearken  to  the  message  of  God,  "  Seek  ye  me,  and  ye  shall  live."  2.  By
prevailing  idolatries.  Show  how  places  of  sacred  memory  had  become  sources  of
idolatry  and  pollution  (ver.  6).  Bethd,  where  Jacob  saw  the  heavenly  ladder,  and
vowed  that  he  and  his  would  ho  the  Lord's;  OUgal,  where  the  people  reconsecrated
themselves  on  entering  Canaan ;  Beersheba,  where  Abraham  called  on  the  Lord,  and
Isaac  built  his  altar,  and  Israel  offered  saerifice  when  going  with  his  sons  into  Egypt ;
— were  all  transformed  into  idolatrous  resorts.  From  this,  point  out  how  easily  creeds,
forms  of  worship,  holy  places  and  relics,  nominal  profession  of  Christianity,  etc.,  may
hide  God,  instead  of  bearing  witness  to  him.  Suggest  also  certain  modern  idolatries.
3.  By  practical  unrighteomnest.  Amos  addressed  his  hearers  as  "Ye  who  turn
judgment  to  wormwood  [that  is,  who,  instead  of  rendering  justice,  commit  bitter
wrong],  and  leave  off  righteousness  In  the  earth  [or,  rather, '  dethrone  it  from  rule ']."
Trace  these  sins  in  some  trades  and  professions,  and  in  some  social  customs  and
ecclesiastical  movements,  of  our  own  day.  Yet,  in  spite  of  such  sins,  which  will
incur  the  penalties  here  foretold,  the  message  comes  to  every  sinner  from  him  who
is  not  willing  that  any  should  perish,  "  Seek  ye  me,  and  ye  shall  live."

II.  The  sbaboh  fob  God.  Let  us  rightly  estimate  the  privilege  offered  to  us.
God  is  great  beyond  our  conceptions.  "  He  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion,"  etc,
yet  says,  "  To  that  man  will  I  look  .  .  .  who  is  of  a  humble  and  contrite  heart."  1.
There  i$  necessity  for  seeking  him.  He  will  not  force  himself  on  our  notice,  nor  blazen
his  name  in  the  sky.  Any  man,  if  he  chooses,  is  free  to  live  as  if  God  were  not.  It
is  "he  who  seeketh  findeth."  2.  There  are  advantages  in  seeking  him.  These  are
additional  to  the  advantages  of  finding  him.  The  most  precious  things  (jewels,  com,
knowledge,  etc.)  are  not  the  most  easily  obtained.  The  self-discipline,  the  steadfast
effort,  the  trials  of  faith  and  hope,  etc.,  cultivate  character.  So,  in  seeking  God,  we
find  that  the  pains  and  difficulties  resulting  from  doubts,  indolence,  sins,  etc.,  are
part  of  our  Heaven-appointed  discipline.  If  God  were  visible  as  the  sun  is  visible,
there  would  be  no  moral  advantage  in  "seeking"  him;  but  as  he  is  visible  only
through  faith  and  prayer,  we  rise  heavenward  in  our  very  seeking  after  him.  3.
There  is  a  right  way  of  seeking  him.  Hence  ver.  6,  "  Seek  not  Bethel,"  etc.  Some
hoped  to  get  help  in  other  directions  rather  than  in  the  path  of  penitential  prayer.
Multitudes  now,  instead  of  turning  to  him  who  is  the  Light  of  the  world,  pursue
false  lights,  which,  like  the  will-o'-the-wisp,  will  lead  to  destruction.  Hear  the  words
of  Jesus  Christ:  "He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father; "  "land  the  Father
are  one."

III.  The  life  in  God.  "  And  ye  shall  live."  This  does  not  allude  to  national  life.
That  was  irrevocably  doomed.  But  in  the  doomed  nation  any  sinner  turning  to  God
would  live.  Nor  is  the  allusion  to  natural  life,  but  to  that  spiritual  life  which  is
referred  to  in  the  verse,  "  This  is  life  eternal,  that  they  might  know  thee,"  etc.  This
life  in  its  nature  and  source  is  more  fully  revealed  to  us  than  to  Amos  himself.  1.
The  source  of  this  life  is  found  in  God,  revealed  to  us  in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  No
man  can  create  life  where  it  is  not,  nor  restore  it  where  it  once  was._  Christ,  by  the
raising  of  the  dead,  showed  in  a  visible  sphere  what  he  alone  can  do  in  the  invisible.
"The  wages  of  sin  is  death;  but  the  gift  of  God  is  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ


108  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  t.  1— 2T,

our  Lord."  2.  The  nature  of  this  l^fe.  It  is  Divine,  and  constituteB  us  "  partakers  of
the  Divine  nature."  Its  germ  is  faith,  its  inspiration-  is  love,  its  breath  is  prayer,  its
manifestation  the  likeness  of  Christ.  3.  The  vigour  of  this  lijfe.  It  will  live  amid  the
influences  of  an  evil  atmosphere,  as  a  hale  man  walks  unhurt  through  a  tainted  hospital.
It  will  assert  itself  in  streams  of  benediction  to  the  world  around,  and  it  will  finally
prove  itself  victorious  over  death ;  for  the  Lord  has  said, "  He  that  liveth  and  believeth
in  me  shall  never  die; "  text. — A.  R.

Yer.  8. — The  message  of  the  sta/rs.  "  Seek  him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and
Orion,  and  tumeth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning,  and  maketh  the  day  dark
with  night :  that  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and  poureth  them  out  upon  the  face
of  the  earth :  The  Lord  is  his  Name."  This  recognition  of  God  amidst  the  phenomena
of  nature  is  characteristic  of  Amos.  He  looked  on  the  Pleiades  and  Orion,  as  they
shone  radiantly  in  the  heavens,  changeless  in  their  relations,  calm  amidst  human
vicissitudes,  and  constant  in  diffusing  their  light  upon  a  troubled  world,  and  bade
men  seek  him  who  created  them.  He  speaks  of  night,  that  "  shadow  of  death,"  and
reminds  his  hearers  that,  though  it  be  long  and  fearsome,  the  light  of  dawn  comes  at
last,  and  God  tiirns  it  into  morning ;  and  again,  after  the  work  of  the  day.  is  done,
and  tired  men  want  rest,  God  draws  the  curtains,  and  "  makes  the  day  dark  with
night."  The  last  clause  is  more  obscure.  Sometimes  the  waters  have  been  "  poured
out  upon  the  earth  "  in  destructive  deluge,  and  this  has  occurred  at  the  command  of
God ;  but  we  prefer  the  application  of  the  prophet's  words  to  that  familiar  and  constant
display  of  the  Divine  power  by  means  of  which  the  waters  are  secretly  gathered  up
into  the  sky,  that  they  may  be  poured  out  in  showers  of  blessing  upon  the  earth.  Our
text  is  true  of  nature ;  but  it  is  also  true  of  that  of  which  nature  is  the  symbol  and
shadow,  as  we  shall  endeavour  to  show.    It  reminds  us —

I.  That  God  ovebeules  the  outwaed  conditions  of  human  life.  "  Seek  him
that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion."  The  words  are  literally  true.  Philosophy
teaches  us  to  find  an  adequate  cause  for  all  effects,  and  science  acknowledges  that  the
First  Cause  eludes  its  search,  and  is  beyond  its  sphere.  Revelation  declares,  "  Gtod
made  the  sun  to  rule  by  day,  and  the  moon  to  rule  by  night :  he  made  the  stars  also."
More  than  this  primal  fact  is,  however,  asserted  here.  Amos  was  speaking  to  those
who  saw  in  the  stars  more  than  material  lights.  His  hearers  believed  in  astrology,
which  has  been  prevalent  in  all  ages,  from  the  very  dawn  of  history.  This  superstition,
which  has  left  its  mark  on  the  earliest  records  of  our  race,  in  the  literature  of  the
Egyptians,  Chaldeans,  Hindus,  and  Chinese,  was  not  without  effect  on  the  people  of
Israel,  as  many  passages  in  Scripture  show.  Indeed,  it  only  received  its  deathblow
when  the  Copernican  system  was  finally  established;  for  even  Eepler  would  not  deny
that  there  was  a  connection  between  the  movements  of  the  stars  and  the  fortunes  of
men.  Kow,  two  constellations  so  peculiar  and  brilliant  as  Pleiades  and  Orion  naturally
had  special  powers  ascribed  to  them.  Thus  Kabbi  Isaac  Israel,  in  his  remarks  on  Job
xxxviii.  31,  says,  "  Some  of  the  stars  have  operations  in  the  ripening  of  fruits,  and
such  is  the  opening  of  the  Pleiades ;  and  some  of  the  stars  retard  and  delay  the  fruits
from  ripening,  and  this  is  the  opening  of  Orion."  In  other  words,  the  Pleiades  were
associated  with  the  spring,  when  Nature  was  bursting  into  new  life,  when  she  was
emitting  the  sweetest  influences  from  every  blade  and  flower,  when  ships  which  had
been  shut  up  through  stress  of  weather  could  put  out  once  more  to  sea.  Hence  the
question,  "  Canst  thoii  bind  the  sweet  influence  of  Pleiades  ?  " — Canst  thou  prevent
the  outpouring  of  vernal  life?  Whether  you  will  or  not,  the  change  comes;  for  it  is  of
God.  Similarly,  Orion  was  associated  with  autumn,  when  the  earth  was  throwing  off
her  beauty,  and  the  voyages  of  the  ancient  times  came  to  an  end,  and  frost  bound  the
streams  as  in  fetters  of  iron.  "  Canst  thou  loose  the  bands  of  Orion  ?  "—Canst  thou
check  the  storms,  and  break  up  the  reign  of  frost  ?  Now,  says  Amos,  look  beyond
these  constellations  to  him  who  made  them  ;  and  when  you  rejoice  in  the  spring,  or
dread  the  approaching  winter,  when  you  are  glad  over  the  pleasantness  of  life,  or  faint
under  its  adversity  ; — think  of  him  who  is  above  and  beyond  all  material  forces  and  ali
visible  influences.  There  is  a  spring  and  autumn  known  in  human  experience  which
have  their  sources  beyond  ourselves  and  beyond  all  visible  agency ;  and  our  heart*
find  rest  in  the  assurance  of  this.    Compare  the  lot  of  two  ciuMreu  in  dissimilar  cir«


OH.V.  1— 27.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AM03.


109


cumstances — the  one  with  every  comfort  and  care,  as  if  "  born  under  a  lucky  star  "
and  sharing  "  the  sweet  influences  of  Pleiades ;  "  the' other  in  the  drunken  home,  with
curses  temporal  and  moral  on  every  side.  These  children  do  not  choose  their  lot,  they
do  not  appear  to  deserve  treatment  so  different ;  yet  their  circumstances  are  not  the
result  of  chance  nor  the  decree  of  blind  fate,  but  are  to  be  ascribed  to  him  "  who  made
the  seven  stars  and  Orion,"  and,  as  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth,  he  will  do  right.  (Suggest
other  examples  of  seeming  unfairness  in  men's  circumstances.)  This  Divine  revela-
tion in  Scripture  affirms  of  God  that  he  appoints  the  lot  of  each,  and  this  with  a  view
to  the  training  of  character,  which  far  outweighs  the  pleasantness  or  the  painfulnesa
found  in  mere  cii  cumstances.  Adversity  will  by-and-by  appear  to  be  but  a  small
thing  to  him  who  amidst  it  proved  himself  faithful,  and  prosperity  will  seem  in  the
retrospect  of  little  worth  to  him  who,  through  his  thanklessness  and  prayerlessness,  has
failed  to  "lay  hold  on  eternal  life."  Whatever  influences  surround  us,  we  are,  for  our
own  sakes,  called  on  to  recognize  &od  as  overruling  them.  If  we  are  prosperous,  it  is
"  the  Lord  who  gives  power  to  get  wealth ;  "  if  we  are  in  adversity,  we  are  not  to  blame
our  luck  or  our  friends,  but  to  seek  the  comfort  and  help  of  him  "  who  maketh  the  seven
stars  and  Orion."

II.  That  God  overbulbs  the  inwaed  experience  op  men.  "He  turneth  the
shadow  of  death  into  the  morning,"  etc.  The  Hebrew  word  translated  "  shadow  of  death  "
almost  always  means  more  than  natural  night,  however  black  that  may  be  (see  refer-
ences in  Job  and  Pisalms).  Admitting  this  figurative  use  of  the  word  here,  the  reference
of  the  prophet  would  seem  to  be  to  the  changes  from  sorrowfulness  to  joyfulness,  and
from  joyfulness  to  sorrowfulness,  which  we  frequently  experience.  These  are  not
dependent  on  circumstances.  The  wealthiest  men  have  often  said  of  their  surround-
ings, "  I  have  no  pleasure  in  them ; "  while  the  poor  and  persecuted  have  sometimes
made  their  miserable  abodes  resound  with  praise.  We  may  illustrate  this  from  the  life
of  our  Lord.  At  one  time  "  he  rejoiced  in  spirit,"  at  another  time  he  was  "  exceeding
sorrowful,  even  unto  death ;"  yet  the  Father's  hand  was  recognized  in  both  experiences.
God  inspires  the  children's  songs,  and  he  gives  the  cup  of  agony.  What  abundant
reason  we  have  to  praise  God  for  certain  inward  changes — the  carelessness  turned  into
serious  and  sad  penitence,  and  this  again  into  the  joyfulness  of  pardon !  To  many  a
weeping  penitent,  sitting  in  darkness,  he  has  come  and  "  turned  the  shadow  of  death
into  morning."  Others  have  been  in  the  darkness  of  doubt.  They  have  cried, "  Why
hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  They  have  felt  around  them  for  some  hand  to  help  in  their
dire  extremity.  At  last  the  sense  of  Christ's  love  has  come  home  to  them,  and  though
their  questions  »re  not  all  answered,  they  believe  in  him,  and  enter  into  rest,  and  soon
they  find  that  "he  that  believeth  does  not  walk  in  darkness,  but  has  the  light  of  life."
God  turns  for  them  tlie  shadow  of  death  into  morning.  Soon  "  the  shadow  feared  of
man  "  will  come.  Yet  even  the  darkness  of  death  shall  be  transformed  into  the  bright-
ness of  heaven  ;  and  in  the  place  where  "  there  is  no  need  of  the  sun  or  moon  to  shine,"
because  God  himself  is  the  Light  thereof,  we  shall  see  how  God  has  for  evermore  turned
the  shadow  of  death  into  morning.

in.  That  God  transforms  curses  into  blessings.  God  "  calls  for  the  waters  of
the  sea."  They  secretly  ascend  to  heaven,  and  then  descend  in  refreshing  showers.
The  transformation  effected  in  that  phenomenon  is  noteworthy.  If  wo  pour  sea  water
on  flowers,  they  will  die  ;  but  when  it  is  called  up  into  the  heavens  the  pernicious  salt
is  left  behind,  the  water  is  purged  from  its  destructiveness,  and  the  curse  is  made  a
blessing.  A  transforming  iufiuence  passes  over  all  that  comes  to  us,  if  it  is  caught  up
to  heaven.  Suppose  prosperity  comes  to  you.  It  may  enervate  and  destroy  your
spiritual  life,  but  if  praise  to  God  is  associated  with  it,  and  habitual  prayer  that  you
may  use  this  for  God,  you  may  become  by  your  very  prosperity  a  more  generous,
tender-hearted,  and  Christ-like  man.  If  adversity  is  yours,  and  you  take  all  your
troubles  before  the  Lord,  they  will  be  transfigured  before  you  in  the  light  of  God's  love
and  Christ's  sufferings,  and  through  your  valley  of  Achor  you  will  enter  into  deeper
rest  and  nobler  hope.  If  doubts  or  temptations  try  you,  they  will  not  curse,  but  bless
you,  if  they  arouse  the  earnest  prayer,  "  Lord,  help  me ! "  Christ  was  never  more
precious  to  Thomas  than  when,  after  his  doubts,  he  exclaimedj  "  My  Lord  and  my
God ! "  But  his  doubts  would  have  ruined  him  had  they  kept  him  from  the  presence
of  the  Lord.    Let  all  your  troubles  and  joys  be  wafted,  by  prayer  and  praise,  into  the


110  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [ch.  v.  1— 2T.

heaveH  of  Ood's  presence,  and  they  shall  be  poured  down  upon  jou  In  showen  of
Bpiritnal  blessings.

Conclusion.  If  you  would  know  the  comfort  of  the  text,  yon  will  only  find  it  in
obedience  to  its  first  clause,  "  Seek  him  I "  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  ba
found,"  etc.;  "Acquaint  now  thyself  with  him,  and  be  at  peace."  Then,  under  the
quiet  light  of  the  stars,  or  in  the  splendours  of  sunset  and  dawn,  or  watching  the  fall  of
the  heaven-sent  showers,  you  will  have  thoughts  of  him  who  rules  over  a]U,  aa  of  one
who  through  Jesus  Ofarist  is  your  Father  and  your  Friend. — A.  B.

Vers.  8,  9.— The  glory  of  religion.  "  Seek  him  that  maketh  the  seven  stars  and
Orion,  and  tumeth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning,"  etc.  The  word  reveals
two  things.

I.  The  connection  which  Gh>D  has  with  his  UNirEBSB.    His  connection  is  that :

1.  Of  a  Creatw.  "  He  maketh  the  seven  stars  and  Orion."  These  constellations  are
only  given  as  specimens  of  all  the  things  he  has  created  in  different  parts  of  the  uni-
verse. "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth."  2.  Of  a  Oauemor.
"  He  tumeth  the  shadow  of  death  into  the  morning,  and  maketh  the  day  dark  with
night :  that  calleth  for  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and  poureth  them  out  upon  the  face  of
the  earth."  The  truth  taught  is  this — that  he  presides  over  the  revolution  of  day  and
night,  and  the  changes  of  the  seasons,  and  the  fortunes  of  men.  All  nature  is  nnder
his  control.  "  He  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good,  and  sendeth
rain  on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust."  3.  Of  a  Bedeemer.  "  That  strengtheneth  the
spoiled  against  the  strong,  so  that  the  spoiled  shall  come  against  the  fortress."  The
reference  is  here  undoubtedly  to  his  redemptive  work  in  human  history.

II.  The  connection  which  man  bhottld  have  with  God.  "  Seek  him."  A  phrase
of  frequent  use  in  the  Bible,  denoting  the  duty  of  man  to  attain  to  the  knowledge,  the
friendship,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Eternal.  And  in  this  all  true  religion  consists.
The  pursuit  implies :  1.  Faith  in  God's  personal  existence.  A  belief  that  he  is.  2.
A  consciousness  of  moral  distance  from  God.  We  do  not  seek  what  we  possess.  3.
A  felt  necessity  of  friendly  connection  with  God.  4.  An  assurance  that  such  a  con-
nection can  be  obtained.

Conclusion.  What  a  grand  thiog  is  religion  1  It  is  not  a  thing  of  mere  doctrine^
or  ritual,  or  sect,  or  party.  It  is  a  moral  pursuit  of  "him  that  maketh  the  seven  stan
and  Orion,"  etc.— D.  T.

Ver.  14. — Eeligion.  "  Seek  good,  and  not  evil,  that  ye  may  live :  and  so  the  Lord,
the  God  of  hosts,  shall  be  with  you,  as  ye  have  spoken."  From  these  words  two  thing*
may  be  inferred  concerning  religion,

I.  It  implies  a  specific  pubbuit.  "  Seek  good,  and  not  evil."  Good  and  evil  are
both  in  the  world ;  they  work  in  all  himian  souls ;  they  explain  all  history.  1.  They
imply  a  standard  of  right.  By  what  do  we  determine  the  good  and  evil  in  human
life?  The  revealed  will  of  God.  What  accords  with  that  will  is  good,  what  disagrees
with  it  is  evil.  2.  Their  object  is  a  human  pursuit.  There  are  those  who  pursue
evil ;  they  follow  it  for  worldly  wealth,  animal  pleasure,  secular  aggrandizement.
There  are  those  who  pursue  good;  and  their  grand  question  is,  "Lord,  what  wUt  thou
have  me  to  do  ?  "  3.  The  pursuit  of  good  is  the  specific  effort  of  religion.  Good  in
thought,  spirit,  aim,  habit,  as  embodied  in  the  life  of  Christ.  To  get  good  requires
strenuous,  persistent,  devout,  prayerful  effort.

II.  It  involves  the  highest  benediction.  1.  The  enjoyment  of  true  life.  "  That
ye  may  live."  Without  goodness  you  cannot  really  live :  goodness  is  life.  Everlasting
goodness  is  everlasting  life.    "This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee,"  etc.  (John  xvii.  3).

2.  The  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  friendship.  "  So  the  Lord,  the  God  of  hosts,  shall
be  with  you."  What  a  benediction  is  this  1  "  The  Lord  God  of  liosts,"  the  Almighty
Creator,  Proprietor,  and  Governor  of  the  universe  to  be  with  us,  to  guide,  guard,  beautify
existence  I  "  I  will  walk  among  you,"  says  he ;  "  I  will  be  your  God,  and  ye  shall  be
my  people."— D.  T.

Ver.  19. — Selfishnesi  in  terror.  "  As  if  a  man  did  flee  from  »  lion,  and  a  bear  met
Um ;  or  went  into  the  house,  ard  leaned  his  hand  on  the  wall,  and  a  serpent  bit  him."


OH.  T.  1—27.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  Ill

The  Israelites  rested  their  hope  of  deliTerance  from  every  kind  of  foreign  danger  upon
their  outward  connection  with  the  covenant  made  with  their  forefathers ;  hence  many
put  their  trust  in  the  days  spoken  of  in  the  context,  when  Jehovah  would  judge  all  the
heathen,  expecting  that  he  would  then  in  all  probability  raise  Israel  to  might  and
dominion.  All  this  was  simple  delusion,  the  delusion  of  selfishness ;  for  when  Jehovah
vould  appear  to  punish  the  nations,  Amos  says  they  would  be  bo  panic-struck  as  to  be
confounded  in  their  efforts  to  escape.  Running  from  the  lion,  they  would  fall  into  the
J»WB  of  the  bear ;  or  fleeing  into  a  house,  they  would  be  met  by  a  serpent  that  would  bite
them.  The  passage  illustrates  selfishness  in  terror.  Its  characteristic  is  that  in  seek-
ing protection  from  one  danger  it  rushes  into  another.    This  is  often  seen —

I.  In  commercial  life.  A  eelBsh  man  in  trade  often  finds  himself  running  down
the  hill  of  insolvency,  and  ruthless  bankruptcy  appears  before  him  as  a  lion  ready  to
destroy  him.  What  does  he  do?  Where  does  he  seek  protection?  Perhaps  in
absconscion.  But  he  is  apprehended,  and  he  finds  he  has  fled  from  "  a  lion  "  to  "  a
bear,"  enters  the  house  where  the  "  serpent "  of  enraged  justice  fastens  on  him.  Or
perhaps  he  resorts  to  forgery.  Here  he  is  detected,  and  the  same  result  is  experienced.
He  has  fled  from  the  lion  only  to  rush  into  the  jaws  of  the  bear.

IL  In  social  life.  In  few  social  circles  are  men  not  to  be  found  who  in  some  way
or  other  commit  a  wrong  against  their  members.  Indeed,  in  family  life  it  is  so.
Children  do  some  injury  to  their  parents,  and  parents  to  their  children,  husbands  to
their  wives,  and  wives  to  their  husbands.  After  the  commission  of  the  deed,  selfish
terror  is  awakened,  and  they  fabricate  falsehoods  in  order  to  escape  the  danger.  The
falsehood  is  detected,  and  then  it  is  felt  that  the  man  has  only  fled  firom  the  lion  to  the
bear.     He  has  run  for  protection  where  he  has  found  the  "  serpent."

III.  In  belioious  life.  Men  get  convinced  of  sin,  their  consciences  are  roused,  and
hell  appears  before  them  as  a  ravenous  lion,  which  they  endeavour  to  escape ;  and  they
fly  for  protection  to  what  ?  To  selfish  prayers,  selfish  sacrifices,  selfish  performances ;
but  to  attempt  to  escape  from  hell  by  selfish  efforts  is  only  running  from  the  lion  to
the  bear,    ."  He  that  seeketh  his  life  shall  lose  it,"

GoNOLUSioN.  This  subject  is  capable  of  endless  illustrations.  It  is  an  eternal  truth
that  be  who  seeks  protection  from  selfish  fear  only  rushes  from  one  danger  into
another.  There  is  no  protection  for  a  soul  but  in  self-renunciation,  in  the  entire
consecration  of  self  to  the  worship  and  service  of  the  great  God. — D.  T.

Yers.  21 — 24. —  The  divinely  abhorrent  and  the  divinely  demanded,  "I  hate,  I
despise  your  feast  days,  and  I  will  not  smell  in  your  solemn  assemblies,"  etc.  Notice—

I.  The  divinely  abhobbent.  What  is  that  ?  Mere  ceremonial  religion ;  empty
ritual.  "I  hate,  I  despise  your  feast  days,  and  I  will  not  smell  in  your  solemn
assemblies,"  etc.  "  The  same  aversion  from  the  ceremonial  observances  of  the  insincere
and  rebellious  Israelites  which  Jehovah  here  expresses  he  afterwards  employed  Isaiah
to  declare  to  the  Jews  (Isa.  i.  10,  etc.).  The  two  passages  are  strikingly  parallel,  only
the  latter  prophet  amplifies  what  is  set  forth  in  a  more  condensed  form  by  Amos.  It
is  also  to  be  observed  that  where  Amos  introduces  the  musical  accompaniments  of  the
sacrifices,  Isaiah  substitutes  the  prayers ;  both  concluding  with  the  Divine  words,  '  I
will  not  hear.'  '  Take  thou  away  from  me  the  noise  of  thy  songs ;  for  I  wiU  not  hear
the  melody  of  thy  viols.'  The  singing  of  their  psalms  was  nothing  more  to  God  than
a  wearisome  round  which  was  to  be  brought  to  an  end.  Singing  and  playing  on  harps
was  a  part  of  the  worship  of  the  temple  (1  Uhron.  xvi.  41 ;  xiiii.  5  ;  xiv.).  Nothing
seems  more  abhorrent  to  the  holy  eye  and  heart  of  Omniscience  than  empty  ceremony
in  religion.  No  sacrifices  are  acceptable  to  him,  however  costly,  unless  the  offerer  has
presented  himself.  No  psalmody  is  acceptable  to  his  ear  but  the  psalmody  of  self-
oblivious  devotion."  "  God  is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him
in  spirit  and  in  truth."

II.  The  divinely  demanded.  "  Let  judgment  run  down  as  waters,  and  righteous-
ness as  a  mighty  stream."  While  no  direction  is  given  respecting  the  regulation  of
the  sacrifices  in  order  that  they  may  be  rendered  acceptable,  here  is  a  special  demand
for  morality  in  life,  moral  rectitude  in  conduct.  Thus  God  once  more  expresses  the
idea  that  "  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams."  The
way  to  worship  Qo(J  acceptably  is  not  by  ceremonial  observances,  not  by  religioua


lU


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[oh.  VI.  1 — 14.


eontributions,  not  in  singing  psalms,  but  in  doing  the  right  and  loving  thing  toward*
our  fellow-men.  The  true  practical  expression  of  our  love  to  (Jod  is  that  of  a  virtuous
and  generous  conduct  towards  mankind,  Stud  your  country  with  fine  churches  if  yon
like,  fill  them  with  aesthetic  worshippers  and  enthusiastic  devotees.  But  all  that  is
abhorrent  to  God  unless  you  feel  and  act  rightly  towards  your  fellow-men  in  your
daily  life.  We  had  rather  see  justice  rolling  on  like  mighty  waters,  and  righteousness
es  a  swelling  aud  ever-flowing  stream,  than  crowded  churches.  "  Show  me  your  faith . . .
by  your  works."  Show  me  your  worship  by  your  morality ;  show  me  your  love  to  Gk)d
by  your  devotion  to  your  fellow-men.  "  If  we  love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us."
"  If  a  man  say,  I  love  God,  and  hateth  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar :  for  if  he  loveth  not  his
brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  can  he  love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen  ?  " — ^D.  T.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  VI.


Vers.  1 — 6. — With  a  second  woe  the  pro-
phet denounces  the  chiefs  of  the  whole
nation,  who  were  quite  satisfied  with  the
present  state  of  things,  and,  revelling  in
luxury,  feared  no  coming  judgment.

Ver.  1. — Them  that  are  at  east  in  Zion ;
living  in  fancied  eecuiity  and  self-pleasing
(Isa.  xxxii.  9, 11 ;  Zeph.  i.  12).  Judah  is  in-
cluded in  the  denunciation,  because  she  is
equally  guilty ;  the  whole  covenant  nation
is  sunk  in  the  same  dangerous  apnthy.
Septuagint,  to"i  i^oveivoviri  iiiv,  "  them
that  set  at  naught  Zion."  The  same  ren-
dering is  found  in  the  Syriac,  and  can  be
Bupported  by  a  small  change  in  the  Hebrew.
It  may  have  been  intended  thus  to  confine
the  announcement  to  Israel  alone,  in  con-
formity with  the  prophet's  chief  scope.  But
he  has  introduced  meution  of  Judah  else-
where, as  cU.  iL  4;  vi.  5;  ix.  II,  and  his
sense  of  his  own  people's  careless  ease  may
well  load  liim  to  include  them  in  his  warn-
ing. Trust  in  the  mountain  of  Samaria.
The  city  was  deemed  impregnable,  and  it
kept  the  Assyrians  at  bay  for  three  yeara
before  it  was  finally  taken  (2  Kings  xviii.
9,  etc.;  see  notes  on  ch.  iii.  9  and  iv.  1).
Another  rendering,  not  so  suitable,  is,  the
earelege  ones  upon  the  monntam  of  tiamaria.
The  point,  however,  is  the  supposed  im-
pregnability of  the  city  which  occasioned
a  feeling  of  perfect  security.  Which  are
named  chief  of  the  nations ;  rather,  to  the
notable  men  of  the  chief  of  nations;  i.e.  tlie
principal  men  of  Israel,  which  had  the  proud
title  of  the  chief  of  the  nations  because  it
was  beloved  and  elected  of  God,  and  was
designed  to  keep  alive  true  religion,  and
to  set  an  example  to  the  rest  of  the  world
(Exod.  xix.  5;  Numb.  i.  17;  Deut.  iv.  20;
2  Sam.  vii.  23).  Septuagint,  airfTpiyriaav
ifX^ti  iSyav,  "  they  plucked  the  chiefs  of
the  nations,"  where  the  verb  is  a  mistaken
rendering.  To  whom  the  house  of  Israel
came;  or,  come.    Besort   for  counsel  and


judgment  (2  Sam.  xv.  4),  and  who  ought
therefore  to  be  patterns  of  righteousness  and
equity.  The  rendering  of  tlie  Vulgate,  tn-
gredientei  pompntice  domum  Israel,  "  enter-
ing with  pomp  4nto  the  house  of  Israel "
(which  does  not  agree  with  '  the  present
Hebrew  text),  implies  that  these  chieftaini
carried  themselves  haughtily  in  the  congre-
gation of  Israel.

Ver.  2. — Pass  ye.  Go  and  compare  your
condition  with  that  of  otiicr  countries,  from
the  furthest  east  to  the  north,  to  your  own
neiglibours — has  not  God  done  more  for
you  than  for  them  ?  Nothing  is  said  about
the  destruction  of  the  three  capitals,  noi
is  Samaria  threatened  with  similar  ruin.
Bather  the  cities  are  contemplated  as  still
flourishing  and  prosperous  (ttiough  by  this
time  they  had  Bufi'ered  at  their  enemies'
hands),  and  Israel  is  bidden  to  remember
tliat  she  is  more  favoured  than  they.
Calneh,  one  of  the  five  great  Babylonian
citie'j,  is  probably  tlie  Kul-unu  of  the  in-
scriptions, a  town  in  Southern  Babylonia,
wliose  site  is  unknown.  In  Gen.  x.  10  and
Isa.  X.  9  the  LXX.  call  it  Cluilanne  or
Chalan^;  in  the  present  passage  they  mis-
take the  Hebrew,  and  render,  Stdp-rfTe  irivres,
"  pass  ye  all  by"  (see  Sohrader, '  Die  Keilin-
schrifion,'  p.  442).  St.  Jerome  identifies  it
with  Otesiphon,  on  the  east  bank  of  the
Tigris.  Others  (see  Rawlinson, 'Herodotus,'
i.  p.  490,  2nd  edit.)  find  in  it  Nopher  or
Nipur,  tlie  modern  Niffer,  some  sixty  miles
south-east  of  Babylon.  As  one  of  the  oldest
cities  in  the  world,  ranking  with  Babel,
Erech,  and  Accad,  it  was  well  known  to
the  Israelites.  Hamath  the  great ;  Septua-
gint, 'EfiaTpa^fii.  This  was  the  principal
fity  of  Upper  Syria,  and  a  place  of  great
importance.  In  after-years  it  was  called
Epiphania,  after  Antiochus  Epiphanes  (Gen.
X.  18 ;  Numb,  xxxiv.  8 ;  Isa.  x.  9).  It  fell
in  Sargon's  reign,  b.o.  720;  afterwards  it
lost  its  independence,  and  was  incorporated
in  the  Assyrian  empire.  Oath  of  the  Philis-
tines. One  of  their  five  cliief  cities,  and
at  one  time  the  principal  (1  Chron.  xviii.


OH.  VI.  1—14.]


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.


113


1).  The  site  is  placed  by  Porter  at  Tell-
a-Safi,  an  ieolated  hill,  etanding  above  the
broad  valley  of  Elah,  and  "presenting  on
the  north  and  west  a  white  precipice  of
many  hundred  feet."  Dr.  Thomson  ('The
Land  and  the  Book,'  p.  215,  etc.)  cousiders
Gath  to  be  the  same  city  as  Betogabra,
Eleutheropolis,  and  the  modern  Beit  Jibrin,
■which  is  some  few  miles  south  of  Tell
Safi.  He  thinks  the  site  of  Tell  S&fi  is
not  adapted  for  the  seat  of  a  large  city,
and  he  saw  few  indications  of  ancient  ruins
there;  whereas  Beit  Jibrin  has  in  and
around  it  the  mnst  wonderful  remains  of
antiquity  to  be  found  in  all  Fhilistia.  It
had  probably  declined  in  importance  at  this
time  (see  note  on  ch.  1.  6),  but  its  old  repu-
tation was  still  remembered.  It  was  taken
by  Uzziah,  but  seems  not  to  have  remained
long  in  his  possession  (2  Cliron.  xzvi.  6).  In
the  year  B.0,  711  Sargon  reduced  Ashdod
and  Gath,  which  he  calls  Gimtu  Asdudim,
i.e.  Gath  of  the  Ashdoditea.  Be  they  better  1
Have  they  received  more  earthly  prosperity
at  God's  bands  than  you?  Is  their  terri-
tory greater  than  yours?  No.  How  ungrate-
ful, then,  are  you  for  all  my  favours  (comp.
Jer.  ii.  5 — H)l  Schrader  and  Bickell  re-
gard the  verse  as  an  interpolation,  gram-
matically, metrically,  and  clironologically
inadmissible;  but  their  arguments  are  not
strong,  and  Amos  makes  no  mention  of  the
fate  of  these  cities.

Ver.  3. — Ye  that  put  far  away  the  evil  day.
They  assigned  a  distant  date  to  the  time  of
punishment  and  calamity;  they  would  not
look  it  in  the  face  or  contemplate  it  as
approaching  and  ready  to  come  upon  them,
Septuagint,  Oi  ipxiM""'  "'  v/iepav  Koxriv,
"Ye  who  are  coming  unto  the  evil  day."
The  Alexandrian  manuscript  has  ot  evxi-
Itevoi,  "ye  who  pray  for"  (ch.  v.  18),  with
which  the  Syriao  seems  to  agree.  The
Vulgate  (as  Aquila,  Symmachus,  and  Theo-
dotion),  taking  the  verb  passively,  ren-
ders, qui  teparati  estis  in  diem  malum.  But
it  is  best  to  translate  it  as  above,  in  the
sense  of  "repelling,"  "putting  away  with
aversion,''  as  in  Isa.  Ixvi.  S.  And  cause  the
seat  of  violence  to  come  near.  They  erected
the  throne  (shebheth,  "  the  sitting,"  or  "  en-
throning") of  violence  in  their  midst,  made
themselves  the  subjects  and  slaves  of  wicked-
ness and  oppression.  The  LX.X,,  mistaking
thebheth  for  shabbath,  translates,  Oi  £771'-
(avTiS  Kol  tipairr6iieyoi  (TaP^iTuii  tfieuSav, "  Ye
who  are  drawing  near  and  clinging,  to  false
sabbaths."

Ver.  4. -That  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory;
conches  inlaid  with  ivory  (see  note  on  ch.
iii.  15)  at  meals.  The  prophet  substantiates
his  denunciation  by  describing  their  selfish
luxury  and  debauchery.  Stretch  themselves ;
literally,  are  poured  out ;  Septuagint,  koto-

AKOS.


<nroTaX3i»T6i,  "  wantoning."  Out  of  the  midst
of  the  stall.  Calves  put  up  to  be  fattened.
They  do  this  presumably  not  on  festivals,
when  it  would  have  been  proper  and  ex-
cusable, but  every  day.

Ver.  5. — That  chant.  The  word  parat
(5tTo|  \tyiixsvov)  means  rather  "  to  prattle,"
"  to  sing  idle  songs,"  as  the  Eevised  Ver-
sion translates  it.  The  reading  of  the
Septuagint  varies  between  dnuepaTovvres,
"excelling,"  and  eiriKpoTouvres,  the  latter
of  which  words  might  mean  "applaud-
ing." Viol  (see  note  on  ch.  v.  23).  Invent
to  themselves  instruments  of  mnsio,  like
David,  As  David  devised  stringed  instru-
ments and  modes  of  singing  to  do  honour  to
God  and  for  the  service  of  his  saaotnary
(see  1  Chron.  xv.  16,  etc. ;  xxiii.  5 ;  2  Chrou.
xxix.  26, 27 :  and  the  supernumerary  p^jalm
at  the  end  of  the  Psalter  in  the  Septuagint),
so  these  debauchees  invented  new  singing
and  playing  to  grace  their  luxurious  feasts.
The  Septuagint  rendering,  which  Jerome
calls  "sensus  pulcherrimua,"  is  not  to  be
explained  by  the  present  Hebrew  text,  how-
ever true  to  fact  it  may  be  considered,  'ns
etTTTiKdra  ^\oyltravTOf  Kal  ovj^  us  tpciyovTo,
"Begarded  them  as  abiding  and  not  as  fleet-
ing things."

Ver.  6, — Wine  in  bowls  (mizraqim);  to-
crificial  bowls  ;  used  in  libations  of  wine  and
in  tlie  sprinkling  of  blood  (comp.  Exod.
xxxviii.  3 ;  Numb.  vii.  13,  etc. ;  1  Chron.
xxviii,  17;  2  Chron.  iv.  8,  22;  Zech.  ix.  15;
xiv.  20).  These  vessels  the  luxurious  and
sacrilegious  princes  employed  in  their  feasts,
proving  thus  their  impiety  and  their  excess
(comp,  Dan.  v.  2).  Septuagint,  01  irlvovres
rhv  Siv\t<rii4vov  olvof,  "who  drink  strained
wine."  The  chief  ointments.  Such  as  were
used  in  Divine  service  (Exod.  xxx.  23,  etc.),
and  nowliere  else.  If  they  had  felt  as  they
ought  to  feel  in  this  time  of  rebuke  and
sorrow,  tliey  would,  like  mourners,  have
refrained  from  anointing  themselves  (Ruth
iii,  3 ;  2  Sam.  xiv.  2) ;  but,  on  the  contrary,
they  are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of
Joseph.  The  coming  ruin  of  the  ten  tribes
affects  them  not ;  in  their  selfish  voluptuous-
ness tliey  have  no  sympathy  with  calamity
and  suffering,  and  shut  their  eyes  to  coming
evil.  "  The  affliction  of  Joseph  "  is  probably
a  proverbial  expression  derived  &om  the
narratives  in  Gen.  xzxvii,  25,  etc.,  and  zL
14, 23  (comp.  Gen.  xlii.  21).

Vers,  7^11, — Here  follows  the  announce-
ment of  punishment  for  the  crimes  men-
tioned above:  the  people  sliall  go  into
captivity;  they  shall  be  rejected  of  God,
and  given  over  to  utter  ruin,

Ver.  7,— "With  the  first.  They  shall  have
a  pre-eminence  indeed,  being  the  first  to  go


m


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[oh.  ti.  1—14.


into  captivity.  St.  Jerome,  "Vob  qni  prim!
estis  divitiis,  primi  captivitatis  sustinebitig
juguni,  secundum  illud  quod  in  Kzechiele
Boiiptum  est :  'a  sanctuario  meo  incipite ' "
(Ezek.  ix.  6).  With  the  fint;  literally,  at
the  head,  with  reference  doubtless  to  ver.  1.
The  banquet  (mirzakh);  the  screech  of  re-
VLllera.  The  word  is  used  of  the  scream  of
mourners  in  Jer.  xvi.  5;  here  of  the  cries
and  shouts  of  feasters  at  a  banquet.  Them
that  stretched  themselves  on  couches,  as
ver.  4.  The  Septuagint,  reading  differently,
has,  "  They  shall  depart  into  captivity  from
the  dominion  of  princes,  and  the  neighing
of  horses  shall  be  taken  away  from  Bphraim."
From  this  passage  of  Amos  St.  Augustine
takes  occasion  to  show  that  the  most  un-
trained of  the  prophets  possessed  eloquence
and  literary  skill  ('  De  Doctr.  Christ.,'
iv.  7).

Ver.  8. — Hath  Bwom  by  timaeUQuephesh);
in  anima  sua  (Vulgate),  "  by  his  soul ; "  a
concession  to  human  languags  (comp.  ch.  iv.
2;  Jer.  IL  14;  Heb.  vi.  13,  17,  18).  God
thus  shows  tliat  the  threat  proceeds  from
him,  and  is  immutable.  The  ezceUenoy ;
the  pride  (fifiptv,  Septuagint;  superiiam,
Vulgate);  that  of  which  Jacob  is  proud
(Hos.  v.  5),  as,  for  instance,  his  palaces,
built  by  exaction,  maintained  in  voluptuous
luxury.  Will  deliver  up  to  the  enemy  for
destruction  (Deut.  xxxii.  30 ;  Obad.  14).

Ver.  9. — It  there  remain  ten  men  in  one
house.  If  these  escape  death  in  war,  they
■hall  die  of  famine  and  pestilence  in  the
three  years'  siege  of  Samaria  (2  Kings  xvii.
6).  If  the  prophet  is  still  referring  to  the
rich  chieftains,  ten  would  be  only  a  poor
remnant  of  the  inhabitants  of  their  palaces.
The  LXX.  adds,  very  unnecessarily,  Kal
iiroKet^B'^ffovTat  oi  KarcfAoiTroi,  ^'And  those
remaining  shall  be  left  behind."

Ver.  10.— The  prophet  gives  an  instance
of  the  terror  and  misery  in  that  common
calamity.  He  depicts  a  scene  where  the
nearest  surviving  kinsman  comes  into  the
house  to  perform  the  funeral  rites  for  a  dead
man.  And  a  man's  uncle ;  better,  and  to7ten
a  man's  kinsman;  the  apodosis  being  at
the  end  of  the  verse,  "  Then  shall  he  say."
Dod  is  sometimes  rendered  "  beloved,"  but
usually  "  father's  brother,"  but  it  may  mean
any  near  relation  upon  whom,  in  default
of  father  and  brethren,  would  devolve  the
duty  of  burying  the  corpse.  Septuagint,  oi
o'lKfiOi  ainuv:  propin^uus  luus  (Vulgafe).
And  he  that  burneth  him ;  literally,  and  his
burner.  This  is  the  same  person  as  the  kins-
man, the  burier;  but  for  some  reason,  either
from  the  number  of  deaths,  or  from  the  pesti-
lence, or  from  the  distance  of  the  burying-
place,  which  would  be  out  of  the  city  and
inaccessible  in  the  blockade,  he  cannot  lay
the  body  in  the  grave,  and  ia  forced  to  take


and  bum  it.  Though  the  Jews  generally
buried  dead  bodies,  cremation  was  some-
times used,  both  in  honour  or  emergency
(1  Sam.  xxxi.  12)  and  in  punishment  (Lev.
XX.  14 ;  xxi.  9).  The  bones ;  i.e.  the  corpse,
as  in  Exod.  xiii.  19;  Josh.  xxiv.  '62;  and  2
Kings  xiii.  21 ;  Keil.  The  kinsman  takes  it
up  to  bring  it  out  of  the  house  to  bum  it.
Him  that  is  by  the  sides  of  the  house ;  him
that  is  in  the  innermost  parts  of  the  house ;  qui
in  penetralibus  domus  est  (Vulgate).  This  is
the  last  living  person,  who  had  hidden  him-
self in  the  most  remote  chambers ;  or  it  may
be  a  messenger  whom  the  kinsman  had  sent
to  search  the  house.  He  asks  him — Is  there
yet  any  with  thee  t  Is  there  any  one  left
alive  to  succour,  or  dead  to  bury  ?  And  he
shall  say,  No ;  Vulgate,  et  respondebit,  Finis
est.  Then  he  (the  kinsman)  shall  say,  Hold
thy  tongue  (Hasl);  Hush  I  He  stays  the
man  in  the  inner  chamber  from  speaking;
and  why  ?  For  we  may  not  make  mention
of  the  name  of  the  Lord ;  Vulgate,  et  non
reeorderis  nominis  Domini.  Some,  as  Pusey,
Schegg,  and  Gaiidell,  see  here  the  voice  of
despair.  It  is  too  late  to  call  upon  God
now ;  it  is  the  time  of  vengeance.  We  re-
jected him  in  life ;  we  may  not  cry  to  him
in  death.  St.  Jerome  refers  the  prohibition
to  the  hardness  of  heart  and  unbelief  of  the
people,  who  even  in  all  this  misery  will  not
confess  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Keil  gays,  "It
indicates  a  fear  lest,  by  the  invocation  of
the  name  of  God,  his  eye  should  be  drawn
towards  this  last  remaining  one,  and  he  also
should  fall  a  victim  to  the  judgment  of
death."  Others  again  think  that  the  notiou
in  the  mind  of  the  impious  speaker  is  that
Jehovah  is  the  Author  of  all  their  calamities,
and  that  he  is  impatient  at  the  very  mention
of  his  name.  The  simplest  explanation  is
the  first,  or  a  modidoation  of  it.  The  person
addressed  is  about  to  pray  or  to  call  on  God
in  his  distress.  "  Be  silent,"  says  the  speaker ;
"  we  can  no  longer  appeal  tu  Jehovah  as  the
covenant  God;  by  naming  him  we  call  to
his  remembrance  how  we  have  broken  the
covenant,  violated  our  relation  to  him ;
therefore  provoke  him  not  further  by
making  mention  of  his  name."

Ver.  11. — The  prophet  confirms  the  judg-
ment denounced  in  ver.  8.  The  Lord  com-
mandeth,  and  he  will  smite.  The  expression,
thus  taken,  implies  that  God  execute*  his
commands  through  the  ministers  of  hig
jurlgment;  but  it  may  well  be  rendered,
"  and  men  shall  smite "  (comp.  cb.  ix.  9).
Breaches  .  .  .  clefts.  The  great  palace  re-
quires a  breach  to  bring  it  to  the  ground ;
the  little  hut  is  ruined  by  a  small  rent  or
cleft.  All  houses,  great  and  small,  shall  be
smitten.  Possibly  Israel  and  Judah  are
signified  respectively  by  "the  great  house"
and  "the  little  house"  (oomp.  ch.  is.  11);


CH,  TI.  1—14.]


THE   BOOK  OF  AMOS.


115


and  tlieir  treatment  by  the  Ajeyriana  may
be  thuK  symbolized.

Vert.  12 — 14. — The  prophet  shows  the
folly  of  these  evil-doers  who  think  in  their
owa  strength  to  defy  judgment  and  to  resist
the  enemy  whom  God  is  sending  against
them.

Ver.  12.— Shall  horses  mn  upon  the  roolc  t
Can  horses  gallop  safely  over  places  covered
with  rocks  and  stones?  WUl  one  plough
there  with  oxen  1  Do  men  plough  the  rock
with  their  oxen?  The  answer,  of  course,  is
"  No."  Yet  your  conduct  is  equally  foolish,
your  labour  is  equally  lost.  Some,  dividing
the  words  differently,  translate,  "  Does  one
plough  the  sea  with  oxen  7  "  which  reminds
one  of  the  Latin  proverb,  "Lltiis  aiare
bubus."    Thus  Ovid, '  Ep.  Heroid,"  v.  115—

"Quid  faeis  (Enone?    Quid  arenas  semina
mandas  ?
Non  profecturis  litora  bubus  aras."

Tor  ye  have  turned ;  or,  that  ye  have  turned.
Judgment  into  gall  (see  note  on  eh.  v.  7).
Hemlock.  Borne  plant  with  an  acrid  juice.
Ye  turn  the  administration  of  justice,  which
is  "the  fruit  of  righteousness,"  into  the
bitterest  injustice  and  wrong.  It  were
"more  easy,"  sayi  Pusey,  "to  change  the


enurso  of  nature  or  the  use  of  things  of
nature,  than  the  course  of  God's  providence
or  the  laws  of  his  just  retribution."

Ver.  13. — In  a  thing  of  nought  j  a  nothing
— a  tiling  which  does  not  really  exist,  viz.
your  prosperity  and  power.  Horns ;  symbols
of  strength  (Deut.  xxxiii.  17;  1  Kings  xxii.
11);  the  idea  being  derived  from  the  wild
bull,  the  strongest  animal  of  their  fauna.
Their  boast  whs  a  consequence  of  the  suc-
cessful wars  with  the  Syrians  (2  Kings  xir.
25 — 28).  The  prophet  proceeds  to  demolish
their  proud  vaunt.

Ver.  14. — I  will  raise  up  (comp.  1  Kings,
xi.  14,  23 ;  Hab.  i.  6,  where  see  note).  A
nation.  The  Assyrians.  From  the  entering
in  of  Hamath,  A  district  in  the  upper  part
of  Coele-Syria,  hod.  El-Bukaa,  the  northern
boundary  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  (Numb,
xxxlv.  8;  see  on  ver.  2).  The  river  of  the
wilderness  ;  rather,  the  torrent  of  iheArabah,
which  is  the  curious  depression  in  which
the  Jordan  flows,  and  which  continues,
though  now  on  a  higher  level,  south  of  the
Dead  Sea,  towards  the  Gulf  of  Akaba.  The
torrent  is  probably  the  Wady  e»  Safieh,  just
south  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  limits  named
define  the  territory  which  Jeruboam  re-
covered (2  Kings  xiv.  25).  The  LXX.  gives,
rav  XfifiiAjiav  rSv  iwiiir,  "the  torrent  of
the  west''


H0MILETIC3.

Vers.  1—7. —  Wantonness  the  way  to  woe.  God's  thoughts  »re  not  as  ours.  He  iees
tUngs  all  round;  we  see  but  one  side  of  them.  He  sees  the  inner  reality  of  things;
we  see  but  their  outward  semblance.  He  sees  the  tendency  and  ultimate  result  of
things ;  we  but  guess  their  probable  tendency,  knowing  nothing  of  distant  results
whatever.  Hence,  in  -their  estimates  of  life  and  of  good,  "  the  wisdom  of  men  is
foolishness  with  God."  The  passage  before  us  is  an  illustration  of  this.  The
conditions  of  being  desiderated  by  carnal  wisdom  are  here  declared  utterly  baneful,
its  calculations  fallacious,  and  its  canons  of  judgment  false.    We  see  here —

1.  The  gbeatnbss  of  the  wicked.  This  is  no  uncommon  sight  (Ps.  xxxvii.  35),
nor  one  whose  lesson  is  hard  to  read  (Ps.  xcii.  7).  1.  Israel  was  first  of  the  nations.
(Ver.  1.)  In  its  palmy  days,  and  even  now,  it  would  have  compared  favourably  with
the  neighbouring  heathen  states  (ver.  2).  It  had  the  power  of  unique  knowledge.
It  had  the  greatness  of  a  unique  culture.  It  had  the  glory  of  a  unique  Divine  connec-
tion (Exod.  xix.  5 ;  2  Sam.  vil.  23).  With  an  equal  numerical,  financial,  and  terri-
torial strength,  it  held,  in  virtue  of  these  advantages,  a  pre-eminenceabove  any  other
people.  Its  wealth  and  magnificence  were  the  admiration  of  even  Oriental  sovereigns
(1  Kings  X.);  its  armies,  under  normal  circumstances,  could  hold  their  own  with
any  of  the  time  (1  Sam.  xv.  1 — 8) ;  and  the  white  wings  of  its  commerce  gleamed  on
every  sea.  In  spite  of  national  unfaithfulness  and  rebellion  and  wickedness,  God's
promise  to  Abraham  to  make  of  him  "  a  great  nation  "  had  been,  in  the  fullest  sense,
accomplished.  2,  These  were  the  chiefs  of  Israel.  (Ver.  1.)  They  were  magistrates,
rulers,  and  judges  of  the  people.  They  occupied  the  position  of  princes,  and  the  house
of  Israel  came  to  them  for  the  regulation  of  its  affairs.  "  They  were  the  descendants  of
those  tribe-princes  who  had  once  been  honoured  to  conduct  the  affairs  of  the  chosen
family  along  with  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  whose  light  shone  forth  from  that  better  age
as  brilliant  examples  of  what  a  truly  theocratical  character  was"  (Hengstenberg>
This  was  a  proud  position,  and  it  had  brought  the  usual  amount  of  arrogance  with  it


116  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [ch.  vi.  1— H

II.  The  BECUBiTT  or  THE  OBEAT.  "  Woe  to  the  secure ! "  Conscious  strength  makes
men  and  nations  feel  secure.  'As  to  Israel :  1.  They  were  secure  in  religious  privilege,
"  In  Zion."  Tliey  presumed  on  their  covenant  relation.  They  ignored  its  sanctions,
disregarded  its  responsibilities,  and  took  it  as  a  guarantee  of  immunity,  even  in  sin.
Religion  is  only  good  as  a  whole.  To  have  its  privileges  without  its  spiritual  character
leads  through  carnal  security  to  carnal  indulgence,  and  so  to  a  condition  worse  than
to  be  destitute  of  both.  2.  They  were  secure  in  strategic  strength.  "And  to  the
careless  upon  the  mountain  of  Samaria."  Samaria  was  a  strong  place,  a  mountain-
fortress,  situated  in  a  rich  valley.  It  held  out  against  Benhadad,  King  of  Syria,  defying
assault,  and  escaping  reduction  even  by  famine  (2  Kings  vii.).  To  Shalmaneser,
long  afterwards,  it  only  yielded  after  a  three  years'  siege  (2  Kirjgs  xvii.  5,  6).  Man
naturally  looks  for  victory  to  "the  big  battalion."    This  is  reasonable  in  the  case

•of  a  human  enemy,  but  mere  fatuity  if  the  enemy  be  God.  3.  They  were  secure  in
self-deception.  "Put  far  away  the  evil  day."  Security,  beaten  out  of  one  retreat,
betakes  itself  to  another.  Trust  in  our  earthly  resources  will  ultimately  fail.  Security
in  external  religious  advantages  will  some  day  be  broken  also  by  a  rude  awaking.
But  the  Fabian  policy  still  prevails,  and  proves  an  almost  impregnable  last  resort.
"It  cannot  be  for  a  long  while  yet"  is  an  argumentative  device  that  seldom  fails  to
reassure.

III.  The  wantonness  or  the  SEcmiB.  The  idea  of  immunity  is  an  encouragement
to  sin.  Among  Israel's  sins  were:  1.  Indolence.  "Stretch  themselves  upon  their
couches."  This  is  the  first  temptation  of  wealth.  Work  has  ceased  to  be  necessary,
and  the  easily  acquired  habit  of  idleness  very  soon  develops  indolence  of  disposition.
Having  nothing  to  do  leads  to  doing  nothing,  and  when  a  man  does  nothing  for  a
while  he  wants  to  go  on  with  it.  2.  Luxury.  "  Lie  upon  beds  of  ivory ; "  "  Eat
lambs,"  etc.  Luxury  is  a  direct  result  of  indolence.  Having  nothing  else  to  occupy
their  attention,  men  concentrate  it  on  themselves.  They  make  it  the  business  of  their
life  to  coddle  tliemselves,  with  the  inevitable  result  of  becoming  harder  to  please.  As
the  appetite  is  pampered  it  becomes  more  dainty,  and  must  be  tempted  with  luxury
after  luxury,  if  any  measure  of  relish  would  be  retained.  3.  Effeminacy.  "  Who  trill
to  the  sound  of  the  liarp "  (ver.  5).  The  tendency  of  luxury  is  to  unman.  On  the
discontinuance  of  manly  exercises  follows  closely  the  loss  of  manly  qualities.  Pamper-
ing the  body  weakens  body  and  miud  both,  and  prepares  the  way  for  occupations  that
will  be  in  character.  Effeminacy  grows  fastest  when  nursed  in  the  lap  of  luxury.
The  Israel  that  was  too  fastidious  to  lie  on  anything  but  an  ivory  conch,  or  too  dainty
to  touch  coarser  fare  than  "  the  fatted  calf,"  was  too  enervated  in  a  little  while  for  any
manlier  pastime  than  trilling  to  a  harp.  4.  Profanity.  "Drink  wine  out  of  sacri-
ficial bowls."  "  The  pleasures  of  sin  "  are  only  "  for  a  season."  They  quickly  wear
out.  Zest  and  relish  fail,  and  satiety  and  disgust  follow.  Hence  the  tendency  of
indulgence  to  become  more  and  more  extravagant  and  eccentric.  It  is  an  attempt  to
stimulate  failing  powers  of  enjoyment  by  presenting  new  sensations.  Then  the  natural
heart  is  essential  enmity  against  Q-od.  Accordingly,  in  the  case  of  a  thoroughly
perverted  nature,  when  a  sinful  indulgence  has  ceased  to  give  pleasure  as  indulgence,
it  will  continue  to  do  so  as  sin.  Israel  had  now  fallen  so  low  as  this.  Sensual  indul-
gence began  to  pall,  and  it  took  a  fresh  lease  of  enjoyableness  by  becoming  sacrilegious.

5.  Heartless  egotism.  "  And  do  not  grieve  for  the  hurt  of  Joseph."  Sin  is  essentially
selfish,  and  the  sin  of  self-indulgence  supremely  so.  The  happiness,  and  even  the
lives,  of  others  are  as  nothing  in  the  balance  against  lust.  Let  who  may  suffer,  let
what  may  happen,  the  sensualist  will  indulge.  To  such  a  person  philanthropy  and
patriotism  are  alike  impossible.  He  will  "  not  grieve  for  the  hurt  of  Joseph  "  even
when  he  is  himself  responsible  for  it.    He  could  play  comfortably  "  while  Rome  burns."

6.  Increasing  violence.  "And  bring  near  the  seat  of  violence."  As  destruction
becomes  more  imminent,  the  violence  that  provokes  it  becomes  more  extreme.  This
is  sometimes  due  to  the  blindness  that  will  not  see ;  sometimes  to  the  recklessness  that
does  not  care;  sometimes  to  the  malignity  that,  forecasting  overthrow,  vvoald  do  all
the  evil  possible  before  it  comes.  In  any  case  it  is  aggravated  and  judgment-
hastening  sin.

IV.  The  doom  op  the  wanton.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  punishment  answers  to  crime,
both  at  to  degree  and  kind.     1.  Chtrished  indulgence  should  he  interruptai.     "The


COL  Ti.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa  117

I

shouting  of  the  revellere  will  depart "  (rer.  7).  This  is  about  the  first  step  in  retribu-
tive punishment.  The  criminal's  enjoyment  comes  to  be  centred  in  his  sin,  and  to
interrupt  it  is  a  sharp  blow.  The  retributive  measure  to  which  lust  is  most  of  kO.
anienable  ia  to  put  a  stop  to  indulgence.  Deprive  the  oppressor  of  his  power,  the
extortioner  of  his  opportunity,  the  drunkard  of  his  drink,  and  already  the  work  of
taking  vengeance  on  him  is  well  begun.  2.  Apposite  hardship  should  he  inflicted.
"  Shall  go  captive."  As  captives  they  should  endure  dppres8ion,  not  inflict  it.  For
indulgence  would  be  substituted  privation  Jn  every  form.  They  would  make  juster
acquaintance  with  luxury  by  having  the  means  of  it  wrung  out  of  their  owq  helpless-
ness and  misery.  It  is  no  doubt  along  these  lines  that  eternal  reward  and  punishment
are  arranged.  Heaven  will  be  the  perfect  exercise  and  enjoyment  of  all  that  is  pure
and  spiritual  in  desire  and  taste.  Hell,  among  other  things,  will  be  the  cutting  off
for  ever  of  sinful  sources  of  enjoyment,  for  which  the  wicked  had  learned  to  live.
3.  Those  who  had  been  first  among  the  nations  should  he  first  among  the  captives.  Thi»
is  only  fitting.  The  guilt  of  any  evil  movement  culminates  in  its  ringleaders,  and
"first  in  transgression,  first  in  punishment,"  is  a  maxim  of  natural  justice.  Those
who  organize  and  officer  a  wicked  movement  are  those  on  whom  justice  will  lay  the
earliest  and  the  heaviest  hand.

Ver.  1. — Sorrow  dogging  the  secure.  Human  life  is  proverbially  uncertain.  "We
know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow,"  whether  we  ourselves  shall  b&  "The
unexpected  "  is  always  happening ;  and  the  lesson  of  this  is — take  nothing  for  granted
that  is  still  future.  In  the  religious  sphere  the  application  of  this  principle  would
put  an  end  to  carnal  security,  and  at  this  object  our  text  aims.  As  to  the  security
denuunced  here,  notice —

I.  The  sphere  of  it.  "In  Zion."  This  is  often  in  Scripture  a  name  for  the
Church  on  earth  (Bom.  ix.  33 ;  see  on  ch.  i.  2).  The  membership  of  this  is  mixed
(Matt.  xiii.  30,  41).  There  are  cold  and  hot  and  lukewarm  among  them.  Some  love
God,  some  hate  him;  some  are  in  equilibria,  having  neither  declared  for  him  nor
against  him.  Of  the  last  two  classes  many  are  at  ease.  The  ideal  of  spiritual  life
is  watchfulness,  activity,  and  self-suspicion;  but  these  qualities  need  not  be  looked
for  in  nnspiritual  men.  Their  fitness  is  not  seen,  nor  the  motives  to  them  felt.
Though  in  the  Church,  they  are  not  of  it ;  and  the  characters  of  their  life  are  not
those  proper  to  the  sincere  believer.

II.  The  meaning  of  it.  There  are  principles  at  hand  on  which  to  account  for
it  without  difficulty.'  1.  Preoccupation.  Spiritual  things  ought  to  get  our  first  and
best  and  continuous  attention  (Matt.  vi.  33 ;  xxvi.  41 ;  Luke  xiii.  24).  But  they  do
not.  The  careless  "  eat,  and  drink,  and  marry,  and  are  given  in  marriage "  (Luke
xvii.  27),  and  so  events  come  on  them  unawares.  The  householder  relaxes  his
vigilance,  and  as  a  result  his  hou^e  is  broken  into  (Matt.  xxiv.  43).  The  wise  virgins
as  well  as  the  foolish  sleep  (Matt.  xxv.  6),  and  the  bridegroom  comes  on  them
unawares.  The  security  is  foolish  in  proportion  to  the  interests  involved,  and  criminal
in  proportion  to  the  number  and  plainness  of  arousing  circumstances.  2.  Blindness.
The  natural  man  is  blind  in  spiritual  things  (1  Cor.  ii.  14).  He  does  not  see  the
beauty  of  spiritual  qualities  (Isa.  liii.  2),  nor  the  self-evidentness  of  spiritual  principles,
nor  the  inviolability  of  spiritual  deliverances,  nor  the  grounds  of  spiritual  assurance,
nor  the  evidences  of  approaching  Divine  action.  He  sees  neither  what  has  been,  nor
what  is,  nor  what  is  coming.  Accordingly,  he  is  secure  and  at  ease  in  the  very  teeth
of  danger.  3.  Presumption.  Men  do  not  adequately  realize  sin  as  to  either  its  guilt
or  danger.  They  live  in  it  equably  and  calmly,  as  if  it  were  the  normal  thing.
They  anticipate  no  evil  and  no  disturbance.  They  reckon  on  being  spiritual  fixtures,
and  on  the  perpetual  maintenance  of  the  status  quo.  They  do  not  mean  to  turn,  nor
take  account  of  being  disturbed ;  but  assume  that  there  will  be  "  no  changes  "  for  ever-
more. Chaiacter  is  become  stereotyped,  conscience  is  silent,  and  the  quiet  of  strong
delusion  is  within  them  and  around.

III.  The  vakietibs  of  it.  The  secure  in  Zion  are  not  all  secure  in  the  same
degree  or  sense.  1.  Sorne  are  secure  in  sin.  They  expect  to  sin  on  and  suffer  no  eviL
Either  they  do  not  recognize  the  inseparable  connection  between  the  two,  or  'they
trust  to  the  chapter  of  accidents  for  something  to  intervene  and  stay  proceedings  before


118  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [ta.  ti,  1— 14.

evil  actually  falls  (Isa.  xxviii.  15).  2.  8<mte  are  secure  in  morality.  They  trust  in
the  arm  of  flesh.  They  persuade  themselves  that  they  are  but  little  to  blame.  They
view  the  coming  judgments  as  provoked  by,  and  meant  for,  others.  They  see  nothing
in  their  own  life  to  provuke  them;  and  they  build  on  this  as  a  ground  of  immunity
from  evil  when  the  day  of  it  shall  come.  And  so  they  are  secure ;  less  guiltily,  it
may  be,  but  no  more  reasonably  than  the  secure  in  sin  (Jer.  xvii.  6  ;  Rom.  iii.  20).
3.  Some  are  secure  in  ordinances.  They  locate  spiritual  power  in  Church  forms.  The
sacraments,  they  say,  contain  and  convey  the  grace  they  signify.  Begeneration  with
them  meaus  a  sprinkled  face,  and  justification  an  elevated  host,  and  sanctification
an  exhaustive  observance  of  ordinances.  Many  are  secure  in  the  persuasion  of  these
thingsr  They  put  a  hollow  form  of  godliness  for  its  spirit  and  power,  and  lull  their
souls  to  rest  in  its  deep  recesses.

IV.  The  occasioks  of  it.  There  is  an  incongruity  about  it  that  seems  to  call  for
explanation.  In  the  case  of  Israel,  and  others  like  it,  one  cause  was :  1.  Unvarying
prosperity.  "Because  they  have  no  changes  they  forget  God."  People  calculate
on  uniformity.  As  life  has  been,  so  they  easily  assume  it  will  be.  A  Smiling  world
is  a  dangerous  tranquillizer.  Even  the  godly  experience  this  (Ps.  cxix.  67),  and  the
direct  tendency  of  adversity  is  to  prevent  it  (2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18).  An  unbrcien  run  of
prosperity  is  most  unfavourable  to  spiritual  life  and  liveliness.  2.  Luxurious  living.
(Yer.  4.)  The  course  of  religion  in  the  soul  is  just  the  progress  of  a  warfare  between
flesh  and  spirit  (Bom.  vii.  23).  To  this  warfare  there  is  one  uniform  issue — the  triumph
of  the  spiritual  principle.  But  victory  is  not  won  without  a  struggle.  The  spiritual
principle  waxes  strong  only  under  culture.  The  flesh  gets  weak  only  by  being
crucified.  If  it  be  let  alone  it  will  grow  strong,  much  more  if  it  is  indulged  and  fed.
Hence  "  fulness  of  bread  and  abundance  of  idleness "  (Ezek.  xvi.  19)  are  a  revealed
occasion  of  spiritual  declension;  and  God  was  lightly  esteemed  and  forsaken  when
Jeshurun  "  waxed  "fat,  and  grew  thick  "  (Deut.  xxxii.  15).  Luxury  is  leaving  its  mark
on  all  the  Churches  in  indolence  and  self-indulgence  and  a  lowered  spiritual  tune.
3.  Companionship  of  the  ungodly.  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise,"
etc.  Character  propagates  itself — begets  character  in  its  own  likeness.  Familiarity
with  sin  breeds  tolerance  of  it.  A  sinful  example  is  a  temptation  to  sin.  So  long
as  men  not  impeccable  instinctively  imitate  each  other,  association  with  the  wicked
must,  to  a  certain  extent,  corrupt.  The  corrupter  any  society  is,  the  lower  will  be
the  spiritual  tone  of  the  Church  in  it.  All  Israel  were  not  alike  guilty,  nor  alike
secure.  Many  were  innocent,  no  doubt,  of  the  special  national  sins ;  and  there  is  no
reason  to  suppose  that  they  all  were  recklessly  at  ease  in  Zion.  But  it  is  certain  that
the  security  of  many  was  due  to  the  hardening  influence  of  the  sins  become  familiar  to
his  mind.  4.  Sin.  This  is  not  an  occasion  merely,  but  a  cause,  and  the  most  fruitful
canse  of  all.  Sin  both  blinds  and  hardens.  The  more  sin  we  commit  the  less  do
we  see  of  its  consequences,  the  less  do  we  fear  what  we  can  see,  and  the-  further  are
we  from  an  appreciative  knowledge  of  God  in  those  characters  which  lead  inevitably
to  the  punishment  of  it.  The  climax  of  security  is  more  than  likely  to  correspond  to
the  extreme  of  wickedness.  It  was  so  with  Israel.  Never  was  slie  more  corrupt,  yet
never  was  she  more  recklessly  at  ease,  than  when  these  words  were  spoken.

V.  The  evil  of  it.  "Woe  to  them,"  etc.!  Wherever  the  security  is  the  woe  is
denounced.  1.  With  the  godly  it  comes  hefore  a  fall.  They  stand  by  faith.  That
faith  is  not  an  act  merely;  it  is  a  habit  of  soul.  It  is  not  maintained  at  normal  strength
without  an  effort.  And  the  frame  most  favourable  to  its  maintenance  at  par  is  evident
from  the  injunction,  "  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear  "  (Bom.  xi.  20).  In  the  perfect
realization  of  our  dependence  on  God  is  the  condition  of  abiding  faith,  and  in  the
maintenance  of  such  laith  is  the  condition  of  escaping  a  fall.  From  the  moment  Peter
soared  in  his  own  imagination,  his  fall  was  a  foregone  conclusion  (Matt.  xxvi.  33,  34).
2.  With  tht  ungodly  it  comes  before  destruction.  Carnal  security  is  in  proportion  to
blindness,  and  blindness  is  in  proportion  to  coruption.  When  a  sinner  is  most  secure
he  most  of  all  deserves  his  doom,  and  is  least  of  all  on  his  guard  against  it.  Hence,  as
the  height  of  imagined  safety  is  the  depth  of  real  danger  (1  Thess.  y.  3).  No  surer  sign
of  destruction  near  than  the  cry,  "  Peace,  peace  t "

Xu.  3. — I%e  preerattinator  family.    The  fear  of  suffering  u  universal  and  instino-


CT.TI.1— 14.]  TUB  BOOK   JP  AMOS.  119


tire.  All  the  lower  animals  exhibit  it.  So  do  men  in  different  ways.  It  is  not
joyous,  but  grievous.  Human  life  and  happrsesg  are  shaped  largely  by  this  feeling.
Men  make  their  relations  to  it  a  chief  concern.  If  it  be  past,  they  seek  compensations
for  it.  If  it  be  present,  they  seek  relief.  If  it  be  coming,  they  try  to  prevent  it;
or,  failing  that,  to  postpone  it;  or,  failing  both,  to  mitigate  it.  And  as  a  certain
proportion  of  the  pain  is  altogether  mental,  and  due  to  our  thoughts  about  it,  one  of
the  commonest  palliatives  for  it  is  the  endeavour  to  ignore  it  altogether.  Among  her
other  follies  and  sins,  the  attempt  to  do  so  on  the  part  of  Israel  is  here  announced.

I.  The  evil  day  which  men  would  put  opp.  This  will  be :  1.  The  day  of  actual
tvU,  To  the  wicked  there  are  many  such  days,  with  almost  as  many  individual
oharacteiistics.  Such  a  day  pre-eminently  is :  (1)  The  day  of  death.  This  is  the  king
of  terrors.  To  the  wicked  it  means  the  end  of  all  the  good  they  know  of,  and  the
beginning  of  sufferings  of  every  possible  kind  and  a  magnitude  inconceivable.  It
is,  therefore,  the  day  of  evil  in  a  sense  peculiar  to  itself.  (2)  The  day  of  visitation  for
sin.  Such  days  are  sure  and  frequent.  Israel  had  experienced  many  of  them,  and
the  reminiscence  was  not  agreeable.  They  had  brought,  and  might  again  bring,  every
calamity  for  body,  mind,  and  estate  short  of  utter  destruction.  They  were  evil  days  in
a  very  emphatic  sense,  and  as  such  were  specially  feared.  2.  The  day  of  imagined  evil.
Such  days  would  be :  (1)  The  day  of  submission  to  God,  which  is  an  evil  day  in  the
estimation  of  pride.  (2)  The  day  of  forsaking  sin,  which  is  disagreeable  to  lust.  (3)
The  day  of  coming  into  relation  to  spiritual  things,  against  all  which  the  carnal  mind
is  enmity.  For  such  things  the  "  more  convenient  season  "  is  convenient  in  proportion
as  it  is  or  can  be  regarded  as  distant.

n.  The  poolish  devices  by  which  men  try  to  accomplish  the  impossible.  A
foolish  thing  is  never  attempted  for  a  wise  reason  or  in  a  wise  way.  As  to  the  evil
day :  1.  Some  do  not  practically  lelieve  that  it  is  coming  at  all.  They  minimize  their
own  guilt,  which  is  the  provoking  cause.  They  magnify  the  considerations  which  bear
in  the  direction  of  postponement.  They  ignore  the  sure  Word  of  God,  which  denounces
inevitable  suffering  on  sin.  The  result  is  an  amount  of  ignorance  or  scepticism  about
the  matter  suffioient  to  prevent  its  exercising  any  practical  effect.  It  is  believed  in  a
vague  and  heedless  way,  but  not  so  as  to  lead  to  appropriate,  nor  in  fact  to  any,
action.  2.  Some  trust  to  the  chapter  of  accidents.  They  know  the  evil  day  is
denounced.  They  know  it  is  coming.  They  know  that,  if  it  comes,  it  will  involve
them  in  its  calamities.  But  they  hope  events  will  take  some  happy  turn,  and  some-
thing indefinite,  but  highly  convenient,  will  occur,  which  will  change  the  issue,  and
prevent  the  crisis  from  touching  them  (Isa.  xxviii.  15).  All  sinners  persist  in  the  life
of  sin,  yet  hope,  somehow  or  other,  to  escape  hell.  3.  Some  endeavour  not  to  think  about
it  at  all.  They,  of  set  purpose,  divert  their  attention  from  the  subject.  They  refuse
to  "consider  their  latter  end."  They  busy  themselves  about  other  things.  They
insanely  act  as  if  the  danger  would  be  annihilated  by  being  ignored.  Into  this  snare
of  the  devil  many  fall.  They  cannot  see  the  nearness  of  the  evil  day  who  refuse  to
look  at  the  matter.  Blinder  and  more  stupid  than  the  ox  or  the  ass  is  the  people  that
will  not  consider  (Isa.  i.  3).

III.  The  last  state  op  the  pbocbastinatoe,  which  is  worse  than  the  first.
What  he  gains  is  a  heritage  of  woe  (ver.  1).  As  to  the  coming  of  this,  it  is  evident :
1.  He  cannot  prevent  it.  God  makes  his  own  arrangements  and  keeps  to  them.  We
cannot  resist  his  power.  We  cannot  change  his  purpose.  His  word  on  any  matter
is  the  last  word,  and  fixes  it  once  for  all.  What  he  has  spoken,  and  as  he  has  spoken,
must  come  to  pass.  2.  Se  cannot  postpone  it.  The  justice,  goodness,  and  wisdom
that  combine  in  fixing  an  event  enter  also  into  the  timing  of  it.  All  possible  con-
siderations are  taken  into  account,  and  infinite  power  no  more  surely  does  the  thing  it
means  than  at  the  time  it  means.  It  would  be  as  wise  to  attempt  and  as  easy  to
accomplish  the  defeat  of  God's  purposes  as  their  postponement.  Our  mental  and  active
attitude  are  alike  inoperative  as  to  both.  3.  He  disqualifies  himself  for  facing  it.  "  Be
ye  also  ready  "  is  the  Divine  prescription  in  reference  to  the  unrevealed  date  of  the
day  of  God.  To  be  unready  is  to  face  it  at  tremendous  disadvantage.  To  be  inex-
pectant  besides  is  to  aggravate  the  disadvantage  to  the  very  utmost.  Prepare  and
watch  are  equally  essential  -jonditions  of  meeting  the  day  of  God  in  safety.  Wilful
delusion  about  the  event  means  woeful  injury  by  it.    Men  ought  to  be  prepared  for


120  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa  [oh.  n.  1—14.


wbat  is  sure  to  come,  and  when  it  conies  be  in  expectation  of  it.  "  Be  ye  also  ready  ' "
"  Watch  therefore."  By  the  confluence  of  these  streams  of  action  it  made  the  river  of
a  life  "  throughly  furnished."

Ver.  6, — The  dry  eye  of  the  dettroyer.  "  But  they  are  not  grieved  for  the  hurt  of
Joseph."  Of  the  many  aspects  of  Israel's  sin,  this  is  among  the  most  repulsive.  It  is
bad  enough  to  sin  against  our  brother,  and  by  our  wrong-doing  to  blight  his  life ;  but
it  makes  the  crime  hideous  to  look,  uncaring  and  callous,  on  the  desolation  we  ourselves
have  wrought.

I.  OsB  man's  sufferiko  IB  A  HT  OCCASION  OF  ANOTHER  han's  borbow.  Men  are
brothers  (Acts  zvii.  26),  and  uwe  a  mutual  regard  for  each  other's  concerns  (Phil.  ii.  4).
Suffering  is  evil,  and  the  proper  relation  toward  those  enduring  it  is  sympathy  (I  John
iii.  17).  God  pities  the  a£9icted,  and  compassion  in  him  is  the  reason  and  measure  of
its  dutifulness  in  us  (Matt.  ix.  36 ;  Luke  x.  33 — 37).  We  cannot  disregard  the  suffer-
ings of  men  without  sinning  against  God  and  against  our  own  humanity.

n.  The  obeat  obstacle  to  sympathy  is  the  selfishness  of  sin.  This  leads  to
atheism  on  the  one  hand,  and  misanthropy  on  the  other.  The  first  man  showed  this
tendency,  the  second  that.  Adam  failed  in  regard  for  God,  Cain  iu  regard  for  his
brother.  Bat  both  transgressions  arose  out  of  the  one  sinful  character  of  selfishness.
Adam  violated  God's  command  because  he  preferred  his  own  way;  Cain  destroyed
Abel's  life  because  he  thought  less  of  it  than  of  his  own  wounded  self-love.  And  all
men,  in  proportion  as  they  are  sinful,  are  selfish,  inconsiderate,  and  misanthropic.
Love  is  of  God,  and  rules  where  God  dwells.  Where  God  dwells  not  we  have  men
"  hateful  and  hating  one  another."  Selfishness  and  disregard  of  others'  happiness  is
the  very  mark  and  token  of  a  corrupt  nature.

III.  Selfishness  is  worst  in  kind  when  manifested  toward  our  own  kindbed.
In  addition  to  the  philanthropy  which  has  its  basis  in  the  brotherhood  of  the  race,  is
the  stronger  affection  which  arises  out  of  nearer  ties.  "  Our  neighbour,"  "  our  own,"
"  those  of  our  own  household,"  aie,  in  an  ascending  scale,  the  prescribed  and  natural
objects  of  our  love  and  care  (Matt.  xix.  19;  1  Tim.  v.  8).  In  proportion  to  the
closeness  of  our  relation  to  an  individual  is  the  normal  strength  of  the  tie  between  us,
and  so  the  guilt  of  disregarding  it.  The  disregard  of  Israel  for  Israelites  was  selfishness
of  a  peculiarly  heartless  kind.  It  was  the  sin  of  brother  against  brethren,  and  involved
the  violation  of  blood  ties  sacred  by  every  law.

IV.  The  greatest  deosee  of  selfishness  is  that  in  eeoabd  to  the  suffebinos
OF  OTHERS,  INFLICTED  OR  BROUGHT  ABOUT  BY  OURSELVES.  In  Israel,  the  men  who
disregarded  the  judgments  decimating  the  nation  were  the  men  whose  wickedness  bad
brought  them  on.  They  were  indifferent,  in  fact,  about  sufferings  of  which  they  were
themselves  the  authors.  And  they  have  their  counterparts  in  the  world  still.  The
drunkard  who  ruins  his  own  family,  the  libertine  who  ruius  the  family  of  his  neighbour,
are  the  only  men  in  the  community  who  "care  for  none  of  these  things."  The
explanation  is  that  special  sin  produces  special  hardness  of  heart,  and  the  man  whose
wickedness  involves  society  in  misery  is  the  man  who,  by  the  very  fact,  is  constituted
most  incapable  of  feeling  it.

Vers.  8 — 11. —  Wrath  revealing  itself  in  judgment.  The  squaring  of  a  sinner's
account  with  God  is  of  necessity  a  bitter  experience.  It  is  the  last  fact  in  a  wide
induction,  and  completes  our  knowledge  of  what  sin  really  is.  The  best  and  only
adequate  view  of  this  is  reached  when  a  man  reads  it  in  the  light  of  its  punishment.
We  are  enabled  to  perform  this  office  for  Israel's  crying  and  incredible  wickeduess  here.

I.  The  word  that  cannot  be  broken.  Accommodating  himself  to  our  mode  of
conceiving  things,  God  condescends  to  give  assurance  of  his  faithfulness  in  three
degree*  ^  assertion.  The  word  that  cannot  be  broken  is :  1.  What  Ood  says.  "  Thy
Word  is  truth."  God  can  neither  err  nor  lie.  He  does  when  he  promises  (Numb,
xxiii.  19).  He  does  as  much  as  he  promises.  He  does  exactly  the  thing  he  promises.
The  fact  of  his  truth  lies  at  the  foundation  of  all  religion  and  all  knowledge.  Beciuse
he  is  true,  we  not  only  believe  his  testimony  absolutely,  but  we  believe  absolutelj  the
testimony  of  I  )ur  own  consciousness  as  being  his  gift.  2.  What  Ood  swears.  In  Itself
his  word  ii  as  good  as  bis  oath.     But  to  our  apprehension  there  may  be  a  difference.


OH.  VL 1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AM03.  121

For  God  to  swear  m  an  act  of  special  condescension.  It  is  making  a  great  concession
to  our  unbelief,  and  the  limitation  of  our  faculties,  that  God  conforms  to  our  human
modes  of  making  solemn  affirmation,  in  order  if  possible  to  win  our  implicit  credcQca
for  his  words  (Heb.  vi,  17).  His  oath,  added  to  his  word  in  any  matter,  is  for  fulness
of  confirmation  and  assurance,  and  is  a  specially  gracious  act.  3.  What  he  swears  by
himself.  In  default  of  a  greater,  God  swears  by  himseli  (Heb.  vi.  13).  He  is  "the
true  God,"  and  a  "God  of  truth."  An  oath  in  his  name  has  the  highest  sanction
possible,  and  assumes  its  most  solemn  form.  God's  oath  in  his  own  name  is  as  sure  as
bis  own  existence — is,  in  fact,  a  putting  of  his  existence  in  pledge  for  the  word  of
his  mouth.

II.  The  essential  antagonibu  between  Divine  holiness  and  human  sin.  This
is  extreme,  utter,  aod  necessary.  1.  God  does  not  hate  men,  but  their  sin.  He  is  not
said  to  do  so  here.  The  statements  elsewhere,  that  he  hates  the  wicked  (Ps.  v.  6 ;
Rom.  ix.  13),  must  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  clearly  revealed  fact  that  he  also
loves  them  (John  iii.  16),  and  loved  his  people  while  they  were  of  them.  It  cannot
be  that  he  loves  the  wicked  and  hates  them  in  the  same  sense.  His  love  has  reference
to  their  humanity,  his  hatred  to  their  sinfuloess  (Rom.  i.  18).  He  hates  them  as
sinners,  yet  loves  them  as.  men;  forgives  them  often,  yet  takes  vengeance  on  their
inventions  (Ps.  xcix.  8).  2.  Ood's  hatred  of  sin  extends  to  the  occasions  of  it.  "  I
abhor  the  pride  of  Jacob."  God's  abhorrence  of  sin  extends  to  everything  that  tends
to  produce  it.  Pride  or  loftiness,  being  in  itself  sinful,  and  a  fruitful  occasion  of  sin,
he  must  hate.  Excellence  or  greatness,  whether  imaginary  or  real,  is,  in  so  far  as  it
leads  to  pride,  included  in  the  reach  of  the  Divine  abhorrence.  Sin,  like  a  cesspool,
fouls  all  approaches  to  it.  It  is  spiritual  treason,  and  attaints  its  nearest  of  kin.  3.
/(  includes  even  the  scenes  of  it.  "  And  I  hate  his  palaces."  The  palaces  were  closely
connected  with  the  sin.  They  were  built  with  the  wages  of  unrighteousness,  for
luxurious  gratification,  and  as  a  means  to  further  exaction.  Accordingly,  as  at  once  an
expression  of  sin  and  an  accessory  of  it,  they  were  hateful  in  God's  sight.  God's
attitude  in  the  matter  is  the  model  for  ours.  If  we  are  baptized  into  his  Spirit  we  shall
"  hate  even  the  garments  spotted  by  the  flesh."  Not  only  is  sin  hateful,  but  all  that
leads  to  it,  all  that  borders  on  it,  all  that  has  any  connection  with  it.  Even  the
remotest  contact  with  it  will  be  hateful  to  the  spiritually  minded.

III.  The  sweeping  judgments  that  express  a  holt  wrath.  These  are  set  forth
in  various  forms  and  degrees  of  severity,  1.  2%e  capital  would  be  delivered  up.  "  And
give  up  the  city  and  the  fulness  thereof,"  Samaria,  the  capital,  was  the  strength  and
pride  of  Israel,  It  was  the  impregnable  metropolis,  the  gieat  storehouse  of  national
wealth,  the  seat  of  government,  the  home  of  luxury,  the  social,  political,  economical,  and
military  centre  of  the  kingdom.  To  destroy  it  was  like  taking  the  heart  out  of  their
kingdom  at  one  fell  stroke.  Notwithstanding  this,  or  rather  perhaps  because  of  this,
it  would  be  captured  and  pillaged.  In  sia  it  had  set  the  example,  and  taken  the  lead,
and  in  punishment  its  leading  position  would  be  retained.  2.  Not  even  one  out  of  ten
should  escape.  (Yer.  9,)  Such  sweeping  destruction  as  this  was  almost  unheard  of.
Even  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  were  not  more  utterly  destroyed.  This  was  due  ultimately
to  the  almost  universal  impenitence,  and  proximately  to  the  length  and  stubbornness
of  the  fighting,  God  would  not  allow  the  persistently  impenitent  to  escape,  and  the
Assyrian  armies,  his  instruments,  would  not  spare  the  obstinate  defenders  of  Samaria,
who  bad  kept  them  three  years  at  bay,  3.  3%e  straggling  survivors  should  be  in  abject
fear  of  the  almost  universal  fate.  (Ver.  10.)  The  solitary  survivor  is  no  nearer  faith
in  God  than  those  who  have  been  destroyed.  He  does  not  cast  himself  on  his  mercy.
He  does  not  even  in  that  dreadful  hour  seek  his  face.  His  stupid  but  thoroughly
characteristic  impulse  b  to  hide  away  from  his  presence.  Apart  from  Divine  grace,
sin  committed  drives  away  from  Gud  (Gen.  iii.  8),  and  punishment  approaching  drives
further  still  (Eev,  vi,  16).  In  prosperity  the  wicked  will  not  even  fear  God ;  in
adversity,  if  they  fear,  they  still  refuse  to  trust  him.  4.  The  work  of  destruction
would  be  carried  out  systematimlly  and  in  detail.  (Ver.  11.)  Neither  palace  nor
cabin  should  escape.  The  great  house  would  be  broken  into  great  pieces,  and  the
small  house  into  small  pieces,     God's  judgments  are  nothing  if  not  effective.     The

geatest  cannot  defy,  nor  can  the  smallest  elude  them.    The  destruction  of  each  ihall
elaborately  and  oirconutantially  complete.


123  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  tl  1—14.

rV.  God  thk  Author  of  the  fctnishmbnt  hb  peocitbes.  "  The  Lord  commandeth,"
etc.  1.  The  sin  of  man  is  often  a  f odor  in  the  accomplishment  of  God's  purpose.  It
was  so  with  the  transportation  of  Joseph  (Gen.  xlr.  6,  8 ;  1.  20),  with  the  death  of
Christ  (Acts  ii.  23 ;  It.  28),  and  with  the  afSiction  of  Israel  by  Assyria  (Isa.  z.  5—7).
The  actors  are  in  each  case  impelled  by  their  own  evil  motives,  aim  at  their  own  evil
ends,  use  their  own  evil  means,  and  act  altogether  of  their  own  free  will ;  and  yet,  when
they  succeed,  the  result  is  found  to  serve  some  important  collateral  interest  they  think
nothing  of,  and  so  to  be  part  of  the  infiaitely  good  purpose  of  God.  It  is  thus  that
God  accomplishes  his  will  by  the  instrumentality  of  men,  without  infringing  on  their
perfect  freedom,  or  beiag  implicated  in  the  sin  which,  in  unconscious  furtherance  of
it,  they  commit.  The  Assyrian  destroying  Israel  in  an  unjustifiable  war  was  at  once
carrying  out  God's  purpose  and  sinning  against  him.  2.  God  destroys  the  chosen
people,  not  as  " Israel"  hut  as  "  Jacoh."  " Israel,"  the  covenant  name,  is  given  them
in  connection  with  promises  of  covenant  treatment.  God  blesses  them  as  "  Israel,"
and  afiSicts  them  as  "  Israel,"  and  eveo  decimates  them  as  "  Israel,"  all  these  being
elements  of  a  gracious  discipline.  But  destruction  is  not  so.  It  is  the  penalty  of  a
covenant  already  broken,  and  God  marks  them  out  for  this  by  the  uucoven  anted  name
of  "Jacob,"

Vers.  12 — IL—The  doomed  people  who  will  not  turn.  Sin  brings  often  present  gain,
but  it  never  pays  in  the  end.  When  the  balance  is  struck,  the  wrong-doer  always  finds
it  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  book.  A  sinner  is  one  who  sets  himself  against  God,  and
in  the  nature  of  things  ignorance  cannot  overreach  knowledge,  nor  weakness  overcome
omnipotence.  Israel  had  long  been  under  instruction  in  this  matter,  and  they  would
see  it  one  day  when  the  knowledge  would  be  too  late.  Many  Scripture  maxims  are
illustrated  here.

L  "  Behold,  tb  abe  of  hothino,  and  toub  wobk  of  nottoht."  (Ver.  13.)  "  In
a  thing  of  nought ; "  literally,  a  "  non-thing,"  a  phantasm,  what  has  an  appearance  of
being,  and  yet  is  not.  1.  Human  strength  i$  nothing.  It  is  nothing  ia  comparison
with  God's.  It  is  nothing  apart  from  God's.  Being  derived  wholly  from  God,  it  has
no  existence  independent  of  him.  It  is,  therefore,  virtually  and  practically  "  a  thing
of  nought ; "  incapable  of  being  used  for  any  purpose  either  against  him  or  irrespective
of  him.  2.  Out  of  nothing  nothing  comes.  Human  power  being  a  nonentity,  belief
in  it  is  delusion,  trust  in  it  is  baseless,  and  expectation  from  it  must  be  disappointed.
Doubly,  therefore,  and  trebly  "cittsed  is  he  that  maketh  flesh  his  arm."  3.  Tet  it  is
in  this  nonentity  that  men  rejoice.  Sin  is  at  bottom  a  deification  of  selt  We  believe
in  ourselves — ^in  our  own  power  and  knowledge  and  excellence.  We  are  satisfied  with
ourselves,  expect  great  things  from  ourselves,  and  rejoice  in  ourselves  (Ps.  x.  6;  lii.  7).
Only  by  a  work  of  grace  are  we  disabused  of  our  carnal  confidence  and  won  to  a  higher
trust.  It  is  as  complementary  of  our  "  trusting  in  the  Lord  "  that  we  "  lean  not  to
our  own  understanding."

II.  "  Who  can  being  a  clean  thino  out  of  an  unclean  ?  Not  one."  (Ver.  12.)
Israel  joined  oppression  to  unrighteousness,  and  out  of  this  endeavoured  to  bring
themselves  lasting  gain.  This  is  likened  to  an  attempt  by  the  husbandman  to  cultivate
the  rock.  It  im  plies  :1.  Utter  futility.  The  husbandman  does  not  attempt  impracti-
cable things.  He  knows  there  is  no  fertility  in  a  bare  rock — no  soil  for  crop,  no  bed
for  seed,  no  furrow  for  plough;  and  so  he  cultivates  the  good  soil,  and  leaves  the  rook
alone.  And  no  more  than  till  the  rook  for  a  harvest  need  men  seek  safety  by  wrong-
doing. They  cannot  find  it  so.  It  is  not  where  they  seek  it.  Good  cannot  come  out
of  evil  by  natural  generation,  for  it  is  not  in  it.  2.  Loss  instead  of  gain.  An  attempt
to  plough  the  rock,  like  every  other  offence  against  the  nature  of  things,  must  be
worse  than  futile.  It  means  lost  time,  lost  labuur,  and  broken  implements.  So  with
the  perversion  of  justice,  and  the  corruption  of  the  fruit  of  righteousness.  It  is  evil,
and  can  only  lead  to  evil.  It  increases  the  sum  total  of  the  wickedness  that  provokes
Divine  wrath,  and  itself  creates  a  new  source  of  danger.

III.  "  Theeefoee  let  no  man  oloey  in  men."  (Ver.  13.)  It  is  the  very  essenca
of  unreason.  1.  It  isa  crime.  It  involves  departure  from  God.  The  soul  is  capabl*
of  sustaining  but  one  great  attachment  at  a  time.  We  cannot  love  both  the  Father
and  the  world,  or  "  serve  God  and  mammon,"  or  "  make  flesh  our  arm,"  without  out


OH,  VI,  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  123

heart  departing  from  the  Lord.  And  it  is  not  only  that  the  two  trusts  are  one  too
many;  they  are  incompatible  and  mutually  destructive.  To  deify  self,  and  defy
Jehovah,  are  acts  of  the  same  moral  quality.  The  blindness,  and  only  the  blindness,
that  is  capable  of  the  one  is  capable  of  the  other.  2.  It  is  a  blunder.  It  is  putting
faith  in  the  faithless.  It  is  attributing  power  to  the  impotent.  It  is  pitting  the
creature  against  the  Creator,  the  vessel  against  the  potter,  the  thing  formed  against
him  that  formed  it.  Only  disappointment  can  come  out  of  this.  A  pierced  hand  is
the  natural  and  inevitable  penalty  of  leaning  on  a  broken  reed.  "  East  thou  an  arm
like  God,"  etc.?

IV.  "  O  Assyrian,  the  rod  of  mine  anqbb."  Israel's  overthrow  was  decided  on,
and  the  instrument  of  it  prepared.  1.  War  the  minister  of  God.  He  does  not
command,  nor  authorize,  nor  sanction  it.  He  forbids  the  lusts  of  ambition  and  greed
and  revenge  that  lead  to  it.  He  inculcates  a  love  of  others  which,  carried  out,  would
make  it  impossible.  The  progress  of  his  religion  leads  to  the  diminution  of  war,  and
its  firial  establishment  will  co-ordinate  itself  with  the  turning  of  war  into  peace  to  the
ends  of  the  earth.  Yet,  as  with  other  evil  things,  he  permits  it  to  happen,  controls
its  operation,  utilizes  its  results,  and  makes  it  a  means  of  good,  and  the  minister  of  his
holy  wilL  War  has  always  been  a  prominent  agency  in  the  judgments  that  fall  on
nations.  And  a  terrible  agency  it  is,  more  ruthlessly  destructive  than  any  other.  It
expresses  all  the  evil  qualities  of  corrupt  humanity,  deserviug  the  poet's  scathing
words —

"  O  war,  thou  son  of  hell.
Whom  angry  Heavens  do  make  theii  minister."

And  war,  apart  from  its  severity  as  a  scourge,  is  well  calculated  to  be  disciplinary.
As  a  revelation  of  human  wickedness,  it  indirectly  lays  bare  to  us  the  plagues  of  our  own
heart.  Linked  hand  in  hand  as  it  is,  moreover,  with  deceit  and  treachery,  it  exhibits
carnal  human  nature  as  "a  thing  of  nought,"  and  so  is  an  effective  antidote  to
confidence  in  the  flesh.  2.  Tlie  heathen  the  rod  in  his  hand.  God  is  not  fastidious  in
the  matter  of  instruments.  He  uses  every  man,  however  vile,  for  some  purpose  or
other.  Israel,  moreover,  was  so  enamoured  of  the  heathen — of  their  gods  and. worship
and  ways — that  to  know  them  in  the  character  of  enemies  and  conquerors  and
masters  would  be  a  great  advantage.  It  would  be  in  these  capacities  that  the  worst
effects  of  idolatry  on  the  human  character  would  show  themselves  and  closer  acquaint-
ance with  them  might  help  to  disenchant  the  idol-loving  Israel.'  3.  Victory  always  on
Ood's  side.  God,  for  the  time  being,  would  be  on  the  Assyrian's  side.  Without
reference  to  the  intrinsic  merits  of  the  struggle,  as  between  parties  almost  equally
wicked,  he  would  help  the  heathen  to  overcome  the  apostates.  Israel's  victories  over
the  nations  were  due,  not  to  their  own  valour  or  strength,  but  to  God's  assisting  arm
(Ps.  xliv.  2,  3).  Left  to  themselves,  they  would  be  utterly  beaten  now.  The  differenca
between  defeat  and  victory  is  the  difference  between  the  God-forsaken  and  the  God-
defended.  4.  Ood-sent  affliction  covers  all  the  ground  covered  by  the  provoking  sin.
"And  it  shall  oppress  you  from  the  entrance  Hamath"-^the  extreme  northern
boundary  (Numb,  xxxiv.  8) — "to  the  brook  of  the  desert,"  the  southern  boundary,
whether  "the  brook  of  the  willows,"  Isa.  xv.  7  (Pusey),  or  the  present  "El  Ahsy"
(Keil).  This  territory  they  had  recovered  under  Jeroboam  II.,  and  lost  soon  to
Tiglath-Pileser,  defeat  and  loss  retracing  to  the  last  inch  the  steps  of  conquest.  Not
only  was  "  the  whole  scene  of  their  triumphs  one  scene  of  affliction  and  woe  "  (Pusey),
but  the  very  thing,  and  the  whole  thing,  which  they  had  made  an  occasion  of  pride
and  carnal  confidence,  vainly  deeming  that  they  had  conquered  it  in  their  own
strength,  is  made  an  occasion  of  humiliation  and  distress.  The  only  way  to  put  us  out
of  conceit  with  our  idol  is  to  destroy  it  all,  and  destroy  it  utterly.

Ver.  13. — Joy  in  the  unreal  always  precarious.  It  is  quite  unaccountable.  It  is
almost  incredible.  But  it  is  unquestionably  true.  Men  reject  the  staff,  and  lean  npon
the  broken  reed.  Whatever  is  worthy  of  trust  they  doubt,  whatever  is  utterly  unreli-
able they  confide  in.  This  was  the  way  of  Israel,  and  it  is  the  way  of  humanity.
They  do  not  see  the  reality  of  things.  They  attribute  to  them  qualities  they  do
not  possess,  qualities  sometimes  the  very  opposite  of  the  actual  ones.     Then  they


124  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh,  tl  1—14

acton  their  theory  of  things,  and  rejmce  in  a  figment,  the  creation  of  their  own  fancy,
whilst  repudiating  or  disregarding  real  and  reliable  objects  of  tmst.

L  The  thinos  that  are  "  THmas  of  NonoHX."  The  arm  of  flesh,  or  human
help,  as  against  God's  strength,  is  the  "  non-thing  "  or  nonentity  referred  to  primarily.
But  the  expression  is  capable  of  wider  application.  Among  the  nonentities  are:  1.  All
tilings  sinful.  This  is  an  extreme  case.  Sin  is  an  ephemera,  offering  only  what  fleets
away.  It  is  a  negation,  the  privation  of  all  good.  It  is  a  phantasm,  having  an  appear-
ance  of  good  with  no  reality  below  it.  It  is  a  deception,  having  a  lie  nt  the  bottom  of  it.
It  is  a  non-thing  in  a  unique  sense.  2.  All  things  material.  The  positivist  only
believes  in  material  phenomena,  as  those  of  which  alone  he  has  positive  knowledge.
But  these  are  really  the  most  uncertain  phenomena  there  are.  The  Iradily  sense  that
notes  them  is  more  certain,  and  the  thinking  mind  that  has  cognizance  of  the  bodily
sense  is  more  certain  than  either,  and  the  ultimate  test  of  the  existence  of  both.  What
we  know  most  surely  and  directly  is  spirit.  Observation  may  be  incorrect,  and  lead
us  astray,  but  consciousness  speaks  only  tmth.  If  there  are  things  which  "  are  not
•s  they  seem,"  they  are  physical,  as  distinguished  from  psychical  thiogs.  3.  All  things
temporal.  These  are  evanescent  in  their  nature.  "  The  world  passeth  away."  They
are  still  more  evanescent  in  their  form :  "  The  fashion  of  this  world  passeth  away."  They
are  doubly  evanescent  in  their  character  as  a  means  of  happiness;  for  not  alone  the
world,  but  the  "  lust  thereof,"  passeth  away.  This  evanescence  means  unreality.  The
thing  that  perishes  in  the  using  is  conspicuously  a  thing  of  nought.  Such  a  thing  is
human  nature,  and  each  of  its  temporal  blessings  and  relations — in  other  words,  human
life.  It  is  a  vapour  on  the  hill,  a  bubble  on  the  stream,  a  ripple  on  the  wave,  a  meteor
in  the  sky,  an  unsubstantial  thing  that  passes  and  leaves  no  trace.  4.  All  thingi
createcf.  God,  the  "  I  Am,"  is  essential  Existence.  He  alone  hath  immortality,  exists
of  himself  and  from  himself.  The  existence  of  creatures  is  derived,jin  existence  &om
God  and  in  him.  It  is  not,  therefore,  veal  as  God's  is.  We  are  phantoms,  he  is  reality.
We  are  shadows,  he  is  substance.  Creation  as  contrasted  with  the  Creator  is  a  "  non-
thing,"  a  thing  of  nought.

II.  The  ohabaoteb  that  finds  its  jot  in  xtnbealitt.  This  character  is  one  with
a  wide  geographical  range.  It  might  almost  be  said  to  belong  to  sinful  man  as  such.
As  to  its  qualities,  it  is :  1.  Blind.  Such  a  man  "  cannot  see  afar  off."  He  does  not
see  things  through  and  through.  He  does  not  see  things  as  they  are.  He  sees  things
through  coloured  glasses.  He  dwells  in  the  superficies  of  things.  He  is  deceived  by
appearances.  He  confounds  the  qualities  of  things.  He  cannot,  in  fact,  be  said  to
"  know  anything  as  he  ought."  The  blindness  of  our  heart  is  a  universal  infirmity.
Sin  blinds,  and  prejudice  blinds,  and  infirmity  blinds  us  all ;  and  the  most  convincing
proof  of  the  fact  is  that  we  choose  the  worst  and  poorest  in  the  universe,  and  often  and
long  reject  the  true  riches.  2.  Prejudiced.  The  blindness  that  permits  us  to  rejoice  in
the  flesh  must  have  prejudice  behind  it.  It  involves  a  wrong  condition  of  heart.  "  The
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  "  is  a  maxim  which  explains  the  rejection  of  him  by
the  sinner.  "They  that  are  after  the  flesh  do  mind  the  things  of  the  flesh"  is  one
which  explains  his  choice  of  sin.  In  the  spiritual,  as  in  other  departments,  things
follow  their  afSnities.     3.  Proud.     Well  says  the  poet —

**  What  the  weak  head  with  strangest  bias  rules
Is  pride,  the  never-failing  vice  of  fools."

It  misreads  altogether  the  proportions  of  things.  It  has  an  overweening  estimate  of
self.  "  Thinlsing  of  ourselves  more  highly  than  we  ought  to  think,"  and  "  thinking
God  to  be  altogether  such  a  one  as  ourselves,"  the  transfer  of  trust  from  heaven  to
earth,  is  not  alone  natural,  but  inevitable.

III.  The  jot  that  flames  withodt  fubl.  That  there  should  be  such  joy  at  all
is  an  abnormal  thing.  A  priori  it  is  not  what  we  should  expect.  ~  And  we  are  prepared
to  find  something  anomalous  about  a  joy  that  could  exist  in  such  circumstances.  This
we  do.  1.  It  is  a  passing  joy.  It  cannot  last.  The  meteor  irradiating  the  sky,  the
thorns  crackling  under  the  pot,  both  blaze  and  both  burn  quickly  out.  The  fire  has
too  little  to  feed  on.  It  is  only  a  puff,  and  done  with.  So  with  joy  in  the  earthly.  It
has  an  unsubstantial  and  unenduring  basis.  The  thing  it  rests  on  perishes,  and  it  can-
not itself  endure.    2.  /(  is  an  unreal  Joy.    It  is  not  alone  that  it  has  reference  to  an


CH.  TI.1— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  125

ephemeral  thing,  but  to  an  unsubstantial  thing.  It  is  a  mere  figment  of  the  mind  ;
an  appearance  •  rather  than  an  existence ;  not  a  fire  in  the  proper  sense,  but  a
phosphorescence.  3.  Its  unreality  is  the  parent  of  real  woe.  To  rejoice  in  a  nonentity
is  a  course  on  which  disappointment  clearly  waits.  It  also  involves  distrust,  and
BO  incurs  the  wrath  of  God.  No  man  can  deceive  himself  with  impunity.  The  line  of
action  into  which  his  false  notion  will  lead  him  must  end  in  calamity.  Mistaken
opinion  associates  itself  with  unfitting  action,  and  this  in  turn  with  undesired  results.
He  who  follows  the  fen  fire  lands  in  the  fen.  4.  O/all  who  rejoice  in  a  thing  of  nought
the  most  hopelessly  deceived  are  the  self-righteous.  ■  With  others  the  trust  is  something
apart  from  religion,  and  adopted  in  preference  to  it.  But  with  the  self-righteous  it
masquerades  in  the  name  of  religion  itself.  There  is  an  idea,  either  that  nothing  is
wrong,  or  that  the  man  can  help  himself.  In  either  case  Divine  help  is  despised.
Qod's  right  is  spurned.  The  one  only  way  is  refused.  And  on  the  moral  impossibility
of  escaping  if  they  neglect  so  great  salvation,  the  self-deluded  soul  makes  shipwreck.
"Behold,  all  ye  that  kindle  a  fire,"  etc.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — Religious  indifference  and  false  security.  Amos  was  a  native  of  the
southern  kingdom,  but  his  ministry  was  mainly  to  Israel.  His  impartiality  appears  in
the  censures  and  reproaches  which  he  addresses,  as  in  this  passage,  to  both  Judah  and
Samaria.  But  the  desicription  applies  to  professing  Christians  to-day  as  accurately  as
if  it  had  just  then  been  written,  and  had  been  explicitly  applied  to  such.  How  many
who  are  called  to  devotion  and  diligeaoe  are  "  at  ease,"  are  "  confident,"  or  "  secure  " !

I.  The  disposition  and  habit  herb  condemned.  The  following  elements  are  to  be
recognized.  1.  Self-satisfaction.  2.  Self-indulgence.  3.  Indifiference.  4.  Carelessness.
6.  Negligence.

II.  The  oircumstanoeb  which  aggravate  the  bin  of  indifperenok  and  security.
In  the  case  of  those  here  addressed  we  observe :  1.  That  they  resided  in  places  which
were  themselves  a  reminder  of  the  character  of  Jehovah  and  of  his  past  "  dealings  "
with  the  chosen  people.  2.  That  they  occupied  positions  fitted  to  inspire  them
with  a  sense  of  personal  responsibility.  They  were  the  distinguished  chiefs  of  the
nations — the  men  to  whom  the  people  looked  as  their  leaders,  and  in  whom  they  might
reasonably  expect  to  find  an  example  of  piety,  unselfishness,  and  zeal.  3.  That  they
lived  in  times  when  the  judgments  of  God  were  abroad,  and  when  insensibility  to  duty
and  religion  were  all  the  more  inexcusably  culpable.

III.  The  evii.  following  upon  the  disposition  and  habit  herb  condemned.
1.  Divine  displeasure  is  prophetically  declared  against  those  who  are  at  ease  when  they
should  be  at  work,  against  those  who  are  secure  and  confident  when  they  should  be
examining  and  judging  themselves,  and  beginning  a  new  and  better  life.  2.  Moral
deterioration  cannot  but  follow  upon  such  a  state  of  mind  as  is  here  depicted.  The
slothful  are  the  first  to  feel  the  ill  effects  of  their  sloth ;  the  habit  grows,  and  a  religious,
not  to  say  an  heroic,  life  becomes  an  impossibility.  3.  National  disaster  and  punish-
ment are  entailed  by  the  indifference  and  unfaithfulness  of  those  who  are  called  to  be  a
nation's  guides  and  rulers. — T.

Ver.  3. — Putting  away  the  evil  day.  By  the  "  evil  day  "  must  be  meant  the  day  of
account  and  reckoning  which  comes  to  all  men  and  to  all  communities.  A»  surely  as
there  is  a  moral  government  and  a  moral  Governor  in  the  universe,  so  surely  must  all
reasonable  and'  intelligent  natures  be  held  responsible  for  their  conduct  and  for  their
influence.  Yet  it  is  no  unusual  thing  for  men  to  follow  the  example  of  those  who  are
censured  in  this  verse.

I.  The  thought  or  a  day  of  account  is  unwelcome  to  the  unfaithful  and
THE  irreligious.  Such  persons  need  not  be  disbelievers  in  j  udgment,  in  accountability ;
they  may  accept  the  assurance  of  their  own  reason  and  conscience  that  an  account
must  be  rendered  to  the  Judge  of  all.  Yet,  as  the  thought  of  a  reckoning  is  one
•Itogether  repugnant  to  them,  they  persuade  themselves  that  it  may  be  indefinitely
deferred.    It  must  come,  but  it  may  not  come  yet ;  it  may  not  come  for  a  very  long


126  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  VL 1—14.

time;  indeed,  may  be  bo  remote  that  it  need  not  be  taken  into  consideratioa  lo
arranging  the  plans  of  life.  "  Because  sentence  against  an  evil  work  is  not  executed
speedily,  therefore  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men  is  fully  set  in  them  to  do  evil."

II.  The  defbrbino  op  the  thought  of  the  day  of  account  will  not  defeb
THE  DAT   ITSELF.    Moral  law  is  never  inoperative,  is  never  suspended.    Judgment
lingereth  not.    The  history  alike  of  nations  and  of  individuals  proves  that  there  is  a  .
Buler  on  high,  who  is  not  remiss  in  carrying  out  his  purposes.    There  is  a  reckoning
in  time ;  there  will  be  a  reckoning  in  eternity.

"Though  the  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  yet  they  grind  exceeding  small)
Though  with  patience  he  stands  waiting,  he  exactly  judgeth  aU."

It  is  irrational  and  futile  to  imagine  that  by  forgetting  responsibility  men  can  efface  it.
Such  a  supposition  reminds  of  the  action  of  the  foolish  ostrich  who  thrusts  his  head  into
a  bush,  and,  because  he  loses  sight  of  his  pursuers,  supposes  that  he  has  eluded  them.
There  is  no  discharge  in  this  war.

III.  NeOLIOENCE  OONCEBNINa  RESPONSIBILITY  MAT  ETEH  HASTEN  THE  APPBOAOH  OF

THE  iHBViTABLB  DAT  OF  ACCOUNT.  They  who  forget  their  accountability  to  God  for
their  unfaithfulness  are  likely  to  be  confirmed  in  their  sinful  courses  ;  an(^  as  iniquity
abounds,  judgment  approaches.  Thus  the  dreaded  retribution  is  hastened  rather  than
postponed ;  and  the  evil  day  which  men  would  fain  put  far  from  them  is  brought  near,
and  the  tempest,  which  they  dread  and  would  avoid  and  escape,  breaks  upon  them  in
all  its  force  and  fury. — T.

Vers.  4 — 7. — The  sin  of  dissolute  life.  A  herdsman  and  gatherer  of  wild  figs  like
Amos,  brought  into  contact  with  the  nobility  and  the  courtiers  of  a  wealthy  and
luxurious  city  like  Samaria,  was  likely  enough  to  be  shocked  and  scandalized.  The
judgments  he  formed  were  naturally  severe,  but  they  were  not  unjust  or  passionate.
His  language  remains  a  merited  and  everlasting  rebuke  to  those  in  high  station  who
live  for  their  own  gratification  and  indulgence.

I.  A    LUXUBIOUB  AND   DIBSOT;UTE   LIFE  IS   A   SHAMEFUL   MISUSE   OF  FBE0IOU8   OPFOB-

TUN1TIE8.  It  is  sometimes  judged  that  those  who  are  "  born  in  the  purple,"  those  who
inherit  great  estates,  great  wealth,  are  to  be  excused  if  they  form  in  youth,  and  retain
in  manhood,  habits  of  expensive  self-indulgence.  But  as  all  men  are,  above  all,  the
children  of  God,  endowed  with  a  spiritual  nature  and  entrusted  with  sacred  oppor-
tunities, it  is  not  to  be  for  a  moment  admitted  that  the  advantages  of  high  station
absolve  them  from  the  obligations  involved  in  human  nature  and  human  life.  A  man
has  no  right  to  pamper  the  body  and  exalt  it  to  a  lordship  over  the  spirit ;  he  has  no
right  to  gratify  his  tastes  as  though  self-gratification  were  the  great  end  of  existence.

II.  A  LUXUBIOUS  AND   DISSOLUTE  LIFE  IS  MOEALLT  DEBASING  AND  DEOBADINO.      No

one  can  live  below  the  appointed  level  of  humanity  without  paying  the  inevitable
penalty,  without  incurring  the  inevitable  deterioration.  The  light  burns  dim ;  the
fine  gold  turns  to  clay.  The  couch  of  iuduleuce,  the  feast  of  gluttony,  the  voluptuous
music,  the  brimming  bowls  of  wine,  the  costly  unguents, — these  are  dangerous
indulgences.  Men  may  give -them  fine  names,  and  call  them  the  bounties  of  Divine
providence.  And  it  is  quite  true  that  the  ev'l  is  not  in  the  instruments  of  self-
indulgence,  but  in  the  bad  uses  to  whioli  they  are  put.  But  none  can  live  merely  for
bodily,  for  assthetic,  for  social,  enjoyment,  without  injuring  his  own  character,  without
losing  self-respect  and  the  esteem  of  those  whose  esteem  is  worth  having.

III.  A    LUXUBIOUS    AND    DISSOLUTE    LIFE    ON    THE    PART    OF    THE    GBEAT    IS    A    BAD

EXAMPLE  TO  THE  COMMUNITY  AT  LARGE.  Bad  habits  penetrate  from  the  so-called
upper  to  the  so-called  lower  class.  When  the  nobility  and  gentry  are  self-indulgent,
the  tradespeople  who  grow  wealthy  are  likely  to  follow  their  example,  and  the  poor
are  likely  enough  to  grow  envious  and  discontented.  The  Samaritan  chiefs  were
reproached  for  misleading  the  people,  and  justly.  The  ignorant  and  the  thoughtless
are  naturally  influenced  by  an  example  of  selfishness,  and  none  can  altogether  escapa
receiving  some  measure  of  harm.

IV.  A    LUXURIOUS    AND    DISSOLUTE    LIFE   BENDERS   THE    GREAT    INSENSIBLE    TO   THB

AFFLICTIONS  OF  THB  POOR  AND  OPPBESSED.  The  language  of  the  prophet  is  very  touch*
in^  :  the  sell-indulgont  "are  not  grieved  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph,"     Wrapped  up  in


OH.  VI.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  127

their  own  enjoyments,  comforts,  and  luxuries,  the  great  fail  to  sympathize  with  those
whom  we  call  "  the  masses."  A  self-denying  and  beuevolent  and  public-spirited  course
of  conduct  would  have  precisely  an  opposite  effect.  There  is  no  reason  in  the  nature
of  things  why  nobles  should  not  feol  with  and  for  the  poor  and  unfortunate ;  as  a
matter  of  fact,  they  often  do  so.  But  those  whose  absorbing  thought  is  of  self  have
neither  heart  nor  time  to  give  to  their  less-favoured  neighbours.

V.    A   LUXURIOUS    AKD    DISSOLUTE    LIFE    OFTEN   INVOLVES    A    SPEEDY   AND    FEARFUL

KETBIBUTJOK.  The  table  of  the  epicure  is  overthrown.  The  sybarite  is  dragged  from
his  palace,  and  sent  away  into  exile.  Those  who  have  been  worthless  meiubers  of  their
own  state  become  banished  mourners  in  a  strange  land.  And  the  sung  of  pleasure
is  exchanged  for  the  wail  of  woe. — T.

Ver.  11. — "  The  Lord  commandeth,''  It  was  the  office  and  function  of  a  prophet  to
lose  himself  in  becoming  the  vehicle  of  Divine  communioations,  the  organ  of  Divine
decisions.  His  prefatory  words  were  these :  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  He  saw  and  felt
the  Lord's  presence,  not  only  in  his  own  ministry,  but  in  all  the  events  that  occurred  in
the  range  of  bis  observation,  whether  affecting  individuals  or  nations.

L  There  is  an  element  of  authority  in  eveby  word  of  the  Lord.  Whether
God  addresses  to  men  language  of  rebuke  or  reproach,  of  entreaty  or  of  threatening,  he
speaks  with  authority.  His  invitation  is  that  of  a  King ;  it  is  a  command  When  our
Loid  Christ  spoke  in  the  course  of  his  ministry,  he  spoke  with  authority.  The  Divina
judgment  is  always  correct,  the  Divine  will  is  always  obligatory.

II.  All  aqengibs  and  instrumentalities  are  obedient  to  the  Lord's  behests.
It  is  so  with  the  forces  of  nature.  "  The  stormy  wind  fulfilleth  his  word ; "  "  His
ministers  are  a  flaming  fire."  It  is  so  with  the  institutions  of  human  society,  with  the
purposes  and  the  activities  of  men.  The  hand  which  is  visible  in  a  work  may  be  that
of  a  creature ;  the  power  that  directs  that  hand  may,  nevertheless,  be  creative  wisdom
and  creative  might.  God  gives  the  word;  it  is  executed  hy  ten  thousand  ministers  of
his  holy  will.     He  maketh  even  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him.

III.  The  power  of  the  greatest  among  men  is  incapable  op  resisting  the
Diyike  commands.  The  "  great  house  "  and  the  "  little  house  "  alike  are  smitten  when
the  Lord  makes  bare  his  arm.  Israel  and  Judah,  the  prince  and  the  husbandman,  may
know  that  nothing  can  protect  them  from  the  might  of  the  Eternal  when  bis  decree  of
judgment  has  gone  out  against  them.  Well  may  the  people  that  rebel  against  God
tremble  and  fear,  and  remember  that  they  are  but  men. — T.

Ver.  12. — The  vanity  of  the  linner'g  principles  and  hopes.  The  perfect  naturalness
and  genuineness  of  Amos  must.be  apparent  to  every  reader.  The  sources  from  which
he  drew  his  graphic  imagery  were  his  own  life  and  experiences.  As  a  husbandman
employed  upun  the  land,  he  was  brought  into  contact  both  with  the  phenomena  of
nature  and  with  the  processes  of  agriculture;  and  from  these  sources  his  mind  was
supplied  with  the  bold  similitudes  which  occur  in  his  prophecies.  Wishing  to  depict
the  irrational  and  absurd  suppositions  and  expectations  of  the  sinful  and  rebellions,
he  compared  them  to  husbandmen  who  should  attempt  to  drive  horses  up  a  steep  cliff,
or  to  plough  the  hard,  barren  rock  by  oxen.

I.  Justice  is  the  eternal  law  of  the  moral  universe.  Here  is  the  true  and
Divine  bond  of  human  society  ;  here  is  the  principle  which  should  govern  earthly  rulers,
judges,  and  princes.  The  higher  men's  station,  the  greater  men's  power,  the  more
important  is  it  that  justice  should  guide  ami  inspire  their  conduct.

II.  In  a  corrupt  state  of  society  oppression  and  violence  are  substituted  fob
JUSTICE.  Amos  complained  that  the  kings  and  nobles  of  Israel  were  f;uilty  of  the
basest  and  most  degrading  conduct ;  they  exchanged  the  sweet  and  wholesome  fruit  of
righteousness  for  the  bitterness  of  gall  and  wormwood  and  the  poison  of  hemlock,  t.e.  for
bribery,  for  violence,  for  oppressiveness.  History  is  full  of  such  instances.  The  noble
institutions  of  society  are  perverted  into  instruments  of  personal  ambition,  aggrandize-
ment, and  wrong.  Cruel  kings,  luxurious  nobles,  corrupt  judges,  are  morally  disas-
trous to  the  state ;  their  example  spreads  through  all  classes,  and  faith,  honour,  and
purity  decay  and  perish.

III.  It  is  impossible  that  tbue  prosperity  should  fbicvail  where  the  fountain


1!»  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  vi.  1— U

OF  BIOHTEOUSNESS  IS  POISONED.  The  great  men  of  Israel  had  come  to  confide  in  theii
own  BtreuKth,  in  their  military  power,  and,  like  so  many  in  high  estate,  thought  that
physical  force  was  sufficient  to  secure  a  nation's  greatness.  The  prophet  justly  charac-
terizes such  a  doctrine  as  "  a  thing  of  nought,  a  nouentity,  an  absurdity  1  As  well
may  horses  climb  tlie  scaur,  as  well  may  oxen  plough  the  bare,  hard  rock,  as  a  nation
prosper  which  has  renounced  the  Law  of  God,  and  is  attempting  to  base  its  success
upon  physical  force,  military  prestige,  ostenlatious  luxury,  judicial  corruption.  We  in
our  own  days  need  not  look  far  for  an  exemplification  of  the  folly  of  such  confldencfe
*'  Be  wise  now  therefore,  0  ye  kings :  be  instructed,  ye  judges  of  the  earth."— T.

Ter.  14. — The  hind  of  Ood  seen  in  national  retribution.  Coming  when  it  did,  this
prophecy  was  an  unmistakable  proof  of  Divine  foresight.  Samaria  was  rejoicing  and
boasting  because  of  a  temporary  victory  obtained  by  her  arms.  The  kingdom  of  Israel
had  taken  horns,  and  by  its  own  strength  had  pushed  back  the  foe  from  the  borders.
This  was  the  monjent  appointed  for  Amos  to  utter  the  faithful  warning  contained  in
this  verse.  Subsequent  events  proved  the  predictive  authority  from  which  this  language
proceeded.  The  advance  of  Assyria  soon  reminded  the  unbelieving  and  impenitent  of
the  warning  to  which  they  had  been  indifferent.  But  we  are  chiefly  concerned  to  trace
the  truths  and  to  draw  the  lessuns  regarding  Divine  government  upon  earth,  wliich  thii
prediction  so  strikingly  unfolds.

I.  The  fact  that  a  nation  ib  chosen  vr  God  fob  a  bfeoial  fubfose  does  not

EXEMPT  THAT  NATION   FEOM   THE   OPEKATION  OF  THE   LAWS  OF    THE   DiVINE   GOVBRN-

MKNT.  It  is  sometimes  represented  that  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob
were  treated  by  the  Euler  of  all  with  an  especial  favouritism.  But  such  a  view  cannot'
be  justified  from  the  sacred  records.  Undoubtedly,  this  nation  was  selected  for  high
purposes,  and  appointed  to  occupy  a  position  of  enlightenment  and  eminence ;  but  this
was  in  order  that  the  Jews  might  ful61  the  purposes  of  God's  wisdom,  might  in  the
fulness  of  the  time  produce  the  Messiah,  and  might  become  a  blessing  to  all  the  nations
of  the  earth.  But  never  was  a  nation  subjected  to  more  stringent  discipline  than  the
Hebrew  theocracy  endured.  No  transgression  was  unnoticed  or  unchastised.  Such
afflictions  have  indeed  seldom  been  endured  as  Israel  has  known,  both  in  ancient  and
in  modern  times.

II.  God,  who  is  not  confined  to  ant  special  agencies,  has  often  employed  one

KATION  AS  THE  SCODEOE  BY    WHICH   ANOTHER  NATION  HAS  BEEN  CHASTISED.      It  may  be

asked  why  Assyria,  an  idolatrous  nution,  should  be  employed  to  pnnish  the  trans-
gressions of  Israel.  To  such  a  question  we  can  give  no  answer;  but  we  may  point  out
that  the  moral  qualities  of  the  chastising  instrument  have  no  bearing  upon  the  purposes
of  punishment.  God  raiseth  up  one  and  setteth  down  another.  History  is  full  of
examples  of  this  principle.  Amidst  very  much  that  is  mysterious,  there  is  not  a  little
that  is  plain.  Only  in  the  most  general  way  is  it  permitted  us  to  interpret  the  methods
of  the  Divine  government.  But  the  authoritative  language  of  this  and  other  passages
of  Scripture  assure  us  that  he  who  dneth  according  to  his  will  among  the  inhabitants
of  the  earth  is  impressing  his  own  great  lessons  and  fulfilling  his  own  great  designs  by
the  changes  which  occur  among  the  nations.  Even  wars,  conquests,  and  captivities
are  the  means  by  which  God's  Law  is  vindicated  and  God's  kingdom  is  advanced.

III.  National  tribulation  mat  be  the  means  of  national  purification  and
PEOQEESS.  Punishment  is  not  an  end  initself;  however  deserved  and  just,  it  is  inflicted
with  a  view  to  the  good  of  the  community  or  individual  punished,  or  the  good  of
human  society  at  large.  We  can  to  some  extent  trace,  in  the  subsequent  history  of
the  Hebrew  people,  the  beneficial  results  of  the  conquest  and  captivity  here  foretold.
Idolatry,  at  all  events,  came  to  an  end ;  more  spiritual  views  of  religion  became  general ;
the  nation,  or  that  portion  of  it  which  returned  to  the  land  of  promise,  was  prepared  for
giving  birth  to  the  Messiah,  and  for  furnishing  the  elements  which  were  to  constitute
the  primitive  Church.  Thus  God  brought  the  light  of  ujorning  out  of  the  darkness,  and
a  spiritual  spring  from  the  long  winter  of  affliction. — T.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Wo^id  ease.  "  Woe  t  >  them  that  are  at  ease  in  Zion,  and  trust  in  the
mountain  of  Samaria,  which  are  named  chief  of  the  nations,  to  whom  the  house  of
Israel  carnal  "eta   "This  chapter  embraces  the  character  and  punishment  of  the  whol*


<m.Ti.l— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  129


Hebrew  nation.  The  inhabitants  of  the  two  capitals  are  directly  addressed  In  the
language  of  denunciation,  and  charged  to  take  warning  from  the  fate  of  other  nation!
(vers.  1,  2).  Their  carnal  security,  injustice,  self-indulgence,  sensuality,  and  total
disregard  of  the  Divine  threatenings  are  next  described  (vers.  3 — 6).  After  which  the
prophet  announces  the  Captivity  and  the  calamitous  circumstances  connected  with  the
siege  of  Samaria,  by  which  it  was  to  be  preceded  (vers.  7 — 11).  He  then  exposes
the  absurdity  of  their  conduct,  and  threatens  them  with  the  irruption  of  an  enemy
that  should  pervade  the  whole  country  (vers.  12—14)  "  (Henderson).  The  words  of  our
text  (ver.  1)  denounce  a  state  of  mind  which  most  men  desiderate — "  ease."  Amidst
the  harassing  cares,  turmoils,  and  agitating  events  of  life,  men  on  all  hands  are  crying'
out  for  ease.  Like  mariners  that  have  long  battled  with  tempests,  they  long  for  a
calm  sea  in  which  to  drop  anchor  and  be  at  rest.  But  here  there  is  a  fearful  "woe"
denounced  against  ease.    What  is  this  ease  ?

I.  It  IB  THE  EASE  OF  PBiDE.  These  great  nations,  Judah  and  Israel,  the  one  having
its  seat  in  Zion  and  the  other  in  Samaria,  because  of  their  imaginary  superiority  bm
the  chief  of  the  nations,  settled  down  in  carnal  security.  Those  that  dwelt  in  Zion,
or  Jerusalem,  felt  themselves  safe  because  of  its  historic  grandeur,  its  temple,  the
dwelling-place  of  the  Almighty,  and  its  mountain  fortifications.  Those  that  dwelt
in  Samaria — the  ten  tribes — had  the  same  false  confidence  in  their  safety.  The
mountains  of  Samaria,  the  seat  both  of  the  religion  and  government  of  a  strong  people,
they  relied  upon,  free  from  all  apprehension  of  dangers.  It  was  the  ease  of  pride  ana
overrated  power.

II.  It  is  the  ease  of  bdih.  "  Pass  ye  unto  Calneh  [this  was  an  ancient  city  built
by  Nimrod]  and  see ;  and  from  thence  go  ye  to  Hamath  the  great  [one  of  the  chief  cities  of
Syria] :  then  go  down  to  Gath  of  the  Philistines  [the  great  city  in  Philistia]."  Remem-
ber these  cities,  "  Be  they  better  than  these  kingdoms  ?  "  Are  you  who  live  at  Zion
and  Samaria  greater  people  than  they  were,  more  strong  and  invincible  ?  Yet  they
are  gone.  Calneh  gone,  Hamath  gone,  Gath  gone.  All  are  in  ruins,  long,  longago.
Why,  then,-  should  you  feel  yourselves  safe  and  be  at  ease  in  Zion  and  Samaria?  Their
example  condemns  your  False  security  and  predicts  your  ruin.  The  ease  here  denounced
is  like  the  ease  of  stolid  indifference  or  the  ease  of  a  torpid  conscience,  terribly  general,
fearfully  criminal,  and  awfully  dangerous.  It  must  sooner  or  later  be  broken.  The
hurricanes  of  retribution  must  sooner  or  later  lash  the  sleeping  ocean  into  foaming  fury.
Souls  aie  everywhere  sleeping  on  the  bosom  of  volcanoes.  Oh  for  some  voice  from  the
heavens  above  or  the  earth  beneath,  to  startle  the  men  of  this  generation !

Conclusion.  Learn  from  this  subject:  1.  That  the  mere  feeling  of  lecurity  U  no
infallible  proof  of  safety.  Men  are  prone  to  deceive  themselves.  "  The  heart  is  deceit-
fed  above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked."  Some  men,  like  the  drunkard  whose
vessel  is  going  down,  feel  themselves  safe  because  they  are  unconscious  of  the  danger.
Some  men  feel  themselves  safe  because  of  the  confidence  they  have  in  objects  that  are
utterly  unable  to  sustain  them.  The  only  feeling  of  security  that  warrants  safety  ii
that  which  springs  from  a  conscious  trust  in  God.  Such  as  have  this  can  say, "  God  is
our  Refuge  and  Strength,"  etc.  2.  That  great  advantage*  may  prove  great  curses.  It  was
a  great  advantage  for  Judah  to  have  Zion,  and  Israel  to  have  Samaria — great  in  many
respects,  national  and  religious.  But  these  advantages,  because  they  were  overrated,
trusted  in,  put  in  the  place  of  God  himself,  proved  to  them  most  disastrous.  So  it  ever  is.
Our  civilization,  our  literature,  our  Churches,  our  Bibles,  have  proved  curses  to  millions,
and  will  perhaps  to  millions  more.  The  Pharisee  in  the  temple  is  an  illustration  of
this.  3.  That  retributions  which  have  overtaken  others  should  be  a  warning  to  us.  The
prophet  calls  upon  these  men  of  Judah  and  Isiael  to  remember  Calneh,  Hamath,  Gath.
"  All  these  things,"  says  Paul, "  happened  unto  them  for  ensamples."  Learn  to  read  our
fate  in'  history.  Ungodly  nations,  where  are  Egypt,  Babylon,  Greece,  Rome  ?  Ungodly
Churches,  where  are  the  Churcheu  of  Asia  Minor? — D.  T.

Ver.  3. — Man's  evil  day.  "  Ye  that  put  far  away  the  evil  day,  and  cause  the  seat
of  violence  to  come  near."  This  is  another  denunciation  addressed  to  the  great  men
in  Zion  and  Samaria.  They  are  said  "  to  keep  the  day  of  calamity  afar  off,  and  bring
the  seat  of  violence  near"  (Delitzsch).     Three  remarks  are  suggested  by  these  words.

I.  All  men  have  an  "  evil  day  "  in  theib  futubb.    Even  the  holiest  men,  men

Alios.  K


130  THE  BOOK  OP   AMOS.  [oh.  vi.  1—14

whose  path  through  life  has  been  most  calm  and  prosperous,  have  to  expect  certain
calamities  that  befall  all.  There  are  trials  common  to  all  men,  whatever  their  con-
dition or  character — afSictions,  bereavements,  infirmities;  these  await  most  men.
There  is  one  evil  day,  however,  for  us  all.  Death  is  in  many  respects  an  "  evil  day."
What  mysterious  sufferings  it  generally  involves  1  What  privileges  and  pleasures  it
terminates!  What  disruptions  it  produces!  Sinner,  thy  death  will  be  an  evil  day;
and  il  is  before  thee,  and  it  is  nearer  now  than  ever.

II.  Some  men  adjourn  in  thooqht  this  "  evil  day."  They  "  put  far  away  the
evil  day."  Ungodly  men  put  this  evil  day  so  far  on  iu  the  course  of  time  that  they
seldom  discern  it  and  never  realize  it.  It  is  a  mere  speck,  seldom  visible  on  the
horizon  of  many  years  of  unclouded  sunshine.  Why  do  men  adjourn  in  thought  this
evil  day  ?  1.  Not  because  they  have  any  doubt  as  to  its  advent.  No  day  is  more
certain.  Sooner  shall  all  the  wheels  of  nature  be  stopped  than  the  sun  of  this  day
fail  to  break  on  every  eye.  "  It  is  appointed  to  men  once  to  die."  2.  Not  because
they  lack  reminders  of  its  approach.  Every  physical  pain,  every  tolling  knell,  every
funeral  procession,  every  graveyard — all  remind  us  almost  every  moment  that  our  evil
day  is  coming.  Why,  then,  adjourn  the  thought  ?  The  reason  is  found :  1.  In  the
strength  of  our  material  attachments.  2.  In  our  dread  of  the  mysterious.  3.  In  our
lack  of  interest  in  the  spiritual  and  material.  4.  In  our  conscious  want  of  preparation
for  the  scenes  of  retribution.

III.  None  who  adjourn  this  "  evil  dat  "  in  thought  can  delay  it  in  fact.
"  And  cause  the  seat  of  violence  to  come  near."  Perhaps  what  is  meant  here  is  that
these  men  so  ignored  their  coming  calamities  that  by  their  conduct  they  hastened
them  on.  Ignoring  the  evil  day,  they  pursued  such  a  course  of  injustice,  falsehood,
dishonesty,  sinful  indulgence,  and  impiety  as  served  to  bring  it  nearer.  Thus  the  more
they  put  it  off  in  thought  the  nearer  it  drew,  because  they  became  more  self-destructive
in  their  conduct.  A  general  truth  is  suggested  here,  viz.  that  a  man  who  adjourns  all
thought  of  his  end  will  pv/rsue  such  a  course  of  conduct  as  will  hasten  its  approach.
Some  men  imagine  that  by  thinking  upon  death  they  will  hasten  its  advent ;  hence
their  dread  of  making  wills.  But  such  is  not  the  fact.  He  who  keeps  the  evil  day  in
view,  rightly  regards  it,  prepares  for  it,  will  render  such  a  practical  obedience  to  the
laws  of  health  as  to  delay  rather  than  hasten  it.  "  Teach  us  to  number  our  days,  that
we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom." — D.  T.

Vers.  4 — 7. —  Ca/rnal  indulgence.  "  That  lie  upon  beds  of  ivory,  and  stretch  them-
selves upon  their  couches,  and  eat  the  lambs  out  of  the  flock,  and  the  calves  out  of  the
midst  of  the  stall,"  etc.  Here  is  a  sketch  of  the  way  in  which  these  leading  men  of
the  chief  nations  luxuriated  in  carnal  pleasures  and  sensual  indulgences.  Observe  two
things.

I.  The  moral  torpok  of  oaenal  indclqenob.  Observe  two  things.  1.  These
people  wrought  entirely  for  thesenses.  See  how  they  slept!  They  provided  themselves
with  "  beds  of  ivory."  They  did  not  require  rest  for  their  weary  limbs,  otherwise  beds
of  straw  would  have  done.  They  wanted  to  be  grand,  they  loved  glitter,  hence  "  beds
of  ivory."  Here  is  the  lust  of  the  eye.  See  how  they  ate  I  "  And  stretch  themselves
upon  their  couches,  and  eat  the  lambs  out  of  the  flock,  and  the  calves  out  of  the  midst
of  the  stall."  They  aliounded  in  superfluities;  they  partook  of  the  choicest  dainties
of  nature,  and  that  in  a  recumbent  position.  Here  is  the  lust  of  the  palate.  See  how
they  sany/  "That  chant  to  the  sound  of  the  viol,  and  invent  to  themselves  instru-
ments of  music,  like  David."  Musical  sounds  gratified  their  auricular  sensihilitieg,
and  they  chanted  to  the  "  viol."  Here  is  the  lust  of  the  ear.  See  how  they  drank!
Tliey  "  drink  wine  in  bowls."  Small  vessels  would  not  do ;  they  must  take  long,  deep
diaughts  of  the  pleasing  beverage.  Here  again  is  the  lust  of  the  palate.  See  how
they  anointed  themselves!  "  With  the  chief  ointments."  They  regaled  their  olfactory
nerves  with  the  choicest  perfumes  of  nature.  Here  is  the  lust  of  the  smell.  See  how
indifferent  they  were  to  the  suffering  of  the  true  Church  of  God  1  "  They  are  not
grieved  for  the  affliction  of  Joseph."  What  a  description  this  of  a  people  that  lived
and  wrought  entirely  for  the  senses  1  They  were  practical  materialists.  They  had  no
spiritual  vision,  sensibilities,  or  experience.  Their  imperishable  souls  were  submerged
in  the  deep  flowing  ae*  of  mere  animal  pleasures.    Are  there  no  such  men  now  ?    Fol


OttTLl— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  131

what  do  our  prosperous  tradesmen  and  the  upper  ten  thousand  live?  For  the  most
part,  we  fear,  for  the  senses.  Grand  furniture — "beds  of  ivory;"  choicest  viands —
"  lambs  out  of  the  flock,  and  calves  out  of  the  midst  of  the  stall ; "  ravishing  music—
"chants  to  the  sound  of  the  viol;"  delectable  beverages — the  choicest  wines  in  "bowls;"
the  most  delicious  aromas — "the  chief  ointments."  Has  carnal  indulgence  been  more
rife  in  any  land  or  age  than  this  ?  Matter  everywhere  governs  spirit ;  the  body  every-
where is  the  despot,  men  are  "carnal,  sold  under  sin."  2.  These  people  wrought
without  conscience.  In  all  this  there  is  no  effort  of  conscience  recorded,  no  word
uttered.  There  is,  indeed,  a  reference  to  intellectual  effort,  for  it  is  said  "  they  invented
to  themselves  instruments  of  music."  Carnal  indulgence  has  ever  been  and  is  now  as
much,  if  not  more  than  ever,  the  great  employer  of  man's  inventive  faculties.  Luxury
in  England  to-day  is  the  great  employer  of  human  ingenuity.  But  there  is  no  con-
science here.  When  conscience  is  touched  in  such  a  state  of  things,  and  startled  by
the  sense  of  its  guilt,  it  exclaims,  "0  wretched  man  that  I  ami  who  shall  deliver  me
from  the  body  of  this  sin  and  death  ?  "

II.  The  RETRiBtJTiVB  KEStTLT  OF  CARNAL  iNDULGEKCB.  The  threat  In  the  text  is :
1.  The  loss  of  liberty.  "  Therefore  now  shall  they  go  captive  with  the  first  that  go
captive."  Those  who  had  taken  the  lead  in  revelry  and  all  manner  of  wickedness
were  to  be  the  first  in  the  procession  of  captives.  In  such  a  position  their  disgrace
would  be  more  conspicuous.  Luxury  always  leads  to  slavery :  it  is  the  eternal  law  of
justice,  that  those  who  live  to  the  flesh  shall  lose  their  freedom  and  be  exiled  into  the
region  of  tyranny.  "  Lust,  when  it  hath  conceived,  bringeth  forth  sin  ;  and  sin,  when
it  is  full-grown,  bringeth  forth  death"  (Jas.  i.  15).  2.  The  loss  oi  provisions.  "And
the  banquet  of  them  that  stretched  themselves  shall  be  removed."  They  shall  have
scarcity,  perhaps  starvation,  instead  of  the  profusion  of  dainties  with  which  their
tables  have  been  spread.  All  this  carnal  indulgence  and  voluptuousness,  this  luxury
in  ease,  and  diet,  and  music,  and  aroma  will  not  go  on  for  ever.  They  are  abnormal
conditions  of  human  nature ;  retribution  will  one  day  put  an  end  to  them.

"  O  luxury,
B*ne  of  elated  life,  of  afSuent  states,
What  ruin  is  not  tbine  ?  .  .  .  Behind  thee  gapes
Th'  unfathomable  gulf  where  Ashur  lies
O'erwhelmed,  forgotten;  and  high  boasting  Cham;
And  Elam's  haughty  pomp ;  and  beauteous  Greece ;
And  the  great  queen  of  earth,  imperial  Borne."

(Dyer.)

D.T.

Ver.  8. — National  depravity.  "  The  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  himself,  saith  the
Lord  the  God  of  hosts,  I  abhor  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  and  hate  his  palaces :  there-
fore will  I  deliver  up  the  city  with  all  that  is  therein."  In  order  to  show  the  voluptuous
debauchees  referred  to  in  the  preceding  verses  the  terrible  judgments  that  would  over-
take them,  Jehovah  is  here  represented  as  making  a  solemn  oath.  Whether  the  city
here  refers  to  Samaria  or  Jerusalem,  or  both,  is  of  little  moment.  The  subject  is
national  depravity,  and  we  infer  from  the  words —

I.  That  depravitt  may  exist  in  a  nation  where  there  is  much  that  la
MAGNIFICENT.  Here  is  a  reference  to  the  "  excellency  " — or,  as  some  render  it,  the
splendour — "  of  Jacob ; "  and  here  is  a  reference  to  "  palaces,"  the  homes  of  princes.
There  was  much  that  was  magnificent  amongst  the  Jewish  people  of  old  in  their  own
land.  Great  cities  and  their  palaces,  and,  above  all,  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  beautiful
in  architecture  and  situation,  with  an  organized  priesthood  and  gorgeous  ceremonies.
Still,  its  depravity  at  this  time  was  wide  and  deep  and  hideous.  A  nation  may  have
much  that  is  magnificent,  and  yet  be  deeply  sunk  in  moral  corruption.'  Witness
ancient  Greece  and  Home;  witness  England  to-day.  The  arts,  sculpture,  painting,
architecture,  music,  have  reached  their  perfection,  and  abound.  On  all  hands  our  eyes
are  attracted  by  grand  churches,  splendid  mansions,  marts,  banks,  museums,  colleges,
and  galleries  of  art.  Albeit  was  depravity  ever  more  rife  in  any  age  or  country  than
this?  Greed,  ambition,  selfishness,  sensuality,  fraud,  falsehood,  and  self-indulgence,—
these,  the  elements  of  depravity  and  the  fountains  of  crime,  abound  in  all  directions.


132  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  tl  1—14

It  is  true  they  do  not  appear  in  their  naked  deformity,  as  in  barbaric  lands.  Our
ciTilization  not  only  spreads  a  veil  over  them,  but  paints  and  decorates  them,  and  thus
conceals  their  native  hideousness.  Still,  though  the  devil  robes  himself  in  the  garb  of
an  angel,  he  is  yet  the  devil.    Poison  is  poison,  however  much  you  may  flavour  it.

II.  That  depbatitt  undeb  the  most  uaonificent  toem  is  utteelt  abhoeebnt  to
THE  geeat  God.  "  I  abhor  the  excellency  of  Jacob,  and  hate  his  palaces."  No  veil
can  cover  it  from  his  eye ;  his  glance  pierces  through  all  its  decorations;  to  his  view
its  oroamentations  add  to  its  ugliness.  The  same  vices  displayed  in  the  hut  of  a
savage  chief,  are  more  hideous  to  him  when  developed  in  the  gorgeous  palaces  of
Christian  sovereigns.  "I  abhor  the  excellency  [splendour]  of  Jacob."  God  has
moral  sensibility.  He  has  not  only  a  sensibility  for  the  beautiful  in  form  and  the
perfect  in  arrangement,  but  for  the  moral.  He  loves  the  true,  the  beautiful,  and  the
good;  he  loathes  the  false,  the  selfish,  and  the  corrupt.  "Oh,  do  not  this  abominable
thing,  which  I  hate  "  (Jer.  xliv.  4).

III.  That  depbavitt,  which  is  ever  abhobbent  to  God,  must  beino  euin  on  its
SUBJECTS.  "Therefore  will  I  deliver  up  the  city  with  all  that  is  therein."  Observe:
1.  The  eompletenest  of  the  ruin.  "  All  that  is  therein " — utter  destruction.  2.  The
certainty  of  the  ruin.    "  The  Lord  God  hath  sworn  by  himself."

Conclusion.  What  an  argument  does  this  subject  furnish  for  national  seriousness
and  investigation !  The  progress  of  civilization  is  not  the  true  progress  of  humanity.
A  nation  may'advance  in  the  arts,  and  go  back  in  morals ;  may  be  robed  in  artistic
beauty,  and  yet  be  loathsome  in  moral  corruption.  Heaven  will  not  smile  on  a  nation
because  it  is  externally  grand,  but  only  when  it  is  internally  good. — ^D.  T.

Ver.  12. — laying  the  impossibk,  " Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock?  will  one  plough
there  with  oxen?"  The  folly  of  expecting  real  prosperity  by  committing  acts  of
injustice  or  pursuing  courses  of  sin  is  here  forcibly  represented  by  comparing  it  to  the
absurdity  of  attempting  to  run  horses  upon  a  rock  or  to  plough  the  rock  with  oxen.
The  strength  of  the  representation  is  increased  by  its  interrogative  form.  Our  subject
is — Trying  the  impossible.  Men  are  constantly  doing  this.  Let  us  furnish  a  few
examples.

I.  When  thet  attempt  to  destroy  an  eneut  bt  physioal  roBOE.  An  individual
has  an  enemy,  a  man  whp  hates  him  with  an  inveterate  antipathy.  In  order  to  over-
come him,  what  does  he  do  ?  He  disables  or  perhaps  kills  him.  Or  a  nation  has  an
enemy,  strong  and  malignant.  How  does  it  seek  to  overcome  it  ?  In  the  same  way,
by  brute  force — swords,  cannons,  bayonets,  these  are  employed.  Now,  the  attempt  to
destroy  an  enemy  by  brute  force  is  as  absurd  as  to  make  horses  run  on  the  peaks  of
craggy  rocks,  or  to  put  oxen  to  plough  them.  To  destroy  the  enemy's  body  is  not  to
destroy  either  him  or  his  enmity.  Philosophy  and  the  Bible  teach  that  the  body  is
not  the  man ;  it  is  his,  not  himself.  All  the  men  that  have  fallen  in  duels,  campaigns,
or  private  assassinations  are  living,  thinking,  acting  still,  and  await  their  murderers
in  another  state.     No  bullet  or  sword  can  touch  the  man.

II.  When  they  attempt  to  make  society  morally  good  by  mere  secdlab
INSTRUCTION.  There  are  men  who  imagine  that  by  teaching  children  the  arts  of  read-
ing, writing,  ciphering,  and  the  rudiments  of  science  they  will  improve  the  morality
of  the  nation.  When  you  remember  that  the  moral  character  grows  out  of  the  heart
and  not  out  of  the  brain,  out  of  the  likings  and  dislikings,  nut  out  of  the  ideas  or
intelligence,  all  this  seems  as  absurd  as  the  attempt  to  make  horses  run  on  rocks.
Secular  knowledge  cannot  change  the  heart,  cannot  alter  a  man's  likes  or  dislikes.  It
may  strengthen  them,  but  not  alter  them.  Dishonesty,  uneducated,  may  commit
petty  thefts ;  but  educated,  it  will  legally  swindle  a  nation.  Knowledge,  alas  I  is  all
in  vain.

III.  When  thet  attempt  to  get  happiness  from  without.  All  mankind  are  in
search  of  happiness.  "  Who  will  show  us  any  good  ?  " — this  is  the  universal  cry.  The
great  bulk  seek  happiness  from  without,  from  what  they  can  see,  and  taste,  and  hear,
and  handle.  They  look  fur  liappiness  in  the  titillation  of  the  nerves  and  the  gratifica-
tion of  the  senses.  Now,  were  man  nothing  but  body,  this  would  do.  This  does  for
the  brute  and  the  bird.  But  man  is  spirit ;  and  matter  m  no  form  or  combination  can
satisfy  spirit.    A  man's  life,  or  happiness,  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  materia]


OH.  Ti.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  133

things.  True  happiness  springs  from  within,  not  from  without ;  arises  from  holy  lovei,
hopes,  aspirations,  and  aims.  In  one  word,  love  is  the  well  of  water  that  springs  up
unto  everlasting  life.

IV,  When  thet  attempt  to  ba.ve  bottls  by  misistbbins  to  theib  selfishness.
There  are  men  in  all  Churches  who  give  themselves  to  saving  souls,  as  they  say.
Salvation  is  the  burden  of  aU  their  thought  and  talk.  But  how  do  they  endeavour  to
accomplish  their  object  ?  By  everlasting  appeals  to  the  selfish  fears  and  hopes  of  men.
Tragic  descriptions  are  given  of  hell  in  order  to  f lighten  men,  and  sensuous  descriptions
of  heaven  in  order  to  attract  them.  But  can  this  save  the  soul?  Impossible.  It  will
only  aggravate  its  damnation.  Salvation  consists  in  the  extinction  of  all  that  is  selfish
in  human  nature,  and  in  the  generating,  fostering,  and  perfecting  disinterested,  self-
oblivious  love.  "  He  that  seeketh  his  Ufa  shall  lose  it :  he  that  loseth  his  life  shall
find  it."  A  preacher  may  increase  his  congregation  by  appealing  to  the  selfishness  of
his  hearers,  but  he  does  not  add  one  to  the  family  of  the  good.  The  man  who  tries  to
save  souls  by  constant  appeals  to  the  selfishness  of  human  nature  acts  more  absurdly
than  he  who  attempts  to  gallop  horses  upon  the  sharp  peaks  of  rugged  rocks.

V.  When  they  attempt  to  convebt  heathens  abroad  bbfobe  oonvebtinq  thb
HEATHENS  AT  HOME.  LoudoD  abounds  with  heathens.  All  the  heathens  of  the  heathen
world  have  their  representatives  in  London;  besides,  the  great  bulk  of  the  resident
population  are  heathens ;  they  are  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world.  Th*
influence  of  London  upon  the  most  distant  parts  of  the  world  is  a  thousand  times  as
great  as  that  of  all  the  missionaries  from  England  and  America.  Under  such  circum-
stances, to  send  a  few  lonely  men  to  distant  peoples,  who  are  ignorant  of  our  language,
modes  of  thought,  and  habits,  with  the  idea  of  converting  the  world,  is  more  absurd
than  to  put  horses  to  run  on  the  rook,  and  oxen  to  plough  thereon.  Are  we  not  bound
to  go  into  all  the  world  to  spread  the  gospel  ?  Yes,  but  is  there  a  greater  world  than
London  ?  and  should  not  our  sailors,  our  merchants,  our  travellers,  and  emigrants  be
the  missionaries  to  foreign  lands  ?  Whilst  your  missionaries  carry  teaspoonfuls  of  the
gospel  here  and  there,  your  London  pours  out  floods  of  depravity  on  every  zone.

Conclusion.  Alas  1  how  much  human  effort  and  sacrifice  are  lost  for  the  want  ol
practical  wisdom  and  common  sense  I  "  Shall  horses  run  upon  the  rock  1  will  one
plough  there  with  oxen  ?  "  Yes,  more  successfully  than  we  poor  fools  can  accomplish
some  things  that  we  labour  to  attain. — D.  T.

Ver.  12. — Man's  perverting  power.  "  For  ye  have  turned  judgment  into  gall,  and
the  fruit  of  righteousness  into  hemlock."  The  meaning  of  this  is  that  they  had  turned
the  best  things  into  bad  use.  Judgment  and  righteousness,  the  laws  of  right,  they
bad  made  as  nauseous  and  noxious  as  "gall"  and  "  hemlock."  Our  subject  is  man'$
perverting  power.  Our  blessed  Maker  in  our  constitution  has  endowed  us  with  a  force
which  no  other  creature  under  heaven  seems  to  have,  of  turning  things  to  wrong  uses,
and  making  those  things  which  he  intended  to  bless  us  the  means  of  misery  and  ruin.
You  can  see  man  exercising  this  power  in  many  departments  of  action.

L  In  physical  opebations.  What  does  he  do  with  the  iron  which  he  discovers  in
the  depths  of  the  earth  ?  Forges  it  into  implements  of  human  destruction.  What
does  he  do  with  the  vineyards  and  the  corn-fields  ?  He  turns  them  into  inebriating
liquids,  and  rolls  them  like  rivers  of  poison  through  every  district  of  society.  What
does  he  do  with  his  own  physical  appetites  ?  Instead  of  attending  to  them  as  means
of  relief,  he  makes  their  gratification  the  chief  sources  of  his  pleasure,  and  thus
degrades  his  mental  and  moral  nature.  Everywhere  you  see  man  perverting  nature-
perverting  the  metals,  the  rivers,  the  fruits,  and  the  chemical  elements  of  the  world,

n.  In  civio  lite.  The  principle  of  human  government  is  a  Divine  ordinance,
intended  to  secure  equal  justice  and  protection.  But  how  has  man  perverted  itl  'He
has  turned  it  into  an  instrument  to  benefit  the  few  at  the  expense  of  the  many,  an
instrument  of  tyranny  and  oppression.  The  principle  of  Jridicatwe,  intended  to
secure  for  all  a  just  administration  of  law,  man  notoriously  perverts.  Men  are
appointed  to  occupy  the  throne  of  judgment  who  are  not  always,  or  generally,  known
as  incorruptibly  just  and  morally  pure.  Hence  often  in  the  name  of  justice  iniquities
are  enacted.  Man's  perversion  of  the  law  is  proverbial  as  a  hideous  enormity.  The
principle  of  merohandiie,  intended  to  band  man  together  by  the  exchange  of  com«


134  THB  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oi  -n.  1—14.

modities  in  mutual  obligation  and  fellowship,  man  has  awfully  perverted.  He  has
made  it  the  instrument  of  cupidity,  monopoly,  and  nameless  frauds.  Thus,  in  every
part  of  social  life  you  see  this  perverting  power  in  action — ^man  turning  "  judgment
into  gall,  and  the  fruits  of  righteousness  into  hemlock."

III.  In  the  belioious  bphebe.  In  spiritual  matters  and  in  scenes  that  should  be
the  most  sacred,  its  action  is  perhaps  more  flagrant  and  formidable  than  anywhere  else.
Without  going  into  the  great  world  of  heathenism,  or  even  to  remote  parts  of  Christen-
dom, look  into  our  own  religious  England,  and  what  do  you  see  ?  You  see  the  gospel
ministry,  which  is  essentially  self-denying,  humble,  devout,  turned  into  an  arrogant
and  plethoric  priesthood.  You  see  gospel  ceremonies,  intended  to  adumbrate  spiritual
truths,  employed  as  mystic  channels  of  saving  grace.  You  see  a  system  of  universal
philanthropy  made  an  instrument  of  miserable  sectarianism  and  intolerable  bigotry.

CoNOLUSlON.  Do  not  let  man  say  he  has  no  power.  His  moral  power  is  something
stupendous.  He  has  power  to  turn  the  things  of  Q-od  to  the  use  of  Satan,  heavenly
blessings  into  hellish  curses.  This  he  is  doing  everywhere.  "  Ye  have  turned  judg-
ment into  gall,  and  the  fruit  of  righteousness  into  hemlock." — D.  T.

Ver.  13. — Human  Joy  in  the  unsubstantial.  "  Ye  which  rejoice  In  a  thing  of  nought)
wMch  say.  Have  we  not  taken  to  us  horns  by  our  own  strength  ?  "  "  Horns  "  are  signs
and  symbols  of  power;  here  they  stand  for  the  military  resources  with  which  they
fancied  that  they  could  conquer  every  foe.  "  These  delusions  of  Gk)d-forgetting  pride
the  prophet  casta  down,  by  saying  that  Jehovah,  the  God  of  hosts,  will  raise  up  a  nation
against  them,  which  will  crush  them  down  in  the  whole  length  and  breadth  of  the
kingdom.  This  nation  was  Assyria "  (Delitzsch).  What  these  ancient  Hebrews  did
is  an  evil  prevalent  in  all  times  and  lands — rejoicing  in  the  things  of  nought,  taking
pleasure  in  the  unreal,  the  empty,  and  the  fleeting.

I.  To  BBjoicE  m  woBLDLY  WEALTH  is  to  "  rcjoice  in  a  thing  of  nought."  Rich
men  everywhere  are  always  disposed  to  rejoice  in  their  wealth.  House!!,  lands,  and
funded  treasures,  of  these  worldly  men  are  ever  boasting,  in  these  they  proudly  exult.
But  what  is  earthly  wealth  ?  It  is,  in  truth,  so  far  as  the  possessor  is  concerned,  "  a
thing  of  nought."  It  was  not  his  a  few  years  ago,  and  may  not  be  his  to-morrow.
"Wilt  thou  set  thine  eyes  upon  that  which  is  not?  for  riches  certainly  make  them-
selves wings ;  they  fly  away  as  an  eagle  towards  heaven  "  (Prov.  xxiiL  5).  Wealth,
at  best,  is  a  most  unsubstantial  thing ;  it  is  a  mere  air-bubble  rising  on  the  stream  of
life,  glittering  for  a  moment,  and  then  departing  for  ever.  Great  fortunes  are  but
bubbles;  they  vanish  before  a  ripple  on  the  stream  or  a  gust  in  the  atmosphere.
"Wealth,"  says  old  Adams,  "is  like  a  bird;  it  hops  all  day  from  man  to  man  ts  the
bird  from  tree  to  tree,  and  none  can  say  where  it  will  roost  or  rest  at  night,"

"  Go,  enter  the  mart  where  the  merchantmen  meet,
Get  rich,  and  retire  to  some  rural  retreat :
Ere  happiness  comes,  comes  the  season  to  die ;
Quickly  then  will  thy  riches  all  vanish  and  fly.
Go,  sit  with  the  mighty  in  purple  and  gold  ;
Thy  mansions  be  stately,  thy  treasures  untold ;
But  soon  shalt  thou  dwell  in  the  damp  house  of  day.
While  thy  riches  make  wings  to  themselves  and  away."

n.  To  BBjoioE  IN  PEBSONAL  BEAUTY  is  f 0  "  rejoicc  in  a  thing  of  nought."  Nature
has  endowed  some  with  personal  charms  which  it  has  denied  to  others — finely  chiselled
features,  a  radiant  countenance,  commanding  brow,  symmetrical  form,  majestic  presence.
He  who  is  thus  blest  has  many  advantages;  he  commands  admiration  and  exerts  an
influence  upon  human  hearts.  But  is  this  beauty  a  thing  to  rejoice  in  ?  Those  who
possess  it  do  rejoice  in  it;  many  pride  themselves  on  their  good  looks  and  fine  figures.
But  what  Is  beauty?  It  is  "a  thing  of  nought."  Why  rejoice  in  that  for  which  we
can  take  no  credit?  Does  the  moss-rose  deserve  praise  for  unfolding  more  beauty  and
emitting  more  fragrance  than  the  nettle?  Who  can  make  one  hair  white  or  black,
or  add  one  cubit  to  his  stature?  Why  rejoice,  too,  in  that  which  is  so  evanescent?
Socrates  called  beauty  "  a  short-lived  tyranny ; "  and  Theophrastus,  "  a  silent  cheat."
One  old  divine  says  it  is  like  an  almanac — it  "lasts  for  one  year,  as  it  were."    Men


OH.  ■n.l— U.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  186

are  like  the  productions  of  the  fields  and  the  meadows.  In  the  summer  the  variety  ii
sttiking,  some  herbs  and  flowers  appear  in  more  stately  form  and  attractive  hues  than
others;  but  when  old  winter  comes  round,  who  sees  the  distinctions?  Where  are  the
plants  of  beauty  ?  They  are  faded  and  gone.  "  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodlineu
thereof  as  the  flower  of  the  field."

"  Beauty  is  but  a  vain  and  doubtful  good,
A  Bhining  gloss,  that  fadeth  suddenly;
A  flower  that  dies,  when  first  it  'gins  to  bud;
A  brittle  glass,  that's  broken  presently :
A  doubtful  good,  a  gloss,  a  glass,  a  flower,
Lost,  faded,  broken,  dead  witliin  an  hour.

"And  as  good  lost  is  seldom  or  never  found.
As  fading  gloss  no  rubbing  will  refresh.
As  flowers  dead  lie  withered  on  the  ground.
As  broken  glass  no  cement  can  redress.
So  beauty,  blemished  once,  for  eyer's  lost,
Li  spite  of  physio,  painting,  pain,  and  cost."

(Shakespeare.)

III.  To  BKJOIOB  IN  ANOBSTBAL  DISTINCTION  is  to  "rejolco  in  a  thing  of  nought."
There  are  those  who  are  constantly  exulting  in  their  pedigree.  Some  who  in  this
country  can  go  back  to  the  days  of  William  the  Conqueror,  how  delighted  they  are  I
But  who  were  the  men  that  William  brought  over  with  him,  and  between  whom  he
divided  this  England  of  ours?  Cobblers,  tailors,  smiths,  plunderers,  men  of  rapine  and
blood,  most  of  them  destitute  alike  of  intellectual  culture  and  morality.  But  even  had
we  come  from  the  loins  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  peers  of  the  race,  what  cause  in  this
is  there  for  rejoicing  ?  It  is  truly  "  a  thing  of  nought."  Our  ancestry  is  independent  of
us ;  we  are  not  responsible  for  it.  It  is  not  a  matter  either  of  blame  or  praise.  Each
man  is  complete  in  himself — an  accountable  unity,  a  moral  cause.  A  prime  minister
has  a  number  of  earnest  servile  lackeys — they  are  printers,  jewellers,  clothmakers,
tailors,  and  such-like ;  in  the  zenith  of  his  power  he  rewards  them  by  causing  them
to  be  titled  "  sir,"  "  lord,"  "  baron,"  etc.  In  this  their  children  rejoice.  But  ia  it  not
"  a  thing  of  nought "  ?     What  is  there  in  it  ?    Nothing.

"  Knighthoods  and  honours  txtrne
Without  desert,  are  titles  but  of  seom."

(Shakespeare.)

IV.  To  EBjoiOE  IN  HOBAL  MBBiTOEiousNBSs  Is  to  "  rejoico  in  a  thing  of  nought."
There  are  many  who  rejoice  in  their  morality.  Like  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  they
thank  God  they  are  not  as  "other  men."  They  consider  they  are  "rich,  and  increased
with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing,"  whereas  they  are  "  wretched,  and  miserable,  and
poor,  and  blind,  and  naked."  Moral  merit  in  a  sinner  is  a  baseless  vision,  a  phantom  of
a  proud  heart.  The  man  exulting  in  his  own  self-righteousness  acts  as  foolishly  as  the
man  who  endeavours  to  secure  himself  from  the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun  imder  bis
own  shadow.  He  seeks  to  bring  his  shadow  between  him  and  the  sun,  but  cannot.  If
he  runs,  the  shadow  is  before  or  behind  him ;  if  he  falls  down,  the  shadow  falls  with
him,  and  leaves  him  in  contact  with  the  burning  beam.  No;  our  righteousness  is  "»
thing  of  nought;"  it  is  "filthy  rags."

"Beware  of  too  sublime  a  sense
Of  your  own  worth  and  consequence.
The  man  who  deems  himself  so  great.
And  his  importance  of  such  weight.
That  all  around,  in  all  that's  done,
Must  move  and  act  for  him  alone.
Will  learn  in  school  of  tribulation
The  folly  of  his  expectation."

(Oowper.)

Ck>NOLUBiON.  Ah  me !  how  many  on  all  hands  are  rejoicing  in  "  a  thing  of  nought "  1
Wealth,  beauty,  ancestry,  self-righteousness, — ^what  are  these?    Fleeting  shadows,


IM  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  ti.  1— U

dying  echoes.  They  are  clouds  without  water ;  to  the  eye  they  may  for  a  niinute  ot
two  appear  in  gorgeous  forms,  but  before  a  breeze  they  melt  into  thin  air  and  are  bwt.
Rejoice  in  the  re(d,  the  spiritvial,  the  eternal,  the  Divine. — D.  T.

Ter.  14. — Ood  ehcutising  nationt  by  nationM.  "But,  behold,  I  will  raise  up  against
yon  a  nation,  0  house  of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord  the  God  of  hosts ;  and  they  shall  afflict
JOJX  from  the  entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the  river  of  the  wilderness."  What  "nation"
IB  here  referred  to  as  about  to  be  raised  up  by  God  against  Israel?  Undoubtedly,
Assyria.  This  Assyrian  nation  is  here  represented  as  overspreading  the  country
"  from  the  entering  in  of  Hamath  unto  the  river  of  the  wilderness."  Hamath  was
a  point  of  entrance  for  an  invading  army  into  Israel  from  the  north,  which  had  Just
been  subjugated  by  Jeroboam  II.  The  boundaries  are  virtually  the  same  as  those
mentioned  (2  Kings  xiv.  25)  as  restored  to  Israel  by  Jeroboam  IL,  "  from  the  entering
of  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of  the  plain,"  i.e.  the  Deiid  Sea,  into  which  the  river  of  the
wilderness  here  mentioned  flows.  Do  not  glory  in  your  recently  acquired  city,  for  it
shall  be  the  starting-point  for  the  foe  to  afflict  you.  How  sad  the  contrast  to  the  feast
of  Solomon,  attended  by  a  congregation  from  the  same  Hamath,  the  most  northern
boundary  of  Israel,  to  the  I^ile,  the  river  of  Egypt,  the  most  southern  boundary]
"Unto  the  river  of  the  wilderness,"  t.e.  to  Eedron,  or  that  part  of  it  which  empties
itself  into  the  northern  bay  of  the  Dead  Sea  below  Jericho  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  16),
which  city  was  at  the  southern  boundary  of  the  ten  tribes  (Maurer).  To  the  river
Nile,  which  skirts  the  Arabian  wilderness  and  separates  Egypt  from  Canaan  (Grotiui).
If  this  verse  includes  Judah  as  well  as  Israel,  Gretius's  view  is  correct,  and  it  agrees
with  1  Kings  viii.  65,  "  Solomon  held  a  feast,  and  all  Israel  .  .  .  from  the  entering  in
of  Hamath  unto  the  river  of  Egypt "  (Fansset).  The  subject  suggested  by  the  words
is  this — Ood  chastising  nations  by  nations.  He  now  threatens  to  chastise  the  kingdoms
of  Judah  and  Israel  by  the  Assyrian  people.  This  is  how  the  Almighty  has  acted
from  the  beginning.  He  has  chastised  nations  by  nations.  The  history  of  the  world
is  little  else  than  a  history  of  civil  wars.  Let  us  for  a  moment  notice  the  how  and  the
why  of  this.

L  Thk  how.  How  does  the  Almighty  bring  about  wars?  1.  Not  by  his  inspira-
tion. The  God  of  peace  does  not  breathe  into  any  people  greed,  ambition,  revenge.
These  principles,  from  which  all  war  emanates,  are  repugnant  to  his  nature.  Ha
denounces  them.  His  grand  aim  in  the  world  is  to  annihilate  them,  and  in  their  place
propagate  disinterestedness,  humility,  and  tnagnaniinous  love.  2.  Not  by  his  authority.
All  war  is  directly  against  his  command ;  whilst  everywhere  he  prohibits  covetousness,
pride,  and  revenge^  he  inculcates,  in  almost  every  page  of  inspiration  and  every  form
of  utterance,  love  to  our  neighbours.  The  God  of  peace  works  everywhere  in  the
world  through  peace,  works  by  the  peaceful  influences  of  nature  and  the  love  of
the  gospel  to  produce  "peace  on  earth,  and  good  will  towards  men."  -How,  then,  can
he  V»  said  to  raise  a  nation  to  war  ?  Simply  by  permission.  He  allows  human  nature
freedom  to  work  out  the  evil  principles  that  are  operating  in  it.  The  power  of  free
action  with  which  he  endowed  men  at  first  he  does  not  crush,  he  does  not  restrict;  he
treats  it  with  respect,  and  leaves  men  free  to  do  evil  as  well  as  good.  He  who  permits
the  river  at  times  to  overflow  its  boundaries,  and  the  subterranean  fires  to  break  forth,
permits  the  passions  of  men  to  issue  in  war  and  bloodshed.  Permission  is  not
authorship.

II.  The  why.  Why  does  the  Almighty  chastise  nations  by  nations?  Why  not
employ  the  elements  of  nature  or  angelic  intelligences?  or  why  not  do  it  by  his  own
direct  volition,  without  any  instrumentality  whatever  ?  He  may,  for  aught  we  know,
chastise  men  in  all  these  ways ;  but  we  can  sec  reasons  for  his  employing  nations  to
chastise  nations  by  wars.  In  acting  thus :  1.  Man  has  revealed  to  him  in  the  most
impressive  way  the  wickedness  of  the  human  heart.  It  has  been  well  said  that  war  is
the  effect,  the  embodiment,  and  manifestation  of  every  conceivable  sin.  In  every  war
hell  is  revealed;  its  fires  flash,  its  thunders  roll,  its  fiends  revel  and  shriek.  For  man
to  get  rid  of  sin,  he  must  be  impressed  with  its  enormity ;  and  does  not  war  make  that
impression  ?  Does  not  every  crimson  chapter  in  its  history  reveal  to  the  human  heart
the  stupendous  enormity  of  sin?  2.  Man  has  revealed  to  him  the  utter  folly  iffputtinf
eot^fidetice  in  hisfeRouMnan.  War  reveals  falsehood,  treachery,  cunning,  fraud,  cruelty  |


OH.  Tn.  1 — 17.]


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


187


and  who  can  trust  these  ?  Does  not  war  say  to  every  man,  "  Cursed  is  the  man  that
trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm  "  ?  To-day  a  man  may  fondle  you  as  a
friend,  to-morrow  foam  at  you  as  a  fiend.  "  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  in  the
son  of  man,  in  whom  there  is  no  hope."  3.  Man  has  revealed  to  him  the  supreme
importance  qf  cultivating  the  true  friendship  of  his  fellow-men.  What  thoughtful  men
have  not  groaned  and  wept  over  the  utter  failure  of  all  means  to  produce  the  results
for  which  they  were  ostensibly  commenced — to  vindicate  national  honour,  to  establish
peace?  Such  ends' are  never  realized.  What,  then,  is  the  lesson  ?  Cultivate  friend-
ship with  your  fellow-men,  the  friendship  of  man  with  man,  family  with  family,  tribe
with  tribe,  nation  with  nation.  Wars  are  God's  moral  lessons  to  man  in  tragedy.—
D.T.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEE  VII.


Vei.  1— oh.  ix.  10.  — Part  III.  Five
Visions,  with  Explanations,  continuing

AND  OONFIRMINO    THE   PREVIOUS  PkOPHECT-

The  afflictions  are  climactic,  increasing  in
intensity.  The  first  two  symbolize  judgments
which  have  been  averted  by  the  prophet's
intercession ;  the  third  and  fourth  adumbrate
judgments  which  are  to  fall  inevitably;
and  the  fifth  proclaims  the  overthrow  of
the  temple  and  the  old  theocracy.

Vers.  1 — 3. — §  1.  The  first  vision,  ofloeusts,
represents  Israel  as  a  field  eaten  dovm  to
the  ground,  hut  shooting  up  afresh,  and  its
uUer  destruction  postponed  at  the  prophet's
prayer.

Yer.  1. — Thus  hath  the  Lord  God  showed
unto  me.  By  an  inward  illumination  (comp.
vers.  4,  ?•  and  oh.  viii.  1 ;  Jer.  xxiv.  1 — 3).
He  formed  grasshoppers;  rather,  locusts
{Nah.  iii.  17).  This  points  to  the  moral
government  of  God,  who  uses  nature  to
work  his  purposes,  "  wind  and  storm  ful-
filling his  word."  In  the  beginning  of  the
shooting  up  of  the  latter  growth ;  when  the
afDermath  was  beginning  to  grow  under
the  influence  of  the  latter  rains.  If  the
herbage  was  destroyed  then,  there  would  be
no  hope  of  recovery  in  the  rest  of  the  year.
After  the  king's  mowings.  It  is  deduced
from  this  expression  that  the  first  crop  on
certain  grounds  was  taken  for  the  king's
use — a  kind  of  royal  perquisite,  thongli
there  is  no  trace  of  such  a  custom  found
in  Scripture,  the  passage  in  1  Kings  xviii.
5,  where  Abab  sends  Obadlah  to  search  for
pasture,  having  plainly  nothing  to  do  with
it;  and  in  this  case,  as  Keil  remarks,  the
pUgae  would  seem  to  fall  upon  the  people
only,  and  the  guilty  king  would  have
escaped  But  to  interpret  the  expression
entiroiy  m  a  spiritual  sense,  with  no  sub-
■tantial  basis,  as  "Jehovah's  judgments,"
destroys  the  harmouy  of  the  vision,  ignoring


its  material  aspect  altogether.  It  if  quite
possible  that  the  custom  above  mentioned
did  exist,  though  it  was  probably  limited
to  certain  lands,  and  did  not  apply  to  the
whole  pasturage  of  the  country.  It  is  here
mentioned  to  define  the  time  of  the  plague
of  locusts — the  time,  in  fact,  when  its
ravages  would  be  most  irremediable.  The
LXX.,  by  a  little  change  of  letters,  render,
ISoit  ^povxos  els  r&yy  6  $atri\6vs,  by  which
they  imply  that  the  locusts  would  be  as
innumerable  as  the  army  of  Gog.  The
whole  version  is,  "Behold,  »  swarm  of
locusts  coming  from  the  East ;  and  behold,
one  caterpillar.  King  Gog."  The  vision  is
thought  to  refer  to  the  first  invasion  by
the  Assyrians,  when  Pul  was  bribed  by
Menahem  to  withdraw.

Ver.  2. — The  grass  of  the  land.  The
term  includes  vegetables  of  all  sorts,  the
food  of  man  and  beast  (Gen.  i.  11 ;  see  note
on  Zecb.  x.  1).  0  lord, .  .  .  forgive.  The
prophet  is  not  concerned  to  obtain  the
fulfilment  of  hit.  prophecy ;  his  heartfelt
sympathy  for  his  people  yearns  for  their
pardon,  as  he  knows  that  punishment  and
restoration  depend  upon  moral  conditions.
By  whom  shall  Jacob  STisef  better.  How
shall  Jacob  stand  ?  literally,  as  who  f  If  he
is  thus  weakened,  as  the  vision  portends,
bow  shall  he  endure  the  stroke?  Small;
weakened  by  internal  commotions  and
foreign  attack  (2  Kings  xv.  10  -16,  19).

Ver.  3. — Eepented  for  this ;  or,  concerning
this  destruction.  The  punishment  was  con-
ditioned by  man's  behaviour  or  other  con-
siderations. Here  the  prophet's  intercession
abates  the  full  infliction  of  the  penalty
(compare  analogous  expressions.  Bent,
ixxii.  36;  1  Sam.  xv.  11;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  16;
Jer.  xviii.  8;  xlii.  10;  Jonah  iii.  10,  where
see  note).  Amos  may  have  had  in  memory
the  passage  in  Joel  ii.  13.  The  LXX.  here
and  in  ver.  6  has,  yieraviriirov,  Kvpti,  <V!
T-oirt^'  Koi  rovTO  oiiK  earai,  \4yei  Kvpios,
"  Bepent,  O  Lord,  for  this ;  and  this  shall
not  be,  saith  the  Lord."  Hence  some  early
commentators  gathered  that   the  prophet'i


138


THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa


[oh.  til  1 — 17.


intercession  vras  rejected ;  bnt  the  words  do

not  necessarily  bear  that  sense  (see  St.  Cyril
Alex,  and  Theodoiet,  in  Zoo.).  It  shall  not
be.  This  respite  refers  to  the  retreat  of  the
Assyrians  under  Pul,  the  usurping  monarch
who  assumed  the  name  of  Tiglath-Pileser  II.
(2  Kings  XV.  17,  etc.).  Some  oommentators
oonsider  the  judgment  to  be  literally  »
plague  of  locusts;  but  this  is  not  probable.

Vers.  4 — 6. — §  2.  The  second  vision,  de-
vou  ingfire,  represents  a  more  severe  judgment
than  the  preceding  one,  involving  greater
consequences,  hut  still  one  which  was  again
modified  by  the  prayers  of  the  righteous
prophet.

Ver.4. — Called  to  contend  by  fire;  Septua-
glnt,  ^Kc(A.e(r6  tV  SIkw  iv  irvpi,  "called
for  judgment  by  Are ; "  Vulgate,  vocahat
judicium  ad  ignem.  God  called  the  people
to  try  their  cause  with  him  by  sending  fire
as  a  punishment  among  them  (comp.  Isa.
Ixvi.  16;  Ezek.  xxxviii.  22);  and  in  the
vision  the  fire  is  represented  as  so  vehement
that  it  deTOUxed  the  great  deep,  drank  up
the  very  ocean  itsulf  (Gen.  vii.  11 ;  Isa.  li.
10);  or  the  subterranean  fountains  and
springs,  as  Gen.  xUx.  25.  And  did  eat  np  a
part  J  tV  yu^p'So  Kuplov  (Septuagint).  This
version  takes  eth-haeheleq  as  the  "inheri-
tance "  or  "  portion  "  of  the  Lord,  i.e.  the  land
of  Israel  (Jer.  xii.  10) ;  but  Canaan  is  no-
where called  absolutely  "  the  portion ; "  nor
were  the  ten  tribes  specially  so  desiguated.
Bather,  the  portion  (not  a  part)  is  that  part
of  the  land  and  people  which  was  marked
out  for  judgment.  The  particular  calamity
alluded  to  is  the  second  invasion  of  I'iglath-
Pileser  II.,  when  he  conquered  Gilead  and
the  northern  part  of  the  kingdom,  and
carried  some  of  the  people  captive  to
Assyria  (2  Kings  xv.  29)

Vers.  5,  6. — The  intercession  is  the  same
as  in  ver.  2,  except  that  the  prophet  says
oease  instead  of  "  forgive ; "  and  in  effect  the
tide  of  war  was  rolled  back  from  Israel,  and
Samaria  itself  was  spared  for  the  time.

Vers.  7 — 9. — §  3.  The  third  vision,  the
plumh-line,  represents  the  Lord  himself  as
cominq  to  examine  the  conduct  of  Israel,  and
finally  deciding  on  its  entire  ruin.

Ver.  7. — Upon  (rather,  over)  a  wall  made
by  a  plumb-line.  The  word  translated
"plumb-line"  (anakh)  occurs  only  here.
Septuagint,  aSifias:  so  the  Syriac;  Vulgate,
trulla  ceementarii;  Aquila,  ydvaxris,  "bright-
ening," "splendour;"  Theodotion,  Trixd-
fxfvov.  As  the  word  in  other  dialects  means
tin  or  lead,  it  is  usually  taken  here  ^o
mean  t'le  plumb-liue  which  builders  use  to
ascertain  that  their  work  is  even  and  per-


pendicular (see  a  rery  different  explanation
in  Knabenbaner,  p.  314,  etc.).  The
"  wall "  is  the  kingdom  of  Israel,  once  care-
fully built  up,  solidly  constructed,  accu-
rately arranged.  God  had  made  it  upright ;
how  was  it  now  ?

Ver.  8. — Amos,  what  seest  thont  A
question  asked  to  give  occasion  for  the
explanation  of  the  symbol,  as  in  Jer.  L
11, 13 :  xxiv.  8.  I  will  set  a  plumb-line  in
the  midst  of  my  people  Israel.  As  it  was
built  by  rule  and  measure,  so  it  should  be
destroyed.  The  line  was  used  not  only  for
building,  but  also  for  pulling  down  (see
2  Kings  xxi.  13;  Isa.  xxxiv.  11;  Lam.  ii.
8).  And  this  should  be  done  "in  the
midst"  of  the  people,  that  all  might  be
tried  individually,  and  that  all  might
acknowledge  the  justice  of  the  sentence,
which  now  denounced  complete  ruin.  Pass
by  J  so  as  to  spare,  or  forgive  (ch.  viii.  2;
ProT.  xii.  11;  Mioah  vii.  18).  The  judg-
ment is  irremediable,  and  the  prophet  inter-
cedes no  more.  The  final  conquest  by
Shalmaneser  is  here  typified.

Ver.  9. — The  high  places  of  Isaac.  The
shrines  of  idolatry  all  over  the  land.  The
bamoth  are  the  altars  erected  on  high  places
aad  now  dedicated  to  idols  (1  Kings  iii.
2;  2  Kings  xxiii.  8;  Isa.  xvi.  12;  Hos.
X.  8).  Isaac  here  and  in  ver.  16  is  used
as  a  synonym  for  Israel,  perhaps  with  some
idea  of  contrasting  the  deeds  of  the  people
witli  the  blameless  life  of  the  patriarch  and
his  gentle  piety  (Pusey).  Septuagint,  fia/juil
ToS  yeXwTos,  with  reference  to  the  meaning
of  the  name  Isaac,  "  altars  of  derision,"
whence  Jerome's  version,  exeelsa  idoli.  The
sanctuaries  of  Israel.  The  idol-temples  at
Dan  and  Bethel  (1  Kings  xii.  29),  at  Gilgal
(ch.  iv.  4),  and  perhaps  in  other  places,
wliich  had  beeu  sanctified  by  ancient
patriarcljal  worship.  Septuagint,  at  TeAeroJ
ToC  'lupaTjA,  "the  rites  of  Israel; "  Vulgate,
sanetificationes  Israel.  With  the  sword.  God
is  represented  as  standing  like  an  armed
warrior  taking  vengeance  on  the  guilty
family.  Jeroboam  II.  had  saved  Israel  from
Syria,  and  was  popular  owing  to  his  success
in  war  (2  Kings  xiv.  25 — 28) ;  but  his  dynasty
was  overthrown,  and  this  overthrow  was  the
destruction  of  the  Israelitish  monarchy.  The
murder  of  his  son  Zachariali  by  Shallum
(2  Kings  XV.  10)  led  to  those  disastrous
commotions  which  culminated  in  the  con-
quest of  Samaria  by  the  Assyrians  and  the
deportation  of  the  people.

Vers.  10—17 — §  4.  This  bold  prophecy,  no
longer  conceived  in  general  terms  or  referring
to  distant  times,  but  distinct  and  personal,
arouses  tlie  animosity  of  the  priestly  authori-
ties at    Betlwl,  who  aecune  Amna  before   Ou


OH.  VII.  1 — 17.]


THE   BOOK  OF  AMOS.


18t


Ung,  and  warn  him  to  Uaea  {he  eountry
in'tAout  more  vmrde,  or  to /ear  the  wont.

Ver.  10. — Amaziah  the  priest  of  BetheL
Amaziah  (*<  the  Lord  is  strong  "),  the  chief
of  the  idol-priests  at  Bethel,  a  crafty  and
determined  man,  hearing  this  prophecy
against  the  royal  house,  takes  it  up  as  a
political  matter,  and  makes  a  formal  accnaa-
tion  against  Amos  with  theyiewof  silencing
him.  Hath  conspired  against  thee,  Pro-
bably some  of  the  Israelites  had  been  con-
Tincedby  the  prophet's  words,  and  bad  joined
themselves  to  him ;  hence  Amaziah  speaks
of  "a  conspiracy"  (1  Sam.  xxii.  8,  13;
1  Kings  XT.  27)  against  tlie  king.  Or  very
possibly  the  story  was  fabricated  in  order
to  accentuate  the  charge  against  Amos.  In
the  midst  of  the  house  of  IsraeL  In  the  very
centre  of  the  kingdom,  where  his  treason-
able speeches  would  have  the  greatest
effect.  The  land,  personified,  cannot  endure
luoh  language,  which  is  calculated  to  dis-
turb its  peace,  and  is  quite  contrary  to  its
ideas  and  hopes.

Ver.  11. — This  ie  a  partly  correct  account
of  what  the  prophet  had  said,  but  it  difiered
in  some  important  particulars.  Amaziah
carefully  omits  the  fact  that  Amos  had
merely  been  the  mouthpiece  of  God  in  all
his  announcements ;  he  says  falsely  that
a  Tlolent  death  had  been  predicted  fur
Jeroboam  himself;  and,  in  stating  that
Amos  had  foretold  the  captivity  of  Israel,
he  says  nothing  of  the  sins  which  led  to
this  doom,  or  of  the  hope  held  out  to
repentance,  or  of  the  prophet's  intercession.

Ver.  12. — Also  Amaziah  said.  Jeroboam
appears  to  have  taken  no  steps  in  conse-
quence of  this  accusation,  either  deeming
that  the  words  of  a  visionary  were  unworthy
of  serious  consideration,  or,  like  Herod
(Matt.  xiT.  5),  fearing  the  people,  who  had
been  impressed  by  t^  prophet's  words  and
bold  bearing.  Therefore  Amaziah  endea-
vours by  bis  own  authority  to  make  Amos
leave  the  country,  or  else  does  not  wait
for  the  command  of  the  king,  who  was
probably  at  Samaria.  0  thou  seer  I  Ama-
ziah calls  Amod  chozeh,  6  dpav  (1  Chron.
xxi.  9 ;  XXV.  5),  either  with  reference  to  the
visions  just  given,  or  in  derision  of  his
claims — as  we  might  say, "  visionary."  Plee
thee  away;  fly  for  thine  own  good  to
escape  punishment,  patronizing  and  coun-
selling him.  Go  to  the  land  of  Judah;
where  doubtless  your  announcement  of  the
ruin  of  the  rival  kingdom  will  be  accept-
able. Eat  breadi  Amaziah  speaks  as  if
Amos  was  paid  for  his  prophecies,  made
a  gain  of  godliness.  Prophesy  there.
"Vaticinare  in  terra  Juda,  ubi  libenter
andiuntur  insani "  (St.  Jerome).  The  idola-
ttous  priest  has  no  conception  of  the  in-


spiration under  which  the  prophet  ipeaka.
He  judges  others  by  himself,  attribnting^
to  Amos  the  sordid  motives  by  which  h»
himself  was  influenced.

Ver.  13.— The  king's  ohapel;  i.e.  <*»
sanctuary"  (Exod.  xxv.  8;  Lev.  xix.  80)
founded  by  the  king  (1  Kings  xii.  28),  not
by  God.  So  in  truth  it  had  only  an  earthly
sanction,  and  thepropbet  of  the  Lord  was  out
of  place  there.  The  king's  court ;  literally.
house  of  the  kingdom.  "National  temple'*
(Kuenen);  "a  royal  temple,  the  state
church"  (Pusey).  Not  the  political,  but
the  religious,  capital,  the  chief  seat  of  the
religion  appertaining  to  the  nation.  Ama-
ziah speeds  as  a  thorough  Erastiau;  as  if
the  human  authority  were  everything,  and
the  Lord,  of  himself  had  no  claims  on  the
land.

Ver.  14. — ^The  prophet,  undaunted  by
Amaziah's  threats,  in  simple  language
declares  that  he  does  not  practise  pro-
phecying  as  a  profession  or  to  gain  a  liveli-
hood, but  in  obedience  to  the  voice  of  God.
The  exercise  of  the  prophetical  ofSce  was
restricted  neither  to  sex  nor  rank.  There
were  many  prophetesses  in  Israel,  e,a.
Deborah  (Judg.  iv.),  Huldah  (2  Kings  xxii
11),  Noadiah  (Neh.  vi.  14);  and  besides  a
large  number  of  nameless  prophets  there
are  twenty-three  whose  names  are  preserved
in  Holy  Writ,  omitting  those  whose  writ-
ings have  come  down  to  us  (Ladd,  'Doctrine
of  Scripture,'  i.  117,  etc.).  A  prophet's  son  ;
i.e.  brought  up  in  the  schools  of  the  pro-
phets, the  pupils  of  which  were  called
"sons  of  the  prophets"  (see  1  Kings  xx.  35;
2  Kings  ii.  5).  Amos  was  neither  self-
commissioned  nor  trained  in  any  human
institution.  A  herdman  (boger') ;  usually
"  a  cow-herd ; "  here  "  a  shepherd  ; "  aiiri\os
(Septuagint).  A  gatherer  of  lycomore
fruit.  The  phrase,  bolet  ehiqmim,  may  mean
either  one  who  plucks  mulberry-figs  for  his
own  sustenance,  or  one  who  cultivates  them
for  others.  The  latter  is  probably  the
meaning  of  the  term  here.  The  Septuagint
rendering,  KvlQav  irvKiniva,  "  pricking  syca-
more fruit,"  and  that  of  the  Vulgate,  veUi-
earn  »yeomoro$,  indicate  the  artificial  means
for  ripening  the  fruit,  which  was  done  by
scrapiug,  scratching,  or  puncturing  it,  as
is  sometimes  done  to  the  figs  of  commerce.
As  the  tree  bore  many  crops  of  fruit  in
the  year,  it  would  afibrd  constant  employ-
ment to  the  dresser  (see '  Diet,  of  the  Bible,'
iii.  p,  1394 ;  '  Bible  Educator,'  iv,  p.  343).

Ver.  15. — As  I  followed;  literully,  from
after,  from  behind,  as  in  the  call  of  David
(2  Sam.  vii  8;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  70).  The
Divine  call  came  to  him  suddenly  and
impeiatively,  and  he  must  needs  obey  it.
He,  therefore,  could  not  follow  Amaziah'i
counsel.


140


THE  BOOK  OF   AMOS.


[oh.  rn.  I — 17.


Yer.  16. — Hear  thon  the  word  of  the
Loid,  The  punishment  of  him  who  tried  to
impede  God'i  message.  Drop  not  thy
yiotd.  Be  not  continnally  pouring  forth
prophecy.  The  word  is  nsed  eimilarly  in
Mlcah  ii.  6,  11  and  Ezek.  xxi.  2.  The
idea,  though  not  the  term,  is  taken  from
Deut.  xxxii.  2.  Beptnagint,  /tJ)  ix\aywrti<rris,
"  raise  no  tumult,"  which  rather  expresses
Amaziah's  fear  of  the  effect  of  the  uttei^
anoe  than  translates  the  word.  St.  Jerome's
explanation  is  somewhat  too  subtle,  '^Stillare
propheta*  idioma  Scripturarum  est,  quod  non
totam  Dei  eimul  inferant  iram,  $ea  parvai
etillat  aomminatione  denuntient."

Ver.  17. — With  this  denunciation  oom-
pare  that  of  Jeremiah  (xx.  3,  etc.)  against
Pashnr.  As  husband,  as  father,  as  citizen,
Amanah  shall  eaSer  grievously.  Shall  be
•n  harlot  in  the  city.  Not  play  the  harlot
willingly,  but  suffer  open  violence  when


the  city  is  taken  (comp.  Isa.  xiii  16;  Lam.
T.  11).  And  thy  daughters.  This  wonid
be  abnormal  cruelty,  as  the  Assyrians
usually  spared  the  women  of  conquered
towns.  Shall  he  divided  by  line.  Amaziah's
own  land  was  to  be  portioned  out  to
strangers  by  the  measuring-line  (Zeob.
ii.  2).  A  polluted  land ;  an  unclean  land}
i.e.  a  Gentile  country.  Amaziah  himself
was  to  share  his  countrymen's  captivity.
The  sins  and  idolatry  of  the  people  are
often  said  to  defile  the  land ;  e.g.  Lev.  xviii.
25;  Numb.  xxxv.  33;  Jer.  li.  7.  Shall
surely  go  into  captivity;  or,  be  led  aaay
captive.  Amos  repeato  the  very  words
which  formed  part  of  his  accusation  (ver.
11),  in  order  to  show  that  God's  purpose
is  unchanged,  and  that  he,  the  prophet,
must  utter  the  same  denunciation  (see  th«
accomplishment,  2  Kings  xvii.  6),


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  vision  of  devouring  locusts.  The  prophet  Is  appropriately  called
•  seer.  He  sees  clear  and  he  sees  far.  Not  only  has  Amos  foresight  of  what  U
coming;  he  has  insight  into  what,  in  certain  circumstances,  would  have  come.  He  is
taken  as  it  were  behind  the  scenes,  and  made  a  witness  of  the  forging  of  Heaven's
thunderbolts,  to  be  laid  up  for  use  as  occasion  may  require.  In  this  case  he  is
cognizant  by  spiritual  intuition  of  the  preparation  of  judicial  measures  which,  as
circumstances  turn  out,  are  never  executed.

L  All  his  obeatubes  abe  ministebs  of  God  to  do  his  will.  The  angels  are
his  "  hosts  " — ministers  of  his  that  do  his  pleasure.  The  Assyrian  was  the  rod  of  his
anger.  He  says,  "  I  will  command  the  serpent,  and  it  shall  bite  them."  He  maketh
the  winds  his  messengers,  the  flaming  fire  his  minister  (Ps.  civ.  4).  All  created
things,  in  fact,  are  but  different  elements  in  a  vast  ministry,  by  which  he  executes  his
purpose.  1.  judgments  are  generally  brought  about  by  second  causes.  To  this  rule
there  is  scarcely  an  exception.  Sometimes  it  is  famine,  brought  about  by  drought,
or  mildew,  or  locusts.  Sometimes  it  is  desolating  war,  brouglit  about  by  jealousy,  love
of  power,  and  greed.  Sometimes  it  is  pestilence,  the  result  of  causes  sll  vitlun  the
natural  sphere.  We  know  notliing  of  a£9ictive  judgments  coming  apart  from  the
interposition  of  the  causes  out  of  which  they  would  naturally  arise.  2.  Second  causes
are  all  in  the  hands  of  the  First  Cause.  They  do  not  operate  at  random.  Theirs  ii
action  "  co-operant  to  an  end."  They  are  adjusted  and  controlled.  They  are  combined
in  schemes  of  order  and  proportion,  nicely  fitted  to  the  achievement  of  their  ultimata
results.    The  eye  is  of  the  blindest  that  cannot  see  how —

"  Behind  the  dim  unknown
fitandeth  God,  within  the  shadow,  keeping  watch  above  his  own."

(Lowell.)

8.  Natural  causes  are  prepared  and  used  for  a  moral  end.  Manasseh's  captivity  leads
to  his  conversion  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11 — 13).  Israel's  desert  discipline  cultivates  •
robustness  of  national  character  which  was  wanting  at  the  Exodus  (Isa.  xliii.  21).  So
a  long  captivity  in  heathen  Babylon  puts  an  end  to  the  eyer-recurring  national  idolatry.
When  all  God's  measures  were  executed,  he  could  look  on  the  Hebrews  and  say,
"  This  people  have  I  formed  for  myself;  they  shall  show  forth  my  praise."  And  that
is  God's  method  in  all  cases.  Scripture  declares,  and  experience  and  observation
grguft^

"  All  discord,  harmony  not  understood;
▲11  partial  evil,  univerial  good."

(Pop*


OH.  TIL  1—17.]  THE   BOOK.  OK  AMOS.  141

n.  God's  agents  btbikb  in  the  nick  of  timb.  "He  formed  locusts  in  the
beginning  of  the  springing  up  of  the  second  crop."  In  consequence  of  the  timing  of
this  judgment,  it  is:  1.  More  thorough-going.  If  the  locusts  had  been  sent  earlier,
there  might  have  been  time  after  they  had  gone  for  the  second  crop  to  grow.  If  they
had  come  later,  it  might  have  been  already  saved.  God  will  not  beat  the  air.  He  will
strike  how  and  when  and  where  the  culprit  shall  feel  his  blow.  2.  It  it  more
striking.  The  element  of  time  is  the  chief  index  to  the  miraculous  character  of  many
events.  They  follow  immediately  on  the  Divine  word  or  act,  and  so  reveal  themselves
to  be  Divine  works.  The  catching  of  a  netful  of  fishes,  or  the  sudden  calming  of  a
storm,  or  the  recovery  of  a  woman  from  fever,  were  none  of  them  necessarily
miraculous  events.  It  was  their  occurrence  at  the  Saviour's  word  that  revealed  the
Divine  agency  in  them.  The  coming  of  the  locusts  at  the  prophet's  word,  and  at  the
critical  time,  revealed  God's  hand  in  the  event.  3.  It  is  more  effectual.  A  judgment
is  likely  to  serve  its  disciplinary  purpose  in  proportion  as  it  is  real,  appropriate,  and
manifestly  of  God.  The  difference  between  a  timely  judgment  and  an  imtimely  one
would  be  the  difference  between  one  blessed  to  its  proper  effect  and  one  utterly
futile.

III.  They  make  an  end  of  the  wokk  thet  take  in  hand.  In  all  that  God
does  we  should  expect  thoroughness.  1.  There  is  the  power.  All  forces  and  agents  are
under  his  control.  He  can  bring  them  to  bear  in  any  quantity  and  on  any  point.
For  him  "nothing  is  too  hard,"  and  "all  things  are  possible."  When  God  lifts  his
hand  he  can  "  smite  through."  2.  There  is  the  need.  Divine  judgments  never  come
unneeded,  nor  till  it  is  evident  that  nothing  else  will  do.  Each  is  wanted,  and  the
whole  of  each.  If  anything  less,  or  anything  else,  were  sent  it  would  be  inadequate.
The  last  atom  of  imagined  strength  must  be  destroyed.  The  last  remnant  of  fancied
resource  must  be  swept  away.  Only  when  every  conceivable  prop  has  been  knocked
away  will  men  be  brought  to  their  knees  in  absolute  submission.

IV.  The  hand  of  judgment  may  be  arrested  by  the  touch  of  fbayeb.
"  Jehovah   repented  of  this  :  It  shall  not  take  place,  saith  Jehovah."     The  pictured

'  events  never  transpired.  The  adoption  and  abandonment  of  them  as  retributive
measures  occurred  only  in  vision.  Still,  a  parallel  for  this  "  plastic  vision  "  may  be
found  in  God's  actual  doings,  as  in  the  case  of  the  antediluvians,  of  Saul,  of  Hezekiah,
of  Jerusalem,  and  of  Nineveh  (Gen.  vi.  6;  1  Sam.  xv.  11;  Isa.  xxxviii.  1—5;  2  Sam.
xxiv.  16;  Jonah  iii.  10).  As  to  this:  1.  God  does  not  change  his  mind,  but  his
method.  His  immutability  arising  out  of  his  infinity  is  clearly  revealed  (Numb,  xxiii.
19 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  29 ;  Ezek.  xxiv.  14 ;  Mai.  iii.  6).  As  self-existent  and  independent
he  is  above  the  causes  of  change,  whilst  as  an  absolute  Being  he  is  above  the
possibility  of  it.  And  the  immutability  of  his  Being  is  true  of  his  purpose.  His  ends
are  unchallengeably  right  and  his  means  resistlessly  powerful.  He  may  change  his
method,  and  often  does.  Up  to  a  certain  point  is  mercy.  Then  it  is  expostulation,
denunciation,  and  judgment  in  quick  succession.  When  one  method  fails  to  bring
about  desired  results,  another  and  another  are  resorted  to  by  a  God  who  will  not  fail.
The  variation  of  method  is  really  the  expression  of  an  unalterable  plan.  2.  This
change  of  method  is  correlative  to  a  change  of  circumstances.  It  is  the  varying  of  the
one  that  leads  to  the  varying  of  the  other.  New  circumstances  justify  and  even  call
for  a  new  line  of  action.  Yet  these  circumstances  are  themselves  part  of  his  wider
purpose,  which  therefore  remains  unchanged  and  unchangeable.  3.  Such  a  change  of
circumstances  is  often  the  introduction  of  the  element  of  prayer.  This  is  a  new  factor  in
the  problem,  and  puts  another  complexion  on  the  case.  Nineveh,  sinning  with  a  high
hand,  God  said  he  would  destroy.  But  Nineveh,  praying  in  dust  and  ashes,  was  a
different  thing.  God  does  not  destroy  penitent  people.  This,  and  not  the  sparing  of
them,  would  imply  a  change  of  purpose,  and  even  of  nature  itself.  Intercessory
prayer,  as  here,  modifies  the  circumstances  in  a  different  way;  but  the^ modification  it
real  and  will  be  co-ordinated  with  a  corresponding  modification  in  God's  way.  4.  The
necessity  of  a  case  is  a  legitimate  plea  with  God.  "  How  can  Jacob  stand?  for  it  is
small."  So  David  prays,  "  Pity  me,  for  I  am  weak."  God's  blessings  are  not  only
gifts,  "but  mercies.  He  bestows  them  freely,  and  in  pity  for  our  need.  The  extremity
of  this  need  is,  therefore,  its  strength  as  an  appeal  for  God's  help.  ^^"My  God  sha  1
unpply  all  your  need,  according  to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus.'


U2  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  vn.  1—17.

Ter.  2. — l%e  problem  of  itaMlity.  The  prayer  of  faith  is  free.  The  believing  loul
has  the  privilege  of  reasoning  with  God,  and  embraces  it.  It  asks  what  it  wills,  and  as
it  wills,  and  for  whom  it  wills.  There  is  room  for  originality  in  it,  and  scope  for
inventive  resource ;  yet  little  risk  of  impropriety.  The  Spirit  safeguards  that  in  an
effective  "unction."  Then  grace  ia  one  tlung  ever,  and  there  is  a  ground-plan  of
supplication  which  is  practically  the  same  with  all  the  faithful.  It  has  centrifugal
energy,  flowing  from  the  individual  outwards.  Its  rivers  wind  and  wander  and
discharge  themselves  ultimately  on  the  desolate  places  of  ungodly  lives;  but  they  run
first  by  the  homes  of  the  household  of  faith.  And  then  it  has  a  spiritual  stream.  It
blesses  temporal  interests  too,  but  leaves  its  fertilizing  ooze  most  richly  on  the  things
of  the  religious  life.  Of  the  prophet's  prayer  here  all  this  is  characteristic.  It
reveals  to  us —

I.  Jacob's  aotualitt.  "  Small."  There  is  a  natural  Israel  and  a  spiritual  Israel
also,  the  one  at  once  the  type  and  the  germ  of  the  other.  The  Christian  Church  is  not
distinct  from,  but  a  continuation  and  expansion  of,  the  Jewish ;  and  both  together  are
the  one  visible  Church  of  Q-od.  To  this,  an  already  existing  community,  many  were
added  at  Pentecost  (Acts  ii.  47).  In  the  congregation  of  Israel  to  which  the  sweet
psalmist  sang  (Fs.  xxii.  22)  Paul  sees  the  one  Church  of  G-od  (Heb.  ii.  12) ;  and  with
Stephen  (Acts  vii.  38)  the  wandering  host  of  the  tribes  (Exod.  xvi.  2)  was  nothing
else  than  the  "  Church  in  the  wilderness."  This  Church,  continuous  from  the
beginning,  and  one  in  all  ages,  is  the  "good  olive  tree"  (Bom.  xi.  17 — 24),  whose
Jewish  "branches"  excised,  and  again  to  be  "  graffed  in,''  are  meantime  displaced  by
the  ingraifed  Gentile  shoots,  which  partake  "  of  the  root  and  fatness  of  the  olive  tree."
In  Amos's  time  it  was  a  little  flock,  whose  preservation  was  matter  to  him  of  anxiety
and  prayer.  1.  He  i»  small  in  comparison  with  Esau.  The  heathen  around  out-
numbered Israel  overwhelmingly.  Left  to  itself  in  the  struggle  among  them  for
existence,  it  would  inevitably  have  been  swallowed  up.  So  with  the  spiritual  Israel.
Satan  has  had  in  his  kingdom  a  majority  of  the  race  for  so  far.  Faith-gate  is  a  strait
one,  Purity-way  is  a  narrow  one  (Matt.  vii.  13, 14),  and  the  saints  who  enter  the  one
and  follow  the  other  are  a  little  flock  (Luke  xii.  32).  And  no  wonder.  Unbelief  is
natural,  living  after  the  flesh  is  congenial  (Exod.  xxiii.  2),  and  an  overwhelming
preference  for  both  is  a  foregone  conclusion.  Hence,  not  only  has  the  Church  been
smaller  than  the  world,  but  within  the  Church  itself  the  wheat  has  apparently  been
less  than  the  tares.  Belatively  to  Esau,  Jacob  is,  and  has  been,  small  indeed.  2.  Ht
is  small  in  comparison  with  what  he  might  have  heen.  Smallness  is  sometimes  a
misfortune,  but  it  was  Israel's  fault.  It  was  a  result  of  persistent  national  sin,
drawing  down  the  destroying  judgments  of  Heaven.  Their  ranks  had  been  thinned
by  war,  or  pestilence,  or  famine  in  just  and  necessary  retribution  for  their  incorrigible
unfaithfulness.  So  the  small  number  of  the  saints  is  the  cjn  of  all  concerned.  It
means  opportunities  neglected,  ordinances  abused,  and  a  Holy  Spirit  resisted.  None  of
the  agencies  of  a  heavenly  culture  have  been  withheld  (Isa.  v.  1 — 4).  Every
unbeliever  is  such  in  despite  of  influences  that  ought  to  have  brought  him  to  faith
(Acts  vii.  51).  Every  spiritual  weakling  is  one  who  has  debilitated  himself  (Heb.
V.  12 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  1 — 3).  Moreover,  as  workers  for  God  the  saints  are  not  guiltless,  for
which  of  them  has  exercised  his  full  influence  for  good?  The  difference  between  what
the  Church  is  and  what  she  might  have  been  is  the  measure  of  her  delinquency  before
God.  When  the  sun  shines  and  the  showers  fall,  something  subjective  is  wrong  with
the  crop  that  stunts.  3.  Ee  is  small  in  comparison  with  what  he  viill  yet  he.  Israel
is  not  yet  full  grown.  The  Gentiles  are  Abraham's  seed  (Gal.  iii.  7),  and  their
in-bringing  is  the  increase  of  spiritual  Israel.  That  increase  is  to  attain  world-wide
proportions  yet.  The  Church's  limits  shall  be  the  ends  of  the  earth  (Ps.  Ixxii.  8),  and
its  constituents  the  heathen  nations  (Ps.  ii..8;  Ixxii.  11).  It  shall  be  a  centre  to
which  all  the  peoples  shall  gravitate  (Isa.  ii.  2).  It  shall  be  a  light  illuminating  and
incorporating  in  its  own  radiance  the  entire  globe  (Hab.  ii.  14).  It  is  only  a  stone  as
yet,  but  it  will  be  a  mountain  one  day,  and  fill  the  whole  earth  (Dan.  ii.  35,  44).  In
the  faith  of  such  a  destiny  the  Church  may  well  find  strength  to  avail  her,  even  in  the
day  of  small  things.

II.  Jacob's  ideal.  "Stand."  It  is  assumed  here  that  he  ought  to  stand;  that
standing  ia  his  appropriate  and   normal  position.     And   so  it  is.     In  the  ideal  and


OH.  VII.  1— 17.J  THE   BOOK   OF  AMOS.  143

purpose  and  promise,  and  as  the  handiwork  of  God,  he  is  not  to  fall.  He  is :  1.  To
itand  against  destruction.  Israel  was  not  to  perish.  Low  she  might  fall,  small  she
might  become,  contemptible  she  might  long  remain;  but  in  all,  and  through  all,  and
after  all,  she  was  to  live.  The  spiritual  Israel  has  a  perpetuity  of  existence  also.  The
individual  Christian  "  shall  never  perish  "  (John  x.  28).  The  grace  that  is  in  him  is  a
Divine  thing,  and  indestructible  (Gal.  ii.  20).  His  life  is  a  living  Christ  within,  and
he  is  immortal  while  Christ  lives.  This  involves  that  the  Church — God's  kingdom —
is  an  everlasting  kingdom.  If  even  a  member  cannot  perish,  much  less  the  wliole
body.  Redeemed  by  his  Son,  and  dowered  in  permanence  with  his  Spirit,  the  Church
stands,  let  what  may  fall  (Dan.  ii.  44).  A  structure  of  God's  building,  on  a  foundation
of  God's  laying,  according  to  a  plan  of  God's  devising,  it  stands  impregnable  on  its
rock  (Matt.  xvi.  18),  and  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  it.  Its  immovable
stability  is  a  question  of  Divine  will  and  resource.  There  is  the  unchangeable  purpose,
the  unconquerable  power,  the  inviolable  promise.  The  house  is  impregnable  over
which  these  three  mount  triple  guard  (Johu  x.  28).  In  the  soil  of  God's  plan,  in  the
rock-cleft  of  bis  might,  in  the  showers  and  sunshine  of  his  pledge,  the  fair  Church-
flower  can  neither  fall  nor  fade,  but  must  bloom  while  the  ages  run.  2.  To  stand
against  temptation.  Israel  was  separate  and  to  be  pure.  The  Divine  ideal  was  set
before  her  not  to  mingle  with  the  nations,  nor  serve  their  gods,  nor  learn  their  ways
(Numb,  xxiii.  9;  Deut.  vi.  14;  xviii.  9).  So  with  the  Church  as  a  whole,  and
individual  members  in  particular.  Temptation  in  some  degree  is  inevitable.  While
within  is  the  iron  of  a  corrupt  nature,  and  outside  the  loadstone  of  a  corrupt  surround-
ing, there  will  be  the  drawing  toward  sin.  But  while  God  is  stronger  than  the  devil,
and  his  grace  stronger  than  sin,  there  shall  not  be  a  lapsinE;  into  wickedness.  The
word  of  acceptance  is  pe  ice-bringing.  The  change  by  regeneration  is  rafiical.  The
measure  of  grace  conferred  is  sufficient  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  Therefore  Israel,  harnessed  in
armour  of  proof,  shall  defy  the  devil's  darts,' and  stand  in  the  evil  day  (Bph.  vi.  13).
The  bride  of  Christ  will  abide  in  loyal  love,  and  be  to  eye  and  heart  at  last  his
"  undefiled,"  with  no  spot  in  her  (Cant.  vi.  9 ;  iv.  7),  She  may  grow  languid  almost
to  slothfulness,  but  even  in  her  sleep  her  "  heart  waketh  "  (Cant.  v.  2 — 6).  Her  love
may  at  times  burn  low  (Matt.  xxiv.  12),  but  the  fire  remains  alight,  and  glows  at  the
slightest  breath  from  heaven.  In  the  end  she  is  presented  to  Christ  a  glorious  Church,
without  spot;  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing  (Bph.  v.  27).  3.  To  stand  against
mi'fortune.  From  this  there  is  no  earthly  immunity  (Job  v.  7).  God's  Israel  will
get  a  share,  and  a  large  share,  of  the  shocks  of  calamity.  There  will  even  be  special
evils  to  which  their  character  will  expose  them  alone  of  men.  But  over  against  this
stand  the  Divine  helps  which  also  are  theirs  alone.  God  is  for  them.  They  are  the
objects  of  a  special  providence.  The  Divine  favour-r-their  shield  and  buckler — is
armour  of  proof.  The  darts  of  evil  are  turned  aside,  and  fall  pointless  and  broken  to
the  ground.  Nay,  the  evil,  having  been  endured  and  survived,  may  be  utilized.  God
constitutes  it  the  appropriate  and  effective  means  of  a  heavenly  culture  (Heb.  xii.  11 ;
2  Cor.  iv.  17).  It  destroys  nothing,  not  even  a  hair  of  their  head ;  and  it  prunes  the
tree  into  richer  and  choicer  fruit-bearing.  It  even  increases  future  glory,  adding  the
piquancy  of  contrast  to  its  otherwise  perfect  bliss.

HI.  Jacob's  attainment  of  his  ideal  a  oabb  of  God.  God  concerns  himself
about  all  that  concerns  his  people.  The  prophet  assumes  that  one  way  or  other  Jacob
is  bound  to  be  upheld,  and  that  God  in  the  last  appeal  will  see  it  done.  As  to  this
ideal:  1.  Ood  loves  it.  It  is  s^t  up  by  his  own  hand,  and  characterized  by  his  own
excellences,  and  it  must  be  a  thing  after  his  own  heart.  All  the  graces  that  are
acceptable  with  God  shine  in  the  saints,  and  the  interests  dear  to  his  heart  are  those
with  which  they  are  inseparably  identified.  Righteous  himself,  he  loveth  righteousness ;
unchangeable,  he  loveth  ste  idfastness ;  and  the  things  his  heart  loves  his  hand  will
guard.  2.  God  appoints  it.  Salvation  from  first  to  last  is  of  his  devising.  He
decides  that  salvation  shall  be,  and  what,  and  how.  It  is  the  purpose  of  his  adorable
grace,  and  therefore  something  along  the  lines  of  which  he  may  be  expected  to  work.
He  lias  predestinated  the  individual  "  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son,"  and
the  Church  to  "  come  to  a  perfect  man."  And  we  may  safely  reckon  that  his  measures
will  work  in  these  directions;  helping  the 'individual,  that  he  is  "xjhanged  into  the
■ama  image  from  glory  to  glory  j"  and  blessing  the  Church,  that  she  gathers  up  and


144  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  Im.  vu.  1-17

exemplifies  in  her  many-sidedness  the  graces  of  Christ's  faultless  character.  Tha
Divine  forceful  action  propels  things  in  the  direction  of  the  Divine  gracious  appoint-
ment. 3,  Ood  has  already  committed  himself  to  it.  To  Israel  his  word  of  promise
was  pledged,  "I  wiU  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  To  us  it  is  pledged  with
greater  emphasis  still,  "  They  shall  never  perish ; "  "  Whom  he  justified,  them  he
also  glorified,"  etc.  None  shall  pluck  the  Christian  out  of  Christ's  hand,  nor  shall  the
gates  of  hell  prevail  against  his  Church.  The  circle  of  the  promises  towers  a  wall  of
fire  around  the  saints.  The  result  is  pledged  to  them ;  so  are  the  means.  The
inheritance  is  reserved  for  them,  and  they  for  the  inheritance  (1  Pet.  i.  4,  5).  Their
faith  will  keep  them,  and  God  will  keep  their  faith  (1  Pet.  i.  5).  Then  Ood  had
already  hegun  to  help.  Israel  had  heen  upheld  in  many  an  evil.  And  there  is
continuity  in  the  operations  of  God.  He  does  not  abandon  a  work  once  begun,  nor
allow  after-disaster  to  neutralize  accomplished  good.  He  had  done  something  for
Israel;  he  has  done  something  for  us.  Then  he  will  do  more,  and  he  will  do  alL
Having  bestowed  his  grace,  he  swears  by  the  gift  that  the  circle  of  our  good  will  be
made  complete.  A  part  already  of  the  work  of  God,  invulnerable  in  his  armour,  and
immortal  in  his  life,  they  have  "a  strong  consolatioD,"  surely,  "who  have  fled  for
refuge,"  etc.

IV.  The  whole  matteb  a  fitting  subject  of  pbatbb.  The  prophet  comes
between  God  and  Israel  as  an  intercessor.  In  his  act  we  see  that :  1.  Prayer  is  a
universal  means  of  grace.  "  Men  ought  always  to  pray ; "  "  In  everything  by  prayer
and  supplication,"  etc.  There  is  no  blessing,  temporal  or  spiritual,  that  is  not  the
gift  of  God.  There  is  no  way  of  securing  the  least  of  these  but  by  seeking  it  in
prayer.  The  heart  must  throb  continuously  if  the  blood  would  be  driven  through  the
body;  the  breath  must  be  regularly  drawn  if  this  blood  would  be  purified  and
oxidized.  So  prayer,  the  throb  of  the  new  heart,  the  breath  of  the  new  creature,  must
go  on  if  the  new  life  is  to  be  maintained.  The  interruption  of  it  means  the  suspension
of  the  most  essential  vital  function.  There  is  nothing  we  can  count  on  getting
without  it  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  37;  Jas.  iv.  2).  There  is  nothing  legitimate  we  may
despair  of  getting  by  it  (John  xiv.  13).  In  prayer  the  soul  puts  forth  its  tentacles
round  about,  and  lays  hold  of  good  on  every  side.  2.  Prayer  is  a  universal  instinct
of  grace.  All  vital  functions  go  on  without  an  act  of  the  will  or  the  exercise  of
attention.  And  so  with  prayer  in  the  new-created  soul.  It  does  not  require  a  specific
injunction.  It  does  not  wait  on  an  effort  of  the  will.  It  goes  up  as  naturally  as  the
hunger-cry  of  the  young  raven.  The  new  man  breathes,  the  new  heart  pulsates,  the
opened  lips  speak,  and  the  action  in  each  case  is  prayer.  "  Behold,  he  prayeth,"  is  an
infallible  token  of  a  converted  man.  3.  Prayer  is  expansive  like  grace.  Sin  is  selfish.
Seeking  salvation,  the  sinner  prays  for  himself  only.  He  is  conscious  of  need,  but  as
yet  knows  nothing  of  supply.  Only  when  he  gets  spiritual  blessing  himself  does  he
know  how  valuable  it  would  be  to  others,  and  begin  to  desire  it  for  them.  Selfishness
gives  way  with  sin.  Philanthropy  grows  with  the  love  of  God.  And  prayer  answers
to  and  expresses  the  change.  The  prayer-circle  widens  as  personal  religion  deepens.
Its  instinct  is  catholic.  It  goes  out  to  the  Church  of  the  Firstborn.  It  seeks  the
coming  of  the  kingdom.  We  pray  for  Israel  when  we  are  Israelites  indeed.  Bequest
for  the  household  of  faith  is  God's  will,  the  Church's  weal,  and  the  spontaneous
offering  of  the  gracious  souL

Vers.  4 — 6. — The  vision  of  consuming  fire.  The  prophet's  vision  goes  on,  and  the
situation  in  it  becomes  more  critical.  One  woe  is  averted  only  for  a  worse  to  take  its
place.  The  Divine  avenging  hosts  remain  in  battle-line.  They  return  to  the  attack
with  renewed  vigour.  For  the  fu^illade  is  substituted  the  booming  of  the  great  guns.
Escaping  as  by  the  skin  of  their  teeth  from  the  wasting  locust,  incorrigible  Israel  are
met  in  the  prophet's  eye  by  the  devouring  fire.  In  connection  with  tUs  second  scene
in  the  panoramic  vision  notice —

1.  God  contending  by  fire.  Again  and  again  is  it  so  in  Scripture.  1.  Iti$tht
most  destuctive  ehment  in  nature.  It  destroys  all  comfort,  inflicting  intense  pain.  It
destroys  all  life,  no  animal  or  vegetable  organism  being  capable  of  enduring  it.  It
destroys  the  very  form  of  organic  matter,  leducing  it  to  its  original  element!
It  destroys  with  unparalleled  rapidity  and  thoroughness  almost  anything  it  attacks.


OH.  Til.  1— 17.J  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  145


2.  It  is  the  element  used  and  to  be  used  by  Ood  in  bringing  about  the  greatest  catas-
trophes. It  was  in  the  fire-shower  from  heaven  that  Sodom  was  overwhelmed  (Gen.
lix.  24).  Fire  "  very  grievous  "  was  mingled  with  the  plague  of  hail  which  smote  the
land  of  Egypt  (Bxod.  ix.  24).  It  was  the  fire  of  the  Lord  that  burnt  up  complaining
Israel  at  Taberah,  and  also  Korah  and  his  company  in  their  gainsaying  (Numb.  xi.  1 ;
xxvi.  10).  By  fire  from  heaven  were  Ahaziah's  two  captains  and  their  fifties  consumed
before  Elijah  (2  Kings  i.  10 — 12).  It  was  by  bringing  down  fire  that  James  and  John
proposed  to  destroy  the  inhospitable  Samaritans  (Luke  ix.  54).  And  it  is  in  a  lake
burning  with  fire  that  the  beast,  the  false  prophet,  and  all  the  finally  impenitent  shall
be  overwhelmed  at  last.  3.  It  is  in  Scripture  a  frequent  emblem  of  active  power.  Grod
the  Father  in  wrath  (Deut.  iv.  24;  ix.  3),  God  the  Son  in  judgment  (2  Thess.  i.  8),
God  the  Holy  Ghost  in  grace,  are  each  so  figured  (Luke  iii.  16).  Indwelling  sin  is
fire  (1  Cor.  vii.  9  ;  2  Cor.  xi.  29);  the  busy  mischief-making  tongue  is  fire  (Jas.  iii.  6);
God's  Word  is  a  fire  (Jer.  xiiii.  29) ;  his  ministers  are  "  burning  ones"  (seraphim) ;
spiritual  life  is  fire  (Luke  xii.  49) ;  affliction  is  fire  (1  Cor.  iii.  13 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  12) ;
and  the  misery  of  the  finally  lost  is  fire  (Mark  ix.  44).  A  God  contending  by  fire
is  a  God  putting  forth  the  extreme  of  destructive  energy.

II.  Judgment  drinking  up  the  gbbat  deep.  As  the  fire  is  figurative,  so  probably
is  the  "deep."  It  is  the  heathen  world.  God's  judgment  which  includes  this  is:
1.  Discriminating.  "  The  deep."  The  sweltering,  restless  sea ,  is  a  fit  symbol  of  the
wicked  in  their  unrest  of  heart  and  rebellion  against  God  (Isa.  Ivii.  20 ;  Ps.  xlvi.  3).
These  are  the  natural  prey  of  the  eagles  of  judgment.  They  deserve  it,  provoke  it,  and
•re  its  characteristic  objects.  The  righteous  may  suffer  sometimes  with  the  wicked,
but  the  ungodly  cannot  escape.  2.  Mxtensive.  "The  great  deep."  Not  merely
"  wells,"  which  are  individuals  (2  Pet.  ii.  7),  nor  "  rivers,"  which  are  nations  (Isa.  viii.
7 ;  Jer.  xlvi.  7,  8),  nor  "  seas,"  which  are  races  (Ps.  Ixv.  7 ;  Isa.  xvii.  12),  but  "  the
great  deep,"  or  rebellious  humanity  in  its  entire  extent,  shall  be  contended  with  and
destroyed.  When  the  last  word  has  been  spoken  God's  argument  against  sin  will  be
overwhelming;  and  all  the  ground  covered  by  sin  will  have  been  covered  also  by
judgment.

III.  Judgment  bating  up  "  the  portion  "  doomed.  "  Probably  the  definite  portion
foreappointed  by  God  to  captivity  and  desolation"  (Pusey).  1.  Good's  acts  are
coextensive  with  his  decrees.  His  plan  has  reference  to  all  events,  and  these  in  turn
exactly  embody  his  plan.  He  had  devoted  beforehand  a  definite  number  to  judgment ;
and  all  these,  and  these  only,  would  it  eat  up  in  the  day  of  its  falling.  No  tares
escape,  nor  is  any  wheat  burned.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his."  2.  To  be
nominally  God's  people  establishes  no  special  relation  to  him.  Outward  relations,  if
they  have  not  inward  relations  to  which  they  correspond,  are  nothing.  Mere  names
and  semblances  leave  unchanged  the  underlying  realities  which  God  regards,  and  to
which  his  dealings  are  adjusted.  A  hollow  profession  is  simply  unbelief  plus  hypocrisy.

3.  Ood's  Judgments  on  his  professing  people  ore  not  for  annihilation,  hut  for  weeding
out.  The  "  portion  "  was  not  all  Israel  (Isa.  x.  20—22 ;  xxxvii.  31,  32).  After  it  had
been  devoured,  a  remnant  would  remain.  Judgments  are  the  gardener's  knife ;  they
prune  out  the  worthless  branches,  but  leave  the  tree.  Exposure  to  the  wind  is  not  for
destruction  of  the  wheat,  but  for  the  scattering  of  the  chaff.  In  the  track  of  the  fire  is
to  be  found  all  that  is  fire-proof.

IV.  Thb  LEGITIMATE  MEASURE  OF  ASKING  IN  PRATER.  (Ver.  5.)  It  seems  a  forlom
hope  to  offer  such  prayer.  Yet  here  it  is  done  by  a  man  under  the  guidance  of  God's
Spirit.  In  imitation  of  him :  1,  We  may  ask  anything  that  is  innocent.  It  may  not
be  promised.  No  one  else  may  have  received  it.  It  may  be  a  thing  utterly  unlikely
to  be  done.  It  may  be  what  God  is  threatening  not  to  do.  Yet  it  is  legitimate  matter
of  prayer,  and  we  need  not  despair  of  it.  God  cannot  do  less  than  he  promises,  but  he
may  do  more ;  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  does  much  for  which  no  explicit  promise  is
to  be  found.  2.  We  may  ask  any  amount  that  can  be  enjoyed.  God's  is  no  niggard
heart  or  hand.  He  has  exhaustless  store.  He  loves  to  see  us  filled  and  thoroughly
furnished.  Hence  he  giveth  liberally,  satisfies  with  his  mercy,  gives  all  we  can  receive,
and  more  than  we  can  ask  or  think.  Economy  in  asking  where  there  is  infinity  to
draw  on  is  modesty  run  inad.  3.  We  may  ask  it  up  till  the  last  moment.  While,  in
the  nature  of  things,  answer  is  possible,  request  may  be  made.    Who  knowi  whether

iVOS.  b


146  ,THB  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  vil  1— J7.


evil  may  not  be  averted  until  it  has  actually  fallen  ?  Besieged  cities  have  been  saved
even  after  the  garrison  bad  thrown  0|^>en  the  gate»,  and  battles  won  after  the  ranks  ol
the  victors  had  begun  to  break.  With  God  all  things  are  possible,  and  by  prayer  he  is
always  moved.  Till  ihe  moment  of  death  we  may  pray  for  life,  for  salvation  till  the
moment  of  destruction.  4.  Having  received,  vie  may  ask  again  a/nd  again.  "  Men
ought  always  to  pray."  Prayer  has  reference  to  returning  wants,  and  is  normally  a
habit  of  soul.  As  often  as  we  hunger  we  eat,  and,  on  the  same  principle,  as  ofteu  as
we  need  we  pray.  Continued  prayer  is  matter  of  necessity,  a  command  of  God,  and  an
instinct  of  the  soul.  "  In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication,"  etc.  Half  a  century
later  the  mercy  of  God's  dealings  appeared.  After  ravaging  the  greater  portion  of  the
land,  the  Assyrians  unaccountably  withdrew,  and  left  the  capital  untouched.  The
connection  between  Amos's  prayer  and  the  unwonted  slackness  of  Tiglath-Pileser
belongs  to  that  region  into  which  sense  cannot  penetrate,  but  which  is  all  patent  to
the  eye  of  foith.

V.  The  mebciful  aspect  op  God's  threats.  (Ver,  6.)  The  perseverance  of  the
prophet's  prayer  is  justiSed  by  the  event.  God's  threat  is  not  executed.  Judgment  is
arrested  on  the  way.  Does  God,  then,  change?  No;  but  circumstances  do,  and  with
them  his  adjusted  mode  of  action.  The  unexecuted  threat  is  not  unmeaning  nor
unnecessary.  1.  It  forewarns  of  the  coming  evil.  When  the  black  clouds  rise  we
know  the  storm  is  brewing.  So  when  God  speaks  we  know  he  is  going  to  act  and
how.  A  threat  is  a  conditional  prophecy.  It  tells  us  exactly  what,  in  given  circum-
stances, we  may  expect.  Knowledge  of  the  evil  coming  is  a  prerequisite  to  any
measure  of  precaution.  2.  It  thereby  often  turns  from  the  path  in  which  the  evil  lies.
All  actions  have  their  proper  issues,  and  whatever  changes  the  One  changes  the  other.
God's  judgments  are  directed  against  us  as  transgressors  in  a  certain  way.  If  wo
cease  so  to  transgress  the  reasc  n  for  them  is  gone,  and  they  will  not  be  sent.  The
knowledge  of  these  two  facts  operates  as  a  powerful  incentive  to  reformation,  and  so  a
means  to  the  arrest  of  impending  judgment.  We  face  a  different  way  when  we
adequately  realize  that  we  thereby  face  a  different  end.  3.  It  displays  God's  character
in  a  most  attractive  aspect.  He  warns  before  he  strikes.  He  warns  that  he  may  not
need  to  strike  at  all.  His  threats  are  the  merciful  heralds  of  his  judgments,  offering
terms  of  peace  before  the  stern  hour  of  intervention  arrives.  "  Except  ye  repent,  ye
shall  all  likewise  perish."  A  threat  like  that  is  only  a  promise  in  disguise.  It
speaks  of  a  gracious  heart  which  "wills  not  that  any  shomd  perish,  but  that  all
should  come  to  repentance."

Vers.  7 — 9. — Righteousness  to  the  plwmb-line.  There  has  been  reprieve  after  reprieve.
The  enemy  of  God's  wrath  has  been  met  in  the  breach  by  intercessory  prayer,  and,  for
the  time,  turned  back.  Once  and  again  the  hounds  of  vengeance  have  been  cried  off.
But  respite  is  not  escape.  There  is  a  certain  limit  beyond  which  the  system  of  Divine
reprieves  cannot  go.  And  that  limit  has  now  been  reached.  The  locust  has  been  dis-
appointed of  his  meal.  The  fire  has  been  beaten  back  from  the  tinder.  But  the  criminal
is  obdurate,  and  now  the  plumb-line  is  applied  to  the  bowing  wall,  and  the  word  goes
forth  to  overturn  and  destroy  utterly.    In  this  graphic  delineation  we  notice —

I.  The  wall.  This  figure  for  Israel  (ver.  8)  suggests :  1.  Something  huiit.  Other
nations  grow  up  as  it  may  happen,  shaped  by  the  circumstances  in  which  they  arise.
The  nation  of  Israel  was  not  a  natural  growth,  but  a  Divine  creation.  "  This  people
have  I  formed  for  myself."  So  with  the  Church.  It  is  not  a  voluntary  association.  It
is  not  a  human  institution.  It  is  a  vineyard  of  God's  husbandry,  a  house  of  God's
building  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  Every  stone  in  it  is  quarried  and  chiselled  and  laid  by  the
Divine  hand.  2.  Something  strong.  A  wall  has  substance,  stability,  resisting  power,
and  is  in  Scripture  emblematic  of  these  things  (Bzek.  iv.  3;  Isa.  xxv.  4;  Zech.  iL  5).
In  regard  to  these  qualities  Israel  is  a  wall.  God  is  "  known  within  her  palaces  for  a
Befiige."  Salvation  is  to  her  for  walls  and  bulwarks.  In  these  things  is  her  strength ;  and
fortified  thus,  she  "  shall  npt  be  moved  "  (Ps.  xlvi.  5).  3.  Something  upright.  "  Made
by  a  plumb-line."  God  "  made  man  Ujjright,"  And  he  made  Israel  upright.  What-
ever comes  out  of  his  hands  comes  out  of  them  free  of  any  moral  twist.  It  is  made
according  to  righteousness.  Formed  into  a  nation  by  God,  Israel  had  a  constitution,
laws,  and  administration  theoretically  faultless.    The  uprightness  of  this  God-built


OT.  TE.  1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  HI

wall  was  a  main  condition  of  its  strength.  In  the  perfection  of  the  one  was  the  per-
feotion  of  the  other.  The  loss  of  one  would  be  the  loss  of  both.  The  wall  that  leans
is  about  to  fall.

II.  The  plumb-linb.  This  is  the  regulating  appliance,  and  the  testing  instrument
with  which  the  building  must  tally.  1.  It  is  righteousness.  Bighteousness  in  the
moral  world  answers  to  straightness  in  tbe  world  of  matter.  It  is  the  moral  recti-
lineal, or  line  of  "  oughtness  " — the  line  along  which  moral  beings  ought  to  move.
This  is  manifestly  the  plumb-line  by  which  to  adjust  the  wall  Israel  to  the  perpen-
dicular. Exemplified  in  the  character,  this  righteousness  is  uprighthess.  Exemplified
in  the  conduct,  it  is  justice.  In  either  case  it  is  the  ideal  of  rightness.  2.  It  is
righteousness  as  it  exists  in  Ood.  God  is  universal  Perfection — "  Light,"  "  Lore,"
"Truth,"  "the  Holy  One,"  "the  righteous  God,"  and  all  in  ideal  form.  He  is,  in
fact,  the  typical  moral  Being.  Each  grace  exists  in  him  in  its  highest  form.  His
righteousness  is  unspotted  righteousness,  and  the  realize!  ideal  of  all  tliat  righteous-
ness ought  to  be.  3.  It  is  this  righteousness  as  it  is  revealed  in  Scripture.  Scripture
is  the  rule  of  man,  just  as  being  the  revelation  of  God.  What  he  is  is  our  Model.
What  he  does  is  our  Exemplar.  What  he  is  and  does  and  requires  is  the  burden  of
Scripture — a  formulation  of  his  whole  will.  "  To  the  Law  and  to  the  testimony,"  etc.
By  the  Law  must  Israel  be  tried,  its  true  character  revealed,  and  its  fitting  destiny
settled.  "  Those  that  have  sinned  in  the  Law  shall  be  judged  by  the  Law."  The
Law  is  the  unerring  plumb-line,  exposing  every  deviation  from  the  moral  perpendicular.

III.  The  testing.  "  Behold,  I  will  set,"  etc.  (ver.  8).  This  is  to  apply  the  plumb-
line  to  the  wall,  so  as  to  reveal  irregularity  if  it  exists.  1.  This  is  no  longer  to  he  put
off.  "  I  shall  pass  by  it  no  more."  The  limit  of  Divine  forbearance  was  now  reached.
No  more  passing  by,  no  longer  indulgence,  no  further  forgiveness,  no  more  postpone-
ment of  the  vengeance  vowed.  There  is  a  last  word  of  God  to  every  man,  and  after  it
nothing  can  come  but  the  blow.  2.  The  wall  is  to  he  tried  by  the  rule  it  was  built  hy.
(Ver.  7.)  "  He  destroys  it  by  that  same  rule  of  right  wherewith  he  had  built  it.  By
that  law,  that  right,  those  providential  leadings,  that  grace  which  we  have  received,  by
the  same  we  are  judged  "  (Pusey).  God  has  only  one  standard,  and  he  uses  it  always.
Things  ought  to  be  as  he  made  them,  and  he  tries  them  to  discover  if  they  are  so.  The
measure  of  divergence  from  original  righteousness,  whether  in  men  or  Churches,  is  the
measure  of  guilt  in  the  diverging  party.  Comparison  with  its  own  pure  ideal  would
bring  out  Israel's  corruption  in  the  strongest  light.  3.  The  testing  is  to  he  one  of  the
entire  nation.  "  The  wall  is  not  the  emblem  of  Samaria,  or  of  any  one  city.  It  is  the
strength  and  defence  of  the  whole  people  "  (Pusey).  There  was  general  deflection,  and
to  discover  this  there  will  be  a  general  plumbing.  All  the  wall  must  be  tested  before
it  can  be  all  destroyed.

IV.  The  demolition.  The  wall  is  found  to  have  bowed,  and  the  word  is  given  to
pull  it  down.  In  this  destruction  would  be  involved  :  1.  The  idolatrous  places.  "  The
sacrificial  heights  of  Isaac,"  all  the  high  places  at  Dan,  Bethel,  and  Gilgal,  where  idol-
worship  was  carried  on.  In  the  wasting  of  these  would  appear,  on  the  one  hand,  the
vanity  of  idol-worship,  and,  on  the  other,  God's  special  wrath  against  it — matters  which
it  was  necessary  to  emphasize  in  the  mind  of  idol-loving  Israel.  2.  Idolatrous  objects,
"The  holy  things  of  Israel"  (ver.  9)  are  the  objects  and  adjuncts  of  their  idolatrous
worship.  Dan  and  Bethel,  as  rivals  of  Jerusalem,  having  been  desolated,  Baal,  Ashta-
roth,  etc.,  as  rivals  of  Jehovah,  would  be  destroyed.  Broken  idols  and  levelled  shrines
would  alone  remain,  a  commentary  on  the  impotence  of  the  "  lying  vanities  "  to  which
blinded  Israel  persistently  turned.  3.  The  Hebrew  monarchy.  "The  house  of  Jeroboam"
was  the  reigning  family.  It  was  the  last  dynasty  of  the  Israelitish  monarchy.  In  it
and  with  it  was  to  perish  (Hos.  i.  4),  and  did  perish,  "  the  kingdom  of  the  house  of
Israel."  The  royal  house  was  so  identified  with  the  national  idol-worship  as  of  necessity
to  be  involved  in  whatever  destruction  this  provoked.  It  was  specially  fitting,  more-
over, that  the  family  of  the  arch-idolater  should  be  the  one  to  sink  in  the  burning
grave  of  the  idolatry  he  set  up.

V«rs.  10—17. — Machination  foiled  hy  fearless  candour.  Amos  h«d  deserved  well  of
Israel.  He  took  a  more  practical  interest  in  their  welfare  than  any  other  man  from
the  king  down.    He  saw  their  sin,  and  lamented  it ;  their  impending  ruin,  and  would


148  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  m.  1—17.

have  averted  it ;  their  one  way  of  escape,  and  pressed  its  adoption  strenuously.  Had
they  not  been  as  blind  as  besotted,  they  w^uld  have  revered  him  as  a  national  benefactor.
But  the  reformation  he  preached  mea^ia  the  abandonmeut  of  rooted  habits  and  the
harassing  of  vested  interests  in  sin,  neither  of  which  would  be  so  much  as  named.
Accordingly,  Amos  anticipated  the  experjanoe  of  all  reformers  since,  in  being  assailed
by  a  policy  of  falsehood,  backed  by  force.     We  have  here —

I.  A  MEDDLING  PRIEST.  "  The  priest  of  Bethel "  was  the  chief  idol-priest  at  the
sanctuary  of  the  golden  calf  there.  His  position  and  functions  were  in  profane  mimicry
of  those  jf  the  high  priest  at  Jerusalem.  In  making  this  charge :  1.  Be  appeals  to
force.  The  tyrant  Jeroboam  was  the  embodiment  of  irresponsible  power  in  IsraeL
Idolatry  is  the  religion  of  brute  force.  Its  appeal  to  the  strong  arm  as  the  only  argu-
ment worth  using  is  characteristic.  Error  eschews  argument.  The  kingdom  of  dark-
ness instinctively  fears  the  light.  What  is  an  outrage  on  reason  takes  its  shelter  fitly
behind  a  sword.  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world ; "  "  The  weapons  of  your  warfare
are  not  carnal."  The  true  religion  makes  its  appeal  to  truth.  The  religion  that  appeals
to  the  sword  is  prima  facie  false.  2.  Ee  ii  prompted  by  jealousy.  He  had  a  vested
interest  in  the  national  idolatry.  To  abolish  it  would  be  to  take  the  bread  out  of  his
mouth.  Like  the  chief  priests  and  scribes  with  Christ,  and  the  Ephesian  silversmiths
with  Paul,  Amaziah  was  striking  for  his  livelihood.  "  He  went  away  sorrowful,  for  he
had  great  possessions."  Conflicting  self-interest,  actual  or  supposed,  is  a  constant  and
effective  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the  religious  life.  It  is  the  preliminary  necessity  of
leaving  all  in  act  or  spirit  that  makes  the  followers  of  the  Lord  so  few.  3.  He  makes  a
lying  accusation,  (Yer.  11.)  Amos  had  not  really  made  either  statement.  That
applied  to  Jeroboam  had  been  made  about  Jeroboam's  bouse.  That  about  Israel  had
been  accompanied  by  a  call  to  repentance,  and  a  conditional  promise  of  escape,  which
modified  its  character  altogether.  The  charge,  therefore,  consists  of  a  lie  and  a  half-
truth,  and  is  an  attempt  to  work  on  the  king's  personal  fears,  by  construing  into  a
conspiracy  against  his  kingdom  and  life  what  Amos  did  to  save  both.  For  this  now
stale  device  persecutors  in  all  ages  have  shown  a  characteristic  predilection.  Christ
was  calumniously  accused  of  speaking  against  Cassar  (Luke  xxiii.  2 ;  John  xix.  12 ;
Matt.  xxii.  21).  Paul  was  falsely  charged  with  "doing  contrary  to  the  decrees  of
Caesar,"  and  "  stirring  up  sedition  among  the  Jews  "  (Acts  xvii.  7 ;  xxiv.  5).  And
often  since  has  the  assertion  of  liberty  of  conscience  been  construed  into  rebellion
against  the  civil  power.  Falsehood  and  violence  are  the  traditional  propaganda  of  the
kingdom  of  darkness.  4.  Ee  judges  the  prophet's  morals  by  the  standard  of  his  own.
(Yer.  12.)  His  relation  to  his  own  office  was  utterly  sordid.  He  held  the  office  of
priest  for  the  "  bit  of  bread  "  it  secured  him.  And  he  assumes  that  Amos  is  like  him-
self. It  is  thus  that  tij»  saint  "judges  the  world,  yet  himself  is  judged  of  no  man."
Forming  an  estimate  of  the  righteous,  the  wicked  leave  conscience  out  of  the  computa-
tion, and  so  vitiate  the  finding,  5.  He  condemns  idolatry  by  tht  urgument ^he  uses  in
its  defence.  (Yer,  13,)  "  The  king's  sanctuary,"  set  up  and  consecrated  by  the  king,
maintained  by  his  authority,  and  subordinated  to  his  purposes.  The  national  idolatry
was  a  creature  of  the  king.  Its  claim  to  be  a  religion  was  no  stronger  than  his  claim
to  be  a  god.  For  religious  ordinances  state  authority  is  so  inadequate  as  only  to  expose
them  to  suspicion — the  suspicion  of  adjustment  to  a  state  policy  rather  than  to  the
Word  and  glory  of  God.

II.  A  FAITHFUL  PROPHET.  Like  every  true  man,  Amos  was :  1.  Humble.  (Yer.
14.)  He  remembers  and  confesses  bis  lowly  origin.  He  asks  no  respect  but  such  as
might  be  due  to  his  native  condition.  He  treats  the  prophetic  office  as  an  entirely
unmerited  dignity.  His  exercise  of  it  was  disinterested.  He  was  neither  a  professional
prophet  nor  the  son  of  one.  His  prophesying  was  an  incident,  and  the  trust  of  Divine
grace.  The  man  whom  office  spoils  was  unfit  for  it.  The  religion  that  is  puffed  up  by
employment  in  God's  work  was  never  intelligent,  or  of  a  high  order.  2.  Loyal  to  his
Divine  commission.  (Yer.  15.)  In  a  believing  life  Gtod  is  all.  His  will  is  the  supreme
interest  ara  exclusive  rule.  God  has  chosen  the  man,  air-,  that  means  unconditioin'
consecratian.  GK)d  has  comifiisBioned  him,  and  he  makes  the  fact  the  basis  of  his  whole
life-programme.  "  I  must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent  me."  That  is  a  compre-
hensive life-maxim.  In  the  spiritual  circle  nothing  is  held  supremely  important  but
that  God's  work  be  dona.     3.  Zealoiu.     Amos  ma.de  the  salvation  of  Israel  a  peraonal


CH.vn.1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  U9


concern  and  his  life-effort.  He  could  think,  speak,  be  active  about  nothing  else.
"  The  land  could  not  bear  his  words,"  so  vehement  were  they  and  so  persistent,  Tha
advocacy  that  will  take  no  refusal,  that  must  be  either  yielded  to  or  silenced,  is  that
which  alone  beseems  the  stupendous  importance  of  the  cause  of  God.  "  The  zeal  of
thine  house  hath  ealen  me  up."  If  this  is  not  an  all-absorbing  passion,  it  is  not  after
the  one  Example.  4.  Bold.  (Vers.  16,  17.)  Prohibition  is  treated  as  a  challenge.
It  only  leads  him  to  repeat  and  emphasize.  There  is  no  bravado  in  this,  but  only  a
supreme  regard  for  the  principle,  "  We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  men."  Tha
King's  messenger,  on  the  King's  business,  must  brook  obstruction  from  none.  Tha
best  soldier  is  the  boldest.  Perfect  devotion  to  and  faith  in  his  Captain  speaks  in
absolute  fearlessness  in  his  service.  5.  Explicit.  (Ver.  17.)  The  heathen  oracles
always  "  paltered  in  a  double  sense."  After  the  event  their  deliverances  could  be
reconciled  with  whatever  happened.  But  the  prophet,  delivering  God's  message,  is
sure  of  his  ground.  He  specifies  details  with  confidence,  for  no  jot  or  tittle  of  tha
Divine  Word  can  fail.  As  in  other  cases,  the  fulfilment  of  this  particular  detail  of  th«
prophecy  is  not  recorded  (Isa.  xxii.  17, 18 ;  Jer.  xxiz.  22),  nor  could  it  be  expected  to
be  in  the  condensed  account  of  the  Scripture  narrative.  "Scripture  hath  no  leisur*
to  relate  all  which  befalls  those  of  the  viler  sort."  Yet  the  broad  fact  of  the  Captivity
and  exile,  accompanied  by  all  the  horrors  of  Oriental  warfare,  forms  a  constructiva
record  of  the  events.

III.  A  HARBOWINO  PICTURE.  (Ver.  17.)  These  are  the  horrors  bom  of  idolatry.
When  Amaziah  came  to  suffer  them  in  his  family  he  would  know  practically  what  hii
chosen  idolatry  was,  and  made  of  men.  1.  Family  dishonour.  "  Wife  dishonoured,"
etc.  A  common  atrocity  (Isa.  xiii.  16 ;  Zech.  xiv.  2),  and  to  all  concerned  the  most
diabolically  cruel  conceivable.  Between  this  crime  and  idolatry  there  are  analogies,
and  probably  affinities,  in  virtue  of  which  the  one  is  figuratively  called  by  the  name  of
the  other  (Jer.  iii.  9 ;  Ezek.  xxiii.  37).  The  patron  of  the  one  is  fitly  punished  by
being  made  the  victim  of  the  other.  'The  conduct  of  Turkish  troops  in  recent  wars,  in
respect  to  this  matter,  is  a  commentary  on  the  assertion  that  Mohammedanism  is  a
valuable  protest  against  idolatry.  2.  Family  impoverishment.  A  Hebrew's  property
is  inalienable.  If  he  lost  it  by  mismanagement-,  it  reverted  to  his  family  at  tha
jubilee.  But  the  Assyrian  would  know  nothing  of  jubilees.  The  chance  of  disgorge-
ment was  small  when  he  had  eaten  up  the  inheritance.  3.  Family  extermination.  We
all  like  to  perpetuate  our  name  and  family.  The  Hebrew  had  this  feeling  in  almost
uEparalleled  strength.  To  die  childless  was  with  him  the  sum  of  all  disaster.  What
more  appropriate  than  that  it  should  wait  on  idolatry,  "  the  sum  of  all  sin  "  ?  4.  2>m-
honow^  death.  Dying  in  a  strange  country,  both  Jacob  and  Joseph  made  provision
for  being  buried  in  their  own  land  (Gen,  xlvii.  30 ;  1.  25 ;  Heb.  xL  22).  No  Jaw  could
die  happy  expecting  burial  in  a  heathen  country.  Exposure  to  such  a  fate  would  cap
the  climax  of  Amaziah's  wretchedness.  6.  Exile  for  all  Israel.  They  had  polluted
their  land,  and  were  unworthy  longer  to  remain  in  it.  They  had  become  assimilated
to  the  heathen  in  their  character  and  ways,  and  would  be  associated  with  them  yet  on'
closer  terms.  It  was  a  holiday  heathenism  they  were  in  love  with,  and  they  would  be
cured  of  their  ^encAon*  by  a  sight  of  it  in  its  working  dress.

IV.  A  CLBNCHiNO  AEGUMENT.  "  The  word  of  Jehovah."  It  was  Amos  who  spoke
it ;  but  the  word  was  God's.  And  it  cannot  be  broken.  The  Divine  truth  is  pledged
to  it.  The  Divine  energy  is  lodged  in  it.  The  Divine  purpose  is  coached  in  it.  The
thing  it  affirms  is  potentially  a  fact.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES.

Ver.  3. — Intercessory  prayer.  In  the  language  which  the  prophet  employed  in  his
appeal  to  God,  he  copied  that  of  the  great  leader  and  lawgiver  of  his  nation ;  and  ha
was  probably  encouraged  by  remembering  that  Moses  had  not  pleaded  for  Israel  in  vain.

I.  The  pbomptino  to  intercbssort  prater.  Why  should  one  man  plead  with  God
on  another's  behalf?  It  is  evident  that  there  is  in  human  nature  not  only  a  principle
of  self-love,  but  also  a  principle  of  sympathy  and  benevolence.  Amos  interceded  for
the  nation  from  which  he  sprang,  in  which  he  was  interested,  and  which  was  endeared
to  him  by  sacred  associations.     He  was  well  aware  of  his  countrymen's  offences,  and  of


150  TUK  BJOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  vn.  1—17.


God's  just  displeasure  with  them.  He  knew  and  had  foretold  that  retribution  should
befall  them.  Yet  he  entreated  mercy — a  withholding  of  judgment,  a  little  respite  at
the  least.     He  identified  himself  with  the  sinful,  and  sought  forbearance.

II.  The  ground  op  confidence  in  intebcessort  prayer.  Amos  could  not  ask
for  the  withholding  of  punishment  on  the  ground  that  punishment  was  undeserved ;
for  he  confessed  that  the  people's  sin  had  merited  chastening.  His  reliance  was  not
upon  justice,  but  upon  mercy.  It  was  forgiveness  he  besought;  and  forgiveness  pre-
sumes disobedience  on  tlie  part  of  the  subject  and  offence  taken  on  the  part  of  the
ruler.  In  pleading  for  our  fellow-men,  as  in  pleading  for  ourselves,  we  have  to  rely
upon  the  pity  and  loving-kindness  of  our  God.

,  III.  The  plea  by  which  interobssort  pbayeb  is  urged.  "Who  is  Jacob?  "is
the  language  of  the  prophet.  "  Who  is  Jacob,  that  he  should  stand,  that  he  should
endure,  if  such  a  visitation  befall  him  ?  He  is  feeble  and  impoverished."  Thus,  whilst
the  main  reliance  of  him  who  intercedes  must  ever  be  upon  the  character  aurl  promises
of  the  Eternal,  he  will  naturally  bring  before  God — ^as  well  known  to  the  Omniscient —
the  weakness  and  helplessness  of  those  whose  interest  he  would  promote.  God  is  not
as  man.  Men  sometimes  are  found  willing  to  favour  the  great,  though  they  are  indiffer-
ent to  the  woes  of  the  obscure ;  whilst  with  God  need,  poverty,  and  helplessness  are  a
commendation  to  compassion  and  assistance.

IV.  The  successful  issue  of  intercessory  pbateh.  The  entreaty  of  the  prophet
was  not  in  vain.  The  calamity — whether  we  undc  rstand  it  literally,  as  a  plague  of
locusts,  or  figuratively,  as  the  invasion  by  Pal — was  averted  and  withdrawn.  This  is
but  one  of  many  instances  in  Old  and  New  Testament  Soriptu/e  in  which  God  repre-
sents himself  as  willing  to  listen  to  the  pleading  of  the  pious  on  behalf  of  their
sinful  I'ellow-men.  It  is  one  office  of  the  Church  of  Christ  to  plead  perpetually  for
mankind,  uttering  the  plaintive  and  effectual  intercession,  "  Spare  them,  good
Lord  1 "— T.

Ver.  3. — The  repentance  of  Jehovah.  Whatever  it  was  of  which  the  Lord  is  here
said  to  have  repented,  the  meaning,  the  lesson,  is  the  same.  The  plague  of  locusts,  the
incursion  of  the  foe,  was  stayed,  and  it  was  stayed  in  consequence  of  the  prophet's
intercession,  and  because  of  the  pity  and  loving-kindness  of  Jehovah.

I.  No   CHANGE   IS   ASSERTED  IN  THE   CHARACTER,   THE   GOVERNMENT,   THE   WILL,   OF

THE  Eternal.  In  this  sense  the  Lord  is  not  a  man  that  be  should  repent.  Whilst
all  men  are  subject  not  only  to  vicissitudes  of  circumstances,  but  to  variations  in  dis-
position, and  even  in  principles  of  action,  God  is  a  stranger  to  all  such  mutability.
"  I,"  says  he,  "am  the  Lord  that  changeth  not."  Well  for  us  is  it  that  this  is  so;  that
we  have  not  to  do  with  a  mutable,  a  capricious  deity.  Because  he  is  the  Lord  that
changeth  not,  therefore  the  sons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed.

II.  But  all  the  threats  of  the  Divine  Judge  aee  conditional  upon  human
CONDUCT.  The  whole  of  revelation  bears  out  this  statement.  What  God  commands
he  enforces  with  the  promise  of  reward  and  with  the  threat  of  punishment.  This  is  in
accordance  with  his  character  and  position  as  the  Moral  Governor  of  his  universe.  He
does  not,  as  an  earthly  tyrant  might  do,  take  pleasure  in  inflicting  punishment  upon
any  of  his  dependent  creatures.  On  the  contrary,  he  desireth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner.
If  the  threatened  respond  to  the  appeal  of  Heaven,  if  they  turn  from  their  wickedness,
they  shall  surely  live,  and  not  die.  He  repenteth  him  of  the  evil,  and  is  favourable
and  forgiving  towards  the  penitent.

III.  The  Divine  repentance  demands  the  adoration  and  the  praise  op  those
WHO  owe  to  it  their  salvation.  There  is  not  one  child  of  Adam  who  is  not
indebted  to  the  repentance  of  Jehovah  for  the  sp'arinj;  of  life,  for  long-suScring,  for
the  aversion  of  judgment.  In  fact,  but  for  this,  the  original  sentence  against  the  sinner
must  have  been  fulfilled,  and  the  race  of  mankind  must  have  perished.  Every  succes-
sive interposition  of  Divine  mercy  has  been  the  evidence  of  that  relenting  which
exclaims,  "How  shall  I  give  thee  up?"  And  the  advent  and  sacrifice  of  Immanuel,
the  mediatorial  scheme,  the  redemption  of  mankind,  the  recovery  of  the  lost,  are  all  to
be  attributed  to  this  same  cause.  The  fountain  of  salvation  must  be  discovered  in  the
repentance  of  the  Unchanging,  It  is  a  paradox ;  but  it  is  a  paradox  honouring  to  Ood
•nd  life-giving  to  man. — T.


I      VB.  YU.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa  151

Vers.  7 — ^9. — The  plumb-line  of  judgment.  The  pictorial  style  of  Amos  here  sets
before  us  in  an  impressive  and  memorable  way  a  great  truth.  Whether  in  a  dream  or
In  a  prophetic  ecstasy,  the  prophet  beheld  one  with  a  plumb-line  standing  by  a  wall.
He  recognized  in  the  wall  the  palaces,  the  temples,  the  city  ramparts  of  Samaria ;  in
the  figure,  a  representation  of  the  eternal  Ruler  of  the  nations ;  in  the  plumb-line,  the
emblem  of  just  and  orderly  procedure.  And  a  voice  explained  the  vision  as  predictive
of  the  destruction  and  ruin  of  the  capital  of  Israel,  in  execution  of  the  decree  of  Divine
justice  against  the  unfaithful,  sinful,  rebellious,  and  impenitent  people.

I.  The  sin  of  man  mat  BXHArsT  the  patience  of  God.  It  must  not,  indeed,  be
supposed  that  the  Divine  nature  is  susceptible  of  capricious  changes,  such  as  men  are
liable  to  experience.  But  we  have  to  consider  God  as  the  moral  Governor  of  the
nations  of  mankind.  And  we  are  taught  that  he  is,  as  we  say,  in  earnest  in  the
laws  which  he  promulgates,  and  in  the  promises  and  threats  by  which  he  accompanies
them.  He  will  not  continue  to  threaten,  and  then  falsify  his  own  words,  by  withhold-
ing punishment  from  those  who  withhold  repentance.  With  no  weariness,  with  no
irritability,  but  with  a  righteous  judgment  and  a  compassionate  heart,  he  will  execute
his  threats..

IL  The  jubt  BBTBrBurioN  of  God  is  accordisq  to  UNCHANonra  and  inflexiblb
BULEB  OF  BIOHTEOUSNESS.  In  humau  punishment  there  is  often  an  element  of  caprice
and  an  element  of  vindictiveness.  From  the  Divine  mind  both  are  for  ever  absent.
No  sinner  can  complain,  or  ever  will  be  able  to  complain,  that  he  has  been  punished
beyond  his  deserts.  On  the  contrary,  he  will  ever  recognize  that  wisdom  and  right-
eousness have  characterized  all  the  appointments  of  the  eternal  King.  The  plumb-line
is  employed  not  only  in  construction  but  in  destruction.  And  God  who  has  made
men's  moral  nature,  and  who  rules  over  it  and  in  it,  will  not  violate  his  principles  of
righteousness  in  the  administration  of  his  government  or  in  the  execution  of  his
sentences.

IIL  The  bightbodsness  of  God  is  a  powebpul  encoubagement  to  bbpentanob
AND  OBEDIENCE.  It  is  a  dissuaslve  from  sin  apd  impenitence,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a
guarantee  that  rebellion  shall  not  go  unpunished.  It  is  an  inducement  to  repentance,
for  it  is  part  of  God's  unchanging  purpose  that  the  penitent  and  submissive  shall
receive  pardon  and  acceptance.  Aud  it  is  not  to  be  forgotten  that  God's  purposes  of
mercy  are  as  much  distinguished  by  law  as  are  his  purposes  of  punishment.  Mercy
is  in  accordance  with  the  "  plumb-line "  of  Divine  righteousness,  and  in  his  gospel
God  appears,  as  he  is,  just  and  "  the  Justifier  of  him  who  believeth  in  Jesus." — T.

Vers.  14,  16. — The  herdsman  leeomes  a  prophet.  The  simple  dignity  of  Amos's
reply  to  Amaziah  must  strike  every  reader  with  admiration.  The  priest  of  Bethel
treated  him  as  a  professional  prophet,  who  had  a  calling  which  he  was  constrained  to
fulfil  in  some  place  or  other.  But  Amos  did  not  prophesy  because  he  had  been  trained
to  the  prophetic  vocation ;  he  prophesied  because  the  Lord  constrained  him  to  do  so.
The  Lord  had  made  him  very  sensitive  to  the  prevailing  sins  of  his  countrymen,  had
sent  him  with  a  message  of  warning  to  the  court  of  Samaria,  and  had  imparted  to  him
supernatural  qualifications  for  the  fulfilment  of  this  sacred  ministry.

I.  God  is  not  dependent  upon  education  ob  lbabninq  fob  the  qualification
OF  THE  AGENTS  HE  SELECTS.  Amos  was  not  the  first  or  the  last  unlettered,  intellectu-
ally uncultivated  man  employed  by  Infinite  Wisdom  upon  a  high  and  sacred  ministry
of  usefulness.  "There  were  in  Palestine  "  schools  of  the  prophets,"  but  in  these  Amos
was  Bot  trained.  The  spiritual  power,  which  is  the  true  "  note  "  of  a  prophetic  calling,
is  not  confined  to  those  who  are  reared  in  seats  of  learning,  who  have  acquired  the
scholarship  which  is  imparted  by  the  intellectual  discipline  of  school  and  university.

II.  God  can,  howeveb,  give  an  education  and  tbaininq  of  his  own,  effective
FOB  THE  PUBP08E8  OF  A  SPIBITUAL  MINISTRY.  It  is  a  commou  mistake  to  suppose  that
those  who  have  not  been  educated  in  the  way  which  is  familiar  to  us  have  not  been
educated  at  all.  The  Lord  taught  Amos  in  the  solitude  of  the  fields,  the  valleys,  the
hills  of  Judaea,  as  he  tended  the  cattle,  as  he  gathered  the  fruit  of  the  syoomore.  His
education  was,  in  a  sense,  very  thorough.  It  gave  him  insight  into  the  mighty  works
of  the  Creator,  into  his  wonderful  ways  in  dealing  with  the  children  of  men,  into  the
Mcrets  of  the  h\unan  heart.    His  writings  are  a  sufficient  Droof  of  his  famili^ty  with


152  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  to.  1—17.

the  works  and  ways  of  God.  His  sublime  descriptions  of  natural  scenery,  of  6h«
heavens  and  the  earth,  his  minute  acquaintance  with  the  processes  of  growth  and  of
husbandly, his  knowledge  of  the  human  heart  and  all  its  conflicts, — these  are  evidences
that  his  mind  was  not  uninformed  or  untrained.

III.  An  unlettered  but  ditinblt  tauqht  natdbb  may  be  a  blessino  to  men,
AND  MAY  BBiNQ  GLOKY  TO  GoD.  The  scrvice  which  Amos  rendered  to  Israel,  to  Jndah,
to  the  Church  of  God  in  subsequent  ages,  is  a  proof  that  Gud  can  use  inrtruments,
which  seem  to  man's  wisdom  unsuitable,  in  order  to  effect  his  own  purposes.  The
power  of  this  prophet's  ministry  is  unquestionable.  To  some  extent  his  message  was
heeded ;  and  that  it  was  not  more  effective  was  not  owing  to  any  fault  in  him,  but
rather  to  the  hardness  of  heart  which  distinguished  those  to  whom  he  was  seut.  At
the  same  time,  there  was  so  manifest  an  evidence  of  Divine  power  in  the  life  and  work
of  Amos  as  must  have  impressed  all  who  knew  him  with  the  conviction  that  the
power  of  God  was  upon  him.  A  Divine  election.  Divine  qualifications,  may  be  as  really
present  in  the  case  of  a  minister  of  religion  who  has  enjoyed  every  social  and  edu-
cational advantage,  as  in  the  case  of  him  who  is  called  from  the  plough  to  prophesy  in
the  name  of  the  Lord.  But  tiie  impression  upon  the  popular  mind  is  in  the  former
case  far  more  deep,  and  naturally  so.  Thus  God  is  honoured,  whilst  witness  is  borne
ii  him  before  men,  and  the  cause  of  righteousness  is  maintained  and  advanced. — ^T.

Ver.  15. — Prophecy.  Amos  was  one  of  the  "  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets,"
who  once  witnessed  for  God  on  earth,  and  who  now  praise  God  in  heaven.  There  was
a  long  succession  of  prophets  in  Hebrew  history,  and  especially  during  one  epoch  of
that  history.  The  Christian  dispensation  has  also  enjoyed  the  benefit  of  prophetic
gifts  and  prophetic  ministrations.

I.  The  Author  and  the  authority  of  pbopheoy.  No  true  prophet  ever  spake  the
counsels  of  his  own  wisdom  merely.  The  preface  to  a  prophetic  utterance  is  this:
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  "  The  Lord  took  me,"  says  Amos,  in  his  simple,  graphic  style,
"  as  I  was  following  the  flock,  and  the  Lord  said  unto  me.  Go,  prophesy."  1.  The
prophet  was  called  and  appointed  by  the  Lord  of  all  truth  and  power.  2.  The  prophet
was  entrusted  by  the  Lord  with  a  special  messa°;e.  It  was  these  facts  that  aggravated
the  guilt  of  those  who  were  inattentive  to  the  Divine  message,  who  rejected  and  perse-
cuted the  Divine  messengers.

II.  The  matter  and  bubstancb  of  prophecy.  The  function  of  the  prophet  wai
to  utter  forth  the  mind  and  will  of  the  Eternal.  Sometimes  it  is  supposed  that  it  was
his  special  duty  to  declare  things  to  come,  to  foretell.  Doubtless  the  prophet  was  often
directed  to  warn  of  evils  about  to  descend  upon  the  guilty  and  impenitent.  But  to
foretell  was  not  so  much  his  distinctive  office  as  to  tell  forth  the  commands  and  the
counsels  of  the  Lord.

III.  The  prophet  ab  the  vehicle  of  prophecy.  Personality,  loving  intelligence
and  will,  a  truly  human  nature, — such  was  the  condition  to  be  fulfilled  by  the  chosen
vehicle  of  the  Divine  purposes.  Men  of  temperaments  as  different  as  Elijah  and
Jeremiah  were  selected  by  him  who  can  make  use  of  every  instrument  for  the  fulfil-
ment of  his  own  purposes.  One  thing  was  necessary,  that  the  prophet's  whole  nature
should  be  penetrated  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  he  should  give  himself  up  entirely  to
become  the  minister  and  the  messenger  of  Eternal  Wisdom.

IV.  The  methods  of  pbopheoy.  Speech  was  no  doubt  the  chief  means  by  which
the  prophet  conveyed  his  message  to  his  fellow-men ;  speech  of  every  kind,  bold  and
gentle,  figurative  and  plain,  commanding  and  persuasive.  Life  was  no  inconsiderable
part  of  prophecy.  There  were  cases  in  which  the  very  actions  and  habits  of  the
prophet  were  a  testimony  to  men.  SymboU  were  not  infrequently  employed  in  order
to  impart  lessons  which  could  be  better  taught  thus  than  by  the  logical  forms  of  speech.
God  made  use  of  every  method  which  human  nature  allowed  and  the  conditions  of  tha
prophetic  ministry  suggested.

V.  The  purport  of  prophecy.  An  agency  so  special  and  so  highly  qualified  must
have  aimed  at  an  end  proportionably  important  and  valuable.     It  may  be  noted  that :

1.  Prophecy  was  largely  intended  to  lead  sinful  people  to  repentance  and  reformation.

2.  To  encourage  the  obedient  and  spiritual  amidst  difficulties  and  persecutions.  3.
To  introduce  higher  views  of  religion  than  those  current  at  the  time,  and  thus  ta


OH.  Tn.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  168


prepare  the  way  for  the  ^spensation  of  the  MesBiah,  for  the  religion  of  the  Spirit,  for
the  universal  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteougness. — ^T.

Ver.  17. — A  polluted  land.  If  in  Amos  we  have  an  example  of  a  faithful  prophet,
in  Amaziah  we  have  an  example  of  an  unfaithful  priest.  One  servant  of  the  Lord
seems  in  this  narrative  to  he  set  against  another ;  but,  in  fact,  the  priest  was  a  nominal
servant,  whilst  the  prophet  was  sincere  and  devoted.  The  fate  predicted  for  Amaziah
was  indeed  terrible ;  but  we  discern  in  its  appointment,  not  the  malice  of  a  human  foe,
but  the  justice  of  a  Divine  Ruler.  Among  the  circumstances  which  enlianced  the
horror  of  this  fate  is  mentioned  the  pollution  of  the  heathen  land  in  which  the  wiclced
priest  should  close  his  life.

I.  A  LAND  MAT  BE  POLHTTKD  NOTWITHSTANDINa  ITS  WEALTH,  LUIDBIOUSNBSS,  AND

roLiTiOAL  EMINENCE  AND  POWER.  Some  of  the  ancient  monarchies  of  the  world  were
no  less  remarkable  for  moral  corruption  than  for  grandeur,  prosperity,  and  military
strength.  Such  was  the  case  with  Assyria.  And  it  is  well  to  be  upon  our  guard
against  the  deceptiveness  of  external  appearances.  The  semblance  of  national  great-
ness may  mislead  us  in  our  judgment.  The  surface  may  deceive ;  there  may  be  much
to  outward  view  fascinating  and  commanding.  Tet  beneath  the  surface  there  may
be  injustice,  oppression,  selfishness,  wretchedness,  and  disunion ;  the  land  may  be
polluted  by  vice  and,  if  not  by  idolatry,  yet  by  practical  atheism.

II.  A    LAND    HAT   BK   POLLUTED    ALTHOITOH   IT    BE    CHOSEN   AS   THE    SCENE   OF    TBI

EXECUTION  OF  PUBF0BE8  OF  DiviNE  JUDOMENT.  It  must  uot  be  supposed  that,  because
certain  nations  were  appointed  by  Divine  providence  to  be  the  ministers  of  retribution
upon  Israel,  those  nations  must  have  been  morally  admirable  or  even  superior  to  that
upon  which  their  power  was  exercised  for  purposes  of  chastisement.  The  records  of  the
Old  Testament  Scriptures  are  decisive  upon  this  point.  Idolatrous  people  were  per-
mitted to  scourge  Israel  for  idolatry.  A  poUnted  land  was  to  be  the  means  of  cleans-
ing those  defiled  by  sin.

III.  'i'O  CLEANSE  A  LAND  FROM  POLLUTION  18  THE  RIOHEBT  END  WHICH  THE  PATBIOTIO

AND  BELiaious  CAN  BET  BEFOBB  THEM.  Splcudour,  opulence,  military  power,  are  in
the  view  of  the  enlightened  as  nothing  compared  with  the  righteousness  whioh
exalteth  a  nation. — ^T.

Vers.  1 — Q.— Revelation  and  prayer,  "  Thus  hath  the  Lord  Ood  showed  unto  me,"
etc.  This  portion  of  the  Book  of  Amos  (ch.  vii.  and  viii.)  contains  four  symbolical
visions  respecting  successive  judgments  that  were  to  be  inflicted  on  the  kingdom  of
Israel.  They  were  delivered  at  Bethel,  and  in  all  probability  at  the  commencement
of  the  prophet's  ministry.  Each  of  them,  as  it  follows  in  the  series,  is  more  severe
than  the  preceding.  The  first  presented  to  the  mental  eye  of  the  prophet  a  swarm  of
young  locusts,  which  threatened  to  cut  off  all  hope  of  the  harvest  (vers.  1 — 3) ;  the
second,  a  fire  which  effected  a  imiversal  conflagration  (vers.  4 — 6) ;  the  third,  a  plumb-
line  ready  to  be  applied  to  mark  out  the  edifices  that  were  to  be  destroyed  (vers.
7 — 9) ;  and  the  fourth,  a  basket  of  ripe  fruit,  denoting  the  near  and  certain  destruction
of  the  kingdom  (ch.  viii.  1 — 3).  The  intervening  eight  verses  which  conclude  the
seventh  chapter  (vers.  10 — XT')  contain  an  account  of  the  interruption  of  Amos  by
Amaziah  the  priest  of  Bethel,  whose  punishment  is  specially  predicted.  In  point  of  style,
this  portion  differs  from  that  of  itie  rest  of  the  Ixwk,  being  almost  exclusively  historical
and  dialogistic  (Henderson).  In  the  words  we  have  two  subjects  of  thought—^  Divine
revelation  leading  to  human  prayer,  and  human  prayer  leading  to  a  Divine  revelation.
I.  A  Divine  rbvelatiok  leading  to  human  pbateb.  1.  Here  is  a  Divine  reve-
lation. What  is  the  revelation  ?  It  is  a  vision  of  judgments  made  to  the  mind  of  the
Erophet.  Both  judgments  are  symbolically  represented.  (1)  Destruction  by  grass-
oppers  at  the  beginning,  or  the  "  shooting  up  of  the  latter  growth  after  the  king's
mowings."  *  The  prophet  saw  the  devouring  grasshoppers  eating  up  the  grass  of  the
*  As  we  write,  glancing  at  the  Timet,  we  are  stmck  with  the  following  statements
leferring  to  such  judgments:  "Australian  papers  state  that  in  the  Biverina  district  the
grasshoppers,  or  locusts,  have  been  very  troublesome  recently,  not  only  destroying  cropi,  but
filling  up  wells  and  water-holes,  and  even  consuming  textile  fabrics,  inoh  •■  blinds  and
window-ourtains,  is  &•  honses."


16*  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [col  to.  1—17*


land.  No  agenta  are  too  insignificant  for  the  employment  of  JehovaK  He  can  inflict
temblo  judfimenta  by  insects.  Here  was  a  prospect  of  famine  set  before  the  prophet.
(2)  D.-8truction  by  fire.  ".Thus  hath  the  Lord  God  showed  unto  me :  and,  behold,  tht
Lord  God  called  to  contend  by  fire,  aad  it  devoured  the  great  deep,  and  did  eat  up  •
part."  Perhaps  this  represents  a  great  drought,  the  sun's  fire  burning  up  all  regetation.
It  is  said  this  fire  "  devoured  the  great  deep."  It  drank  up  the  pools,  the  lakes,  the
rivers.  Ttius  in  two  symbolical  forma  is  a  Divine  revelation  made  to  the  mind  of
Amos.  Most  terrible  and  alarming  is  the  prospect  of  his  country,  thus  divinely  spread
out  before  him.  God  makes  revelations  of  his  mind  to  his  people.  "  Shall  I  hide  from
I  Abraham  the  thing  that  I  do?"  2.  Here  is  a  human  prayer.  What  is  the  prayer?
Here  it  is  :  "0  Lord  God,  forgive,  I  beseech  thee :  by  whom  shall  Jacob  arise  ?  for  he
is  aaiall."  And  again,  in  ver.  5,  "0  Lord  God,  cease,  I  beseech  thee  :  by  whom  shall
Jacob  arise  ?  for  he  is  small."  "  Forgive."  This  calamity  is  brought  on  by  the  sin  of
the  nation.  Forgive  the  sin;  remove  the  moral  cause  of  the  judgment.  "  By  whom
shall  Jacob  arise?"  Or,  better,  "How  can  Jacob  stand?  for  he  is  small."  Jacob's —
the  nation's — weakness  is  the  plea  of  the  prayer  for  forgiveness.  The  Israelites  had
been  greatly  reduced  by  internal  commotions  and  hostile  invasions,  and  were  now  on
the  point  of  being  attacked  by  the  Assyrians,  but  purchased  their  retreat  by  a  payment
of  a  thousand  talents  of  silver  (2  Kings  xv.  19,  20).  The  nation  was  now  so  weakened
that  it  was  unable  to  stand  before  another  invader.  How  can  Jacob  stand  ?  The  time
has  come  when  men  may  well  ask  this  question  in  relation  to  the  Church.  How  can
it  stand?  The  numbers  are  decreasing,  viewed  in  relation  to  the  growth  of  the  popula-
tion. By  whom  shall  it  arise  ?  Not  by  statesmen,  scientists,  ritualists,  priests.  A
new  order  of  men  is  required  to  enable  the  Church  to  stand.     Heaven  raise  them  up]

n.  HnuAN  PBATEB  LEADiNa  TO  A  DiviNE  REVELATION.  The  prophet  prays,  and  the
great  God  makes  a  new  revelation — a  revelation  of  mercy.  "  The  Lord  repented  for
this :  It  shall  not  be,  saith  the  Lord."  "  The  Lord  repented  for  this :  This  also  shall
not  be,  saith  the  Lord  God."  "  Bepented,"  which  means  merely  that  he  appeared  to
Amos  as  if  he  repented.  The  Immutable  One  changeth  not.  Though  we  are  far
enough  from  holding  the  absurdity  that  human  prayer  effects  any  alteration  in  the
ordinances  of  nature  or  the  purposes  of  the  Almighty,  we  nevertheless  hold  with  a
tenacious  faith  the  doctrine  that  a  man  gets  from  Ood  by  prayer  that  which  he  would
not  get  without  it.  Indeed,  in  every  department  of  life  man  gets  from  the  Almighty,
by  a  certain  kind  of  activity,  that  which  he  would  never  obtain  without  the  effort.  A
man  has  a  field  which  he  has  never  tilled,  and  on  which  Providence  has  bestowed  no
crop  for  many  a  long  year.  He  tills  it  this  year,  and  in  autumn  God  crowns  it  with
his  goodness.  Another  man  has  no  health;  for  many  years  he  has  neglected  the  con-
ditions of  physical  vigour,  and  be  is  infirm  and  afflicted.  This  year  he  attends
rigorously  to  the  laws  of  bis  physical  well-being.  He  takes  the  proper  exercise,  the
right  food,  the  pure  air,  and  he  feels  his  infirmities  and  his  pains  decrease,  and  new
vigour  pulsating  through  his  veins.-  Another  man  has  never  enjoyed  the  light  of
Bivine  knowledge;  his  soul  has  been  living  in  the  region  of  indolence;  he  has  neglected
all  the  means  of  intelligence.  He  alters  his  course  and  sets  to  work ;  he  reads  and
thinks,  studies  God's  holy  book,  and  prays ;  he  feels  his  nature  gradually  brightening
under  the  genial  rays  of  truth.  Thus  everywhere  God  reveals  to  man  hi  goodness  in
connection  with  his  activity,  which  never  comes  without  human  effort.  It  is  so  in
prayer.  "  The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much."  It  puts
the  soul  in  that  angle  on  which  the  Divine  light  falls,  in  that  soil  in  which  its  inteU
lectual  and  moral  powers  will  grow.     "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."

"  More,  things  are  wrought  by  prayer
Than  this  world  dreams  of.     Wherefore  let  thy  voioa
Bise  like  a  fountain  for  me  night  and  day.
For  what  are  men  better  than  sheep  or  goats.
That  nourish  a  blind  life  within  the  brain.
If,  knowing  God,  they  lift  not  hands  of  prayer
Both  for  themeelveB  and  those  who  call  them  friends  ?
For  so  the  whole  round  earth  is  every  way
Bound  by  gold  chains  about  the  feet  of  God."

(Tennyson.)

DtT.


00.  Tn.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  01*  AM08.  165

Vers.  7 — 9. — Man't  moral  character.  "  Thu«  he  showed  me :  and,  behold,  the  Lord
stood  upon  a  wall  made  by  a  plumb-line,  with  a  plumb-line  in  his  hand,"  etc.  "  Behold,
the  Lord  stood  upon  a  wall  made  by  a  plumb-line,"  viz.  perpendicular.  "  Amos."  "  The
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his"  (2  Tim.  IL  19),  as  he  saith  to  Moses,  '•  1  know  thee
by  name  "  (Exod.  xxxiii.  12, 17).  "  He  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name  "  (John  x.  3).
"  Behold,  I  will  set  a  plumb-line  in  the  midst  of  my  people  Israel."  No  longer  are  the
symbols,  as  in  the  former  two,  stated  generally ;  this  one  is  expressly  applied  to  Israel.
God's  long-suffering  is  worn  out  by  Israel's  perversity ;  so  Amos  ceases  to  intercede,
as  Abraham  did  in  the  case  of  Sodom.  The  plummet-line  was  used,  not  only  in  build-
ing, but  in  destroying  houses  (2  Kings  xxi,  13 ;  Isa.  xxviii.  17 ;  xxxiv.  11 ;  Lam.  ii.  8).
It  denotes  that  God's  judgments  are  measured  out  by  the  exactest  rules  of  j  ustice.  Here
it  is  placed  in  the  midst  of  Israel ;  t.e.  the  judgment  is  not  tu  be  confined  to  an  outer
part  of  Israel,  as  by  Tiglath-Pileser — it  is  to  reach  the  very  centre.  This  was  fulfilled
when  Shalmaneser,  after  a  three  years'  siege  of  Samaria,  took  it,  in  the  ninth  year  of
Hoshea  the  King  of  Israel,  and  carried  away  Israel  captive  finally  to  Assyria  (2  Kings
xviL  3,  5,  6,  23).  "  I  will  not  again  pass  by  them  any  more."  I  will  not  forgive
them  any  more  (oh.  viii.  2  j  Prov.  xix.  11 ;  Mioah  vii.  18).  "  And  the  high  places,"
dedicated  to  idols,  "  of  Isaac."  They  boasted  of  following  the  example  of  their  fore-
father Isaac,  in  erecting  high  places  at  Beersheba  (ch.  v.  6) ;  but  he  and  Abraham
erected  them  before  the  temple  was  appointed  at  Jerusalem.  But  these  Israelites  did
80  after  the  temple  had  been  fixed  as  the  only  place  for  sacrifices  and  worship.  The
mention  of  Isaac  and  Israel  is  in  all  probability  intended  simply  to  express  the  names
which  their  posterity  boasted  in,  as  if  they  would  ensure  their  safety;  but  these
shall  not  save  them.  Homiletically,  we  may  use  these  words  as  suggesting  certain
things  concerning  man's  moral  character,

I.  There  is  a  kind  of  mabonbt  in  the  formation  of  man's  ohabacteb.  "  Thus  he
showed  me :  and,  behold,  the  Lord  stood  upon  a  wall  made  by  a  plumb-line,  with  a
plumb-line  in  his  hand.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Amos,  what  seest  thou  ?  And  I
said,  A  plumb-line."  A  plumb-line  is  an  architectural  instrument ;  and  the  wall  on
which  the  Lord  stood  was  being  measured  by  a  plumb-line.  Moral  masonry  is  sug-
gested. Man's  character  may  be  compared  to  masonry  in  several  respects.  1.  It  has
one/owndation.  Walls  are  built,  not  upon  two,  but  upon  one  foundation.  So  is  every
man's  character.  There  is  some  one  principle  on  which  it  is  organized,  some  one  fount
to  which  you  can  trace  all  the  streams  of  human  activity.  The  principle  is  the  para-
mount affection  of  the  man.  Whatever  he  loves  most,  governs  him.  If  he  loves
pleasure  most,  his  character  is  sensual ;  if  he  loves  money  most,  his  character  is  worldly ;
u  he  loves  wisdom  most,  his  character  is  philosophic;  if  he  loves  God  most,  his
character  is  Divine,  etc.  2.  It  has  a  variety  of  materials.  In  a  building  there  are
earth,  lime,  stones,  bricks,  wood,  iron,  etc.  These  are  brought  together  into  a  whole.
Character  is  not  formed  of  one  set  of  actions,  thoughts,  impulses,  volitions.  All  kinds
of  acts  enter  into  it,  mental,  moral,  muscular,  personal,  political,  religious — all  are
materials  in  the  building.  3.  It  is  a  gradual  advancement.  You  cannot  build  a  house
in  a  day ;  stone  by  stone  it  must  advance :  so  the  formation  of  character  is  a  slow  work.
Men  cannot  become  either  devils  or  saints  at  once,  cannot  spring  into  these  characters
by  a  bound.  It  takes  time  to  build  up  a  Satan,  and  a  longer  time  still  to  build  up
a  seraph  within  us.     Acts  make  habits;  habits  make  character.

II.  There  is  a  Divinb  standard  by  which  to  test  man's  oharaoteb.  Here  is
the  great  God  standing  on  the  wall  with  a  "plumb-line"  in  his  hand,  with  which  to
test  his  people  Israel.  What  is  the  Divine  "  plumb-line"  by  which  to  test  character  ?
Here  it  is:  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  unto  you,  do  ye  even  so  unto
them."  Or,  perhaps  more  intelligibly,  the  moral  character  of  Christ :  "  If  any  man
have  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his."  That  spirit  is  love  for  God  and  men.
Without  love  we  are  "nothing."  Here  is  a  plumb-line.  Are  you  Ohristlyf  If  not,
your  moral  masonry  is  not  architecturally  sound  or  symmetric.  He  who  now  stood
before  Amos  on  the  wall,  with  a  "  plumb-line  in  his  hand,"  stands  to-day  amongst  men
with  this  moral  test  of  character.

III.  There  is  a  terrible  ruin  foe  those  whose  characters  will  not  bear  thb
test  of  this  plumb-linb.  "  Behold,  I  will  set  a  plnmli-linc  in  the  midst  of  my  people
Israel :  I  will  not  again  pass  by  them  any  more :  and  the  high  places  of  Isaae  shall  be


16«  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oH.Tn.l-17i

desolate,  and  tbe  eanctnaries  of  Israel  shall  be  laid  waste ;  and  I  will  rise  against  tha
house  of  Jeroboam  with  the  sword."  See  this  test  applied  on  the  day  of  judgment,  as
represented  in  Matt.  xxv.  31 — 46,  "  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,"
etc.— D.  T.

Vers.  10 — 17. — Th«  conveniiorud  and  the  genuine  priests  of  a  people.  "Then
Amaziah  the  priest  of  Bethel  sent  to  Jeroboam  King  of  Israel,  saying,  Amos  hath
conspired  against  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  house  of  Israel :  the  land  is  not  able  to  bear
all  his  words,"  etc.  In  these  words  we  have  types.of  two  classes  of  priests  who  are  ever
found  amongst  the  people.

I.  The  conventional  priest  of  a  people.  Amaziah  was  the  recognized,  authorized,
conventional  priest  of  Bethel — ^the  chief  priest  of  the  royal  sanctuary  of  the  calves  at
Bethel.  He  was  the  recognized  religious  teacher — a  kind  of  archbishop.  We  find  this
man  doing  three  things  which  such  conventional  priests  have  done  in  all  ages,  and  are
doing  now.  1.  He  was  in  close  intimacy  with  the  king.  He  "  sent  to  Jeroboam  Kins
of  Israel."  Conventional  priests  have  always  an  eye  upward,  always  towards  kings  and
those  in  authority ;  they  have  generally  proved  ready  to  obey  their  behests,  study  their
caprices,  and  wink  at  their  abominations.  In  their  prayers  they  will  often  insult  the
Omniscient  by  describing  their  royal  masters,  whatever  their  immoralities,  as  "our
most  religious,"  "our  most  gracious  sovereign."  As  a  rule,  they  are  the  mere  creatures
of  kings.  2.  He  seeks  to  expel  an  independent  teacher  from  the  dominion  of  the  king.
He  seeks  to  do  this  in  two  ways.  (1)  By  appealing  to  the  king.  He  does  this  in  a
spirit  that  has  ever  characterized  his  class — by  bringing  against  Amos  the  groundless
charge  of  treason.  "Amos  hath  conspired  against  thee  in  the  midst  of  the  house  of
Israel :  the  land  is  not  able  to  bear  all  his  words."  By  a  base  slander  he  endeavours
to  influence  the  king  against  the  true  teacher.  He  does  this :  (2)  By  alarming  the
prophet.  "  Amaziah  said  unto  Amos,  0  thou  seer,  go,  flee  thee  away  into  the  land  of
Judah,  and  there  eat  bread,  and  prophesy  there :  but  prophesy  not  again  any  more  at
Bethel :  for  it  is  the  king's  chapel,  and  it  is  the  king's  court."  It  does  not  appear  that
the  king  took  any  notice  of  the  message  which  this  authorized  religious  teacher  had
sent  him  concerning  Amos ;  hence,  in  order  to  carry  out  his  malignant  purpose,  he
addresses  the  prophet  and  says,  "  0  thou  seer,  go,  flee  thee  away."  Not  imagining
that  Amos  could  be  actuated  by  any  higher  principle  than  that  of  selfishness,  which
reigned  in  his  own  heart,  the  priest  advised  him  to  consult  his  safety  by  fleeing  across
the  frontier  into  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  where  he  might  obtain  his  livelihood  by  the
unrestrained  exercise  of  his  prophetical  gifts.  Here,  then,  we  have,  in  this  Amaziah,  a
type  of  many  so-called  authorized  religious  teachers  of  a  country.  Two  feelings  inspire
them — a  miserable  seruj'Ziiy  towards  their  rulers,  and  a  cruel  envy  towards  their  religious
rivals.  They  want  to  sweep  the  land  of  all  schismatics.  Thank  God,  the  days  of  tho
Amaziahs,  through  the  advancement  of  popular  intelligence,  are  drawing  to  a  close!

II.  Here  we  have  the  gendinb  pbiest  or  a  people.  Amos  seems  to  have  been
a  prophet  not  nationally  recognized  as  such.  He  was  no  professional  prophet.  Observe
three  things  concerning  the  prophet.  1.  He  is  not  ashamed  of  his  humhle  origin.  "1
was  no  prophet" — that  is, "  I  am  not  a  prophet  by  profession," — "  neither  was  I  a  prophet's
son."  By  the  son  of  a  prophet  he  means  a  disciple  or  pupil.  He  had  not  studied  in
any  prophetic  college.  On  the  contrary, "  I  am  nothing  but  a  poor  labouring  man  " — "  an
herdsman,  and  a  gatherer  of  syconiore  fruit."  No  true  prophet  is  ever  ashamed  of  his
origin,  however  humble.  As  a  rule,  the  greatest  teachers  of  the  world  have  struggled
up  from  the  legions  of  poverty  and  obscurity.  From  the  lower  grades  of  social  lile  the
Almighty  generally  selects  his  most  eminent  servants;  "not  many  mighty  does  he
call."  2.  He  is  conscious  of  the  Divinity  of  his  mission.  "  The  Lord  took  me  as  I
followed  the  flock,  and  the  Lord  said  un'io  me,  Go,  prophesy  unto  my  people  Israel."
Amos  seems  to  have  had  no  doubt  at  all  as  to  the  fact  that  the  Lord  called  him.  How
he  was  called  does  not  appear.  When  God  calls  a  man  to  work,  the  man  knows  it.
No  argument  will  convince  him  to  the  contrary.  The  conventional  t/iacher  may  say,
"  You  are  unauthorized,  unrecognized,  unordained ;  you  have  intruded  yourself  into  the
holy  calling."  But  the  true  teacher  knows  when  he  is  divinely  called,  and  under  this
impression  he  carries  on  his  work.  "The  Lord  took  me  as  I  followed  the  flock."  3.
In   the  name  of  Heaven  he  denounces  the  conventional  priesl.     In  return  for  thii


OH.  vm.  1— U.]


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


167


rebellion  against  .Jehovah,  Amos  foretells  for  the  priest  the  punishment  which  wi'J  fall
upon  him  when  the  judgment  shall  come  upon  Israel,  meeting  his  words,  "  Thou
Bayest,  Thou  shalt  not  prophesy,"  with  the  keen  retort,  "  Thus  saith  Jehova,h."  The
punishment  is  thus  described  in  ver.  17,  "  Thy  wife  shall  be  an  harlot  in  the  !ity,"  i.e.
at  the  taking  of  the  city  she  will  become  a  harlot  through  violation.  His  children
also  would, be  slain  by  the  foe,  and  his  landed  possessions  assigned  to  others,  viz.  to
the  fresh  settlers  in  the  land.  He  himself,  viz.  the  priest,  would  die  in  an  unclean
land,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  land  of  the  Gentiles ;  in  other  words,  would  be  carried  away
captive,  and  that  with  the  whole  nation,  the  carrying  away  of  which  is  repeated  by
Amos  in  the  words  which  the  priest  had  reported  to  the  king  (ver.  11)  as  a  sign  that
what  he  has  prophesied  will  assuredly  stand  (Delitzsch).

Conclusion.  To  which  class  of  teachers  dost  thou  belong,  my  brother?  That
represented  by  Amaziah,  who,  though  recognized  by  his  king  and  country  as  the  true
teacher,  was  nevertheless  destitute  of  loyalty  to  the  one  true  God  and  the  spirit  of  true
philanthropy  and  honest  manhood ;  or  that  represented  by  Amos,  who  although  a  poor
labourer,  unrecognized  by  his  country  as  a  true  teacher,  yet  was  called  of  God  and
manfully  fulfilled  his  Divine  mission  ?  Heaven  multiply  in  this  country  and  through-
out the  world  religious  teachers  of  this  Amos  type  1 — D.  T.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEU  VIIL


Vers.  1 — 14. — §  5.  In  the  fourth  vision,
the  hasleet  of  summer  fruit,  the  Lord  shows
that  the  people  is  ripe  for  judgment.  Ex-
plaining this  revelation,  Amos  denounces
the  oppression  and  greed  of  the  cliieftains
(vers,  i — 10),  and  yrams  them  that  those
who  despise  the  Word  of  God  shall  some
day  suffer  fr6m  a  famine  of  the  Word  (vers.
11—14).

Ver.  1. — A  basket  of  summer  fruit;
Septuagint,  &yyos  <|euToB,  "  a  fowler's
vessel;"  Vulgate,  uneinus  pomorum,  which
Jerome  explains, "  Siout  uncino  rami  arborum
detraliuntur  ad  poma  carpenda,  ita  ego
proxiinum  captivitatis  tempus  attraxi."
The  word  eheluh  is  taken  to  mean  "  a  basket
of  wickerwork;"  it  is  u&ed  for  "  a  cage"  in
Jer.  V.  27,  but  is  found  nowhere  else.  The
gathering  of  fruit  was  the  last  harvest  of
the  year,  and  thus  fitly  typified  the  final
punishment  of  Israel.  This  is  set  forth  by
the  play  on  the  word  in  the  next  verse.

Ter.  2.— The  end  (kets).  This  is  very
like  the  word  for  "  fruit "  (kaits).  Pass  by
(see  note  on  eh.  vii.  8).

Ver.  3. — The  songs  of  the  temple;
Septuagiut,  to.  ^arj/c^/xara  rod  yaov,  *'  the
paunels  of  the  temple ; "  Vulgate,  eardines
templi.  These  versions  point  lo  a  different
reading.  It  is  better  rendered,  "  the  songs
of  the  palace,"  referring  to  the  songs  of  the
revellers  mentioned  already  (ch.  vi.  5).
These  shall  be  changed  into  bowlings  of
lamentation  for  the  dead  which  lie  around
(comp.  ver.  10).  There  shall  be  many
dead  bodies.    The  Hebrew  is  more  forcible :


"Many  the  corpses;  in  every  place  he
hath  oast  them  forth.  Hush  I "  The  Lord
is  represented  as  casting  (lead  bodies  to  the
ground,  so  that  death  is  everywhere;  and
the  interjection  "  hush  I "  (comp.  oh.  vi.  10)
is  an  admonition  to  bend  beneath  the  hand
of  an  avenging  God  (comp.  Zeph.  i.  7).
Orelli  takes  it  as  an  expression  of  tlie  apathy
that  accompanies  severe  and  irremediable
Buffering — suifering  too  deep  for  words.
The  Greek  and  Latin  versions  take  this
onomatopoetic  word  has!  "hushl"  as  a
substantive.  Thus  the  Septuagint,  hrt^fiiifiia
<rumi]v,  "  I  will  oast  upon  them  silence ;  "
Vulgate,  projidetur  silenlium — an  expressive
rendering,  but  one  not  supported  by  gram-
matical cniisiderations.

Ver.  4.— The  prophet,  by  admonishing
the  grandees  of  their  iniquities,  which  they
will  not  cast  away,  shows  ho  w  ripe  they  are
for  judgment.  That  swallow  up;  better,
thai  pant  after  (ch.  ii.  6,  T),  like  a  beast
after  its  prey,  eager  to  devour.  Even  to
make  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail ;  and  cause
the  meek  of  the  land  to  fail.  They  grasp  at
the  property  of  the  unresisting  poor,  adding
field  to  field,  and  impoverishing  tliem  in
various  ways,  to  root  them  out  of  the  land.

Ver.  5. — When  1  expresses  impatience  and
desire,  as  in  the  hymn —

"  Thy  joys  when  shall  I  see  ?"

The  new  moon.  The  first  day  of  the
month  was  a  holiday,  on  which  all  trade
was  suspended.  It  is  not  mentioned  in
Exodus,  Leviticus,  or  Deuteronomy ;  but  its
observance  is  enjoined  in  Numb,  xxviii.  11,
and  various  notices  of  this  occur  in  later
Scriptures;  e.g.  1  Sam.  xx.  5;  2  Kings  iv.
23;  Hos.  ii.  11 ;  Col.  ii.  16.    These  greedy


168


THE   BOOK   OF   AMOS.


[on.  vm.  1 — 14.


BinnerB  kept  the  festivalB,  indeerl,  but  they
giudf:;e(i  the  time  given  to  them,  and  con-
sidered it  ns  wasted.  The  sabbath.  Com-
pare the  difficulties  with  which  Nehemiah
had  to  contend  in  upholding  the  sanctity
of  the  sabbath  (Neh.  x.  31;  xiii.  15—22).
May  set  forth ;  literally,  open ;  so  Septnagint,
Kol  a.vi)l^o/i€v  6ria'avp6i>.  The  word  expresses
tlie  opening  of  the  granaries  and  storehouses.
The  ephah,  by  which  corn  was  measured
(see  note  on  Mioah  vi.  10).  This  they
made  small,  and  so  gave  less  than  was
paid  for.  The  shekeL  The  weight  by  which
money  was  weighed.  This  they  made  great,
and  thus  gained  too  high  a  price  for  the
quantity  of  corn.  Coined  money  of  deter-
mined value  seems  not  to  have  been  used
before  the  return  from  Captivity,  all  payments
of  fixed  amount  previous  to  that  period  being
made  by  weighing  (comp.  Gen.  xxiil.  16;
xxxiii.  19;  xliii.  21;  Exod.  xxx.  13;  Isa.
xlvi.  6).  Falsifying  the  balances  by  deceit ;
better,  as  in  the  Revised  Version,  dealing
falsely  tvitli  halances  of  deceit.  To  increase
their  gains  they  falsified  their  scales  or
used  fraudulent  weights  (see  Lev.  xix.  36).
Thus  they  cheated  the  poor  probably  in
three  ways — by  small  measure,  exorbitant
price,  and  light  weight.

Ver.  6. — Buy  the  poor  for  silver  (comp.
ch.  ii.  6).  The  probable  meaning  is  that
they  so  reduced  the  poor  man  by  their
exactions  and  injustice,  that  he  was  com-
pelled to  pay  his  debt  by  selling  himself
into  slavery  (Lev.  xxv.  39;  Deut.  xv.  12).
For  a  pair  of  shoes.  For  the  smallest  debt
they  would  deal  in  this  harsh  manner.  The
refuse ;  literally,  that  which  fell  through  the
sieve;  Septuagint,  *ATrh  iravrhs  yswitlio/ros
iliTropevir6iJ,e8a,  "  We  will  trade  in  every  kind
of  produce;"  Vulgate,  Quisquilias frumenti
vendamus,  ' '  Lit  us  sell  the  refuse  of  corn."

Ver.  7. — Such  crimes  as  these,  which  sap
the  very  foundations  of  social  life,  shall
meet  with  vengeance.  The  Excellency  of
Jacob,  This  is  a  title  of  God  himself,  as
in  Hos.  V.  5;  vii.  10,  where  it  is  rendered
"pride."  Thug  the  Lord  is  said  to  swear
by  his  holiness  (oh.  iv.  2),  by  his  soul
(cli.  vi.  8;  comp.  1  Sam.  xv.  29).  So  here
lie  swears  by  himself,  who  is  the  Glory  and
Pride  of  Israel ;  as  truly  as  he  is  this,  he
will  punish.  The  Vulgate  treats  the  sentence
differently,  Juravit  in  tuperhium  Jacob,
i  e.  "Tlie  Lord  hath  sworn  against  the  pride
of  Jacob,"  against  the  arrogancy  with  which
they  treat  the  poor,  and  trust  iu  their  riches,
and  deem  themselves  secure.  So  the  Sep-
tnagint, ^0/j.visi  K^'ptos  Kara  ttjs  inreprjtpavlas
'lautip.  1  will  never  forget,  so  as  to
leave  unpunished.  Literally,  if  I  forget,
equivalent  to  a  most  decided  denial,  as
Heb.  iv.  3,  5,  etc.  "Nee  mirum  est,  si
Deus  jurare  dicatur ;   quum   dormientibus


dormiat  et  vigilantibns  vigilet;  hiBqnn  qui
Bibithesaurizarerunt  iram  in  die  irse,  dioatui
irasci "  (St.  Jerome).

Ver.  8. — Shall  not  the  land  tremble  for
thisT  "Thi»"  is  the  coming  judgment,  or
the  oath  with  which  God  announced  it  in
the  previous  verso;  and  the  prophet  asks,
"  Shall  not  the  land  tremble  as  with  an  earth-
quake when  the  Lord  comes  to  judgment  ?  "
The  LXX.,  rendering  l?rl  roirois,  takes  the
reference  to  be  to  the  "  works "  or  sins  of
the  people  (ver.  7) ;  but  the  thought  in
these  two  verses  is  the  punishment  of  the
transgressions,  not  the  transgressors  them-
selves. And  it  shall  rise  up  wholly  as  a
flood  (ch.  ix.  5).  The  LXX.,  pointing
differently,  renders,  Kal  ivaPiiaerai  SuTrora/ihs
<rvi/T4\eia,  "And  destruction  shall  come  up
as  a  river;"  the  Vulgate,  Et  aseendet  qiiasi
fluvius  universus;  4t  is  best,  however,  to
refer  both  clauses  to  the  Nile:  "Yea,  it
shall  rise  up  wholly  like  the  river" — the
land  shall  heave  and  swell  like  the  waters
of  the  Nile  at  its  annual  rising.  And  it
shall  be  cast  out  and  drowned,  as  by  the
flood  of  Egypt ;  better,  it  shall  be  tossed  up
and  sink  again,  like  the  river  of  Egypt — a
picturesque  comparison,  which  would  allude
to  a  phenomenon  well  known  to  the  Israelites.
It  is  as  though  the  whole  earth  were  turned
into  a  sea,  tossing  and  labouring  under  a
tempestuous  wind  (comp.  Isa.  xxiv.  4).

Ver.  9. — I  will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down
at  noon.  This  is  probably  to  be  taken
metaphorically  of  a  sudden  calamity  oo-
curring  in  the  Tery  height  of  seeming'
prosperity,  such  as  the  fate  of  Israel  in
Pekah's  time,  and  Pekah's  own  murder
(2  Kings  XV.  29,  30;  see  also  2  Kings
xvii.  1 — 6).  A  like  metaphor  is  common
enough ;  e.g.  Joel  ii.  2 ;  iii.  15 ;  Micah  iii.
6;  Job  V.  14;  Isa.  xiii.  10;  Jer.  xv.  9.
Hind  calculates  that  there  were  two  solar
eclipses  visible  in  Palestine  in  Amos's  time,
viz.  June  15,  B.C.  763,  and  February  9,  B.C.  784.
Some  have  suggested  that  the  prophit  here
predicts  the  latter  in  the  year  of  Jeroboam's
death ;  but  this,  it  is  discovered,  would  have
been  so  partial  as  hardly  to  be  noticeable
at  Samaria.  And  it  is  improbable  that  such
natural  phenomena,  unconnected  with  God's
moral  govei  nment,  should  be  the  subject  of
the  prophet's  prediction  (Pusey).  Doubtless
a  sudden  reverse  is  signified  (comp.  Matt,
xxiv.  29,  etc.),  expressed  in  tenns  rendered
particularly  appropriate  by  some  late  and
well-remembered  eclipse.  The  Fathers  note
here  how  the  earth  was  darkened  at  the
Passion  of  our  Lord.

Ver.  10. — I  will  turn  your  feasts  into
mourning,  etc.  (onmp.  ver.  3;  ch.  y.  16,
17 ;  Lam.  v.  15 ;  Hos.  ii.  11 ;  Tobit  ii.  6).
Sackcloth.  A  token  of  mourning  (1  Kings
XX.  31 ;  laa.  xv.  3;  Joel  i.  8,  13).    Baldnesa


CH.  ym.  1 — ^14.]


THE  BOOK  OF  AM03.


159


On  shaving  the  head  as  a  sign  of  mourning,
see  note  on  Micah  i.  16;  and  comp.  Job
i.  20 ;  Isa.  iii.  21 ;  Jer.  xvi.  6 ;  xlvii.  5 ;
Ezek.  -vii.  18).  I  will  make  it;  Pmtam
earn  (Vulgate) ;  se.  Urram.  But  it  is  better
to  take  it  to  refer  to  the  whole  state  of
things  mentioned  before.  The  mourning
for  an  only  son  was  proverbially  severe,  like
that  of  the  widow  of  Kain  (Luke  vii.  12,  etc ;
comp.  Jer.  vi.  26  j  Zeoh.  xii.  10).  And  the
end  thereof  as  a  bitter  day.  The  calamity
should  not  wear  itself  out;  it  should  be
bitter  unto  the  end.  Septuagint,  eVo/u"
.  •  .  ro\)s  fier  abrov  ijs  Tj/i^pav  o^iyTjs,  **I
will  make  ,  .  .  those  with  him  as  a  day  of
anguish."

Ver.  11. — This  shall  be  the  bitterneaa  at
the  end;  they  had  rejected  the  warnings
of  the  prophets  (oh.  vii.  12,  etc.);  now  the
Word  of  God  and  tlie-light  of  his  teaching
should  fail  them.  Famine.  When  the  light
of  Gud's  revelation  is  withdrawn,  their
longing  fur  the  Word,  however  sore  and
great,  shall  remain  unsutisfied,  like  that  of
Saul  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  6).  They  may  grieve
like  the  psalmist,  "We  see  not  our  signs;
there  is  no  more  any  prophet;  neither  is
there  among  us  any  that  knoweth  how
long"  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  9);  but  it  will  be  in  vain
(see  a  similar  punishment  threatened,  Lam.
ii.  9 :  Ezek.  vii.  26 ;  Micah  iii.  7).

Ver.  12. — They  shall  wander;  literally,
they  »ftaZZ  reel.  The  verse  implies  the  eager-
ness <jf  their  unsatisfied  desire,  which  seeks
everywhere  for  the  revelation  which  for
their  sin  is  denied  them.  From  sea  to  sea.
This  expression  is  taken,  by  Keil  and  olhers,
to  mean  here  "all  tlio  world  over,"  as  Ps.
Ixxii.  8;_Mirah  vii.  12;  Zeoh.  ix.  10;  but
it  is  probably  used  by  the  prophet  in  a
more  restricted  sense,  as  it  would  not  be
natural  fur  liim  to  refer  in  the  first  place  to
the  seeking  of  the  words  of  God  beyond  the
limits  of  the  Holy  Land.  Therefore  "  from
sea  to  sea "  means  from  tlie  Sea  of  Galilee
or  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Mediterranean ;  and
from  the  north  even  to  the  east — from  the
nortli  round  again  to  tlie  east,  the  south
not  being  mentioned,  because  there  alone
was  the  true  worship  of  God  to  be  found,
and  they  refused  to  seek  it  there  (Pusey).
Of  course,  according  to  the  wide  scope
taken  by  prophecy,  which  is  not  exhausted


by  one  fulfilment,  we  may  see  here  the  fate
of  the  Jews  to  the  present  time  hopelessly
seeking  Messiah  and  the  Word  of  God,  nevei
finding  that  which  they  once  recklessly
rejected.  By  some  error  the  LXX.  render,
^oKevSiifrovTat  SSara  &.Trh  ttjs  BaXdfftrtjSj  /c.T.X.,
unless  they  mean,  "  They  shall  be  tossed  as
waters,"  etc.

Ver.  13. — This  verse  is  parallel  to  the
preceding.  The  thirst,  spiritual  and  physi-
cal, shall  affect  the  fair  virgins  and  young
men — those  in  all  the  freshness,  beauty,  and
vigour  of  youth.  Shall  faint;  literally,  thaU
be  veiled,  covered,  expressive  of  the  feeling
of  faintnesB,  when  the  sight  grows  dim  and
a  mantle  of  darkness  drops  over  one  (Jonah
iv.  8).  If  the  strongest  thus  fail,  much
more  will  the  rest  succumb  to  the  threatened
calamity.

Ver.  11. — ^They  who  trusted  in  idols  shall
find  no  help  in  them.  They  who  swear  by.
Those  who  reverence  and  worship,  as  Deut.
vi.  13 ;  z.  20.  The  sin  of  Samaria.  The  golden
calf  at  Bethel  (comp.  Deut.  ix.  21 ;  Hos.
viii.  5,  6).  Septuagint,  Karh  to3  tKturnov
^afiapfias,  "  by  the  propitiation  of  Samaria."
Thy  god,  0  Dan,  liveth;  i.e.  as  thy  god
liveth,  by  the  life  of  thy  god.  This  was
the  other  calf  erected  at  Dan,  near  the
source  of  the  Jordan,  in  the  extreme  north
(1  Kings  xii.  2t)).  The  manner  of  Beersheha
liveth;  Septuagint,  Z^  i  0i6s  <rov  Pripaa&ei,
"Thy  god,  O  Beersheba,  lives."  Some
commentators,  ancient  and  modern,  think
that  the  actual  road  which  led  to  Beersheba
is  here  meant,  and  would  translate,  "  As  the
way  to  Beersheba  liveth,"  "By  the  life  of
the  way  to  Beersheba,"  as  Mohammedans
swear  by  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.  But  it
is  best  to  take  the  word  remlered  "  manner"
in  the  sense  of  "way,"  as  ASis  is  used  in
Acts  (ix.  2 ;  xix.  9,  28)  for  jnode  of  worship,
or  form  of  religion,  the  ritual,  or  use  of  the
service  there.  (For  Beersheba,  see  note  on
ch.  V.  5.)  From  Dan  to  Beersheba  is  just
a  hundred  and  forty-four  miles.  They  shall
fall,  etc.  This  was  partially  fulfilled  by
the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel
and  the  deportation  of  its  inhabitants ;  and
its  truth  to  this  day  is  demonstrated  by  the
fate  of  the  Jews  who  will  not  receive  Jesus
as  the  promised  Messiah.


HOMILETICa

Vers.  1 3. — A  nation  ripe  for  ruin.    While  immunity  lasts  iniquity  will  go  on.

Men  only  love  it  less  than  they  fear  suffering.  In  the  actual  presence  of  the  penalty
the  hand  of  the  transgressor  is  stayed.  The  murderer  will  not  strike  the  death-blow
under  a  policeman's  eye.  The  blasphemer  will  not  move  a  lip  when  the  thunderbolt
is  crashing  through  his  roof.  But  by  so  little  does  the  one  feeling  master  the  other
that  if  punishment  be  not  both  certain  and  at  hand,  the  fear  of  it  will  fail  to  deter  from


160  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh,  vra.  1— 14

sin.  "  My  lord  delayeth  his  coming."  Let  escape  be  out  of  the  question,  yet  even
the  chance  of  respite  will  turn  the  scale  ia  favour  of  doing  the  forbiddea  thing.  Israel,
sentenced  and  to  be  destroyed  some  time,  sinned  with  a  high  hand.  Israel,  sentenced
to  be  destroyed  soon,  yet  sinned  still.  Perhaps  Israel,  sentenced  to  be  destroyed  at
once,  may  be  brought  to  bay.     Here  God  tries  the  experiment.

I.  There  is  a  time  when  the  vine  of  Sodom  bipbns  its  fbitit.  Sin  has  its
day.  It  disturbs  the  harmony  of  things,  and  when  derangement  reaches  a  climax
a  catastrophe  comes,  and  arrests  the  process  with  a"  thus  far  and  no  further."  Israel's
wicked  course  had  reacherl  this  critical  point.  1.  Idolatry,  the  archetypal  sin  against
the  first  table,  had  practically  superseded  the  worship  of  Qod.  It  was  the  religion  of
the  king  and  court  and  people.  It  was  established  and  endowed  by  the  state.  Its  rites
were  observed  at  Bethel  and  elsewhere,  in  profane  mimicry  of  the  Levitical  worship
at  Jerusalem.  The  substitution  of  it  for  the  worship  of  Jehovah  was  part  of  the  royal
policy.  Short  of  this  the  national  apostasy  could  go  no  further.  Interference,  if  it
would  be  in  time  to  save  anything,  must  take  place  at  once.  2.  Oppression,  the  arche-
typal sin  against  the  second  table,  had  reduced  society  to  dissolution.  The  safeguards
of  property,  liberty,  and  life  were  alike  removed  (oh.  iii.  9, 10;  v.  7,  12;  vi.  3).  The
order  of  society  bad  been  converted  into  chaos.  Incapable  of  using  liberty  without
perverting  it  into  licence,  it  was  high-time  to  deprive  Israel  of  the  grossly  abused  trnst.
As  slaves  they  would  be  under  a  regime  of  the  strung  arm,  which  was  the  only  one
that  suited  them  in  present  circumstances.  There  are  chains  forging  somewhere  for  the
man  who  can  neither  consider  others  nor  rule  himself.

II.  Such  bipenino  fobebodes  an  eablt  OATHEBiNa.  (Ver.  2,  '•  The  end  is  come
upon  my  people  of  Israel")  The  sickle  is  put  in  as  soon  as  the  harvest  is  ripe.  No
practical  husbandry  could  delay  the  operation  longer.  1.  The  crop  has  then  reached
the  limits  of  its  growth.  Like  the  corn  ripe  unto  harvest,  or  the  grape  purple  and
mellow,  the  natural  life  of  Israel  had  fully  developed  itself.  Tastes  were  matured,
habits  acquired,  and  characters  settled  into  crystalline  form.  Things  generally  had  put
on  an  aspect  of  finality,  and  the  sickle  of  judgment  that  follows  the  ripening  of  character
need  no  longer  wait.  Let  the  ripe  sinner  beware  the  scythe.  The  fruits  of  unrighteous-
ness full  jirown  are  suggestive  of  the  harvesters  on  their  way.  2.  It  is  then  ready  to
serve  its  natural  purpose.  Green  grapes  are  useless  in  the  vat,  and  green  faggots  would
only  put  out  the  fire.  It  is  in  the  harvest,  when  both  are  mature,  that  the  wheat  and
the  tares  alike  are  sent  to  their  ultimate  destination.  One  purpose,  a  high  and  noble
one,  Israel  had  at  last  proved  their  unfitness  to  serve ;  their  exclusive  fitness  for  another
purpose  had  only  now  by  the  same  events  become  apparent.  Beward  and  punishment
alike  take  typical  form  only  when  they  have  reference  to  lives  and  characters  which
have  assumed  an  aspect  of  finality.  The  hard  grain  and  the  dry  faggot  are  waiting
respectively  for  the  mill  and  for  the  fire.  3.  After  this  it  will  be  in  the  way  of  the  next
crop.  When  the  reaper  goes  the  ploughman  comes.  If  the  harvesting  were  neglected
the  ploughing  must  be  postponed.  Israel  had  failed  utterly  to  accomplish  its  Divine
mission,  and,  left  longer  alone,  would  only  preveut  its  accomplishment  by  other  agency.
"  Take  the  talent  from  him,  and  give  it  to  him  that  hath  ten  talents."  The  unfruitful
become  in  a  little  while  oumberers  of  the  ground,  and  a  necessary  mensiire  of  practical
husbandry  is  then  to  cut  tlieni  off.  4.  At  this  stage  it  will  begin  naturally  to  decay,
Overiipe  fruit  will  "  go  bad  "  at  once.  If  not  used  or  preserved  when  ripe,  it  will  be  lost
altogether.  National  decline  waits  on  the  development  of  national  corruption.  Israel
become  utterly  dissolute  would  go  to  pieces  according  to  a  natural  law,  even  if  the
Assyrian  never  came.  Indeed,  it  was  in  the  degeneracy  already  apparent  that  the
invader  saw  his  opportunity  and  found  the  occasion  of  his  coming.  The  disease  that
stops  the  career  of  the  sensualist  means  God's  judgment  on  one  side,  and  the  natural
break-down  of  his  constitution  on  the  other.

III.  The  dunghill  is  this  destination  of  all  tainted  produce.  (Ver.  3.)
The  incorrigible  wrong-doer  is  involved  at  last  in  overwhelming  calamity,  God's
judgments  must  fall,  his  mercy  notwithstanding.  Indeed,  they  are  an  aspect  of  it.
"  A  God  all  mercy  is  a  God  unjust."  He  is  leaving  the  lion  to  prey  on  the  lamb.  The
most  merciful  course  is  that  which  offers  most  effective  opposition  to  the  wicked  doings
of  wicked  men.  Israel's  manners  are  past  reforming,  and  past  enduring..  By  their
intolerable  abuse  of  freedom  they  showed  their  fitness  only  to  be  skvu.     And  accord-


OH.  Tm.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  161

ing  to  character  and  capacity  they  must  he  treated.  What  ia  had  for  the  tahle  may  be
good  for  the  duoghill.  The  life  of  many  had  become  a  curse,  and  it  only  remained  to
stop  that,  and  make  their  death  a  warning.  That  ia  one  crop  which  even  the  sluggard's
garden  cannot  refuse  to  hear  (Prov.  xxiv.  30 — 32).

IV.  Thb  oocasiok  of  such  a  habvest  homb  too  deflobablk  fob  wobdb.  (Ver.
8,  "Hush I")  When  judgment  is  overwhelming,  silence  is  fitting.  1.  A$  opposed  to
songs.  These  had  resounded  from  the  palace.  They  spoke  of  mirth  and  revelry.  But
they  would  be  turned  into  yells  ere  long.  In  awestruck  anticipation  of  the  utterance
of  pain  and  horror,  the  prophet  bids  the  revellers  be  silent.  2.  As  opposed  to  lamen-
tationt.  You  cannot  always  "  give  sorrow  words."  There  is  a  grief  that "  speaks  not  "—
the  grief  of  the  overwrought  heart.  "I  was  dumb, opening  not  the  mouth,  because  thia
stroke  was  thine."  Such  grief  would  befit  a  time  like  this.  Words,  however  strong,
must  be  beneath  the  occasion.  Let  them  then  remain  unspoken,  and  let  the  eloquence
of  silence  meet  the  overwhelming  severity  of  the  visitation.  3.  At  opposed  to  reproaches.
Israel  had  outlived  the  period  of  probation,  and  therefore  of  expostulation.  Its  "  great
transgression  "  was  committed,  its  course  uuchangeably.chosen,  its  doom  sealed.  The
condemned  and  sentenced  murderer  is  removed  to  his  cell  in  silence.  In  sterner
measures  than  abuse  of  words  must  his  crime  be  expiated.  His  very  life  is  to  be  exacted,
and  windy  denunciation  may  well  be  spared.  "  Let  him  alone"  is  of  all  measures  the
most  sternly  significant.  It  is  the  preternatural  hush  of  the  elemental  world,  presaging
the  thunder-crash  that  shall  make  the  very  earth  to  reel.

Vers.  4 — 6. — The  covetous  man's  way.  Punishment,  however  stern,  is  proportioned
rigidly  to  sin.  They  answer  to  each  other  as  face  to  face.  From  the  contemplation  of
Israel's  deplorable  fate  we  turn  to  the  horrors  of  her  crime.  And  they  are  dark  beyond
exaggerating.  To  idolatry,  dethroning  God  and  robbing  him  of  his  glory,  is  added
covetousness  defrauding  and  destroying  men.  Indeed,  the  one  is  but  a  department  of
the  other.  The  worst  type  of  mammon-worshipper,  the  covetous,  is  an  idolater  in  a
very  real  sense.  And  Israel's  covetousness,  detached  as  it  was  from  all  religious
restraints,  and  operating  in  a  purely  heathen  connection,  was  of  the  most  aggravated
and  repulsive  kind.     Acting  in  character,  observe  that —

L  It  selects  an  bast  peet.  (Ver.  4,  "  the  poor ; "  "  the  meek.")  1.  The  poor
cannot  defend  themselves.  Their  poverty  makes  them  helpless,  and  the  weakness  which
ought  to  commend  them  to  protection  commends  them  to  plunder.  Covetousness,  the
meanest  of  the  vices  in  any  circumstances,  goes  down  to  the  nadir  of  paltriness  when
it  wrings  its  gold  "  from  the  hard  hands  "  of  the  poor.  2.  The  meek  will  not  resist.
Their  position  and  disposition  are  both  against  it.  They  would  "  rather  suffer  wrong."
And  they  get  enough  of  it  to  suffer.  Weak  on  one  hand,  and  unresisting  on  the  other,
they  are  a  doubly  tempting  prey  to  the  pitiless  vulture's  beak.

IL  It  has  mubdbr  in  its  hbabt.  "  Gape  to  destroy,"  as  the  beast  of  prey  its  victim
at  hand.  There  is  a  covetousness  that  puts  its  own  paltriest  gain  above  another's  life.
It  will  have  men's  money  although  their  life  should  pay  the  forfeit.  This  is  the  very
spirit  of  murder.  To  make  money,  at  the  necessary  cost  of  human  life,  is  to  break  the
sixth  commandment  as  well  as  the  eighth.

III.  It  hankers  after  Sunday  tradino.  (Ver.  6,  "When  is  the  new  moon
over,"  etc.  ?)  These  people  retained  the  form  of  sabbath  observance,  but  the  reality
had  been  altogether  abandoned.  They  occupied  its  sacred  hours  with  wishes  that  they
were  over.  "  Sabbath  days  and  sabbath  work  are  a  burden  to  carnal  hearts  "  (Henry).
The  hours  drag  heavily.  Time-killing  devices  are  exhausted.  "  Behold,  what  a  weari-
ness it  is! "  is  the  verdict  on  God's  day,  given  weekly  through  all  their  years.  "  When
shall  I  come  and  appear  before  God  ?  "  a  question  that  the  spiritually  minded  ask,  is  one
which  the  carnally  minded  cannot  even  understand.  They  are  making  maikets  mentally
iu  the  very  house  of  God,  and,  with  the  words  of  worship  on  their  lips, "  their  heart  goes
after  covetousness."  From  Sunday  devising  to  Sunday  transacting  of  business  the
step  is  but  a  small  one — too  small  not  to  be  taken  when  opportunity  and  templation
meet.

IV.  It  PEAonsBs  unfair  dbalino.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  As  they  fear  not  God,  neither
do  they  regard  man.  When  religion  is  abandoned,  morality  is  undermined.  Given
greed  present,  and  religious  restraint  absent,  and  dishonest  dealing  is  inevitable.    1.

Alios.  ••


162  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  Tin.  1—14

One  device  is  the  use  of  a  false  balance.  "  Make  the  ephah  small,  and  the  shekel  great,"
i.e.  give  thirteen  pounds  to  the  stone,  and  charge  twenty-one  shillings  to  the  pound.  They
perpetrate  thus  a  double  swindle,  robbing  "  with  both  hands  earnestly."  Such  fraud
is  too  unscientific  and  direct  for  any  but  the  coarser  cheats.  There  are  more  delicate
ways  of  fraudulent  dealing,  which  the  more  refined  rogues  affect.  Such  a  method  is :
2.  Selling  an  adulterated  or  inferiw  article.  "  The  refuse  of  the  corn  we  will  sell  "
(ver.  6).  This  is  probably  the  commonest  form  of  commercial  fraud.  There  are  few
who  possess  the  strength  of  moral  fibre  to  avoid  it  entirely.  We  might  arrange  it  on
a  graduated  scale.  At  one  end  is  the  man  who  bluntly  sells  one  thing  under  the  name
of  another.  At  the  other  p.nd  is  the  man  who,  in  selling.  Insinuates  the  impression  that
the  thing  is  of  better  qualify  than  it  really  is.  Between  these  two  are  dishonest  artifices
of  all  varieties  and  shades.  All,  however,  originate  in  covetousness,  eventuate  in  injus-
tice, and  deserve  the  generic  name  of  fraud.

v.  It  traffics  in  human  life,  and  that  fob  a  contemptible  pkice.  (Ver.  6.)
The  law,  compelling  the  poor  to  sell  themselves  to  their  creditors  to  work  for  what  they
owed,  was  enforced  in  the  case  of  the  paltriest  debts,  and  the  needy  might  be  brought
into  bondage  for  want  of  the  price  of  even  a  pair  of  shoes.  To  work  such  hardship  on
such  trifling  occasion  argues  inhumanity  too  gross  to  be  long  endured.  The  worker
has  inverted  the  natural  order,  has  lost  out  the  sense  of  reverence,  is  blind  to  the
dignity  of  human  nature,  and  has  conclusively  shown  that  he  is  an  eyesore,  and  his  life
a  curse,  to  the  society  in  which  he  lives.  His  selfishness  puts  the  least  interest  of  his
own  above  the  most  essential  interest  of  others.  His  greed  of  gain  has  so  intensified
that  he  is  blind  at  last  to  all  other  considerations.  He  has  fallen  altogether  beneath
the  human  level,  and  when  a  man  has  done  this,  the  chances  are  that  he  has  lived  his
day.   Well  may  we  pray, "  Incline  my  heart  to  thy  testimonies,  and  not  to  covetousness."

Ver.  7. — Confirming  iy  ore  oath.  God's  judgments  sometimes  take,  and  will  continue
to  take,  the  wicked  by  surprise  (Matt.  xxiv.  36 — 39).  But  this  need  not  be,  and  should
not  be,  and  can  be  only  where  blindness,  or  heedlessness,  or  incredulity  make  warning
useless.  God  always  warns  before  he  strikes.  Sometimes  he  warns  by  divers  methods
at  ones.  Often  he  warns  again -and  afiain.  Invariably  he  warns  with  a  solemnity  that
makes  disbelief  a  crime  and  stupid.     Here  is  a  case  in  point.

I.  The  oath  that  cannot  be  bkokbn.  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  lie."  To
do  so  would  be  a  natural  impossibility,  a  contradiction  of  himself  For  the  same  reason
his  truthfulness  can  have  no  degrees;  his  slightest  word  is  absolutely  inviolable.  Yet
to  human  apprehension  an  oath  is  peculiarly  convincing,  and,  accommodating  himself  to
men's  weakness,  God  condescends,  on  peculiarly  solemn  occasions,  not  merely  to  say,  but
swear.  Here  he  swears:  1.  By  himself .  "The  Pride  of  Jacob"  is  Jehovah  himself.
Elsewhere  explicitly  God  swears  by  "himself"  (Jer.  li.  14),  by  his  "great  Name"
(Jer.  xliv.  26),  by  his  "holiness"  (ch.  iv..  2),  by  his  "life"  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  This
is  of  necessity.  Men  "swear  by  the  greater."  God,  "  because  he  can  swear  by  no
greater,  swe  irs  by  himself"  (Heb.  vi.  17,  13).  In  this  form  of  oath  the  greatest  Being
is  invoked,  and  so  the  maximum  of  solemnity  is  reached,  whether  it  is  God  who  swears
or  man.  2.  By  himself  in  his  ideal  relation  to  Israel.  "  By  the  Pride  of  Jacob."
Israel,  alas  I  did  not  "  glory  in  the  Lord."  They  gloried  in  their  idols.  "  These  be  thy
gods,  which  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egj  pt,"  they  had  said,  in  their  blind  fatuity,
of  the  molten  calf.  God  had  been  forgotten  and  his  wonders  ignored  before  they  were
many  days  accomplished,  and  in  this  forgetfulness  they  had  persistently  gone  on.  Yet
was  he  none  the  less  their  Glory  still,  the  Strength  of  Israel,  their  Light  and  Life,  the
Pounder,  Builder,  Sustainer,  of  their  kingdom,  the  one  Source  and  Spring  of  all  that
made  them  great.  This  fundamental  relation  he  emphasizes  here  in  vowing  vengeance
on  their  sin.  By  this  character,  as  their  Life  and  Strength  and  Excellence,  he  swears  he
will  now  degrade  and  destroy  them  utterly.  The  nearer  God's  tie  to  the  rebels,  the
grosser  outrage  is  their  rebellion,  and  the  more  embittered  the  after-relations.  It  is  on
the  ruins  of  violated  friendship  that  the  most  irreconcilable  enmity  arises.  Not  even
the  heathen  is  as  hateful,  or  doomed  to  a  fate  as  direful,  as  the  apostate.

II.  The  keoord  that  cannot  be  ebased.  "  I  will  not  forget  and  for  e^flT."  To
forget  is  to  forgive,  put  out  of  sight,  treat  as  non-existent.  "  I  will  remember  their
iniquities  no  more."    Sin  umatoned  for  cannot  he  forgiven,    God  must  be  just  in  his


CH.  vni.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  163

justifying,  and  justice  demands  satisfaction.  From  the  proviiled  satisfaction  the
unbelieving  sinner  has  turned  away,  and  so  from  the  grace  of  his  own  salvation.  Neither
can  sin  unforsoilten.  The  sinner  Is  in  actual  conflict  with  Grod,  and  the  rebel  may  not
be  forgiven  with  arms  in  his  hands.  Neither  can  sin  unrepenied  of.  Still  loving  sin,
the  impenitent  is  not  in  a  moral  condition  to  appreciate  pardon,  and  the  gift  of  God  is
not  to  be  thrown  away.  By  such  a  threefold  cord  was  Israel  bound  to  inevitable
destruction.

III.  The  woRKa  that  cannot  be  forgotten.  There  are  sins  more  heinous,  and
for  the  autliors  of  which  it  will  be  less  tolerable  in  the  jurlgment  than  for  others  (Matt.
xi.  22).  1.  Such  are  the  sins  committed  against  the  poor  and  needy.  "  God  hath
chosen  the  poor  of  this  world."  Their  poverty  presents  the  minimum  of  resistance  to
his  grace.  Their  hardships  excite  his  special  pity.  Their  helplessness  commends  them
to  his  special  protection.  He  gives  them  the  most  prominent  place  in  his  religion.  He
champions  them  against  their  enemies.  He  requires  liis  people  to  do  the  same.  He
identifies  himself  with  them  in  the  judgment,  and  he  deals  with  men  then  in  terms  of
their  relation  to  the  duties  they  owe  the  needy  (Matt.  xxv.  35 — 45).  While  God  is
"the  Avenger  of  all  such,"  oppression  of  the  poor  shall  not  go  unpunished.  2.  Such
etpecially  are  the  sins  committed  against  the  poor  by  those  who  bear  his  Name.  'I  he
element  of  beneficence  bulked  large  in  Judaism.  Besides  the  general  injunctions  to
regard  the  poor  (Dent.  xv.  7 — 11),  there  were  special  enactments  allocating  to  them
a  poor  tithe  (Deut.  xiv.  28,  29),  the  spontaneous  produce  of  the  soil  (Lev.  xxv.  5),  the
droppings  from  the  sheaves,  and  the  produce  of  the  corners  of  the  fields  (Lev.  xix.  9, 10 ;
xxiii.  22),  also  sheaves  accidentally  dropped  (Deut.  xxiv.  19),  as  much  from  vineyard
or  field  as  the  hungry  wayfarer  required  to  eat  on  the  spot  (Deut.  xxiii.  24,  25),  and
periodical  entertainments  at  the  tables  of  the  rich  (Deut.  xvi.  10,»11).  Thus  nothing
could  be  more  utterly  antagonistic  to  the  genius  of  the  Jewish  religion  than  to  rob  or
oppress  the  poor.  The  Israelite  guilty  of  it  sinned  against  Scripture,  against  custom,
against  education,  against  every  deterrent  powerful  with  men  and  increasing  guilt
before  God.  Christianity,  too,  is  essentially  benevolent.  To  "  love  one  another,"  and
"  do  good  unto  all,"  is  the  very  spirit  and  essence  of  the  religion  of  Christ.  Injustice
or  oppression  under  Christian  auspices  is  sin  in  its  most  abomioable  and  heinous  form.

Vers.  8 — 10. — Carried  away  as  with  a  flood.  A  man  in  earnest  is  always  graphic.
If  he  be  also  inspired  he  can  afford  to  be  explicit.  •  In  this  passage  Amos  is  both.  The
words  were  spoken  before  the  convulsions  they  foretell,  and  written  after  some  of  them
had  occurred.  But  the  descriptions  of  events,  transpired  between  the  speaking  and  the
writing,  have  no  flavour  of  an  ex  post  facto  deliverance.  There  is  a  bare  record  of  the
original  verbal  utterance  without  the  attempt  to  write  into  any  part  of  it  details  of  what
.  meantime  had  become  history.  Such  an  apologetic  device,  suicidal  in  any  case,  is  a
thing  to  which  a  man  who  is  God's  mouthpiece  could  not  and  needs  not  stoop.

I.  The  earth  tkemblino  when  God  sweaes.  "For  this"  (ver.  8),  i.e.  the  oath
of  God,  and  its  purport.  That  oath  means  a  catastrophe  on  the  way  in  the  shock  of
which  the  earth  would  tremble.  The  very  utterance  of  it  was  a  cause  of  trembling.
"He uttered  his  voice,  the  earth  melted."  His  word  is  a  word  of  power.  It  operate^!
in  the  physical  forces,  and  shakes  the  whole  frame  of  nature.  In  the  poetic  language  of
the  psalmist,  "  the  voice  of  the  Lord  breaketh  the  cedars,"  "  shaketh  the  wilderness,"
"  divideth  the  flames  of  fire."  In  the  world  of  matter,  as  in  the  world  of  spirit,  the
great  ultimate  force  is  the  word  of  God.

II.  The  creation  suffering  in  the  sufferings  of  men.  Man  sins,  and  the  earth
is  smitten.  It  was  so  at  first  with  the  ground.  It  was  so  at  the  Deluge  with  the
lower  animals  and  plants.  It  is  so  here.  The  universe  is  one  throughout,  and  all  its
parts  are  in  closest  connection  and  interdependence.  "Not  a  leaf  rotting  on  the  high-
way but  is  an  indissoluble  part  of  solar  and  stellar  worlds"  (Carlyle).  Our  life,  our
animal  spirits,  our  reason  itV.elf,  have  fundamental  and  probably  undiscovered  relations
with  the  sun  and  moon  and  stars.  Relations  so  intimate  may  be  assumed  to  be  mutual,
atid  we  need  not  be  surprised  if  we  find  casualties  meant  primarily  for  either  extending
to  both.

III.  God's  judgments,  long  menaced,  take  the  iNCREDtriiOUs  by  surprise  at
last.    (Ver.  9.)    The  antediluvians  were  no  better  jirepared  for  the  Flood  by  their


164  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  vra.  1— 14.

hundred  and  twenty  years'  warning.  They  absorbed  themselves  in  their  work  and
pleasure,  and  knew  not  till  the  Flood  came  (Matt.  xxiv.  88).  So  with  the  Sodomites,
warned  by  Lot  (Gen.  xix.  U) ;  and  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  at  its  capture,  warned
by  Christ  (Matt.  xxiv.  33).  Warning  is  thrown  away  on  unbelief,  and  its  end  ii
always  a  surprise.  In  this  case  the  sun  would  set  at  noon.  The  end  would  come
untimely.  In  the  midst  of  days  and  prosperity  Israel  would  be  cut  off.  There  would
be  no  anticipation,  no  fear,  no  suspicion  even,  of  such  an  event.  So  with  the  ungodly
at  last.  The  judgment  will  surprise  them  and  look  untimely,  but  only  because  their
incredulity  will  be  unconquerable.

IV.    EETBIBnTION    CLOSELY   ADJUSTED    TO    THE    0IE0UMBTANCB8  OP    THE    CRIMINAL.

(Ver.  10.)  Sinners  are  smitten  in  their  joys.  The  covetous  in  their  possessions,  the
luxurious  in  their  luxuries,  the  revellers  in  their  revelries.  When  sackcloth  and  ashes
are  substituted  for  "  ivory  couches,"  and  baldness  for  hair  fragrant  with  the  chief  oint-
ments, when  howls  rend  the  throats  till  lately  melodious  in  song,  the  stroke  is  identified
as  that  of  One  who  never  "  beats  the  air."  The  fly  of  judgment,  selecting  infaHibly  the
sore  spot  of  the  sufferer,  reveals  its  mission  as  from  God  himself.  2%e  Joys  in  which
the  sinner  is  smitten  are,  moreover,  those  most  closely  connected  with  his  sins.  God's
stroke  is  as  obviously  righteous  as  appropriate.  Falling  on  the  sins  that  provoke
them,  God's  judgments  are  self-interpreting.  Israel's  luxurious  appliances  were  simply
plunder,  the  wages  of  iniquity,  sometimes  even  the  price  of  blood.  Hence  God  singles
them  out  for  special  attack,  and  will  plague  Israel  rigorously  in  every  pleasure  that
has  its  root  in  sin.

v.  The  finalitt  of  God's  bbtbibutivb  act.  The  rule  is  that  judgment  is  more
severe  in  proportion  as  it  is  long  delayed.  1.  It  makes  an  end.  The  sun  goes  down,
and  ends  the  day  of  life.  After  that  nothing  can  come  but  night — ^the  night  of  death.
Destruction  for  sinners  of  Israel,  destruction  for  all  such  sinners  while  the  world  stands,
is  the  Divine  provision.  When  the  last  measure  of  retribution  is  executed,  the  last
shred  of  the  sinner's  good  has  been  torn  away.  2.  That  end  unspeakably  bitter.  The
wine-cup  of  God's  fury  is  necessarily  a  bitter  draught.  There  is  wounded  dignity  in  it,
and  wasted  mercy,  and  outraged  love,  and  all  ingredients  which  are  gall  and  worm-
wood in  the  mouth.  They  are  digging  for  themselves  Marah-pools  no  branch  can
sweeten,  who  "  heap  up  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,"  etc.  3.  ITuit  bitterness  <A«
bitterness  of  utter  desolation.  "  And  make  it  like  mourning  for  an  only  one."  That
is  bitter  mourning  indeed.  The  loss  of  an  only  one  is  total  loss,  including  our  alL
It  is  irreparable  loss,  for  the  dead  cannot  come  back.  It  is  loss  not  physical  merely,  nor
sentimental  merely,  but  loss  wringing  the  heart-strings,  and  leaving  us  with  the  very
jewel  of  life  torn  from  its  setting.  Such  is  the  mourning  in  which  unforgiven  sin  is
expiated  at  last.  It  is  heart-agony,  unrelieved,  unmitigated,  and  never  to  end.  "  Son,
remember;"  "There  shall  be  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth;"  "Their  worm  dieth
not,  and  their  fire  is  not  quenched."

Ver.  9. — A  sunset  at  noon.  This  language  is  at  once  prophetic  and  figurative.  It
predicts  an  event  in  the  moral  world  under  the  figure  of  an  analogous  event  in  the
physical  world.  The  symbolical  event  is  not  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  which  the  language
does  not  suit,  but  his  going  down  at  midday ;  and  the  event  symbolized  is  clearly  death
in  the  midst  of  young  life.  Israel  was  rich  and  prosperous  and  young.  To  all  outward
seeming  she  was  just  in  the  meridian  of  her  life.  But  her  sun  would  never  reach  the
west.  Her  end  would  be  premature,  sudden,  and  tragic.  As  if  the  sun  dropped  in  an
instant  beneath  the  horizon  from  mid-sky,  and  the  radiancy  of  noon  gave  place  in  that
instant  to  the  darkness  of  night ;  so  Israel's  day  would  darken  suddenly,  and  the  night
of  death  fall  in  a  sky  all  lit  with  the  golden  glow  of  noon.

I.  Theeb  is  to  men  a  natural  term  op  EXisTBNofe,  WHICH  IS  THEIR  DAT.  There
is  a  natural  life-term  to  all  earthly  creatures.  This  varies  endlessly  for  each,  between
limits  so  far  apart  as  a  millennium  and  a  day.  There  are  chelonise  that  lengthen  ont
their  slow  existence  to  centuries,  and  there  are  insects  that  sport  out  their  little  life  in
an  afternoon.  Intermediate  between  these  widely  distant  limits  is  man  with  his
three  score  years  and  ten  (Ps.  xc.  10).  This  period  is  his  day.  Beyond  it  few  may
hope,  and  none  expect,  to  live.  To  reach  it  even  there  must  be  normal  conditionf  of
Ufe  within  mnd  around.    This  is  not  a  long  time  at  best.    Let  the  utmost  diligenoe  ba


OH.  VIII.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOa  16S

nsed,  and  the  work  that  can  be  done  in  it  is  not  much.  Take  from  it  the  two
childhoods,  infancy  and  infirm  age,  and  it  becomes  greatly  shorter  still.  Not  mora
than  fifty  active  years  enter  into  the  longest  life.  On  the  most  sanguine  assumption
these  are  the  working  hours  of  our  day  of  life.  What  we  do  for  God  and  men  is  done
while  they  pass.  They  may  not  be  so  many,  but  they  can  scarcely  be  more,  and  i(
they  are  all  given  us  we  may  thankfully  reckon  that  we  have  lived  our  time.

II.  Thebe  abb  exceptional  oases  in  which  this  period  is  cut  shobt.  The
normal  life-term  is  not  the  actual  one.  The  overwhelming  majority  never  see  it.
"When  the  septuagenarian  has  his  birthday  feast,  the  friends  of  his  youth  are  not  one
in  ten  among  the  guests.  From  childhood  till  that  hour  they  have  been  dropping  off,
and  now  nine-tenths  and  more  are  gone.  1.  A  moiety  of  the  race  die  in  childhood.
Infant  mortality  is  an  obscure  subject.  Whether  from  the  standpoint  of  equity  or
economy,  there  is  much  in  it  we  cannot  explain.  Their  death  before  they  have
transgressed  brings  up  the  solemn  mystery  of  original  sin,  and  the  suffering  of  one  for
the  sin  of  another  (Rom.  v.  14).  Then  their  death  before  activity  begins  or  conscious-
ness dawus,  and  so  apparently  before  they  have  been  used,  raises  the  almost  equally
perplexing  question — Is  there,  so  far  as  this  life  goes,  a  single  human  being  made  in
vain?  2.  Many  more  die  be/ore  or  at  matitrity.  They  are  healthy  till  growth  is
almost  complete.  The  body  has  acquired  the  strength  and  hardness  needed  for  the
burden  of  life's  work.  The  mind  has  received  the  training  which  fits  it  to  solve  the
problems  of  existence,  and  govern  and  use  the  body  in  accomplishing  the  highest
purposes  of  both.  Yet  just  now,  when  the  tool  has  been  formed  and  tempered  and
finished,  it  is  broken  before  it  has  once  been  used  at  its  best  in  the  more  serious  work
of  life.  Here  we  are  face  to  face  not  only  with  an  apparently  purposeless  creation,  but
also  with  what  seems  an  unproductive  training.  3.  Many  also  die  with  their  work  to
all  appearance  wnfinished,  or  only  well  begun.  Their  capacity  is  growing ;  their  field
is  widening ;  their  influence  is  increasing.  They  are  in  the  full  swing  of  activity  and
usefulness.  Yet  at  the  very  moment  when  the  richest  fruit  of  their  life-work  is
beginning  to  form,  they  are  cut  down — cut  down,  too,  where  their  death  leaves  a
permanent  blank,  and  no  one  is  available  to  take  up  their  work.  Their  mysterious
character  and  solemn  interest  prepare  a  field  for  faith  in  the  fact  that —

III.  These  suitsetb  at  noon  are  divinely  obdsbed.  "I  will  cause,"  etc.  To
kill  and  to  make  alive  are  Divine  prerogatives.  Let  the  sun  set  wliere  he  will,  the
event  is  God's  doing.  And,  in  the  light  of  Scripture  and  observation,  a  philosophy  of
■uch  events  is  not  altogether  impossible  to  conceive.  1.  Take  noon  sunsets  in  tin.
These  are  often  untimely  and  far  from  unaccountable.  (1)  Sin  it  wwr  against  Qod ;
and  while  he  is  omnipotent  and  righteous  and  the  Disposer  of  life,  it  cannot  conduce
to  length  of  days.  The  wickedness  of  men  is  a  continual  provocation  of  his  just
judgment,  and  therefore  an  inevitable  shortener  of  life.  (2)  Bin  is  also  war  against
the  species.  The  wicked  are  hateful  and  hating  one  another.  The  essential  selfishness
of  the  corrupt  heart  is  misanthropy  in  another  aspect.  Misanthropy,  again,  is  murder
in  its  earlier  stage  (1  John  iii.  16),  leading  on  to  the  other  stages  of  it  (Jas.  iv.  1,  2) ;
and  a  dispensation  of  universal  murder  must  mean  many  a  life  cut  short  and  many  a
■un  untimely  set.  (3)  Sin  does  violence  to  owr  own  nature.  The  normal  life  of  the
body  is  a  pure  one ;  the  direction  of  appetites  only  to  their  legitimate  objects,  and  to
these  in  the  strictest  moderation.  This  is  obviously  the  royal  road  to  health  and
length  of  days.  Perversion  of  appetite  on  the  one  hand,  and  excessive  indulgence  of  it
on  the  other,  do  violence  to  the  natural  order.  If  the  Ufa  is  impure,  in  fact,  and  as  it
is  impure,  it  is  unnatural,  and  therefore  likely  to  be  short.  There  is  no  "  fleshly  lust "
which  does  not  "war  against  the  life"  (1  Pet.  ii.  11)  of  soul  and  body- both.  Of
course,  the  operation  of  second  causes,  such  as  the  laws  of  reciprocity  and  health,  is  not
something  distinct  from  the  Divine  agency,  but  the  instrumentality  it  employs.  The
laws  of  nature  are  simply  God's  executive,  the  hands  and  fingers  which  weave  the
threads  of  his  purpose  into  the  web  of  his  work.  2.  Take  noon  sunsets  in  grace.
These  also  are  not  unknown.  The  good  die  youcg.  Sometimes  they  die  through  the
sin  of  others,  sometimes  in  consequence  of  sin  of  their  own.  These,  however,  are  tha
occasions  only  of  their  removal.  The  reason  of  it  lies  deep  in  the  purposes  of  God.
(1)  Some  are  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come.  (Isa.  Ivii.  1.)  The  young  Ahijab,
"because  ify  him  was  found  some  good  thing  toward  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  in  th«


166  THE  BOOK  OF   AMOS.  [oh.  toi.  1— U

liouse  of  Jeroboam,"  was  carried  peacefully  to  his  rest  before  the  falling  of  the
provoked  disaster  (1  Kings  xiv.  10 — 14).  The  good  King  Josiah  also,  because  he
repudiated  and  mourned  the  sin  of  Judah,  "  was  gathered  to  his  grave  in  peace,  that
his  eyes  did  not  see  all  the  evil  which  God  brought  upon  Jerusalem  "  (2  Kings  xxii.
19,  20).  In  many  a  family,  on  whose  survivors  the  shock  of  a  great  calamity  falls,
the  previous  removal  of  some  gentle  spirit  from  their  circle  becomes  intelligible  as  a
merciful  folding  of  the  tender  lamb  before  the  crash  of  the  nearihg  storm.  (2)  Some
are  taken  away  because  their  work,  although  apparently  only  beginning,  is  really  done.
Not  every  man's  life-work  can  be  identified,  during  its  progress,  by  either  his
cotemjioraries  or  himself.  Sometimes  it  is  incidental,  aside  from  his  line  of  effort,
and  altogether  unconscious.  A  child  lives  to  awake  by  its  endearing  ways  a  parent's
sleeping  heart.  A  youth  lives  by  the  tokens  of  early  grace  to  bring  brothers  and
sisters  to  look  at  the  unseen,  and  the  life  for  God.  A  man  lives  to  carry  some
movement  over  its  crisis,  which,  in  its  after-stages,  will  require  a  different  hand.  If
we  only  .knew  "  the  end  of  the  Lord "  (Jas.  v.  11),  we  should  see  that  it  is  always
attained  before  the  means  are  discontinued ;  that  he  never  breaks  a  tool  till  its  work  is
done.  (3)  Some  can  only  do  their  work  hy  dying.  The  errand  of  Bathsheba's  first
child  into  the  world  was  by  its  death  to  bring  David  to  his  knees  and  a  right  mind
(2  Sam.  xii.  13 — 23).  And  how  many  an  early  death  in  a  careless  family  has  been
that  family's  salvation  !  Even  the  minister  cut  dovvn  in  his  early  prime,  with  a  life  of
usefulness  opening  out,  as  it  seems,  before  him,  may  preach  a  sermon  by  his  death  more
potent  for  good  than  all  he  conld  have  said  alive.  Untimely  death  may  even  in
certain  cases  anticipate  the  loss  of  influence  for  good.  We  know  men  of  influence  in
the  Church  who  in  their  erratic  age  are  undoing  the  good  they  were  honoured  to  do  in
their  earlier  years.  Such  men  have  only  lived  too  long.  If  their  sun  had  set  at  noon
their  life-work  would  have  been  far  greater,  humanly  speaking,  than  it  will  now  be.
Looking  as  we  do  at  the  surface  of  things,  and  blind  to  their  deeper  relations  and  far-
reaching  issues,  we  are  not  in  a  position  to  criticize  the  providential  arrangements  of
God.  To  believe  that  there  is  order  in  the  seeming  tangle,  and  ultimate  and  wider
good  behind  the  present  partial  evil,  is  the  attitude  of  that  enlightened  faith  which
argues  that  Infinite  Wisdom,  omnipotent  on  the  one  hand  and  benevolent  on  the  other,
being  at  the  helm  of  things,  will  steer  in  character.

Vers.  11 — 14, — The  ecareity  that  swallows  the  residue  of  good.  To  waste  is  to  want,
in  things  temporal  and  spiritual  aliUe.  Abuse  is  inevitably  followed  by  deprivation,
and  the  pjodigal  is  one  who  is  purveying  for  himself  a  suit  of  rags.  God  caps  our
"will  not "  with  his  "  shall  not,"  and  the  rude  hand  of  change  soon  spills  the  cup  of
good  we  have  refused  to  taste.  Under  the  operation  of  this  law  the  nation  of  Israel
would  now  come.  They  had  wasted  the  Word  of  God,  neglecting  it,  despising  it,  and
at  last  forbidding  it  to  be  spoken.  Now  they  should  "  want "  it  as  a  penal  result.  It
would  be  taken  from  them  in  anger,  and  that  at  a  time  when  even  their  inappreciation
would  long  for  it  as  for  life  itself.    Observe  here —

L  The  woest  or  all  famines.  "  Not  a  hungering  for  bread,  nor  a  thirst  for  water,
but  to  hear  the  words  of  Jehovah."  This  is  a  new  form  of  disaster,  and  one  that  is
specially  severe.  This  follows  from  the  fact  that:  1,  It  is  in  the  spiritual  sphere,
"Fear  not  them  which  kill  the  body."  It  is  the  least  part  of  us.  Whether  it  live  or
die,  enjoy  or  suffer,  is  a  question  involving  trivial  interests,  and  these  during  a  limited
period.  The  soul  is  the  man,  and  its  well-being,  next  to  God's  glory,  the  great  interest.
For  its  injury  there  is  no  compepsation,  for  its  loss  no  parallel.  When  it  suffers,  the
worst  has  happened.  2.  It  is  due  to  the  loss  of  a  necessary  of  spiritual  life.  The
deepest  need  of  humanity  is  a  communication  from  God.  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know
thee  the  only  true  God,"  etc.  Hence  the  Word  which  God  speaks  is  the  Word  of  life.
Apart  from  it  spiritual  life  is  impossible.  (1)  It  is  the  revelation  of  spiritual  things,
God  and  his  will  and  way;  the  soul,  its  duty  and  destiny, — are  subjects  on  which  it
alone  throws  adequate  light.  The  light  of  nature  makes  known  the  existence  of  God,
and  some  features  of  his  character.  But  its  twilight,  whilst  touching  here  and  there
a  mountain-top,  leaves  all  the  valleys  in  darkness.  After  trying  four  thousand  years,
"the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,"  and  did  not  because  it  could  not.  In  all
saving  relations  Christ  is  the  Revelation  of  the  Father  (Heb,  L  1 ;  John  i,  18),  and


OH.  TUL 1— 14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  1«7


Scripture  alone  reveals  Christ  (John  v.  39),  and  the  way  of  life  through  him.  (2)  It
it  the  vehicle  of  spiritual  power.  "The  power  of  God  unto  salvation-"  is  Paul's
gynonym  for  the  gospel.  Spiritual  energy,  no  doubt,  inheres  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  he
operates  only  through  or  with  the  truth.  It  carries  the  power  by  which  life  is  ^ven
(1  Pet.  i,  23),  by  which  life-functions  are  discharged  (Rom.  x.  17),  by  which  the  life-
principle  is  sustained  (Jer.  xv.  16),  by  which  growth  is  promoted  (1  Pet.  ii,  2).  In
fine,  the  "  engrafted  Word,"  received  with  meekness,  "  is  able  to  save  our  souls."  The
power  that  begins,  that  sustains,  that  develops,  that  matures  religious  life  is  a  power
linked  inseparably  to  tlie  Word.  That  any  saving  grace  is  attainable  in  the  absence  of
it  is  a  thing  impossible  of  proof,  and  whicli  all  Scripture  testimony  bears  against.
(3)  Tt  is  the  asswrance  of  spiritual  good.  "  We  are  saved  by  hope,"  and  it  is  through
patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  that  this  heavenly  candle  is  lighted  in  the  soul
(Rom.  viii.  24;  xv.  4).  The  Scriptures  reveal  the  heavenly  blessings  in  store,  and
thus  supply  the  warp  and  woof  out  of  which  the  web  of  comfort  is  woven.  What  we
shall  have,  and  that  we  shall  have  it,  is  the  burden  of  the  Word  of  promise,  which,
making  the  rich  future  sure,  makes  thus  the  present  glad  and  strong.  Poor  indeed
would  man  be  if  there  were  no  such  word  to  twine  the  heart's-ease  wlien  his  brow  is
wrung  in  anguish  and  distress.  To  Israel,  sinful  but  penitent,  God  elsewhere,  allotting
the  bread  of  adversity,  promises,  "  Thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teachers,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxx.  20,
21).  This  is  calamity,  but  with  compensation.  "  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,
but  by  every  word  that  cometh  out  of  the  mouth  of  God; "  and  with  God,  their  Guide
and  Counsellor,  no  scarcity  of  bread  could  make  them  altogether  wretched.  But,  vioe
versA,  the  proposition  will  not  hold,  b'or  the  loss  of  the  Word  there  is  no  offset  possible.
The  impoverishment  is  central  and  radical,  and  all  hedging  is  out  of  the  question.
3.  This  loss  at  a  time  when  it  would  be  most  keenly  felt.  "  The  Word  of  the  Lord  was
precious  in  those  days ;  there  was  no  open  vision."  The  mere  fact  of  the  sudden  with-
drawal of  the  Word  would  create  an  immediate  demand  for  it.  In  this  case  the  demand
would  rest  on  a  practical  necessity.  "Crushed  by  oppressors,  hearing  only  of  gods
more  cruel  than  those  who  make  them,  how  will  they  hunger  and  thirst  for  any
tidings  of  One  who  cares  for  the  weary  and  heavy  laden?  "  (Maurice).

II.  The  oiboumstancks  that  provoke  it.  Tlie  unique  rigour  of  the  penalty
suggests  some  special  circumstances  in  the  provoking  crime.  One  of  these  would  be:
1.  Extreme  heinousness.  "There  is  a  sin  unto  death."  It  will  never  be  forsaken.
It  precludes  the  idea  of  penitence.  It  involves  the  perversion,  or  rather  inversion,  of
character,  whicli  "  calls  evil  good,  and  good  eviU"  There  is  nothing  for  it  but  the
extreme  penalty  of  being  let  alone.  And  even  that  will  be  inflicted.  Saul  had
provoked  it  when  "  God  answered  him  not,  neither  by  dreams,  nor  by  Urim,  nor  by
prophets."  Israel  had  provoked  it  when  God  said  to  his  servant,  "Thou  shalt  be
dumb, and  shalt  not  be  to  them  a  reprover"  (Ezek.  iii.  26;  vii.  26).  When  a  man  sins
on  principle,  he  is  not  far  off  "  a  famine  of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord."  2.  Failure
of  other  judgments  to  turn.  "  Why  should  ye  be  stricken  any  more?  ye  will  revolt
more  and  more."  Other  judgments  had  been  for  reformation  and  had  failed;  this
would  be  for  destruction — the  only  alternative  left.  When  "  cure  "  is  out  of  the  question,
what  else  is  to  be  done  but  "  kill  "  ?  3.  Chafing  under  and  rejecting  the  Word  itself.
Israel  had  heard  more  of  the  words  of  the  Lord  than  they  wished.  'Phey  had  made  an
effort  to  get  rid  of  them,  or  some  of  them,  by  forbidding  his  prophets  to  speak  his
message.  More  of  the  Word  to  men  in  that  mind  would  have  been  thrown  away,  and
God  never  wastes  his  gifts.  If  we  shut  our  eyes,  he  will  take  away  the  light.  If  we
close  our  ears,  "the  voice  of  the  charmer"  will  soon  be  silent.  The  men  who  will  not
have  the  words  of  the  Lord  shall  be  treated  to  a  dispensation  of  silence.

III.  The  persons  it  assails.  When  judgment  falls  upon  a  nation,  the  righteous
often  juS'er  with  the  wicked.  Yet  here  there  are  persons  against  whom  the  shock  is
specially  directed.  They  are :  1.  Those  who  put  their  trust  in  idols.  The  idolater
would  naturally  feel  the  extreme  of  dislike  to  the  Word  of  God,  and  adopt  the  strongest
measures  against  his  prophets.  He  was  therefore  in  that  moral  condition  which
needed,  and  that  opposing  attit'ide  which  provoked,  the  heaviest  stroke.  God  will  not
give  his  "  praise  to  graven  images,"  and  he  will  give  the  man  who  trusts  in  them  an
early  opportunity  of  discovering  whether  they  will  suffice  for  his  need.  The  more
unreservedly  he  has  chosen  them,  the  more  entirely  will  he  be  left  to  them.    2.  The


16»  THE  BOOK  OJf  AMOS.  [oh.  vm.  1— W


young  and  buoyant  among  these.  (Yer.  13.)  Youth  and  hope  are  hardest  to  oyercome.
There  is>  a  buoyancy  in  them,  and  a  recuperative  energy,  that  rises  above  calamity  to
wh  ch  the  old  and  broken  would  succumb.  Yet  even  these  would  not  avail.  Physical
sutfering,  breaking  down  even  youth  and  vigour,  mental  suffering,  overwhelming  the
most  buoyant  hopefulness,  were  among  the  enginery  of  the  wrath  of  Qod.

IV.  The  bffectb  it  produces.  These  are  distressing  as  the  calamity  producing
them  is  stern  (ver.  12).  1.  They  seek  the  Word  in  vain.  It  is  sought  as  a  last  resource.
In  the  extremity  of  trouble,  and  the  failure  of  other  help,  men  turn  perforce  to  God,
And  then  the  quest  is  vain.  It  is  made  too  late,  and  from  a  motive  to  which  there  is
no  promise  given  (Frov,  i.  24 — 28).  It  is  sought  in  an  extremity,  as  the  lesser  evil  of
two ;  and  in  abject  fear,  in  which  there  is  no  element  of  loyalty  or  love ;  and,  thus
sought,  cannot  in  the  nature  of  things  be  found.  The  time  for  Qod  to  give  it  has
passed,  because  the  time  has  passed  in  which  men  might  have  received  it  to  any  effect
of  spiritual  good.  2.  They  faint  in  the  search.  "  They  shall  reel  from  sea  to  sea."
"  The  word  [reel]  is  used  of  the  reeling  of  drunkards,  of  the  swaying  to  and  fro  of  trees
in  the  wind,  of  the  quivering  of  the  lips  of  one  agitated,  and  then  of  the  unsteady
seeking  of  persons  bewildered,  looking  for  what  they  know  not  where  to  find"  (Pusey),
It  is  characteristic  that  search  is  maxie  everywhere  but  in  the  South,  where  alone  the
true  worship  of  God  was,  and  where,  if  anywhere,  his  Word  might  have  been  found
Wrong  seeking  is  wrong  all  round,  and  so  is  of  necessity  in  vain.  It  is  a  loss  of  effort,
which  is  "  a  grievous  labour  won."  It  wearies  itself  out  in  aimless  blind  exertion,
made  out  of  season,  and  vitiated  by  the  very  ills  that  drive  men  to  make  it.  3.  They
fall  and  never  rise.  God  will  "make  an  end."  The  time  for  it  had  come.  Sin  had
reached  a  climax.  Evil  character  had  reached  a  final  fixity.  Calamity  had  ceased  to
improve.  The  tardy  anxiety  for  a  Divine  communication  meant  simply  that  every
other  resource  was  exhausted.  "  Cut  it  down  "  is  the  one  process  of  husbandry  for
which  the  tree  is  fitted.  (1)  There  is  a  fa/mine  of  the  Word  on  IsradstUl.  "Blindness
in  part  has  happened  "  to  them,  in  that,  "  when  Moses  is  read,  the  veil  is  on  their
heart."  This  practically  amounts  to  the  removal  of  the  Word.  It  is  a  sealed  book  to
them — sealed  by  their  blindness  to  its  spiritual  sense.  Not  heathen  ignorance  is  more
effectually  cut  off  from  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  than  Jewish  prejudice  and  hate.
(2)  It  rests  on  them  for  the  lame  reason  for  which  it  came.  Persistently,  blindly,
bitterly,  they  rejected  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  They  made  it  evident  that  they  would
not  have  it  (Acts  xiii.  46).  And  so  sadly,  reluctantly,  but  sternly,  it  was  taken  from
them.  "  Lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gentiles."  When  that  Word  was  spoken,  Israel  was  left
to  the  darkness  it  loved.  In  that  chosen  darkness  they  still  grope,  and  will  till  the
latter-day  glory  dawns.  (3)  It  will  give  place  one  day  to  a  period  of  plenty.  "  God
hath  not  cast  off  his  people  which  he  foreknew."  There  is  a  remnant  to  which  the
promise  belongs,  and  with  which  it  will  be  kept  (Eom.  ix.  27;  xi.  5).  "  When  it  shall
turn  to  the  Lord,  the  veil  shall  be  taken  away.  The  period,  extent,  and  occasion  of
this  turning  are  not  revealed,  but  it  will  be  the  crowning  triumph  of  the  "gloriouf
grace  "  of  God,


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — BipenesB  in  iniquity.  The  figure  here  employed  by  Amos  comes  very
naturally  from  him  who  had  been  a  gatherer  of  the  fruit  of  the  sycomore  tree.  But
at  the  same  time,  it  is  somewhat  of  a  shook  to  the  reader  of  this  prophecy  to  find  such
a  similitude  employed  for  such  a  purpose.  Our  associations  with  "  a  basket  of  summer
fruit "  are  all  agreeable ;  but  here  the  ripeness  is  in  iniquity,  and  is  unto  condemnation
and  destruction.

I.  A  PAST  PBOOBSS  OP  MATURITY  IN  SIN  18  IMPLIED.  As  the  fruit  has  been  ripened
during  months  of  growth  unto  maturity,  so  the  nation  of  Israel  has  gradually  and
progressively  come  to  such  a  condition  as  that  lamented  and  censured  by  the  prophet
of  the  Lord.  1.  Past  privileges  have  been  misused.  No  nation  had  been  so  favoured
as  the  descendants  of  Jacob ;  the  greater  the  privileges,  the  greater  the  guilt  of  neglect
and  abuse.  2.  Past  warnings  have  been  despised.  If  the  people  could  not,  in  the
exercise  of  their  own  faculties,  foresee  the  end  of  all  their  misdeeds,  they  had  no


OH.  vra.  1— 14.]  THE   BOOK  OF  AMOa  169

excuse,  for  prophet  after  prophet  had  arisen  to  rebuke  them  for  unfaithfulness,  and  to
warn  them  of  impending  judgment.  3.  Past  invitations  have  been  unheeded.  Often
had  the  messengers  of  God  mingled  promises  with  threats,  invitations  with  censure.
But  in  vain.  The  voice  of  the  charmer  had  been  disregarded ;  the  tenderness  of  Divine
compassion  bad  been  despised.  Hence  the  process  of  deterioration  had  gone  on.  And
circumstances  which  should  have  ripened  the  national  oharaotei-  into  heroic  virtue,
into  saintly  piety,  had  only  served  to  mature  irreligiousness  and  rebellion.  Thus  the
sun  and  the  showers  which  ripen  the  corn  and  the  wholesome  fruit  bring  also  every
poisonous  growth  to  perfection.

II.  A  SPEEDY   PROSPEOT  OF  CONSEQUENT  DE8TBUCTI0N   IS  BBVBALED.      The  ripe  flXlit

speaks  not  only  of  the  sunshine  of  the  bygone  days,  but  of  the  consumption  which
awaits  it.  In  this  passage  the  figurative  language  of  the  prophet  is  to  be  interpreted
u  foreboding  approaching  ruin.  "  He  that  lieing  often  reproved  hardeneth  his  neck,
shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without  remedy."  1.  Perseverance  in  irreligious-
ness issues  in  deterioration  of  character.  The  very  years,  the  very  privileges,  whicli.
make  the  good  man  better,  make  the  bad  man  worse.  It  was  so  with  Israel  as  a
nation.  The  operation  of  the  same  law  may  be  traced  in  human  society  to-day.  2.
Perseverance  in  irreligiousness  will,  under  the  Divine  government,  involve  chastisement
and  punishment.  The  captivity  foretold  was  to  be  accompanied  by  the  desolation  of
the  capital  and  the  cessation,  or  at  least  the  interruption,  of  national  life.  "  The  end
is  come,"  saith  God,  "  to  my  people  Israel."  The  prosperity  and  superficial  peace  of
the  wicked  must  be  brought  to  a  disgraceful  close. — T.

Ver.  2. — "  My  people."  The  occurrence  of  this  expression  in  such  a  connection  as
this  is  very  amazing  and  very  encouraging.  Even  when,  by  the  mouth  of  his  prophet,
the  Lord  is  uttering  language  of  regretful  denunciation,  the  prediction  of  sore  chastise-
ment, he  still  calls  Israel  his  ownl  God's  ways  are  indeed  higher  than  our  ways,  and
his  thoughts  than  our  thoughts.

I.  This  language  is  a  eeminiscbnob  or  past  elbotion.  God  called  Israel  his
people,  because  he  had  chosen  them  from  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  to  be  the
depositary  of  his  truth,  the  recipients  of  his  Law,  the  Listmment  of  his  purposes  among
TXJtn.  As  early  associations  are  strong  amongoo  men,  as  we  always  retain  a  tender
interest  in  those  whom  we  have  watched  over,  befriended,  and  benefited  from  their
childhood,  so  the  Lord  represents  himself  as  cherishing  kindness  for  the  people  whom
he  had  called  as  it  were  in  their  childhood,  and  nursed  into  maturity.  He  did  not
forget  the  days  "  when  Israel  was  a  child."

XL  This  language  is  proof  of  present  kindness.  He  does  not  say,  "  Te  were
my  people; "  for  they  are  his  people  still.

"  Mine  is  an  unchanging  love,
Higher  than  the  heights  above;
Deeper  than  the  depths  beneath ;
Free  and  faithful  strong  as  death."

Even  In  carrying  out  his  threats  of  punishment,  Jehovah  does  not  act  in  anger  mnd
vindictiveness.  He  is  the  Father  chastening  the  child  whom  he  loveth.  He  does  not
abandon  the  disobedient ;  he  subjects  them  to  discipline  which  may  restore  them  to
submission  and  to  filial  love.

III.  This  language  is  predictive  or  future  reconciliation.  As  long  as  God
says,  "  My  people,"  there  is  hope  for  the  future.  He  has  not  abandoned ;  he  will  not
abandon.  The  city  may  be  razed,  but  it  shall  be  built  again.  There  shall  be
captivity;  but  he  deviseth  means  whereby  his  banished  ones  shall  return.  Wounds
shall  be  healed.  The  grave  shall  give  up  her  dead.  The  wanderer  shall  return,  and
shall  be  clasped  to  the  Father's  patient,  yearning,  rejoicing  heart.  "  My  people  "  are
mine  for  ever.

Application.  God  in  the  midst  of  wrath  remembers  mercy.  When  sin  is  recognized
and  realized  as  such,  when  chastening  has  answered  its  pvirpose,  when  the  disobedient
are  penitent  and  the  rebellious  are  submissive,  then  is  there  hope.  Not  in  any
excellence  connected  with  man's  repentance,  but  in  the  grace  of  the  Father's  heai  t,  in
the  faithfiilness  of  the  Father's  promises.     Not  Israel  alone,  but  mankind  at  Isrge.  arf


170  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  Tm.  1—14.

designated  by  the  Eternal  "  my  people.*  Therefore  he  who  sent  his  Son  to  seek  and
to  save  that  which  is  lost  is  described  as  "  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  specially  of  them
that  believe."— T.

Vera.  4—6. — Oovetoiuness.  It  was  not  for  heterodoxy  in  theology,  it  was  not  for
remissness  in  ritual,  that  Amos  chiefly  reproached  the  Israelites.  It  was  for  injustice,
violence,  and  robbery ;  it  was  for  seeking  their  own  wealth  and  luxury  at  the  expense
of  the  sufferings  of  the  poor.  Avarice,  or  undue  love  of  worldly  possessions,  la  a
serious  vice ;  covetousness,  or  the  desiring  to  enrich  self  at  the  cost  of  neighbours,  is
something  very  near  a  crime,  for  to  crime  it  too  often  leads.

L  Thk  hobai.  disease  of  oovETonsNEBB.  The  symptoms  may  differ  in  differeni
states  of  society ;  and  there  are  details  in  the  text  which  apply  rather  to  the  state  of
society  in  Samaria  of  old  than  to  the  England  of  to-day.  But  the  malady  is  the  same,
deep-rooted  in  the  moral  constitution  of  sinful  men.  This  sin  is :  1.  Injurious  to  the
person  who  commits  it.  He  who  sets  his  affection  upon  this  world's  good,  who  carries
his  selfishness  so  far  as  to  deprive,  or  even  to  wish  to  deprive,  his  neighbour  of  what  is
his — far  more  be  who  uses  fraud  or  violence  to  gratify  this  desire — is  working  his  own
min.  He  is  subverting  the  standard  of  value,  by  setting  the  material  above  the
B|nritual.  He  is  dragging  his  aspirations  down  from  the  stars  above  his  head  to  the
dust  beneath  his  feet.  2.  Mischievous  to  society.  If  all  men  follow  the  example  of
the  covetous,  and  long  for  the  possessions  of  others,  then  human  society  becomes  a
den  of  wild  beasts  bent  upon  devouring  one  another,  and  earth  becomes  a  very  helL
Instead  of  bemg  members  one  of  another,  in  the  case  supposed,  every  man  sees  an
enemy  in  his  neighbour,  and  seeks  bis  harm.  The  bonds  of  society  are  strained,  are
even  broken.  3.  Displeasing  to  God.  In  the  ten  commandments  a  place  was  foimd
for  the  prohibition  of  this  spiritual  offence:- "Thou  shalt  not  covet."  This  fact  is
sufficient  to  show  how  hateful  is  this  sin  in  the  eyes  of  the  great  Lord  and  Buler  of  all.

II.  The  Divinb  remedy  fob  covetousness.  1.  The  recognition  of  the  benevolence
and  bounty  of  God.  Prom  him  cometh  down  "every  good  gift  and  every  perfect
boon."  He  is  the  Giver  of  all,  who  openeth  his  hands,  and  supplieth  the  need  of  every
living  thing.  He  who  would  share  the  Divine  nature  must  cherish  an  ungrudging  and
liberal  spirit.  2.  The  remembrance  of  the  "  unspeakable  Gift,"  and  of  the  incomparable
sacrifice  of  the  Bedeemer.  Our  Saviour's  whole  aim  was  to  impart  to  men  the  highest
blessings,  and  in  the  quest  of  this  aim  he  gave  his  life  for  us.  His  constraining  love
alone  is  able  to  extirpate  that  selfishness  which  in  human  nature  is  the  very  root  of
covetousness.  3.  The  adoption  of  the  counsels  and  the  submission  to  the  spirit  of
Christ.    It  was  his  saying,  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive." — T,

Yer.  7. — The  memory  of  God.  This  language  is  actual  truth,  although  it  is  baled
upon  and  accords  with  the  experience  of  created  intelligences.  Memory  is  one  of  the
primitive  endowments  of  intellect,  admitted  to  be  such  even  by  philosophers,  who  are
very  loth  to  admit  that  the  mind  of  man  can  possess  any  such  endowments.  A  man
who  should  never  forget  would  indeed  be  a  marvel,  a  miracle.  But  it  would  be
inconsistent  with  our  highest  conceptions  of  God  to  suppose  it  possible  for  anything  to
escape  his  memory.  In  his  mind  there  is,  of  course,  neither  past  nor  future,  for  time  ii
a  limitation  and  condition  of  finite  intelligence.  To  the  Eternal  all  is  present ;  all
events  to  him  are  one  eternal  now.

L   A  QENEBAL  TBUTH  CONCEBNINa  THE  DlVINE  NATUBB  AND  GOTEBNMENT.      Nothing

is  unobserved  by  God,  and  nothing  is  forgotten  by  him.  All  men's  actions  as  they
ar«  performed  photograph  themselves  indelibly  upon  the  very  nature  of  the  Omniscient
and  Eternal.    Nothing  needs  to  be  revived,  for  nothing  ever  becomes  dim.

n.   A  SOLEMN    TBUTH    CONOEBNINO    THE    CONDUCT   AND   PS08PE0TB   OF    THE    BIKFUIi.

Parents  forget  the  wrong-doing  of  their  children,  and  rulers  those  of  their  subjects.
Hence  many  evil  deeds  escape  the  recompense  which  is  their  due.  But  Jehovah,  who
"  remembered "  (to  use  the  expression  necessarily  accommodated  to  onr  infirmity)  all
the  acts  of  rebellion  of  which  the  chosen  people  had  been  guilty,  does  not  lose  the
record  of  any  of  the  offences  committed  by  men.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  written
"in  a  book  of  remembrance"— a  book  one  day  to  be  tmroUed  before  the  eyes  of  th«
rigktaoua  Judge.


OH.  vm.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  171


III.   A   PEB0I0U8   A88UKAN0E   CONCERKUla    THE    GOOD    PUEP0SE8   AND   ACTIONS   WHIOB

Gk>D  DIBOEBNB  AND  SEMABK8  IN  HIS  PBOPLB.  Thus  we  find  saintly  men  of  old  in
their  prayers  beseeching  the  Lord  to  remember  them :  "  Remember  me,  O  Lord,  for
good ; "  "  Remember  me  with  the  favour  thou  showest  unto  thy  people."  He  who
said,  "  I  know  thy  works,"  who  said,  "  I  will  never  forget  any  of  their  works,"  is  a
Being  to  whom  we  may  safely  commend  ourselves  and  all  that  is  ours  which  he  himself
creates  and  which  he  approves.

Application.  1.  In  our  confessions  let  us  be  frank  and  open  with  God,  who  searcheth
the  heart,  and  who  forgetteth  nothing.  It  would  be  folly  to  suppose  that  he  forgets
our  sins ;  it  would  be  wickedness  to  strive  to  forget  them  ourselves.  "  If  we  confess
our  sin's,  he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive."  2.  In  our  prayers  for  pardon  let  us  bear  in
mind  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  he  will  "  remember  no  more  "  the  offences  of  his
penitent  and  believing  people.  He  will  treat  us  as  if  he  had  forgotten  all  our  rebellion,
and  as  if  he  remembered  only  our  purposes  and  vows  of  loyalty. — T.

Ver.  10. — "A  bitter  day.'"  There  is  something  incongruous  in  this  language.  Day
is  the  bright  and  beauteous  gift  of  God,  and  its  sunlight  and  all  the  glory  it  reveals
may  justly  be  taken  as  the  emblem  of  happiness  and  prosperity.  The  light  is  sweet ;
the  day  is  joyous.  Yet  here  there  is  depicted  a  bitter  day  I  The  context  makes  it  evident
that  this  is  attributable  to  sin,  which  makes  all  sweet  things  bitter,  and  all  bright
things  dim.

I.  The  bittbe  day  of  Israel  contrasts  with  btoonb  days  op  sweetness.
Festivals  and  songs  are  mentioned  in  the  context  as  distinctive  of  the  religious  life  of
the  chosen  people.  And  in  times  of  national  plenty  and  prosperity  there  had  never  been
wanting  abundance  and  even  luxury,  mirth  and  music,  festivity  and  joy.  These  things
have  vanished  into  the  past  now  that  the  "  bitter  day"  has  dawned.

II.  The  bitter  day  of  Israel  is  marked  by  oiecum stances  op  terrible  distress.
The  sun  goes  down,  the'  laud  is  darkened,  mourning  and  lamentation  are  heard,  sack-
cloth is  worn,  the  hair  is  shaved  off  the  heads  lately  anointed  for  the  banquet  and
wreathed  with  flowers;  the  signs  are  those  of  "  mourning  for  an  only  son."  'I'he  fallen
and  wretched  condition  of  the  nation  could  not  be  depicted  more  graphically.  The
prophet-artist  is  skilful  to  heighten  the  dark  colours  which  are  expressive  of  Israel's  woe.

III.  The  bitter  day  op  Israel  is  the  result  of  Israel's  sins.  What  is  called
misfortune  and  calamity  is  often  really  punishment.  There  was  nothing  accidental  in
what  befell  this  nation.  On  thecontrary,Israel  brought  disaster  upon  itself  by  unfaith-
fulness, disobedience,  rebellion.  As  the  people  had  sown,  so  they  were  to  reap.  Under
the  government  of  a  just  God  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  The  fruit  of  sin  cannot  be
otherwise  than  bitter.

IV.  The  bitter  day  op  Israel  is  suogestive  op  lessons  op  wisdom  to  evert
nation.  The  rule  of  a  righteous  God  is  a  fact  not  to  be  disputed.  The  retributive
consequences  of  that  rule  are  not  to  be  evaded.  Let  not  the  people  imagine  a  vain  thing,
or  the  rulers  take  counsel  together  against  the  Lord. — T.

Ver.  11. — Famine  of  the  Word  of  Ood.  There  are  many  blessings  which  are  not
suitably  valued  until  they  are  withdrawn  and  missed.  It  is  so  with  bodily  health,  with
political  liberty,  with  domestic  happiness.  And  the  prophet  assumes  that  it  will  be
found  the  same  with  the  Word  of  God.  When  it  is  possessed — when  the  Scriptures  are
read  and  the  Go^^pel  is  heard — it  is  too  often  the  case  that  the  privilege  is  unappreciated-
But  what  must  it  be  to  be  shut  off  from  all  communication  with  Heaven  I  And  such,
it  was  foretold,  was  to  be  the  lot  of  Israel  in  the  days  of  retribution  and  calamity  which
were  about  to  overtake  Israel.

I.  The  words  of  God  abe  to  the  soul  as  bread  and  water  to  the  body.  Man's
bodily  constitution  is  such  that  food  and  drink  are  a  necessity  to  health  and  even  to
life;  to  be  even  partially  starved  is  to  be  disabled  and  to  be  rendered  wretched.  Even
BO,  the  truth,  the  righteousness,  the  love  of  God,  are  the  necessary  aliment  of  the
spiritual  nature.  "Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  pro-
ceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  Fellowship  with  God  by  his  Word  is  indispensably
necessary  in  order  that  a  high,  holy,  and  acceptable  service  may  be  rendered.

IL  A  PAMINB  OF  THE  WoBD  OF  GoD  IS  TO  BE  DUBAOEn  AS  DETRIMENTAL  TO  SPIBITUAL


178  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [on.  vm.  1—14,

LIFE  AND  WELL-BEING.  1.  If  the  knowledge  of  God  himself  be  withheld,  there  is  for
man  no  solution  of  all  the  mysteries  of  the  universe,  the  mysteries  of  his  being.  2.  If
the  Law  of  God  be  concealed,  there  is  no  sufficient  guide  through  human  life.  3.  If  the
gospel  of  Christ  be  withheld,  there  is  no  peace  for  the  conscience,  no  sufficient  inspira-
tion for  duty,  no  assurance  of  immortality.  4.  If  revelation  be  denied,  there  is  no  power,
no  principle  sufficient  to  guide  and  to  govern  human  society.  (Vide  'The  Eclipse  of
Faith,'  by  the  late  Henry  Rogers,  where  a  chapter  "  The  Blank  Bible,"  sets  forth  the
consequences  which  may  be  supposed  to  follow  upon  the  disappearance  of  the  Holy
Scriptures.)

III.  Thosb  who  possess  the  Word  op  God  shoxtld  by  these  oonsidbbations  be
INDUCED  to  study  IT  AND  TO  USB  IT  ARIGHT.  Neglect  of  the  Divine  Word  may  not
in  our  case  entail  the  actual  deprivation  foretold  in  the  text.  But  it  certainly  will
entail  an  indifference  and  insensibility  to  the  truth,  which  will  be  equally  injurious
and  disastrous.  Now  the  Word  is  ours ;  let  us  listen  to  it  with  reverence  and  faith ;
let  us  obey  it  with  alacrity  and  diligence.  "Walk  in  the  light  while  ye  have  the  light,
lest  darkness  come  upon  you." — T.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Ripeness  for  judgment.  "  Thus  hath  the  Lord  God  showed  unto  me  :
and  behold  a  basket  of  summer  fruit.  And  he  said,  Amos,  what  seest  thou?  And
I  said,  A  basket  of  summer  fruit,"  etc.     The  text  suggests  three  general  truths.

I.  Wicked  nations  grow  eipe  foe  judgment.  The  "  basket  of  summer  fruit,"  now
presented  in  vision  to  Amos,  was  intended  to  symbolize  that  his  country  was  ripe  for
ruin.  This  symbol  suo;gests :  1.  That  Israel's  present  moral  corruption  was  no  hasty
production.  The  ripe  fruit  in  that  basket  did  not  spring  foj  th  at  once ;  it  took  many
months  to  produce.  It  came  about  by  a  slow  and  gradual  process.  Men  do  not
become  great  sinners  at  once.  The  character  of  a  people  does  not  reach  its  last  degree
of  vileness  in  a  few  years ;  it  takes  time.  The  first  seed  of  evil  is  to  be  quickened,
then  it  grows,  ripens,  and  multiplies  until  there  is  a  crop  ready  for  the  sickle.  2.  That
Israel's  season  for  improvement  was  past  and  gone.  The  ripened  fruit  in  that  basket
had  reached  a  stage  in  which  improvement  was  impossible.  Tlie  bloom  was  passing
away,  and  rottenness  was  setting  in.  Nations  become  incorrigible.  The  time  comei
when  it  may  be  said — The  harvest  is  past,  all  cultivation  is  impossible.  What  boots
your  sowing  seed  under  the  burning  suu  of  July  or  August?  The  fructifying  forces  ol
natui-e  will  not  co-operate  with  you.  3.  That  Israel's  utter  ruin  was  inevitable.
Nothing  awaited  that  "  basket  of  summer  fruit "  but  rottenness.  Its  decomposition
was  working,  and  would  soon  reduce  it  to  putrescent  fllth.     So  it  was  with  Israel.

II.  True  prophets  are  made  sensible  or  this  ripeness.  God  gives  Amos  a  vision
for  the  purpose.  "  Thus  hath  tlie  Lord  God  showed  unto  me :  and  behold  a  basket
of  summer  fruit.  And  he  said,  Amos,  what  seest  thou  ?  And  1  said,  A  basket  of
summer  fruit.  Then  said  the  Lord  unto  me,  The  end  is  come  upon  my  people  of  Israel."
God  always  gives  his  true  ministers  a  clear  vision  of  the  subjects  of  their  discourse.
This  clearness  of  vision  is  in  truth  their  call  and  qualification  for  their  Divine  mission.
Men,  alas!  often  assume  the  work  of  the  ministry  whose  mental  vision  is  so  dim  that
they  are  unable  to  see  anything  with  vivid  clearness ;  hence  they  always  move  in  a
haze,  and  their  language  is  circumlocutory  and  ambiguous.  Amongst  the  vulgar,  those
wiio  should  be  condemned  for  their  obtuseness  get  credit  for  their  profundity.  To
every  true  teacher  God  says  at  the  outset,  "What  seest  thou?"  Hast  thou  a  clear
vision  of  this  basket  of  summer  fruit  ?  Hast  thou  a  clear  idea  of  this  subject  on  which
thou  art  about  to  discourse?     Thus  he  dealt  with  Moses,  Elijah,  Daniel,  Paul,  John.

Ill  Almighty  God  makes  his  prophets  sensible  of  the  ripeness  of  a  people's

CORRUITION   IN   ORDER   THAT   THEY   MAY   SOUND   THE   ALARM.       Why    waS    AmOS    thuS

divinely  impressed  with  the  wretched  moral  condition  of  the  people  of  Israel  ?  Simply
that  he  might  be  more  earnest  and  emphatical  in  sounding  the  alarm.  "  The  end  is
come  upon  my  people  of  Israel ;  I  will  not  again  pass  by  theui  any  more.  And  the
songs  of  the  temple  shall  be  bowlings  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord  God:  there  shall  be
many  dead  bodies  in  every  place ;  they  shall  cast  them  forth  with  silence."  What  was
the  calamity  he  was  to  proclaim  ?  1.  Universal  mourning.  "  The  songs  of  the  temple
shall  be  bowlings."  Where  the  shouts  of  mirth  and  the  songs  of  joy  had  been  heard,
there  should  be  nothing  but  the  bowlings  of  distress.    The  inevitable  tendency  of  sio  w


OH.  vm.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  173


to  turn  songs  of  gladness  into  bowlings  of  distress.  2.  Universal  death.  "  And  there
shall  be  many  dead  bodies  in  every  place ;  and  they  shall  cast  them  forth  with  silence."
The  reference  is  to  swovd,  pestilence,  and  famine  multiplying  the  dead  so  rapidly  as  to
render  impossible  the  ordinary  decencies  and  ceremonies  at  funerals.  "Cast  them
forth  with  silence."

Conclusion.  How  stands  our  country?  Is  not  its  moral  depravity  ripening  in
every  direction  ?  Is  it  not  filling  up  Its  measure  of  iniquities,  treasuring  up  wrath
against  the  last  day?  Does  it  not  become  all  true  teachers  to  sound  the  alarm  ?  The
time  seems  past  for  crying,  "  Peace  and  safety."  Destruction  is  at  hand ;  the  fields  are
white  for  harvest. — D.  T.

Vers.  4 — 10. — Avarice.  "  Hear  this,  0  ye  that  swallow  up  the  needy,  even  to  make
the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail,"  etc.  The  prophet  here  resumes  his  denunciatory  discourse
to  the  avaricious  oppressors  of  the  people.  The  verses  may  be  taken  as  God's  homily
to  greedy  men.  "Hear  this."  Hushl  pay  attention  to  what  I  am  going  to  say.
Listen,  "  ye  that  swallow  up  the  needy."  The  words  suggest  three  remarks  concerning
avarice.

I.  It  is  exbcbablb  in  its  spibit.  1.  It  is  sacrilegious.  "  When  will  the  new  moon
be  gone,  that  we  may  sell  corn  ?  and  the  sabbath,  that  we  may  set  forth  wheat  ?  "  Bad
as  Israel  was,  it  still  kept  up  the  outward  observances  of  religion,  yet  these  observances
they  regarded  as  commercial  inconveniences.  In  their  hearts  they  wished  them  away,
when  they  seemed  to  obstruct  their  greedy  plans.  With  sacrilegious  spirit,  they
treated  religious  institutions  as  worthless  in  comparison  with  sordid  gain.  Avarice
in  heart  has  no  reverence  for  religion.  2.  It  is  dishonest.  "  Making  the  ephah  small,
and  the  shekel  great,  and  falsifying  the  balances  by  deceit."  It  is  always  overreaching,
always  cheating ;  it  generally  victimizes  the  poor ;  it  makes  its  fortunes  out  of  the
brain  and  muscles,  the  sweat  and  life,  of  the  needy.  3.  It  is  cruel.  "  Ye  that  swallow
up  the  needy,  even  to  make  the  poor  of  the  land  to  fail.  .  .  .  That  we  may  buy  the
poor  for  silver,  and  the  needy  for  a  pair  of  shoes."  Avarice  deadens  all  social  affections,
steels  the  heart,  and  makes  its  subject  utterly  indifferent  to  all  interests  but  its  own;
it  will  swallow  up,  or  as  some  render  it,  gape  after,  the  needy  just  as  the  wild  beast
pants  after  its  prey.  "  Greedy  men  are  a  generation  whose  teeth  are  as  swords,  and
their  jaw-teeth  as  Isnives,  to  devour  the  poor  from  off  the  earth,  and  the  needy  from
amongst  men  "  (Prov.  xxx.  14).

II.  It  is  abhobeent  to  Jehovah.  "  The  Lord  hath  sworn  by  the  Excellency  of
Jacob,  Surely  I  will  never  forget  any  of  their  works."  Some  render  the  "  Excellency
of  Jacob  "  the  "  Pride  of  Jacob,"  and  suppose  the  expression  to  mean  that  Israel  pro-
fessed to  regard  him  as  its  Glory ;  and  therefore  it  is  by  himself  that  he  swears,  for  he
can  swear  by  no  one  greater.  God  observes  all  the  cruelties  which  avarice  inflicts
upon  the  poor.  Nothing  is  more  abhorrent  to  his  benevolent  nature  than  covetous-
ness.  One  of  the  leading  principles  in  his  moral  code  is,  "  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy
neighbour's  house,"  etc.  Against  no  sin  did  his  blessed  Son  preach  more  earnestly.
"  Take  heed,  beware  of  covetousness,"  said  he  (Luke  xii.  15).  He  closes  the  gates  of
heaven  against  covetousness.  "  The  covetous  shall  not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "
(1  Cor.  vi.  10).  1.  It  is  repugnant  to  his  nature.  His  love  is  disinterested,  unbounded
love,  working  ever  for  the  good  of  the  universe.  Greed  is  a  hideous  antagonist  to  this.
2.  It  is  hostile  to  universal  happiness.  He  created  the  universe  in  order  to  diffuse
happiness ;  but  greed  is  against  it.  (1)  It  is  against  the  happiness  of  its  possessor.
The  soul  under  the  influence  of  covetousness  can  neither  grow  in  power  nor  be  gratified
in  desire.  Avarice  is  an  element  of  hell.  It  is  in  truth  one  of  the  fiery  furies  of  the  soul.
(2)  It  is  against  the  happiness  of  society.  It  prompts  men  to  appropriate  more  of  the
common  f^ooii  than  belongs  to  them,  and  thus  to  diminish  the  required  supplies  of  the
multitude.     It  is  the  creator  of  monopoly,  and  monopoly  is  the  devil  of  social  life.

III.  It  is  a  cubsb  to  socibtt.  See  what  punishment  comes  on  the  land  through
this !  "  Shall  not  the  land  tremble  for  this,"  etc.  ?  Observe :  1.  How  God  makes
nature  an  avenging  angel.  He  makes  "  the  land  tremble."  He  "  toucheth  the  hills,
and  they  smoke;"  pours  out  waters  as  a  flood.  He  can  make  the  world  of  waters
deluge  the  earth  as  the  overflowing  Nile  at  times  inundates  the  land  of  Egypt.  He
can  (to  use  human  language)  roll  bank  the  sun.     "  I  will  cause  the  sun  to  go  down  at


174  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOtJ.  [oh.  vul  1—14

noon."  2.  How  God  makes  a  multitude  to  suffer  on  account  of  the  iniquities  of  the
few.  "  And  I  will  turn  your  feasts  into  mourning,  and  all  your  songs  into  lamenta-
tions ;  and  I  will  bring  up  sackcloth,"  etc.

CSoNOLUsioN.  Avoid  covetousness.  It  is  the  chief  of  the  principalities  and  powers  of
darkness.  It  may  be  considered  the  grea,t  fountain  whence  all  the  streams  of  crime  and
misery  flow  forth.  It  is  eternally  opposed  to  the  virtue  and  happiness  of  the  universe.
The  fable  of  Midas  in  Grecian  mythology  is  strikingly  illustrative  of  this  tremendous
evil.  Bacchus  once  offered  Midas  his  choice  of  gifts.  He  asked  that  whatever  he  might
touch  should  be  changed  into  gold.  Bacchus  consented,  though  sorry  that  he  had  not
made  a  better  choice.  Midas  went  his  way  rejoicing  in  his  newly  acquired  power,
which  he  hastened  to  put  to  the  test.  He  could  scarcely  believe  bis  eyes  when  he
found  a  twig  of  an  oak,  which  he  had  plucked,  become  gold  in  his  hand.  He  took  up
a  stone,  and  it  changed  to  gold.  He  touched  a  sod ;  it  did  the  same.  He  took  an  apple
from  a  tree ;  you  would  have  thought  he  had  robbed  the  garden  of  the  Hesperides.  His
joy  knew  no  bounds ;  and  when  he  got  home  he  ordered  the  servants  to  set  a  splendid
repast  on  the  table.  Then  he  found  to  his  dismay  that  whether  he  touqhed  bread,
it  hardened  in  his  hand,  or  put  a  morsel  to  his  lips,  it  defied  his  teeth.  He  took  a  glass
of  wine,  but  it  flowed  down  his  throat  like  melted  gold.  In  utter  terror,  fearing
starvation,  he  held  up  his  arms  shining  with  gold  to  Bacchus,  and  besought  him  to
take  back  his  gift.  Bacchus  said,  "  Go  to  the  river  Factolus :  trace  tlie  stream  to
its  fountain-head ;  there  plunge  your  head  and  body  in,  and  wash  away  your  feult  and
its  punishment."    Hence  Midas  learned  to  hate  wealth  and  splendour. — D.  T.

Vers.  11 — 13. — Soul-famine.  "  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord  God,  that  I
will  send  a  famine  in  the  land,  not  a  famine  of  bread,  nor  a  thirst  for  water,  but  of
hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  The  Israelites  now  despised  the  message  of
the  prophets,  and  by  a  just  retribution,  in  addition  to  all  their  other  calamities,  they
should  experience  a  total  withdrawal  of  all  prophetic  communications.  In  whatever
direction  they  might  proceed,  and  whatever  efforts  they  might  make  to  obtain  informa-
tion relative  to  the  issue  of  their  trouble,  they  should  meet  with  nothini;  but  disap-
pointment. The  subject  of  these  words  is  soul-famine,  and  they  suggest  three  general
remarks.

I.  That  the  PBOFOUNDBST  WAKT  of  human  NATUKB  is  a  OOMMnNICATION  FBOM  THB

ETERNAL  MIND.  This  is  implied  in  the  Divine  menace  of  sending  a  worse  famine  than
the  mere  want  of  bread  and  water.  They  were  special  communications  from  himself,  not
the  ordinary  communications  of  nature,  that  Jehovah  here  refers  to.  And  man  has  no
greater  necessity  than  this ;  it  is  the  one  urgent  and  imperial  need.  Two  great  ques-
tions are  everlastingly  rising  from  the  depths  of  the  human  soul.  1.  How  does  the
Eternal  fed  in  relation  to  me  as  a  sinner  ?  Nature  tells  me  how  he  feels  in  relation  to
me  as  a  creature ;  but  nature  was  written  before  I  fell.  2.  How  am  I  to  get  my  moral
nature  restored  f  I  have  a  sense  of  guilt  that  is  sometimes  intolerable ;  the  elements
of  my  nature  are  in  eternal  conflict ;  I  have  sadly  terrible  forebodings  of  the  future.
Kow,  the  special  Word  of  God  can  alone  answer  these  questions.  These  are  the  problems
of  men  the  world  over.  God's  ^ord  is  to  the  human  soul  what  food  is  to  the  body —
that  which  alone  can  strengthen,  sustain,  and  satisfy.  But  as  the  soul  is  of  infinitely
greater  importance  than  the  body,  the  Divine  Word  is  more  needed  than  material  food.

II.  That  the  greatest  disease  of  human  nature  is  a  lack  of  appetite  fob
THIS  communication.  Which  is  the  greater  want  of  the  body — the  want  of  food,  or
the  want  of  appetite  for  food  ?  The  latter,  I  trow,  for  the  latter  implies  disease.  It  is
BO  with  the  soul.  The  vast  majority  of  souls  have  lost  the  appetite  for  the  Divine
Word.  They  are  perishing,  shrivelling  up,  for  the  lack  of  it.  The  desire  is  gone.
They  die,  not  for  the  want  of  the  food,  but  for  the  want  of  appetite.  As  a  rule,  the
starvation  of  souls  is  not  for  the  lack  of  food,  but  for  the  lack  of  appetite.  The  worst
of  this  disease  is  (1)  men  are  not  conscious  of  it ;  (2)  it  works  the  worst  ruin.

III.  That  the  greatest  misery  op  human  nature  is  a  quickened  appetite  and
NO  SUPPLIES.  "  They  shall  wander  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  the  north  even  to  the
east,  they  shall  run  to  and  fro  to  seek  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  shall  not  find  it."
1.  The  appetite  will  be  quickened  sooner  or  later.  Sometimes — would  it  were  ever
sol — it  is  quickened  here,  where  supplies  abound.    Hear  Job's  cry,  "  Oh  that  I  knew


0H.IX.1— 15.J  THE  BOOK  OiJ'  AMOS.  175


where  I  might  find  him  1 "  And  hear  Saul's  cry  at  Endor,  "  Bring  me  up  Samuel."
Oh  for  one  word  from  his  lips,  one  loving  sentence  from  the  mouth  of  the  great  Father !
"  Bring  mo  up  Samuel."  2.  When  the  appetite  is  quickened  and  there  is  no  supply,
it  is  an  inexpressible  calamity.  Such  a  period  will  come.  "  The  days  shall  come,"  saya
Christ,  "  when  ye  shall  desire  to  see  one  of  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  ye  shall
not  see  it "  (Luke  xvii.  22).  And  again,  "  Ye  shall  seek  me,  and  not  find  me :  lor
waere  I  am,  thither  ye  cannot  come  "  (John  vii.  34).  Oh  miserable  state  of  immortal
souls,  to  be  crying  to  the  heavens,  and  those  heavens  to  be  as  hard  as  brass  1 — D.  T.

Ver.  14. — Religious  sincerity.  "  They  that  swear  by  the  sin  of  Samaria,  and  say.  Thy
god,  0  Dan,  liveth ;  and.  The  manner  of  Beersheba  liveth ;  eveia  they  shall  fall,  and
never  rise  up  again."  "  The  sin  of  Samaria "  means  the  idolatry  of  Samaria.  In
Samaria  they  worshipped  the  golden  calf  as  the  chief  object ;  but  it  would  seem  there
were  other  inferior  idols.  The  god  of  Dan  was  the  golden  calf  set  up  by  Jeroboam  in
Dan  (1  Kings  xii.).  "The  lulfilment,"  says  Delitzseh, " of  these  threats  commenced
with  the  destruction  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  and  the  carrying  away  of  the  ten  tribes
into  exile  in  Assyria,  and  continues  to  this  day  in  the  case  of  that  portion  of  the
Israelitish  nation  which  is  still  looking  fur  the  Messiah,  the  Prophet  promised  by
Moses,  and  looking  in  vain  because  they  will  not  hearken  to  the  preaching  of  the
gospel  concerning  the  Messiah  who  appeared  as  Jesus."  The  words  suggest  a  thought
or  two  in  relation  to  religious  sincerity.

I.  That  religious  sincerity  is  no  proof  of  the  aocuract  of  religious  orbed.
These  Israelites  seem  to  have  been  sincere  in  their  worship  of  the  golden  calf ;  "  they
swore  by  it."  That  dumb  idol  to  them  was  everything.  To  it  they  pledged  the
homage  of  their  being.  Yet  how  blasphemously  erroneous,  how  contrary  to  the  expresss
mandate  of  Jehovah,  "  Thou  shalt  have  none  other  gods  but  me  "  1  How  contrary  to  the
dictates  of  common  sense  and  all  sound  reasoning!  Idolatry,  in  every  i'orm  and  every-
where, is  a  huge  falsehood.  Hence  sincerity  is  no  proof  that  a  man  has  the  truth.
There  are  millions  of  men  in  all  theologies  and  religions,  who  are  so  sincere  in  believing
lies,  that  they  will  fight  for  their  lies,  make  any  sacrifice  for  their  lii.'S,  die  for  their  lies.
Error,  perhaps,  can  number  more  martyrs  than  truth.  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  sincere  when
he  was  persecuting  the  Church  and  endeavouring  to  blot  the  name  of  Christ  from
the  memory  of  his  age.  "  I  verily  thought  with  myself,  that  I  ought  to  do  many  things
contrary  to  the  name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,"  etc.  (Acts  xxvi.  9).  Hence  sincerity  is  not
necessarily  virtuous.  A  man  is  sincere  when  he  is  faithful  to  his  convictions;  but
if  his  convictions  are  unsound,  immoral,  ungodly,  his  sincerity  is  a  crime.  The  fact
that  thousands  have  died  for  dogmas  is  no  proof  of  the  truth  of  their  dogmas.

II.  That  religious  sincerity  is  no  pboteotion  against  the  punishment  that
follows  error.  "  They  shall  fall,  and  never  rise  up  again."  The  sincerity  of  the
Israelites  in  their  worship  in  Bethel  and  at  Dan  prevented  not  their  ruin.  There  are  those
who  bold  that  man  is  not  responsible  for  his  beliefs — that  so  long  as  he  is  sincere  he  is  a
truthful  man,  and  all  things  will  go  well  with  him.  In  every  department  of  life  God  holds
a  man  responsible  for  his  beliefs.  If  a  man  takes  poison  into  his  system,  sincerely
believing  that  it  is  nutriment,  will  his  belief  save  him  ?  Error  leads  evermore  to  disap-
pointment, confusion,  and  oftentimes  to  utter  destruction.  To  follow  error  is  to  go
away  from  reality ;  and  to  leave  reality  is  to  leave  safety  and  peace.

Conclusion.  Whilst  there  is  no  true  man  without  sincerity,  sincerity  of  itself  does
not  make  a  man  true.  When  a  man's  convictions  correspond  and  square  with  ever-
lasting realities,  then  his  sincerity'  is  of  incomparable  worth. — D.  T.


EXPOSITION,

CHAPTEB  IX.
Vers.  1 — 10. — §  6.    The  fifth  vision  dis-


plays the  Lord  standing  by  the  altar  and
commanding  the  destruction  of  the  temple
(ver.   1).     No  one  shall  escape  this  judg-


ment, flee  whither  he  will  (vers.  2 — 4);  tor
God  is  Almighty  (vers.  5,  6).  Their  elec-
tion shall  not  save  the  guilty  Israelites ;
still  they  shall  not  be  utterly  destroyed
(veis.  7—10).


176


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[oh.  IX.  1 — 1&


Ver.  1. — I  saw  the  Lord,    It  is  now  no
longer  a  mere  emblem  that  the  prophet
Bees,  but  actual  destruction.     He  beholds
the  majesty  of  God,  as  Isa.  vi.  1 ;  Ezek.  x.
1.    Upon  (or,  by)  the  altar;  t.e.  the  altar  of
burnt  offering  at  Jerusalem,  where,  it  is
supposed,  the  whole  nation,  Israelites  and
Ju.dsean8,  are  assembled  for  worship.     It  is
natural,  at  first  sight,  to  suppose  that  the
Sanctuary  of  the  northern  kingdom  is  the
scene  of  this  vision,  as  the  destruction  of
idolatry  is  here  emblemized ;  but  more  pro-
bably Bethel  is  not  meant,  for  there  were
more  altars  than  one  there  (ch.  iil.  14),  and
one  cannot  imagine  the  Lord  standing  by
the  symbol  of  the  calf-worship.    Smite.   The
command  is  mysteriously  addressed  to  the
destroying  angel  (comp.  Exod.  xii.  13;  2  Sam.
xxiv.  1.5,  etc. ;  2  Kings  lix.  35).   The  lintel  of
the  door;  rh  i\aa-T^piov  (Septuagint) ;  car-
dinem  (Vulgate) ;  better,  the  cliapiter  (Zeph.
ii.  14) ;  i.e.  the  capital  of  the  columns.    The
word  kaphtor  is  used  in  Exod.  xxv.  81,  etc.,
for  the  knop  or  ornament  on  the  golden
candlesticks;    here    the   idea  is  that   the
temple  receives  a  blow  on  the  top  of  the
pillars  which  support  it  suflBoient  to  cause
its  overthrow.     The  LXX.  rendering  arises
from  a  confusion  of  two  Hebrew  words  some-
what similar.   The  posts ;  the  threslioldi ;  i.e.
the  base.     The  knop  and  the   threshold
imply  the  total  destruction  from  summit  to
base.    Cut  them  in  the  head,  all  of  them ;
rather,   hrealt    them  [the    capital    and    the
thresholds']  to  pieces  upon  the  head  of  all.
Let  the  falling  building  cover  them  with
its  ruins.     The  Vulgate  renders,  avaritia
enim  in  capite  omnium,  confounding  two
words.    Jerome  had  the  same  Hebrew  read-
ing, as  he  translates,  qusestus  eorum,  avari-
tia, as  if  giving  the  reason  for  the  punish-
ment.    The  overthrown  temple  presents  a
forcible  picture  of  the  destruction  of  the
theocracy.    The  last  of  them  (oh.  iv.  2);
tlie  remnant;  any  who  escape  the  fall  of  the
temple.    He  that  fleeth,  e'tc.    All  hope  of
escape  shall  be  cut  off.

Ver.  2. — The  thought  of  ver  1  is  further
expanded,  the  notion  of  flight  being,  as
Jerome  says,  dissected.  For  dig,  the  LXX.
reads,  "  be  hidden ;  "  but  the  expression
implies  a  breaking  through, (Ezek.  viii.  8).
Hell  (Sheol)  is  supposed  to  be  in  the  inmost
part  of  the  earth  (comp.  Ps.  oxxxix.  7,  8;
Obad.4).  Take  them.  To  receive  punishment.

Ver.  3. — The  top  of  Carmel.  Among  the
woods  and  thickets.  There  are  no  oaves  on
the  summit  of  Carmel.  "Amos  tells  us  that
in  his  day  the  top  of  it  was  a  place  to  hide
in  ;  nor  has  it  changed  its  character  in  this
respect.  ...  I  would  not  have  been  prompted
t ;  place  '  the  top  of  Carmel '  third  in  such  a
•sries  of  hiding-places,  yet  I  can  fully  appre-
ciate the  comparison  from  my  own  experi-


ence. Ascending  from  the  south,  we  followed
a  wild,  narrow  wady  overhung  by  trees,
bushes,  and  tangled  creepers,  through  which
my  guide  thought  we  could  get  up  to  the
top ;  but  It  became  absolutely  impracticable,
and  we  were  obliged  to  find  our  way  back
again.  And  even  after  we  reached  the
summit,  it  was  so  rough  and  broken  in
some  places,  and  the  thom-bushes  so  thick-
set and  sharp,  that  our  clothes  were  torn
and  our  hands  and  faces  severely  lacerated ;
nor  could  I  see  my  guide  at  times  ten  steps
ahead  of  me.  From  suoh  biblical  intima-
tions, we  may  believe  that  Carmel  was  not
very  thickly  inhabited"  (Thomson,  'The
Lnnd  and  the  Book,'  Central  Palestine,  p.
237,  etc.).  Other  writers  speak  of  the  occur-
rence of  caves  and  deep  valleys  in  the
Carmel  range.  In  the  bottom  of  the  sea.  Both
this  and  heaven  (ver.  2)  are  impracticable
hiding-places,  and  are  used  poetically  to
show  the  absolute  impossibility  of  escape.
Serpent  (naeliash,  elsewhere  called  leviathan
and  tannin,  Isa.  xxvii.  1),  some  kind  of  sea-
monster  supposed  to  be  venomous.  Dt.
Pusey  mentions  that  certain  poisonous
hydrophidsB  are  found  in  the  Indian  and
Pacific  Oceans,  and  may  probably  infest  the
Bed  Sea  and  the  Persian  Gulf.

Ver.  4. — Captivity  itself,  in  which  state
men  generally,  at  any  rate,  are  secure  of
their  lives,  shall  not  save  them  from  the
sword  (Lev.  xxvi.  33;  Dent,  xxviii.  65,  etc;
comp.  Tobit  i.  17,  18;  ii.  3,  where  we  see
that  the  murder  of  captives  was  not  un-
usual). The  prophet  looks  forward  to  the
Assyrian  deportation.  For  evil  The  people
are  indeed  subject  to  God's  special  attention,
but  only  in  order  to  punish  them  (Ps.  xxxiv.
15,  16;  Jer.  xliv.  11).

Ver.  5. — To  confirm  the  threats  just
uttered,  the  prophet  dwells  upon  God's
omnipotence,  of  which  he  gives  instances.
He  who  will  do  this  is  the  Lord  God  of  hosts.
There  is  no  copula  in  the  Hebrew  here.  (So
ch.  iv.  13;  v.  8.)  This  title,  Jehovah  Elohim
Zebaoth,  represents  God  not  only  ns  Buler  of
the  heavenly  bodies,  but  as  the  Monarch  of
a  multitude  of  heavenly  spirits  who  execnte
his  will,  worship  him  in  his  abiding-place,
and  are  attendants  and  witnesses  of  his
glory  (see  note  on  Hag.  i;  2).  Shall  melt ;
iro\ci(ioii  (Septuagint) ;  comp.  Ps.  xlvi.  6;
xcvii.  5;  Micah  i.  4;  Nah.  i.  5.  The  ex-
pression denotes  the  destructive  effects  of
the  judgments  of  God.  Shall  mourn.  The
last  clauses  of  tlie  verse  are  a  repetition  of
ch.  viii.  8,  with  some  slight  variation.

Ver.  6. — Stories;  avdfiaaiv  (Septuagint);
asceneionem  (Vulgate);  upper  ehambert,  or
the  stages  by  which  is  the  ascent  to  the
highest  heavens  (comp.  Deut.  x.  14 ;  I  Kings
viii.  27 ;  Ps.  civ.  3).  His  troop  (agitddaft);
vault.    The  word  is  used  foT"tlie  bonds"


OH.  IX.  1— 15.J


THE   BOOK   OF   AM08.


177


of  the  yoke  in  Isa.  Iviii.  6 ;  for  "  the  bunch  "
of  hyasop  in  Exod.  xii.  22.  So  tlie  Vul<;ate
here  renders  fasciculiim  swum,  with  the
notion  that  the  stories  or  chambera  just
mentioned  are  bound  together  to  connect
heaven  and  earth.  But  the  clause  means,
God  hath  founded  tlie  vault  or  firmament  of
heaven  upon  (not  t»)  the  earth,  where  his
throne  is  placed,  and  whence  he  sends  the
rain.  The  Septiiagitit  renders,  tV  itrayye-
\tav  aiiToi,  "his  promise."  So  the  Syriac.
The  waters  of  the  sea.  The  referunoe  is  to
the  Deluge  (oh.  v.  8 ;  Gen.  vii.  i,  11).

Ver.  7. — Israel's  election  to  be  God's
people  should  not  save  them,  unless  their
conduct  corresponded  with  Uod's  choice.
If  they  obeyed  not,  they  were  no  better  in
his  eyes  than  the  heathen,  their  delivery
from  Egypt  had  no  more  significance  than
the  migration  of  pagan  nations.  Here  is  a
contrast  to  ch.  vi.  1,  etc.  The  children  of
Israel  were  now  no  dearer  than  tlie  children
of  the  Ethiopians  {Cusliites).  The  Cuehites
are  introduced  as  being  descendants  of  the
wicked  Ham,  and  black  in  complexion  (as
Jer.  xiii.  23),  the  colour  of  their  skin  being
considered  a  mark  of  degradation  and  of
evil  character.  The  Philistines  from  Caphtor;
from  Cappadoeia(liS.X.  and  Vulgate).  This
rendering  is  mistaken.  The  immigration
spoken  of  took  place  before  the  Exodus  (see
Deut.  ii.  23 ;  Jer.  xlvii.  4) ;  and  Caphtor  is
either  Crete  (see  Dillman  on  Gen.  x.  14)  or
the  coast-land  of  the  Delta,  "which  was
occupied  from  an  early  period  by  Phoenician
colonists,  and  thus  came  to  be  known  to  the
Egyptians  as  Keft  ur,  or  'greater  PhoBiiicia,'
Keft  being  the  Egyptian  name  of  Phoenicia  "
(Monthly  Interpreter,  iii.  136).  Mediseval
Jewish  writers  identified  it  with  Damietta
(Conder, '  Handbook  to  the  Bible,'  p.  237).
The  Syrians  (Aram,  Hebrew)  from  Kir;  robs
Sipovs  EK  $66pov,  "the  Syrians  out  of  the
ditch  "  (Septuagint) ;  Syros  de  Oyrene  (Vul-
gate) ;  see  note  on  ch.  i.  S.  "  Aram  "  here
prolukbly  means  the  Damascenes,  Damascus
shortly  before  the  time  of  Moses  having  been
occupied  by  a  powerful  body  of  immigrants
from  Armenia  (Bwald,  'Hist,  of  Israel,'  i.
286,  311,  Eng.  transl.).

Ver.  8. — The  sinful  kingdom.  The  king-
dom of  all  Israel  and  Judab,  the  same  as
the  house  of  Jacob  just  below,  though  a
different  fate  awaits  this,  regarded  as  the
covenant  nation,  whose  are  the  promises.
Destroy  it,  etc.,  as  was  threatened  (Deut.
vi.  15).  Saving  that.  In  spite  of  the  de-
struction of  the  wicked  people,  God's  pro-
mises hold  good,  and  there  is  still  a  rem-
nant who  shall  be  saved  (Jer.  xxx.  11).

Ver.  9. — For,  lo !  He  explains  how  and
why  the  whole  nation  is  not  destroyed.  I
will  sift.  Israel  is  to  be  dispersed  among
the  nations,  tried  and  winnowed    among

A.MOa.


them  by  affl'etinn  and  persecution,  tliat
the  evil  may  fall  to  the  ground  and
perish,  and  the  good  be  preserved.  The
word  rendered  "sift"  implies  "to  shake  to
and  fro;  "  and  this  shaking  shall  show  who
are  the  true  Israelites  and  who  are  the  false,
who  retain  their  faith  and  cleave  to  the  Lord
under  all  difficulties,  and  who  lose  their  hold
of  true  religion  and  ussimilate  themselves
to  the  heathen  among  whom  they  dwell.
These  last  shall  not  return  from  captivity.
The  least  grain ;  Hebrew,  tseror, "  pebble ; "
BO  the  Vulgate,  lapillm;  Septuagint,  avy-
rpi)i/ut, "  fragment."  It  is  used  in  2  Sam.  xvii.
13  of  small  stones  in  a  building ;  here  as  hard
grain  in  distinction  from  loose  chaff  (Keil).
The  solid  grain,  the  good  wheat,  are  the
righteous,  who,  when  the  chaff  and  dust  are
cast  away,  are  stored  in  the  heavenly  gamer,
prove  themselves  of  the  election,  and  inherit
the  promises  (oomp.  Isa.  vi.  13;  Bzek.  ix.
38 ;  Matt.  iii.  12).  Fall  upon  the  earth ;  i.e.
perish,  be  lost  (1  Sam.  xxvi.  20).

Ver.  10.— If  any  are  to  be  saved,  it  will
not  be  the  sinners ;  they  need  not  flatter
themselves  that  their  wilful  blindness  shall
seoire  them.  The  evil  shall  not  overtake.
Tliey  lulled  themselves  into  a  false  security,
and  shut  their  ears  against  the  warnings  of
the  prophets;  but  that  would  avail  them
nothing.  Prevent;  come  upon  suddenly,
surprise.

Vers.  11— 15.— Part  IV.  EpiLoauB.  The
Establishment  of  tbe  New  Kinsdoh  and
TBE   Beiqn   of  Messiah.     The   KmoDOM

SHALL  EMBBAOE  ALL  NATIONS  (vorS.  11,
12),  SHALL  BE  ENRICHED  WITH  SUPEB-
ABCNDANT  SPIRITUAL  BlESSINQS  (vcrS.  13,
14),  AND  SHALL  ENDURE  FOR  EVER  (ver.  15).

Ver.  11. — In  that  day.  When  the  judg-
ment has  fallen.  The  passage  is  quoted  by
St.  James  (Acta  xv.  16, 27),  mostly  from  the
Greek,  in  confirmation  of  the  doctrine  that
the  Church  of  God  is  open  to  all,  whether
Jew  or  Gentile.  The  tabernacle  (suhlcaK);
hut,  or  tent  (as  Jonah  iv.  5);  no  palace
now,  but  fallen  to  low  estate,  a  "little
house  "  (oh.  vi.  1 1 ).  The  prophet  refers  pro-
bably to  the  fall  of  the  kingdom  of  David
in  the  ruin  wrought  by  the  Chaldeans.
Interpreted  spiritutdly,  the  passage  shadows
forth  the  universal  Church  of  Christ,  raised
&om  that  of  the  Jews.  Pusey  notes  that
in  the  Talmud  Christ  is  called  "the  Son
of  the  fallen."  The  breaches.  The  house  of
David  had  sustained  breaches  under  the
hands  of  Jeroboam  and  Joash,  and  in
the  severance  of  the  ten  tribes  at  the  hands
of  Assyrians  and  Ohaldees;  these  should
be  repaired.  Unity  should  he  restored,  the
captives  should  return,  and  another  king-
dom should  be  established  under  anotbei


178


THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.


[cm.  IX.  1 — 16.


David,  the  Messiah.  Judah'e  temporary
prosperity  under  Uzziah  and  Hezekiah
would  have  been  a  totally  inadequate  fulfil-
ment of  the  prophecy.  Prophecies  of  the
temporal  and  spiritual  are,  as  usual,  blended
togetlier  and  run  up  into  each  other.  His
ruins,  The  destroyed  places  of  David.  I
will  build  it;  Hebrew,  her.  The  whole
Jewish  Church  (comp.  Jer.  xxxi.  4;  xxziii.
7).  As  in  the  days  of  .old.  The  days  of
David  and  Solomon,  the  most  flourishing
times  of  the  kingdom  (2  Sam.  vii.  11,  12,
16).  In  the  expressiou,  "of  old,"  Hebrew,  "of
eternity,"  may  luik  an  idea  of  the  length  of
time  that  must  elapse  before  the  fulfilment
of  the  promise.  Septuagint,  'Ai/oiKoSo/i'fiira>
ahrijv  Ka6^s  at  Tifiipat.  rov  alwvos,  "  I  will
build  it  up  as  are  the  days  of  eternity."  This
seems  to  signify  that  the  building  is  to  last
for  ever.

Ver.  12. — ^That  they  (the  true  children  of
Israel)  may  possess  the  remnant  of  Edom;
i.e.  those  who  were  nearest  in  blood,  and  yet
most  hostile  of  all  men.  David  had  sub-
dued the  Edomites(2  Sam.  viii.  11;  1  Kings
xi.  16),  and  Amaziah  had  inflicted  a  great
slaughter  upon  them  (2  Kings  liv.  7) ;  but
later  they  recovered  their  independence  (2
Kings  xvi.  6,  where  "  Edomites  "  should  be
read  for  "  Syrians  ; "  2  Chron.  xxviii.  17),
and  were  actively  hostile  against  the  Jews.
It  was  on  this  account  that  they  were  empha-
tically denounced  by  Obadiah.  "  The  rem-
nant" is  mentioned  because,  according  to
the  threat  in  oh.  i.  11,  12,  they  would  be
punished  so  that  only  a  few  would  escape.
The  Septuagint  gives,  "OTraw  fKfyTii(ru<nv  at
KaTd\oaroi  rvv  ayOpdirav  [ritv  Kvptov,  Alex-
andrian], "  That  tlie  remnant  of  men  may
earnestly  seek  the  Lord,"  regarding  Edom
as  a  representative  of  aliens  from  God,  and
altering  the  text  to  make  the  sens*  more
generally  intelligible.  This  version,  which
reads  "  Adam,"  men,  instead  of  "  Edom,"  is
endora  .1  by  St.  James.  Which  are  called  by
my  Name ;  "  over  whom  my  Name  hath  been
called  "  (Septuagint).  Tliis  is  closer  to  the
Hebrew;  but  the  meaning  is  much  the
same,  viz.  all  those  who  are  dedicated  to
God  and  belong  to  him  being  by  faith  in-
corporated into  the  true  Israel.  (For  the
phrase,  comp.  2  Sam.  lii.  28 ;  Isa.  iv.  1 ;
and  to  illustrate  the  idea,  refer  to  Deut.
xxviii.  10;  Isa.  xliv.  5;  Ps.  Ixxxvii.  5,  6.)
The  Messianic  kingdom  shall  be  established
in  order  that  salvation  may  be  extended  to
all  nations  who  embrace  it.  Saith  the  Iiord;
M  the  saying  of  Jehovah.  This  is  added  to
show  the  immutability  of  the  promise.  The
covenant-God  himself  hath  predicted  it.

Vei.  13. — The  prophet  expatiates  upon


the  rich  blessings  which  shall  follow  the
establishment  of  ihe  kingdom.  Under  the
figure  of  a  supernatural  fertility  are  repre-
sented the  victories  of  grace  (comp.  Isa.  zi.
6;  Ezek.  xxvi.  10,  etc.;  xxxiv.  25,  etc.).
The  blessing  is  founded  on  the  Mosaic  pro-
mise (Lev.  xxvi.  5).  The  ploughman  shall
overtake  the  reaper.  Ploughing  and  har-
vest shall  be  continuous,  without  sensible
interval.  The  treader  of  grapes  him  that
soweth  seed.  The  vintage  should  be  so
abundant  that  it  should  last  till  sowing-
time.  The  monntaiuB  shall  drop  sweet
wine.  This  is  from  Joel  iii.  18.  And  alX
the  hills  shall  melt.  As  Joel  says,  "  shall
flow  with  milk,"  in  this  promised  land
"flowing  with  milk  and  honey."  Septua-
gint, irdi'Tes  ot  fiovyol  ffi/Kpvroi  tffoVTaif
"all  the  hills  shall  be  planted"  vrith  vines
and  olives.  For,  as  Corn.  &  Lapide  quotes,
"  Bacchus  amat  colles  "  (Virg., '  Georg.,'  ii
113).  The  hyperbolical  expressions  in  the
text  are  not  to  be  taken  literally;  they
depict  in  bright  colours  the  blessings  at
the  kingdom  of  Messiah.  Material  and
temporal  blessings  arc  generally  represented
as  closely  connected  with  spiritmd,  and  as
figurative  of  them.  Such  predictions,  un-
derstood literally,  are  common  in  the  so-
called  Sibylline  Books;  see  e.g.  lib.  iii.  743,
etc.,  where,  among  other  prodigies,  we
have —

Vbtyis  re  /l^fei  'y\vKtphs  KfVKOio  yi!}uueros.

One  is  reminded  of  the  golden  age  depicted
by  Virgil  in  his  fourth  eclogue.  Troohon
cites  Glaudian,  '  In  Bufln.,'  i.  381,  eto. —

"...  neo  vomere  sulcus  adunco
Findetur ;  subitis  messor  gaudebit  aiistis.
Borabunt  querceta  favls ;  stagnantia  passim
Vina  fluent,  oleique  laous."

Ver.  14. — I  will  bring  again  the  cap-
tivity ;  t.e.  I  will  repair  the  misery  which
they  have  suffered.  The  expression  is  here
metaphorical,  and  does  not  necessarily  refer
to  any  restoration  to  an  earthly  Canaan.
Shall  build  the  waste  cities  (Isa.  liv.  3).  All
these  promised  blessings  are  in  marked  con-
trast to  the  punishments  threatened  (Deut.
xxviii.  30,  83,  39 ;  compare  similar  promises
in  Isa.  Ixv.  21,  etc.).

Ver.  15. — The  blessing  shall  last  for  ever.
They  shall  no  more  be  pulled  up.  This  was
not  true  of  the  literal  Israel ;  it  must  be
taken  of  the  spiritual  seed,  planted  in  God's
land,  the  Church  of  Christ,  against  which
the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  prevail.  "  Lo,"
says  Christ,  "I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto
the  end  of  the  world  "  (Matt  xxviii  20).


OH.IX.  1— 15.j  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOa  179


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1—4. — A  quest  which  none  may  elude.  We  have  here  a  yivid  picture  of  a
dreadful  subject.  The  prophet  makes  a  new  departure  in  his  mode  of  figuration.  In
other  visions  we  saw  the  judgments  of  Heaven  painted  in  terror-moving  forms;  the
mighty  forces  of  nature  let  loose  and  working  destruction  on  sinners  of  men.  Here
we  see,  not  judgments  merely,  but  the  Judge  himself,  active  for  destruction,  fulmi-
nating his  thunders,  brandishing  his  two-edged  sword,  and  spreading  devastation
where  his  anger  rests.  It  is  true  all  natural  forces  are  his  instruments,  and  their
results  his  work.  But  they  do  not  so  reveal  themselves  to  our  sense.  It  is  Scripture
that  shows  us  an  omnipotent  God  in  the  forces  of  nature,  and  in  every  disaster  they
work  a  judgment  from  his  hand.

I.  The  God  of  Isbakl  standing  on  an  idol-altar.  Not  the  altar  of  God  at
Jerusalem,  but  the  altar  for  calf-worship  at  Bethel,  is  probably  here  referred  to.  God's
standing  on  the  idol-altar  is  not  /or  purposes  of  fellowship.  That  would  be  a  moral
impossibility.  "  What  concord  hath  Christ  with  Belial  ?  And  what  agreement  hath
the  temple  of  God  with  idols  ?  "  Not  light  and  darkness  are  less  compatible,  not  fire
and  water  more  inherently  antagonistic,  than  the  great  God,  who  "  is  all  in  all,"  and
the  idol  which  is  "  nothing  in  the  world."  Neither  is  it  in  token  of  tolerance.  Between
the  two  can  be  no  peace,  no  truce,  no  parley.  "  God  is  a  jealous  God,"  and  can  have
no  rival.  His  sovereignty  and  supreme  greatness  make  him  necessarily  intolerant
here.  There  can  be  no  Dagona  on  any  terms  where  the  ark  rests.  It  is  for  purposes
of  destruction  only,  "  There,  where,  in  counterfeit  of  the  sacrifices  which  God  had
appointed,  they  oflered  would-be-atoning  sacrifices  and  sinned  in  them,  God  appeared
standing,  to  behold,  to  judge,  to  condemn "  (Pusey).  When  God  approaches  sin,  it
is  only  to  destroy  it.  Sometimes  be  destroys  it  in  saving  the  sinner ;  sometimes  the
sin  and  the  sinner,  hopelessly  wedded,  are  destroyed  together.

II.  Idolaters'  judgment  beginning  at  theib  idol-shrine.  "Smite  the  lintel,"
etc.  This  is  the  natural  course.  The  lightnings  of  judgment  strike  the  head  of  the
highest  sin,  and  strike  it  in  the  provision  made  for  its  commission.  And  there  is  a
fitness  in  this  Divine  order.  1.  It  stops  the  worship.  With  the  appliances  destroyed,
the  observances  could  not  go  on.  The  interruption  of  sin  is  an  intelligible  and  appro-
priate object  of  Divine  judgment.  The  most  effectual  punishment  of  criminal  indulgence
is  a  visitation  that  stops  it  perforce.  If  not  cured,  at  least  the  evil  is  stayed.  2.  It
reveals  the  Divine  hand.  Two  plagues  had  passed  on  Egypt  without  any  very  deep
impression  having  been  made.  But  when  Moses  smote  the  dust,  and  it  became  lice  on
iJian  and  beast,  the  magicians  said  unto  Pharaoh,  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God."  The
miracle  stopped  at  once  the  entire  ceremonial  of  their  national  worship  by  making  all
the  priests  unclean.  The  idols  were  confounded,  and  Jehovah's  power  revealed.  When
a  man  finds  his  sufferings  in  the  seat  of  his  sins,  he  has  materials  for  identifying  them
as  the  visitation  of  God.

III.  This  judgment  following  them  into  ALL  theib  ebtbbats.  (Vers.  2,  3.)
Driven  in  terror  from  their  idol-shrines,  men  seek  escape  in  diverse  ways,  according  to
their  diverse  characters  and  surroundings.  But  it,  is  a  Vain  quest.  I'he  God  who  is
omnipresent  to  infallible  saving  effect  in  the  case  uf  his  saints  (Ps.  cxxxix.  8—12)  is
so  also  to  the  inevitable  destruction  of  the  ungodly.  One  climbs  the  heaven  of  proud
defiance,  to  be  brought  ignominiously  down  (Jer.  xlix.  16 ;  Obad.  4).  Another  "  breaks
through  into  the  hell"  of  abject  fear  and  self-abasement,  to  be  dragged  forth  into  the
intolerable  light.  The  Carmel  of  philosophic  nescience  presents  no  cave  or  grove
impenetrable  by  the  hounds  of  righteous  judgment.  Even  the  sea  of  deeper  sinful
indulgence  has  a  serpent  of  avenging  providence  in  its  depths,  from  whose  bite  there
is  no  escape.

IV.  This  judgment  eeaohing  them  through  the  lnsthumentality  of  all
natural  causes.  The  "  sword,"  as  representing  human  agency,  and  the  "  serpent,"
as  representing  the  agency  of  natural  causes,  are  both  set  in  motion  by  God's  command.
The  causes  of  nature  are  to  God  as  the  bodily  organs  to  the  brain,  viz.  servants  to  do
his  bidding.  He  "  acts  himself  into  them."  Human  wills  are  accessible  to  the  will  of
the  Supreme,  and  move  with  it  as  the  tides  with  the  circling  moon.    The  Assyrian


IBO  THE   BOOK   OF   AMOS  [oh.  a.  1—15.

warring  against  Israel  for  his  own  reasons  is,  nevertheless,  the  rod  of  his  anger  in  the
band  of  Israel's  God.  This  fact  gives  moral  significance  to  many  events  that  seem
purely  natural.  The  drunkard's  bloated  body,  the  sensualist's  shattered  health,  the
spendthrift's  ruined  fortunes,  are  results  of  natural  laws,  it  is  true,  but  of  these  directed^
and  combined  by  supernatural  power,  and  accomplishing  Divine  moral  ends.  The  evil
that  comes  through  nature  comes  from  its  God.

Ver.  4. — The  lidless  eye.  God  is  not  an  absentee.  He  sits  at  the  helm  of  things.  Ha
administers  the  afifairs  of  the  world  which  he  has  made.  All  creatures  he  takes  cogni-
zance of,  determines  their  destiny,  controls  their  actions.  His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all.
And  this  rule  is  moral.  Under  it  condition  takes  the  colour  of  character.  God  is  pure
to  the  pure,  froward  to  the  froward  (Ps.  xviii.  26).  This  transgressors  know  to  their
bitter  cost.

I.  God's  eye  follows  the  wicked.  In  one  sense  his  "  eyes  are  upon  the  righteous  "
(Ps.  zxziv.  15).  On  the  wicked  they  rest  in  a  very  different  sense.  1.  In  heed/ulness.
Divine  omniscience  is  an  uncomfortable  fact  which  the  wicked  try  not  to  realize.
"  They  seek  deep  to  hide  their  counsel  from  the  Lord."  Their  whole  aim  is  to  get
away  from  him ;  to  be  able  to  think  thoughts  he  shall  not  know,  and  cherish  desires
he  shall  not  sift,  and  do  works  he  shall  not  observe  (John  iii.  20 ;  Isa.  xl.  27).  But
the  project  is  futile  (Jer.  xxiii.  24 ;  Ps.  xxxiii.  13 ;  Prov.  xv.  3).  God  is  everywhere,  sees
everything,  fills  heaven  and  earth.  No  dispensation  of  inadvertency  is  possible.  Gbd
will  not  ignore.  He  cannot  be  inattentive.  Events  of  whatever  kind,  and  everywhere,
are  infallibly  submitted  to  his  cognizance  as  the  movements  of  the  clouds  above  are
faithfully  mirrored  in  the  glassy  lake.  He  fills  all  things,  and  all  that  happens  happens
in  his  presence.  2.  In  perfect  insight.  "  I  the  Lord  do  search  the  heart."  Noticing
things,  God  sees  them  through  and  through,  discerns  their  character,  and  appraises
their  moral  value.  The  mind  and  heart  of  man  are  no  mystery  to  him.  No  slightest
motion  of  either  eludes  his  perfect  knowledge.  The  purpose  before  it  comes  forth  in
action,  the  thought  before  it  has  matured  into  a  purpose,  the  fancy  before  it  has  taken
shape  in  evil  desire, — all  these  are  open  to  his  eye.  Even  to  the  heathen  he  was  totus
oculua,  a  Being  "  all  eye."  He  knows  all  things  eternally,  immeasurably,  immutably,
and  by  a  single  act ;-  and  men  and  their  works  and  words  and  wishes  are  continually  in
his  sight.  3.  In  uncompromising  displeasure.  God  is  passible.  He  can  be  affected  by
the  actions  of  his  creatures.  His  possession  of  genuine  character  ensures  his  genuine
feeling.  The  moral  perfection  of  that  character  ensures  his  feeling  appropriately.
"  There  must  be  so  much  or  such  kind  of  passibility  in  him  that  he  will  feel  toward
everything  as  it  is,  and  will  be  diversely  affected  by  diverse  things  according  to  their-
quality  "  (Bushnell).  Therefore  "  he  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day."  Sin  is  to
him  as  smoke  to  the  eyes  and  vinegar  to  the  teeth.  It  pains  him  inevitably,  and  leads
to  that  infinitely  pure  recoil  of  his  nature  from  evil,  and  antagonism  to  it,  in  which  hii
wrath  consists.

II.  God's  influences  follow  his  eve.  "  I  set  mine  eye  upon  them  for  evil,"  etc.
God's  look  brings  evil  consequences  where  it  falls  on  evil  things.  1.  To  feel  is  with
Ood  to  act.  Much  human  feeling  comes  to  nothing.  No  action  is  taken  on  it.  Its
very  existence  may  remain  unspoken.  Not  so  with  God.  It  is  a  result  of  his  perfec-
tion that  his  mental  or  moral  attitude  toward  any  object  is  his  active  attitude  toward
it  also.  Disposition  associates  itself  inevitably  with  suitable  action.  Feeling  against
sin,  he  must  also  act  against  it.  His  very  feeling  is  equivalent  to  action,  for  his  volition
is  power,  and  to  will  a  thing  is  to  bring  it  to  pass.  2.  God's  action  exactly  answers  to  his
feeling.  If  he  regard  sin  as  evil,  he  will  not  treat  it  as  good.  His  attitude  towards  it
must  be  one  all  round,  and  therefore  rigorous  all  round.  And  so  it  is.  Whatever
mystery  may  be  about  certain  cases,  there  is  no  mystery  about  the  connection  between
all  suffering  and  sin.  In  sickness,  in  sorrow,  in  anxiety,  in  doubt,  in  all  forms  and
degrees  of  pain,  God's  eye  and  hand  are  on  sinners  for  evil.  Until  sin  becomes  con-
genial to  his  nature,  it  cannot  become  satisfactory  to  the  sinner.

III.  God's  mbrot  warns  the  binnbh  of  both.  He  makes  no  secret  of  his  attitude
and  way  in  reference  to  sin.  Both  are  made  known  to  those  whom  they  most  concern.
1.  This  course  is  mercifid.  It  gives  the  sinner  an  advantage.  He  sees  the  moral
quality  of  sin  as  hateful  in  God's  sight,  and  its  inevitable  result  as  provoking  hi*


OH.  IX.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  181

hostile  action.  He  can  neither  sin  ignorantly  nor  incur  the  penalty  unawares.  Fore-
warned, it  is  his  fault  if  he  is  not  forearmed.  2.  It  is  moral.  It  tends  to  deter  from
sin,  and  so  to  save  from  its  penal  consequences.  The  thought  that  it  is  under  God's
eye  ought  to  make  sin  impossible,  and  does  make  it  more  difficult.  The  knowledge
that  it  ends  inevitably  in  ruin  does  much  to  stay  the  transgressor's  hand.  3.  It  is
Judicial.  Sin  done  consciously  under  God's  eye,  and  deliberately  in  defiance  of  his
wrath,  is  specially  guilty.  The  warning  which  being  heeded  might  have  deterred  from
sinning  will  greatly  aggravate  the  guilt  of  it  if  disregarded.  The  truth  will  be,  as  wa
treat  it,  a  buoy  lifting  us  out  of  the  sinful  sea,  or  a  millstone  sinking  us  deeper  in  its
devouring  waters.

Vers.  5,  6. — The  image  of  the  Beity  in  "great  nature's  open  eye."  God's  wrath  "  ia
revealed  from  heaven  against  all  ungodliness."  And  it  is  terrible  as  it  is  great.
Impotent  anger  is  ridiculous,  but  the  wrath  of  Omnipotence  overwhelms.  Whatever,
therefore,  illustrates  the  power  of  God  adds  terror  to  his  threat.  And  such  is  the
effect  of  this  passage.  The  stern  purport  of  the  previous  commination  is  emphasized
by  the  moving  picture  it  presents  of  the  Divine  majesty  and  resistless  might.  Omni-
potent resources  will  push  forward  to  full  aocomplisliment  the  purposes  of  Omniscience
against  doomed  and  abandoned  Israel.     We  have  here —

I.  God's  Name  revbalinq  his  chabaoteb.  This  is  the  ohjeot  of  a  name.  It  dis-
tinguishes the  bearer  from  others,  and  this  by  expressing  some  leading  characteristic.
1.  The  Lord.  This  is  the  word  invariably  substituted  by  the  Jews  for  Jehovah  in  the
reading  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  It  is  a  name  of  authority,  and  means  "  the  supreme
Lord."  The  Lord  is  over  all.  He  is  Governor  and  Judge  in  one.  He  does  as  it  pleases
him.  He  disposes  of  all  matters,  and  settles  all  interests  without  appeal.  He  reckons
with  none,  and  none  can  call  him  to  account.  2.  Jehovah.  This  is  a  verb,  third
person,  signifying  "  he  is,"  and  another  form  of  the  name  "  I  am,"  by  which  God
revealed  himself  to  Moses.  Its  root-idea  is  that  of  "  underived  existence ; "  then,  as
arising  out  of  this,  "  independent  action ; "  and  then,  as  the  corollary  of  both,  "  eternity
and  unchangeableness  "  (see  Fairbairn).  It  is  thus  the  proper  name  of  God  to  man ;
self-existent  himself,  the  Author  of  existence  to  all  persons  and  things,  and  manifesting
his  existence  to  those  capable  of  knowing  it.  Jehovah  is  the  concrete  and  historical
name  of  God.  As  revealed  by  it,  he  exists  by  his  own  energy,  and  makes  to  be  all
things  that  are.  Absolute  and  undetermined,  he  determines  absolutely  all  things
outside  himself  Unseen  and  invisible,  he  comes  forth — concretes  himself,  as  it  were —
in  the  works  which  his  hands  have  made.  3.  Jehovah  of  hosts.  This  title  appears
first  in  1  Sam.  i.  3,  and,  as  has  been  remarked,  "  simultaneously  with  the  foundation
of  the  Jewish  monarchy."  It  may  mean  Lord  of  (Israel's)  armies  (Ps.  xliv.  9),  or  of
celestial  beings  (Ps.  cxlviii.  2),  or  of  the  heavenly  bodies  (Isa.  xl.  26),  or,  more  pro-
bably, of  all  three.  In  this  wide  sense  we  •'  see  in  the  title  a  proclamation  of  the
universal  sovereignty  of  Jehovah,  needed  within  the  nation,  lest  that  invisible  sovereignty
should  be  forgotten  in  the  visible  majesty  of  the  king ;  and  outside  the  nation,  lest
Jehovah  should  be  supposed  to  be  merely  a  national  deity  "  (Kirkpatrick,  on  1  Samuel).
This  is  the  God  whose  eye  is  for  evil  on  Israel — God  supreme,  God  absolute,  and  God
in  special  relation  to  the  hosts  of  Israel  who  had  forsaken  him,  to  the  heavenly  bodies
which  they  worshipped,  and  to  the  angel-hosts,  the  ministers  to  do  his  will  on  those
whom  he  would  visit  in  wrath.

II.  God's  opbeations  eevbaling  his  way.  What  God  does  is  a  criterion  of  what
he  can  do.  His  all-pervading  activity  will  include  in  its  sweep  the  accomplishment  of
the  destiny  again  and  again  announced.  1.  He  occupies  the  sky.  "  Who  buildeth  his
stories,"  etc.  There  were,  according  to  a  rabbinical  theory,  seven  heavens,  the  seventh
containing  the  throne  of  the  Eternal,  symbolized  by  Solomon's  throne  of  ivory  and
gold,  the  six  steps  leading  up  to  which  symbolized  in  turn  the  six  celestial  regions
below  the  highest  heaven  (I  Kings  x.  18—20).  In  terms  of  this  mystic  theory  is  the
expression,  "stories  of  the  heaven."  Heaven  is  conceived  of  as  a  giddy  height,
approached  by  aerial  steps  or  stages,  all  of  them  the  handiwork  of  God.  He  stands  on
the  "cloud-capped  towers."  He  dwells  in  the  "airy  palaces."  He  walks  on  the
"  fleeco-like  floors."  He  makes  the  different  levels  of  the  firmament  steps  between  his
throne  and  the  earth  below     2.  He  metamorphoses  the  earth.    (Yet.  6.)    Gtxi'a  word


182  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  ix.  1—15.

brought  order  out  of  chaos  at  first.  "  He  spake,  and  it  was  done,"  etc.  By  the  same
word,  turning  order  into  chaos  again,  shall  all  things  he  dissolved  (2  Pet.  iii.  10,  11).
It  is  little  for  the  word  that  makes  and  unmakes,  that  created  and  will  dissolve  the
frame  of  nature,  to  move  in  earthquake  upheaval  the  solid  crust  of  earth  till  it
mimicks  the  roll  of  the  sea,  or  "Nile's  proud  flood"  in  its  rise  and  fall.  3.  Ee  dis-
tributes the  waters  of  the  sea.  The  sea  is  the  most  stupendous  natural  object.  There
is  majesty  in  all  its  moods,  and  awe  in  its  very  presence.  Hence  in  the  mythology
a  god  was  allocated  to  it,  brother  to  Zeus,  the  god  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  second
only  to  him  in  power.  And  God's  "  way  is  in  the  sea."  He  rules  its  waves.  He
regulates  its  myriad  currents  and  restless  tides.  Its  great  throbbing  pulse  beats  but
at  his  will.  He  holds  its  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and  concentrates  or  dis-
perses them  as  it  pleases  him.  He  is  a  God,  then,  "whose  wrath  is  terrible."  Every
force  of  nature  he  not  alone  controls,  but  wields  an  instrument  of  his  will.  In  ch.  v.
8  the  same  fact  is  pled  as  an  inducement  to  seek  liis  favour,  which  here  appears  as  a
reason  to  dread  his  wrath.  As  the  same  locomotive  will  drive  the  train  before  it  or
draw  it  after  it  at  the  engineer's  will,  so  the  fact  of  the  omnipresent  energy  of  God  is
fitted  alike  to  alarm  and  to  attract,  but  in  either  case  to  bring  the  sinner  to  his  feet.

III.  Physical  convulsions  the  countbeparts  op  moral  convulsions.  Events  in
the  two  worlds  happen  according  to  similar  if  not  identical  laws.  To  a  discriminating
eye,  the  one  set  rises  up  in  the  likeness  of  the  other,  created  so  by  God.  "  He  daily
buildeth  his  stories  in  the  heavens  when  he  raiseth  up  his  saints  from  things  below  tc
heavenly  places,  presiding  over  them,  ascending  in  them  "  (Pusey).  "  He  touoheth  th«
earth,  and  it  melteth"  when  he  stretches  out  his  hand  in  wrath  on  its  inhabitants,  and
men's  hearts  fail  them  for  fear.  "  He  calleth  to  the  waters  of  the  sea,  and  poureth
them  out  over  the  earth,"  when  he  makes  the  wicked  the  rod  of  his  anger  to  overrun
and  vex  society  (Ps.  xciii.  3,  4).  Verily  the  God  who  makes  the  heavens  his  throne,
the  earth  his  footstool,  the  elements  his  playthings,  and  men  and  angels  his  miciisters,
is  a  Being  in  whose  favour  is  life  and  whose  power  is  terrible.

Vera.  7 — 10. — The  exalted  brought  low.  "Think  not  to  say  within  yourselves.  We
have  Abraham  to  our  father."  And  yet  the  blind  and  infatuate  Israel  were  always
saying  it.  They  said  it  in  view  of  every  imminent  catastrophe.  They  said  it  in
abbreviation  of  all  argument.  They  said  it  in  lieu  of  fit  and  seasonable  action.  They
made  it  an  amulet  to  hang  around  their  neck  when  they  rushed  purblind  into  rebellious
action.  They  ran  into  it  as  into  an  intellectual  joss-house,  where  any  absurdity  was
raised  to  the  dignity  of  a  god.  This  last  support  of  their  false  security  the  prophet  in
this  passage  knocks  away.     They  had  acted  altogether  out  of  character,  and  now —

I.  Apostate  Israel  can  only  take  bank  with  the  heathen  in  God's  estima-
tion. National  election  was,  no  doubt,  a  pledge  of  national  preservation,  but  only  in
connection  with  national  faithfulness;  for:  1.  A  spiritual  relation  with  the  unspiritual
is  impossible.  "  What  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with  unrighteousness  ?  "  It  is  a
moral  impossibility.  They  are  moral  opposites  and  incompatible  in  the  nature  of
things.  Becoming  assimilated  to  the  heathen,  Israel  contracted  themselves  out  of  the
covenant,  and  became  "  afar  off,"  even  as  they.  2.  A  relation,  when  it  is  repudiated
on  either  side,  vii  tually  terminates.  Israel  had  said,  "  We  will  not  have  this  Man  to
rule  over  us ; "  and  the  relation  of  favour  on  the  one  side  and  fealty  on  the  other  could
not  survive  the  step.  God  must  cease  to  be  their  God  when  they  ceased  to  be  his
people.  "  God  chose  them  that  they  might  choose  him.  By  casting  him  off  as  their
Lord  and  God,  they  cast  themselves  off  and  out  of  his  protection.  By  estranging  them-
selves from  God,  they  became  as  strangers  in  his  sight"  (Pusey).  3.  Acts  done  became
of  a  spiritual  relation  existing  lose  their  meaning  when  it  is  broken  off.  "  Have  I  not
brought  Israel,"  etc.?  They  might  think  that,  alter  bringing  them  out  of  Egypt,  God
could  never  disown  them,  however  unfilial  and  unfaithful.  But  had  not  the  circum-
stances of  their  idolatry  and  corruption  altered  the  case  ?  Theirs  was  not  the  only
exodus.  He  had  brought  "  the  Philistines  out  of  Caphtor,  and  the  Syrians  out  of  Kir ; "
yet  these  nations  were  aliens,  and  to  be  destroyed  (ch.  i.  5).  If  Israel  conformed  itself
to  these  in  character  and  way,  then  Israel's  exodus  would  lose  its  significance,  and  be
DO  more  than  events  of  a  like  kind  in  their  distant  past.  What  the  father  did  for  the
eon  is  no  binding  precedent  for  the  case  of  the  prodigaL


OH.  IX.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  183

II.  Accordingly,  Isbabl  shall  fare  as  the  heathen  do  who  PORaBT  Qod.
Grouping  Israel  like  to  like  with  heathen,  God's  attitude  must  be  the  same  to  both.
They  shall  be  treated :  1.  As  the  objects  of  Ood's  displeasure.  He  is  angry  with  the
wicked  every  day.  He  is  angrier  with  those  of  them  who  sin  against  light  and  privi-
lege. He  is  angriest  with  the  spiritual  renegades  whose  disaffection  is  guilty  in  pro-
portion to  the  strength  of  the  ties  it  sets  aside.  2.  As  the  victims  of  his  destroying
judgments.  (Ver.  8.)  "  And  I  will  destroy  it  off  the  face  of  the  earth."  Strange  words
from  a  God  visibly  in  covenant.  But  the  covenant  was  broken.  The  theoretically
"holy  nation  "  was  actually  a  "sinful  kingdom."  Israel's  character  was  not  the  cha-
racter to  which  covenant  promises  referred.  Heathenish  in  corruption,  what  but  the
bolts  forged  for  their  pagan  kin  could  fall  upon  their  heads  ?  3,  This  in  the  character
of  defiant  transgressors.  (Ver.  10.)  "Not  because  they  sinned  aforetime,  but  because
they  persevered  in  sin  until  death "  (Jerome,  in  Pusey).  Sin  may  be  forgiven,  but
impenitence  never.    The  unpardonable  sin  is  unforsaken  sin.

III.  The  judgment  that  shall  destroy  the  wicked  mass  shall  leate  a
RIGHTEOUS  REMNANT.  (Ver.  8.)  "  Except  that  I  shall  not  utterly  destroy  the  bouse
of  Jacob."  God  ordains  no  indiscriminate  destruction.  His  bolts  strike  his  enemies.
Of  his  friends;  1.  Not  one  shall  perish.  "  Not  even  a  little  grain  falls  to  the  ground."
The  Divine  nature,  of  which  the  righteous  are  partakers,  is  indestructible.  The  life  of
the  saint  is  a  living  Christ  within  him  (Gal.  ii.  20).  Christ  "  is  alive  for  evermore  "
(Rev.  i.  18),  and  says  to  all  in  whom  he  is  as  their  life,  "  Because  I  live,  ye  shall  live
also."  In  a  mixed  community  the  righteous  sometiaes  die  for  the  fault  of  the  wicked ;
but  their  death  is  precious  in  God's  sight  (Ps.  cxvi.  15),  and  "  not  an  hair  of  their  head
shall  perish."  2.  They  shall  be  sifted  out  of  the  mas?.  (Ver.  9.)  In  these  graphic
words  the  righteous  minority  are  corn,  and  the  corrupt  masses  the  chaff.  The  nations
are  the  sieve,  and  the  Divine  judgments  the  shaking  of  it.  The  result  is  not  destruc-
tion of  the  grain,  but  separation  between  it  and  the  chaff.  "  In  every  quarter  of  the
world,  and  in  well-nigh  every  nation  in  every  quarter,  Jews  have  been  found.  The
whole  earth  is,  as  it  were,  one  vast  sieve  in  the  hands  of  God,  in  which  Israel  is  shaken
from  one  end  to  the  other.  .  .  .  The  chaff  and  dust  would  be  blown  away  by  the  air ;
.  .  .  but  no  solid  com,  not  one  grain,  should  fall  to  the  earth "  (Pusey).  So  in  other
cases.  God's  judgments  winnow  men,  discerning  clearly  between  clean  and  unclean.
When  the  storm  is  over,  the  seaworthy  vessels  are  ea<y  of  identification,  for  they  alone
survive.  3.  Their  own  sinfulness  shall  be  sifted  out  of  them,  "  What  is  here  said  of
all  God  doth  daily  in  each  of  the  elect.  For  they  are  the  wheat  of  God,  which,  in
order  to  be  laid  up  in  the  heavenly  garner,  must  be  pure  from  chaff  and  dust.  To
this  end  he  sifts  them  by  afBiotions  aud  troubles  "  (Pusey).  Suffering  is  not  purifying
per  te.  But  the  suffering  of  the  righteous  is  (Heb.  xii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  17).  It  sub-
dues the  flesh,  deepens  our  sense  of  dependence  on  God,  spiritualizes  our  thoughts,  and
tests,  and  by  testing  strengthens,  faith  (1  Pet.  i.  7).  In  the  night  of  suffering  come
out  the  stars,  guiding,  consoling,  irradiating  the  soul.

■*  Then  fear  not  in  a  world  like  this.
And  thou  shalt  know  ere  long —
Enow  how  sublime  a  thing  it  is
To  suffer  and  be  strong."

Vers.  11, 12. — 2%«  rebuilding  of  the  waste  places.  "  Qod  hath  not  cast  away  his
people,  which  he  foreknew,"  as  the  cumulative  series  of  woes  announced  might  seem
to  indicate.  As  a  people  they  conspire,  rebel,  and  cast  him  off,  and  as  a  people  they
are  scattered,  decimated,  and  disowned.  In  their  corporate  character  they  cannot
longer  survive.  But  there  were  individuals  among  them  who  had  either  remained
loyal  or  come  back  to  their  allegiance,  and  these  stood  in  a  different  position.  Not
only  would  they  be  spared,  but  made  the  nucleus  of  a  new  people,  and  their  existence
the  occasion  of  a  new  dispensation.  Such  is  the  burden  of  these  verses.  The  sinners
are  destroyed,  and  a  new  prosperity  blooms  for  the  faithful  remnant  that  survives.
The  waifs  of  the  national  wreck  are  drawn  in  safety  from  the  wares,  and  the  desolated
land  is  renovated  for  their  home.

I.  Thb  bbbtobatiok  of  David's  housk.    David'i  house  here  i»  not  merely  the


184  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  el  1—15.

dynasty  of  Darid,  but  the  kingdom  of  David,  and  this  as  a  type  of  the  kingdom  of
Christ.  Its  restoration,  in  the  ultimate  sense,  is  accomplished  only  in  the  establish-
ment of  the  Messianic  kingdom  which  it  lymbolized.  "  The  raising  up  of  the  fallen
hut  of  David  commenced  with  the  coming  of  Christ  and  the  founding  of  the  Christian
Church  by  the  apostles "  (Keil).  Interpreting  the  passage  thus,  the  rabbis  adopted
"  the  Son  of  the  fallen  "  as  one  of  the  titles  of  Christ.  1.  ITiii  house  ha$  degenerated
into  a/allen  hut  before  its  true  dignity  is  reached.  Judah  shrinks  into  a  petty  province,
the  royal  line  ia  represented  by  a  carpenter's  wife,  and  the  Jewish  Church  i*  a  little
flock  with  many  a  black  sheep,  ere  the  set  time  to  favour  Zion  comes.  "  Strange  com'
ment  on  human  greatness,  that  the  royal  line  was  not  to  be  employed  in  the  salvation
of  the  world  until  it  was  fallen.  The  royal  palace  had  to  become  the  hut  of  Kazareth
ere  ihe  Redeemer  of  the  world  could  be  born,  whose  glory  and  kingdom  were  not  of
this  world  "  (Pusey).  2.  Its  restoration  will  be  to  a  state  of  idecU  perfection.  The
"  breaches  "  would  be  repaired,  and  the  "  ruins  "  rebuilt,  with  the  effect  of  making  it
"  as  in  the  days  of  old ; "  i.e.  restoring  it  so  as  to  embody  the  original  design.  This
restoration  to  an  as  yet  unrealized  ideal  could  be  only  spiritual,  and  the  Bestorer  Jesus
Christ.  The  "hut"  into  which  the  "palace"  had  deteriorated  (2  Sam.  v.  11)  was
transformed  into  a  far  more  glorious  structure  when  Christ  sat  "  upon  the  throne  of
David  to  order  it,"  etc.  (Isa.  ix.  7 ;  Luke  i.  32,  33).  The  ideal  of  the  Davidic  king-
dom is  realized  in  the  Christian  Church ;  there  fully,  and  there  only.  3.  7%is  restora-
tion wUl  be  a  work  of  Divine  power.  "  In  the  days  of  these  kingdoms  shall  the  God
of  heaven  set  up  a  kingdom  which  shall  never  be  destroyed  "  (Dan.  ii.  44).  The
Church,  composed  of  Spirit-quickened  men,  is  the  creature  of  Grod  as  no  political  king-
dom can  be.  Bedeemed  by  Jesus  Christ,  quickened  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  made  one  in
the  white  heat  of  heavenly  grace,  it  is  altogether  a  Divine  thing.  Every  energy  it  has
is  God-given ;  every  grace  is  Spirit-wrought.  In  this  is  the  special  glory  of  the  Jerusa-
lem which  is  above.  And  when,  among  the  ruins  of  a  Hebrew  monarchy,  there  rises,
radiant  in  the  beauties  of  holiness,  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  then  indeed  the  bricks
are  changed  to  hewn  stones,  and  the  sycamores  to  cedars,  and  the  palace  of  David  is
rebuilt  as  in  the  days  of  old.

IL  The  widb  oibolb  or  iktehebts  to  be  advxkced  bt  thh  restobatioit.  "The
restoration  was  not  to  be  for  themselves  alone.  No  gifts  of  God  end  in  the  inmiediate
objects  of  his  bounty  and  love.  They  were  restored  in  order  that  they,  the  first  objects
of  God's  mercies,  might  win  others  to  God  "  (Pusey).  Those  brought  in  were  to  be :
1.  Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews.  (Yer.  12.)  James,  in  his  speech  at  the  council  of  Jeru-
salem (Acts  zv.  14 — ^17),  declares  the  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  in  the  calling  of  the
Gentiles.  Edom,  as  the  nation  most  hostile  to  the  Jews  and  furthest  from  David's
house,  is  put  by  a  natural  figure  for  the  whole  Gentile  world.  The  "  remnant  of  Edom,"
whether  mystic  or  natural,  are  the  few  called  in  each  case  out  of  the  many  (Matt,  zz.
16;  oh.  L  12).  "All  the  nations,"  eta,  is  a  fuller  and  more  literal  statement  of  the
ingathering  of  "  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles,"  when  God  brings  his  sons  from  afar,  and
his  daughters  from  the  ends  of  the  earth.  The  gospel  kingdom  is  to  be  the  universal
kingdom, "  filling  the  whole  earth,"  covering  it  with  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  making
it,  as  the  home  of  righteousness,  a  transfigured  place.  2.  The  Oentiles  by  means  of  the
Jews.  "  That  they  may  take  possession,"  etc.  It  it  in  Abraham  and  his  seed  that
the  nations  are  blessed.  In  our  spiritual  freedom  and  fulness  of  privilege  we  may  not
forget  that  Christ  who  founded  the  Church,  the  apostles  who  preached  the  kingdom
of  God  and  organized  it,  and  the  holy  men  who  wrote  the  Scriptures  as  they  were  moved
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  were,  almost  without  exception,  Jews.  It  is  thus  that  "  out  of
Zion  has  gone  forth  the  law,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  To  those  we
owe  to  the  Jews  there  are  no  earthly  obligations  parallel,  and  the  time  of  their  grafSng
in  again  is  one  for  which  by  every  tie  we  are  bound  to  pray.  3.  Both  these  in  virtue
of  a  Divine  appropriating  act.  "  And  all  the  nations  upon  which  my  Name  is  called ; "
i.6.  appropriated,  or  marked  as  God's  own  (Gen.  xlviiL  16;  Deut.  xzviiL  9, 10;  Jer.
zv.  16).  Those  whom  God  saves  are  such  as  he  has  graciously  chosen  to  be  his  own.
"  Whom  he  did  foreknow  them  he  also  called."  Salvation  is  the  evolution  of  an  eztemal
plan,  which  in  turn  is  the  expression  of  Divine  electing  love.

IIL  GIod'b  pubpose  in  this  matter  potentially  a  fact.  "  Saith  Jehovah  who
death  this."     1.  Hie  Divine  energy  is  th«  efficient  cause  of  events.    Second  causes  are


OH.  nu  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  18i

not  independent  of  or  co-ordinate  with  the  First  Cause,  but  the  instruments  in  its  hands.
Behind  all  and  in  all  is  the  Diviue  Omnipotent  energy,  the  ultimate  cause,  direct  or
indirect,  of  whatever  is.  2.  The  Divine  word  pledges  the  exercise  of  this  Divine  energy.
God's  word  is  absolute  truth.  It  cannot  be  broken.  If  it  goes  before,  the  correspond-
ing act  will  follow.  As  well  divorce  the  liglitning  from  the  thunder  as  the  work  &om
the  word  of  God.  When  he  says,  and  what  he  says,  and  as  he  says,  he  does  infallibly.
3.  The  Divine  will  constitutes  the  Divine  energy.  God  wills  all  things  into  existence.
His  choosing  that  a  thing  shall  be  brings  it  to  pass.  What  a  source  of  unfailing  con-
solation is  this  fact  to  the  gracious  soul  I  Its  rich  future  is  assured.  Omnipotent  power
and  unchanging  truth  have  the  issue  in  hand,  and  miscarriage  is  not  to  be  named.

Vers.  13 — 15. — Out  of  the  shadow  into  the  sun.  Israel's  atmosphere  bai  cleared.
The  thunders  are  silent.  The  storms  are  blown  out.  The  clouds  are  scattered.  The
shadow  of  "  the  great  doom's  image  "  has  lifted.  And  now  the  stm  comes  out  in  the
clear  shining  after  rain.  We  look  forth  on  a  new  land  of  promise,  a  land  from  which
the  curse  of  God  and  the  track  of  the  destroyer  have  disappeared.  The  ruins  are  rebuilt.
The  waste  places  bloom.  The  fields  throw  teeming  crops,  beyond  the  harvester's  power
to  gather.  The  erewhile  sinful  and  down-ti^odden  people  are  prosperous  and  pure  and
free.  It  is  a  scene  of  idyllic  beauty  and  peace — a  happy  ^na7«  to  the  dark  storm-times
that  have  gone  before.     This  time  will  be —

I.  A  TIUE  OP  TBBMINO  PLENTY.  Figures  of  unheard-of  fertility  and  abundance  are
multiplied.  1.  Seed-time  and  harvest  should  overlap.  "  The  ploughman  shall  overtake
the  reaper,"  etc.  With  a  certain  difficulty  of  defining  the  exact  idea  here,  the  general
purport  of  the  language  is  plain.  The  teeming  crops  could  scarcely  be  gathered  till
another  seed-time  had  come,  or  else  growth  would  be  so  quick  that  the  harvest  would
begin  m  looa  as  the  seed-time  was  over.     So  Shakespeare —

"  Spring  come  to  you  at  the  farthest
In  the  very  end  of  harvest."

This  rich  promise  was  not  now  recorded  for  the  first  time.  Conditionally  on  obedience,
it  had  been  made  by  the  mouth  of  Moses  seven  centuries  before  (Lev,  xxvi.  5).  But,
absolutely  made,  it  assumes  a  new  value  now.  And  as  the  events  in  it  are  altogether
impossible  in  the  natural  world,  it  must  obviously  be  taken  in  a  spiritual  sense.  The
plenty,  like  the  previously  threatened  famine  (ch.  viii.  11),  was  not  to  be  one  of  bread  and
water,  but  "  of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord."  In  the  spiritual  sphere  the  seed-time
and  the  harvest  may  come  together.  The  man  who  goes  forth  with  seed  may  return
with  sheaves  (Ps.  cxxvi.  6).  Indeed,  the  Samaritan  fieMs  were  "  white  unto  harvest "
(John  iv.  35),  when,  as  yet,  the  sowing  had  only  begun.  In  such  a  case  poetic  figure
becomes  literal  truth,  and  Zion,  as  soon  as  she  travails,  brings  forth  (Isa.  Ixvi.  7,  8).
2.  T!ie  mountains  should  drop  wine  spontaneously.  The  vineyards  of  Israel  were  on
the  mountain-slopes.  Of  the  plethora  of  over-rich  grapes  with  which  they  would  be
loaded  many  would  burst,  and  in  the  spontaneous  discharge  of  their  juice  the  mountains
would  literally  "  drip  new  wine."  This  process,  in  its  spiritual  analogue,  is  more
wondrous  and  delightful  still.  Spiritual  plenty  has  its  inevitable  and  enriching  over-
flow. "  Freely  have  ye  received,  freely  give."  Spiritual  character  is  always  imparting
of  itself  in  spiritual  influence.  From  the  gracious  lip  there  drops  continually  the  new
wine  of  "a  word  in  season."  And  the  religious  life,  "lived  not  for  ourselves,"  is  a  tide
of  helpful  action  beating  perpetually  on  the  shore  of  others'  lives.  3.  The  hills  should
dissolve  themselves  in  the  products  they  yield.  This  is  the  force  of  the  expression,  "All
the  hills  shall  melt."  The  rich  earth  throws  its  own  substance  into  the  teeming  crops
it  bears.  The  richer  it  is  the  larger  proportion  of  its  substance  is  expended  in  this
process.  Pure  leaf-mould  would,  in  this  way,  almost  totally  disappear,  transforming
itself  entirely  into  grain  or  fruit.  In  the  spiritual  sphere  self-surrender  for  others  is  a
law  of  life.  Christ  gave  himself,  and  Christians  give  themselves,  for  men.  "  I  will  very
gladly  spend  and  be  spent  for  you  "  (2  Cor.  xii.  15)  is  the  philosophy,  not  alone  of
Paul's,  but  of  all  Christian  living.  The  gracious  heart  expends  itself  in  helpful  action.
The  sum-total  of  philanthropic  effort  in  the  world  is  just  the  concreted  spiritual  energy
of  the  godly  company.
IL  A  TIUB  or  NATIOVAL  BE8T0BATI0N.    (Ter.  14.)    Each  term  hers  ha*  •  spiritual


186  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  ix.  1— 1&

reference,  and  the  whole  has  an  ultimate  spiritual  fulfllment.  This  comes :  1.  Generally,
in  the  breaking  of  every  yoke  hy  Christ.  Sia  is  bondage — enthralment  by  the  devil,  the
world,  and  the  flesh.  Ceremonialism  was  bondage — subjection  to  "  weak  and  beggarly
elements  "  iu  symbolic  and  wearisome  observance.  From  both  Christ  comes  a  Liberator.
He  "makes  an  end  of  sin"  in  every  aspect;  "destroying  the  devil,"  "delivering  from
this  present  evil  world "  (Gal.  i.  4),  and  fulfilling  his  righteousness  in  men  "  who
^valk  not  alter  the  flesh."  He  abolishes  type,  substituting  for  it  the  thing  typified:
lor  the  shadow,  the  substance;  for  the  Law,  "grace  and  truth."  2.  For  individuals,
when  the  Son  makes  them  free.  Spiritual  bondage  cannot  survive  believing  union  with
Christ.  His  blood  dissolves  the  chains  of  guilt.  His  Spiiit  breaks  the  bunds  of  indwell-
ing sin.  Acceptance  with  God  is  not  conditioned  on  an  impossible  obedience  to  the
whole  Law,  "  for  we  are  not  under  the  Law,  but  under  grace  (Bom.  vii.  6).  The  life
of  self-surrender  is  not  made  burdensome  by  a  carnal  nature,  "  for  the  law  of  the  Spirit
ot  lile  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  The  conditions
of  the  life  of  joyous  fellowship  are  presented  in  the  inwrought  spirit  of  adoption,  and
the  "  Abba,  Father  "  of  the  free,  on  Spirit-opened  lips  (Rom.  viii.  15,  21 ;  John  iv.  18).
They  are  free  indeed,  uhom,  trebly  loosing  thus,  the  Son  makes  free.  3.  For  the  nation,
when  brought  into  the  Ghwrch  dwring  the  millennial  era.  Their  conversion  in  the  latter
days  is  distinctly  and  repeatedly  foretold  (Hos.  iii.  4,  5 ;  Bom.  xii.  12,  15,  23 ;  2  Cor.
iii.  16).  National  restoration  this  may  not  strictly  be,  but  it  is  more  than  equivalent  to
it.  When  the  long- wandering  return,  when  the  hearts  cold  and  embittered  for  ages  glow
with  heavenly  love,  when  the  veil  drops  that  hung  on  mind  and  sense,  when  the
broken-off  branches  are  set  again  in  the  good  old  olive  tree,  a  spiritual  fulfilment  will
have  come  of  Amos's  words,  more  glorious  than  any  literal  or  local  one,  as  the  glory  of
the  second  temple  exceeds  the  glory  of  the  first.

III.  A  TiMB  OF  BESBTTLEMBNT  IN  THEIR  OWN  LAND.  (Ver.  15.)  In  three  classcs  of
events,  come  or  cominu;,  we  have  as  many  steps  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  promise.  1.  The
return  from  the  Babylonish  exile.  The  captivity  was  God's  final,  because  effective,
disciplinary  measure.  Israel  was  thoroughly  sickened  with  heathen  gods  and  heathen
ways.  Osiris  and  Isis  in  Egypt,  and  Baal  and  Ashtaroth  in  Palestine,  had  won,  almost
without  wooing,  an  attachment  which,  in  Babylon,  Bel  and  Nebo  could  not  so  much  as
stir.  The  last  and  bitterest  prescription  had  succeeded,  and  soon  the  patient,  cured ,
abroad,  was  ordered  home.  Amidst  tremendous  difficulties,  Jerusalem  was  repaired,  the
temple  rebuilt,  and  the  land  m  a  measure  resettled,  and  so  an  approximate  fulfilment
of  Amos's  glowing  prophecy  realized  (Ezra  vii.  13,  etc.).  2.  The  calling  of  the  OentHes.
They  are  the  spiritual  Israel,  the  true  children  of  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  7 — 9).  They  throw
off  the  yoke  of  the  mystic  Babylon ;  "  possess  the  kingdom  for  ever  "  (Dan.  vii.  8 — 22) ;
"  inherit  the  earth,"  as  their  own  land ;  repair  the  ruins,  and  restore  the  spiritual  wastes
left  by  sin ;  and  they  revel  in  "  the  feast  of  wines  on  the  lees,"  etc.  "  Throughout  the
world  Churches  of  Christ  have  arisen  which,  for  the  firmness  of  faith,  may  be  called
cities  ;  for  the  gladness  of  hope,  vineyards ;  and  for  the  sweetness  of  charity,  gardens"
(Pusey).  3.  The  future  restoration  of  the  Jews  to  Palestine.  This  is  foretold  (Ezek.
xxviii.  25 ;  xxxvi.  28 ;  xxxvii.  25).  God  does  the  work  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  11 — 13)  through
Gentile  agency  (Isa.  xlix.  22 ;  Ixvi.  20).  "  They  are  to  be  nationally  restored  to  the
favour  of  God,  and  their  acceptance  publicly  sealed  by  their  restoration  to  their  land  "
(David  Brown,  D.D.).  Converted  Israel  will  be  eminent  alike  in  character  and  influence
in  the  millennial  Church  (Isa.  lix.  21 ;  Ixvi.  19 ;  Ezek.  xxxix.  29 ;  Micah  v.  7).  Held
again  by  the  old  people,  her  cities  rebuilt,  her  grandeur  restored,  her  broad  acres  reclaimed
and  fertile,  and,  above  all,  Jesus  Christ  on  the  throne  of  the  nation's  heart,  Palestine
will  be  indeed  "  the  glory  of  all  lands."

IV.  All  this  secdbbd  by  infallible  quaranteb.  There  is  no  romancing  with
inspired  men.  What  they  say  is  coming,  as  God  is  true.  The  pledge  of  this  is:
1.  Q ad's  character.  "  Saith  Jehovah,"  t.e."  the  One  who  is."  He  is  Reality  as  against
the  seeming.  Substance  as  a'lainst  the  typical.  Veracity  as  against  the  deceiving.  Faith-
fulness as  against  the  changeful.  As  being  Benevolent  he  is  true,  human  happiness
depending  on  confidence  in  his  character.  As  Independent  he  is  true,  being  above  all
possible  temptation  to  deceive.  As  Unchangeable  he  is  true,  falsehood  being  essen-
tially a  change  of  character.  As  Omnipotent  he  is  true,  the  use  of  moral  agents  ia
free  and  yet  infallible  execution  of  his  purposes  being  possible  only  as  his  Word  ia  •


OT.  EL  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  18T


revelation  of  his  thought.  2.  His  existing  relation.  "Thy  God."  Not  a  God  unknown.
Not  a  God  apart.  Not  a  God  untried.  In  his  present  attitude,  his  covenant  relation,
his  past  deeds,  in  all  such  facts  is  "  confirmation  strong."  The  God  they  connect  them-
selves with  is  a  God  to  trust.  His  perfections  are  the  strands,  and  bis  relation  their
twining  together,  in  the  cord  of  confidence  not  quickly  broken,  which  binds  the  soul  te
his  eternal  throne.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOES.

Vers.  1 — 4. — InevitaUe  judgment.  The  thought  of  the  Divine  omniscience  is  a
welcome  thought  to  the  friend,  the  child  of  God.  But  to  the  impenitent  transgressor
no  thought  is  so  distasteful,  so  distressing.  If  he  cannot  persuade  himself  that  there
is  no  God,  he  at  all  events  hopes  that  the  Divine  eye  does  not  rest  upon  him,  that  ha
is  overlooked  and  forgotten.  This  vain  refuge  of  sinners  is  discovered  and  destroyed  by
the  revelation  of  this  prophecy.  The  idolatrous  temple  shall  be  dismantled,  the  idola-
trous altar  shall  be  overthrown,  when  the  Lord  enters  into  controversy  with  unfaithful
Israel.  And  in  that  day  the  sinful  and  deluded  worshippers  and  priests  shall  be
scattered.  Whether  slain  or  carried  into  captivity,  none  shall  escape  the  eye  or  elude
the  chastening  hand  of  the  God  who  has  been  defied  or  forgotten.  Every  individual
shall  be  dealt  with  upon  the  principles  of  eternal  justice.

I.  The  foolish  and  vain  endbavocrs  of  sinners  to  avoid  the  recompense  of
THEiB  INIQUITY.  The  language  of  the  prophet  is  vigorous  and  poetical.  He  pictures
the  smitten  and  scattered  Israelites  as  delving  into  the  abyss,  as  soaring  to  the  heights
of  heaven,  as  hiding  in  the  caves  of  Carmel,  as  crouching  beneath  the  waters  of  the
ocean ;  and  all  in  vain.  This  figurative  language  represents  the  sophistry  and  the  self-
deception  and  the  useless  wiles  and  artifices  by  which  the  discovered  sinner  seeks  to
persuade  himself  that  his  crimes  shall  be  unpunished.

II.  The  OMNIPRESENCE  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  JuDGE.  We  are  reminded  of  that  ancient
acknowledgment,  "  Thou  God  seest  me  I "  as  we  read  this  declaration, "  I  will  set  mine
eyes  upon  them."  The  psalmist,  in  the  hundred  and  thirty-ninth  psalm,  has  given
us  the  most  wonderfully  impressive  description  which  is  to  be  found  even  in  sacred
literature  of  the  omnipresence  and  the  omniscience  of  God.  Next  to  that  description,
for  vigour  and  effectiveness,  comes  perhaps  this  passage  of  the  p]-ophecies  of  Amos.  At
every  point  and  at  every  moment  the  universal  and  all-comprehending  Spirit  is  in
closest  contact  with  every  created  intelligence ;  and  that  presence  which  may  be  dis-
cerned in  operation  wherever  any  work  of  God  in  the  realm  of  nature  is  studied,  is
equally  recognizable  in  the  intellectual,  the  spiritual  kingdom.  Every  conscience  is  a
witness  to  the  ever-present,  all-observing  Deity.

III.  The  consequent  certainty  of  the  carrying  out  or  all  the  regal  and
JUDICIAL  DECISIONS  OF  THE  DiviNE  RuLER.  The  circumstances  of  Israel  led  to  the
application  of  this  great  principle  to  the  case  of  the  sinful  and  rebellious.  It  was  a
painful  duty  which  the  prophet  had  to  perform,  but  as  a  servant  of  God  he  felt  that
theie  was  no  choice  left  him.  It  was  his  office,  and  it  is  the  office  of  every  preacher
of  righteousness,  to  say  unto  the  wicked,  "  Thou  shalt  surely  die." — T.

Ver.  1. ^National  pride  and  presumption.  It  is  usual  for  nations  to  boast  of  their
history,  their  position,  their  great  qualities,  their  good  fortune,  their  invincibility.  We
know  this  from  our  own  observation  of  the  nations  of  modern  times.  And  in  this
respect  all  ages  seem  alike.  There  were,  no  doubt,  very  peculiar  grounds  for  self-
confidence  and  boastfulness  on  the  part  of  the  Jews.  Yet  such  dispositions  and  habits
were  asjaiti  and  again  censured  and  condemned  by  the  inspired  servants  of  Jehovah.

I.  It  is  a  BROAD  GENERAL  FACT  THAT  THE  MOVEMENTS  OF  NATIONS  ARE  UNDER
THE   GUIDANCE   OR   SUPERINTENDENCE   OP   THE   ALMIGHTY    RdLBR.        AmOS    is    directed

to  point  out  that  what  was  true  of  Israel  in  this  respect  was  equally  true  of  the  Cushites,
the  Philistines,  and  the  Syrians.  In  the  case  of  all  these  nations  there  had  been
remarkable  migrations  and  settlements.  The  hand  of  God  is  recognized  in  one  as  much
M  in  the  other.  The  Hebrews  are  sometimts  charged  with  narrowness  and  vanity  in
their  interpretations  of  Divine  providence.     Doubtless  many  of  them  may  be  justly  lo


188  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [ch.it.  1-15.

charged.  But  the  language  of  Amos  is  a  proof  that  the  enlightened  Jews  took  a  far  wider
view.  There  is  no  contradiction  between  general  and  special  providence.  The  nations
of  men,  because  they  are  men,  are  subject  to  the  control  and  direction  of  God.  Not  one
tribe  is  unworthy  of  his  regard.  In  what  manner,  and  to  what  extent,  the  great  Euler
interposes  in  the  political  affairs  of  peoples  it  is  not  for  our  limited  wisdom  to  decide.
But  the  petty  notion  that  one  favoured  nation  enjoys  the  protection  and  guidance  of
Heaven,  whilst  other  nations  are  neglected  and  uncared  for,  is  utterly  inconsistent  with
the  teaching  of  the  text.
II.  The  guidakce  and  protection  which  nations  have  enjoyed  in  tes  past

IS   NO  GROUND   OP   EXEMPTION  FROM   THE   OPERATION    OF   THE   MORAL    GOVERKMENT    OP

God.  There  were  those  in  Israel  who  deemed  it  incredible  that  a  nation  so  favoured  as
theirs  had  been  could  possibly  be  called  upon  to  experience  defeat,  conquest,  captivity,
disaster.  But  the  fact  is  that  great  privileges  simply  place  men  upon  a  higher  level
of  responsibility.  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  will  much  be  required.  Unfaith-
fulness is  the  one  great  ground  of  censure,  condemnation,  punishment.  Israel  had
sinned  in  separating  firom  Judah,  in  setting  up  rival  altars  at  Dan  and  Bethel,  in  intro-
ducing an  alien  religion,  idolatrous  sacrifices  and  worship,  in  giving  way  in  times  of
prosperity  to  luxury,  pride,  covetousness,  and  ambition.  All  the  mercies  accorded  to
their  forefathers  could  not  release  the  Israelites  from  the  obligation  to  maintain  the
pure  religion  of  Jehovah,  and  to  keep  his  laws  and  ordinances.  Nor  could  they  be  a
ground  for  exemption  from  the  action  of  those  laws  of  Divine  government  which  are
universal  in  their  operation,  and  disciplinary  and  morally  beneficial  in  their  tendency.
The  Captivity  and  the  dispersion  were  conclusive  proofs  that  there  is  no  favouritism  in
the  administration  of  God's  rule ;  that  his  laws  are  not  to  be  defied  with  impunity  by
the  most  privileged  of  nations.  Presumption  is  irrational  and  foolish,  and  is  the  sure,
swift  road  to  destruction. — T.

Ver.  9. — Sifting  and  salvation.  If  any  prediction  could  convince  the  reader  of  the
Old  Testament  that  the  prophets  spoke  and  wrote  under  a  supernatural  inspiration,
surely  this  prediction  must  possess  this  virtue.  The  history  of  Israel,  not  only  in
times  immediately  following  upon  those  of  Amos,  but  throughout  the  centuries  which
have  since  elapsed,  is  just  a  fulfilment  of  this  language.  How  picturesquely  and
forcibly  is  the  truth  presented  under  this  similitude,  so  natural  as  employed  by  one
familiar  with  all  the  processes  connected  with  husbandry !

I.  The  providential  sifting  appointed  for  the  house  of  Israel.  1.  It  has
been  determined  by  the  Divine  Buler  and  Lord.  "  I  will  command,"  says  Jehovah.
Men  may  trace  the  history  of  the  Jews  with  the  design  of  showing  that  all  the  events
which  have  occurred  to  that  people  are  explicable  upon  ordinary  principles,  that  Israel
drops  into  its  place  when  marshalled  by  the  enlightened  philosopher  of  history.  But
beneath  all  such  theory  there  is  an  explanation  which  satisfies  the  intelligence  of  the
thoughtful  and  devout  student  of  God's  Word :  the  Lord  has  ordered  it.  2.  It  has
taken  place  in  different  lands,  and  throughout  lengthened  periods.  "Among  all  the
nations,"  was  the  expression  of  the  inspired  prophet.  The  successive  invasions  of
Palestine,  the  conquest  of  Israel  and  then  of  Judah,  the  captivity  into  the  East,  the
settlements  in  Assyria  and  in  Persia,  the  partial  restoration  to  the  land  of  promise,  the
subjection  of  Palestine  to  successive  conqueiors,  and  its  subjugation  by  the  Romans,
the  dispersion  among  the  Gentiles,  the  scattering  of  the  sons  of  Israel  amongst  the
nations,  alike  in  the  East  and  the  West, — these  are  but  some  of  the  more  salient
points  in  a  history  the  most  remarkable,  the  most  romantic,  and  yet  the  most  painful,  in
the  annals  of  mankind.  3.  It  has  been  ordained  for  a  purpose  of  a  moral  and  beneficial
character.  Sifting  is  for  the  purpose  of  separating  the  chaff  and  refuse  from  the  pure
grain.  A  process  of  sifting,  winnowing,  tribulation  (in  the  literal  meaning  of  that
word),  has  been  going  on  throughout  the  ages.  Even  yet  the  purposes  of  God  are
very  partially  accomplished,  for  the  process  is  continued ;  nor  is  there  any  sign  of  its
Immediate  termination.

II.  The  DiviKB  preservation  of  those  subjected  to  this  trial.  Not  a  grain
ihall  drop  out  of  sight  and  perish.  It  is  a  wonderful  paradox — sitting  and  salvation,
trial  and  protection,  scattering  and  gathering,  alike  experienced.  Yet  the  marvellous
■tory  of  tha  chosen  people  supports  to  the  letter  this  ancient  representation.     It  is  the


OH.  IX.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOa  189

simple,  actual,  literal  truth.  1.  This  protection  is  apparent  in  the  preserration  of  the
Israelites  during  the  Oriental  captivity.  This  was  even  made  to  minister  to  the  religious
purity  and  enlightenment  of  a  nation  previously  inclined  to  fall  into  idolatrous  worship.
2.  We  recognize  it  equally  is  the  preservation  and  the  national  or  tribal  distinctness
of  the  Jews  in  the  ages  which  have  elapsed  since  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The
corn  has  been  sifted,  but  the  gn\in  has  not  been  lost.  "  Whom  he  scattereth  he  shall
gather."  3.  There  is  a  fulfilment  of  this  inspired  declaration  in  the  individual  con-
versions to  God  which  have  from  time  to  time  taken  place  among  those  who  have  been
trained  among  the  unbelieving  and  rebellious.  As  a  nation  Israel  has  never  ceased  to
endure  chastening.  But  members  of  the  community,  individual  sons  and  daughters  of
Jacob,  have  again  and  again  been  seen  to  turn  unto  the  Lord  whom  their  fathers
grieved  by  their  ingratitude  and  insensibility.  Precious  grains  have  thus  been  pre-
lerred  and  gathered  into  the  garner  and  saved.  4.  Such  cases  are  an  earnest  of  a
more  complete  fulfilment  of  the  prediction.  So — such  is  the  assurance  of  the  Christian
apostle — "  all  Israel  shall  be  saved." — T,

Ver.  10. — The  folly  of  self-confidence.  The  conduct  of  these  Israelites,  and  their
fate,  may  well  stand  as  a  beacon  of  warning  to  all  who  have  heard  the  Word  of  God
with  indifference  and  unbelief.

I.  The  reasons  which  should  pkompt  the  sinneb  to  oonobrn.  1.  The  voice  of
his  own  conscience  assures  him  of  guilt  and  ill  desert.  2.  The  warnings  of  Scripture
should  not  be  lost  upon  him,  and  revelation  abounds  with  such  warnings  uttered  upon
the  highest  authority.  3.  The  examples  of  the  impenitent  who  have  been  overtaken
by  judgment  and  destruction  enforce  the  faithful  admonitions  of  Holy  Writ.

IL   THB   explanations    of   the   sinner's  SELr-CONFIDBNOE    AND   PRESUMPTION.      It

is  unquestionable  that  there  are  many  who  say, "  The  evil  shall  not  reach  nor  overtake
US."  How  can  this  be  accounted  for  ?  1.  The  voice  of  conscience  may  be  silenced  or
unheeded.  2.  The  warnings  of  Scripture  may  be  utterly  disregarded.  3.  The  sinner
may  think  rather  of  those  instances  in  which  judgment  has  been  delayed  than  of  those
in  which  it  has  been  hastened  and  fulfilled.

III.  The  wisdom  and  duty  of  immediate  RBttNTANOB.  1.  God's  Word  will
certainly  be  verified.  2.  No  human  power  can  save  the  impenitent.  3.  The  time  of
probation  is  short,  and  may  nearly  have  expired. — T.

Ver.  11. — The  reconstruction  of  the  tabernacle  of  David.  The  reference  is  probably
not  to  that  tabernacle  which  was  replaced  and  superseded  by  the  temple  of  Solomon,
but  to  the  house  of  David.  The  booth  or  hut  may  well  serve  as  an  emblem  of  the
depressed  state  of  the  Jewish  monarchy  and  people,  not  simply  as  they  were  in  the
time  of  Amos,  but  as  the  prophet  foretold  that  they  should  be  in  days  about  to  come.
The  language  is  very  expressive,  and  depicts  a  restoration  very  complete.  Breaches
shall  be  closed,  ruins  shall  be  repaired,  the  structure  shall  be  rebuilt.  The  fortunes  of
the  people  of  David  must  indeed  be  dark  for  a  season,  but  a  brighter  day  shall  surely
dawn.

I.  The  most  glorious  fulfilment  of  this  prophecy  was  in  the  advent  of
THE  Divine  Son  of  David.  Jesus  was  recognized  by  the  people  as  the  descendant
and  successor  of  their  national  hero.  They  shouted,  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  I  "
He  himself  made  the  claim,  only  that  he  asserted  that  he  was  not  only  David's  Son,
but  also  David's  Lord.  Like  David,  he  was  "  after  God's  heart;"  like  David,  he  sang
praises  unto  God  in  the  midst  of  the  Church;  like  David,  he  overcame  the  enemies  of
Jehovah  and  of  his  people ;  like  David,  he  reigned  over  the  nation  of  Israel.  But
unlike  David,  he  was  Divine  in  his  nature  and  faultless  in  his  character ;  unlike  David,
he  was  rather  a  spiritual  than  a  worldly  Conqueror ;  unlike  David,  he  was  King,  not
over  one  people,  but  over  all  mankind.  In  Christ  the  true  Israel  has  found  more  than
the  Israel  "  according  to  the  flesh  "  lost  in  David's  removal.

II.  The  main  proof  of  this  fulfilment  of  prophecy  is  to  be  found  in  thb
establishment  of  the  Messiah's  spiritual  kingdom.  Time  has  given  an  interpre-
tation to  this  language  which  was  impossible  beforehand.  How  truly  the  house  of
David  has  been  more  than  rebuilt,  the  kingdom  of  David  more  than  re-established,  is
apparent  to  every  observer  of  what  has  occurred  in  the  Christian  centuries.    The


190  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [oh.  a.  1—15.

kingdom  of  the  Redeemer  is  :  1,  Spiritual.  In  which  respect  it  is  more  admirable  and
more  glorious  than  that  of  David,  which  was  founded  upon  the  sword,  and  whose
sway  was  over,  not  the  heart,  but  the  outward  life.  2,  Universal.  For  whilst  David
reigned  over  a  strip  of  Syrian  territory,  Christ's  empire  is  vast,  and  is  widening  year
by  year.  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  of
his  Christ."  3.  Everlasting.  The  few  brief  glorious  years  of  David's  reign  were
prophetic  of  that  sway  which  shall  endure  for  ever.  Of  Christ's  kingdom  "  there  shall
be  no  end." — T.

Vers.  13 — 15. — The  golden  age.  Nothing  short  of  inspiration  can  account  for  such  a
close  to  such  a  book.  Throughout  his  prophecies  Amos  has  been  exposing  national
sinfulness,  threatening  Divine  chastisement,  picturing  the  degradation,  the  desolation,
the  captivity  of  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  of  Judah.  How  comes  it  that  he  is  able
to  transcend  this  distressing  representation  ?  to  look  beyond  these  gloomy  clouds  ?  to
discern,  whether  far  or  near,  the  vision  of  a  smiling  earth,  a  happy  people,  a  splendid
prosperity,  an  eternal  joy?  It  is  not  the  force  of  human  reasoning;  it  is  not  the
impulse  of  delusive  hope.  No;  it  is  the  presence  of  the  Divine  Spirit  that  has
purged  the  prophet's  spiritual  vision,  so  that  he  sees  the  glory  yet  to  be;  it  is  this
that  touches  the  prophet's  tongue,  so  that  the  wail  of  sorrow  and  distress  is  changed  into
the  shout  of  triumph  and  the  song  of  joy.

"The  world's  great  age  begins  anew.

The  golden  years  return ;
The  earth  doth,  like  a  snake,  renew

Her  winter  weeds  outworn ;
Heaven  smiles,  and  faiths  and  empires  gleam

Like  wrecks  of  a  dissolving  dream."

I.  Thb  piotdbb  of  prospeeitt.  The  inspired  poet  presses  into  the  service  all  th«
resources  of  nature  laid  open  to  him  by  long  years  of  observation  and  of  fellowship.
We  notice  as  depicted :  1.  The  fruitfulness  of  the  soil.  The  crops  of  corn,  the  summer
vintage,  follow  each  other  in  quick  succession.  From  the  laden  vineyards  and  adown
the  sunny  slopes  flow  rivers  of  dehcious  wine.  The  boughs  of  the  trees  are  weighed
down  with  fruit.  For  the  tillers  of  the  soil  and  the  dwellers  in  the  cities  there  is
"  enough  and  to  spare."  2.  The  peopling  of  the  towns  and  villages.  The  banished
ones  have  returned.  The  once-silent  streets  resound  with  the  noise  of  traffic,  with  the
voices  of  rnen,  with  the  songs  of  the  happy.  3.  Security  and  perpetual  possession.
No  longer  do  the  dwellers  in  the  fenced  cities  arm  themselves  and  man  their  walls
against  the  foe;  lio  longer  do  the  husbandmen  dread  the  incursions  of  marauders.
Quiet  resting-places  and  a  sure  habitation  are  secured  by  the  goodness  of  Providence.
Earth  seems  transformed  into  primaeval  Paradise.

II.  The  bbalitt  which  this  picture  represents.  1.  By  many  interpreters  this
vision  of  peace  and  happiness  is  deemed  predictive  of  national  prosperity  still  awaiting
the  scattered  children  of  Israel.  The  land  of  promise  shall  again  flow  with  milk  and
honey.  Jerusalem  shall  again  be  the  seat  of  a  mighty  kingdom.  The  hills  of  Judah
and  the  plains  of  Ephraim  shall  again  be  tilled  by  the  children  of  Jacob.  A  converted
Israel  shall — from  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Jordan,  and  from  the  Jordan  to  the
desert,  from  the  heights  of  Lebanon  to  the  river  of  Egypt — witness  to  the  faithfulness
of  the  Eternal,  to  the  Messiah  long  rejected,  but  now  and  henceforth  to  be  held  in
honour  and  to  be  served  with  devotion.  Planted,  and  no  more  to  be  plucked  up,  the
chosen  people  shall  flourish  like  the  green  bay  tree,  like  the  cedar  in  Lebanon.  2.
Other  interpreters  pass  straight  from  this  vision  of  prosperity  and  gladness  to  the
spiritual  prospect  which  it  opens  up  to  the  eyes  of  the  believers  in  God's  Word,  of  the
disciples  of  Christ.  There  is  peace  of  which  the  seat  is  the  conscience,  the  heart,  of
man.  There  is  plenty  for  the  satisfaction  of  man's  deepest  wants.  There  is  a  sure
abiding-place  for  the  faithful  in  the  care  and  love  of  the  Eternal.  There  is  a  kingdom
which  is  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  There  is  a  city  of  which
every  renewed  man  becomes  a  d(  nizen,  nay,  an  immortal  citizen.  There  is  prosperity
in  which  the  poor,  the  feeble,  the  despised  may  share.  And  there  are  songs  of  gladness
and  of  thanksgiving  in  which  all  the  redeemed  and  saved  shall  join. — T.


CH.  IX.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  191

Ver.  9. — The  viinnowini/  of  Ood.  "  For,  lo,  I  will  command,  and  I  will  sift  the
house  of  Israel  among  all  nations,  like  as  corn  is  sifted  in  a  sieve,  yet  shall  not  the
kast  grain  fall  upon  the  earth."  Introduction :  The  Iree  use  made  by  Amos  of  all
the  scenes  in  nature.  .  We  may  learn  from  the  text  three  lessons.

I.  That  amono  those  called  by  a  rblioious  name  thbrb  exists  a  great
DIVERSITY  OF  CHARACTER.  "  I  will  pift  .  .  .  as  corn  Is  sifted."  If  corn  were  gathered
as  manna  was — pure,  unmixed  with  deleterious  or  useless  elements — no  sifting  would
be  needed.  But  it  grows  with  other  growth,  thistles,  poppies,  darnel,  etc.,  and  it  seems
impossible  to  keep  the  field  perfectly  clean.  In  the  physical,  as  in  the  moral,  world
the  false  grows  beside  the  true,  and  the  evil  beside  the  good;  and  God's  own  law  is,
"  Let  boih  grow  together  until  the  harvest."  Indeed,  during  their  growth  it  is  difflcuU
to  distinguish  these.  You  may  mistake  tares  for  wheat,  fool's  parsley  for  the  garden
herb,  poisonous  fun^i  for  edible  mushrooms,  and  so  forth,  and  only  discover  your  error
by  serious  or  even  fatal  consequences.  The  mystery  of  the  coexistence  of  good  and
evil,  then,  runs  through  nature.  It  is  seen  in  character.  "All  are  not  Israel  who  are
of  Israel,"  or  are  called  by  that  sacred  name.  Let  us  now  exemplify  this  from  a
comparison  of  the  times  of  Amos  with  our  own.  1.  Idolaters  were  among  the  prophet's
hearers.  They  had  deliberately  turned  from  Jehovah.  They  held  that  it  was  a  wise
policy  on  the  part  of  Jeroboam  I.  to  prevent  the  people  going  to  Jerusalem.  They
were  convinced  that  the  calves  at  Bethel  gave  a  centre  to  their  national  life;  and
therefore,  from  motives  political  and  worldly,  many  of  them  said,  "  These  be  thy  gods,
0  Israel."  Knowing  as  they  did  the  history  of  their  fathers,  and  the  laws  and
ceremonies  of  the  Mosaic  institutes,  they  sinned  against  the  light.  Yet  they  still
called  themselves  "  Israel,"  and  they  were  not  marked  out  by  external  sign  from  the
true  people  of  God.  No  brand  was  on  their  foreheads,  no  curse  I'ell  on  their  homes,  no
Are  of  judgment  overwhelmed  them  with  destruction ;  but  they  were  amongst  the
sleek,  successful  men  of  Samaria.  In  this  Christian  land,  and  in  our  Christian
congregations,  may  still  be  found  those  who  have  forsaken  God  and  made  unto
themselves  other  gods.  Sometimes,  for  example,  a  man  deidcs  wealth.  His  thoughts
are  concentrated  on  it,  and  his  full  energies  are  directed  to  its  attainment.  To  claims
mid»  on  his  generosity  he  turns  a  deaf  ear;  over  scruples  about  the  forsaking  of
righteousness  and  mercy  be  rides  roughshod.  If  at  last  he  succeeds  he  says,  "  It  is
my  power,  and  the  might  of  my  hand,  that  has  wrought  this."  Yet  prayerless,  godless,
as  such  men  are,  they  still  call  themselves  by  the  Christian  name.  2.  Amos  spolee  to
others  who  were  simply  indifferent  to  religion.  They  considered  that  the  questions
debated  between  the  true  and  false  prophets  were  professional  questions,  with  which
they  had  no  personal  concern.  Worshipijing  neither  the  calves  nor  Jehovah,  their  wish
was  to  glide  quietly  through  life,  winning  for  themselves  such  enjoyment  as  was
possible.  Describe  the  attitude  of  many  towards  religion  in  our  day — occasionally
attending  worship,  knowing  nothing  of  the  meaning  of  it,  and  taking  their  chance  as
to  the  unseen  luture.  They  are  known,  not  to  us,  but  to  God.  3.  Some  in  the  days  of
Amos  had  the  character  as  well  as  the  nams  of  "  Israel."  They  dared  not,  could  not,
go  up  to  Jerusalem.  But  their  families  were  instructed  in  the  Scriptures.  They
thought  of  the  old  days  when  Jehovah  was  universally  acknowledged  as  the  Lord,  and,
like  Jacob,  they  prayed  in  an  agony  of  supplication,  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except
thou  bless  me."  These  belonged  not  only  to  the  "kingdom "  but  to  the  "  house  "  of
Israel,  on  which  God  would  have  mercy.  (See  the  promise  to  this  effect,  distinguish-
ing between  the  "  kingdom  "  and  the  "  house,"  in  ver.  8.)  Such  are  still  to  be  found.
In  business,  because  of  their  integrity  and  charity,  their  name  is  as  ointment  poured
forth.  In  the  homes,  as  instructors  of  their  children,  they  are  preparing  blessings  for
the  world.  In  the  sanctuary  their  praises  wing  their  way  to  heaven,  and  in  prayer
they  are, princes  "having  power  with  God."  Now,  these  differing  characters  were  and
are  mingled,  as  are  the  tares  and  wheat.  They  are  even  united,  as  are  the  chaff  and
the  corn,  and  therefore  the  day  of  sifting  and  separation  must  come.  It  has  not  come
yet.  When  corn  is  ripening  and  flowers  are  blossoming  it  is  useless  to  send  in  the
weeders.  When  the  reapers  are  busy  their  scythes  must  cut  down  all  growths  alike.
There  is  no  time  then  for  separation,  but  it  comes  at  last.  You  see  a  heap  of  winnowed
corn  in  the  granary;  the  weeds  have  been  burned,  the  straw  is  gone,  and  all  the  chaff
is  scattered.  So  Israel  was  to  be  scattered  by  persecution,  war,  and  captivity;  hut  not
one  grain  of  God's  wheat  should  fall  upon  the  ground.     (Text.)


192  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  ts.  1— 15w

n.  That  thbbb  are  TESTma-TiMEs  in  which  such  diversity  asserts  itself.
The  earth  is  here  represeDted  as  a  great  sieve,  in  which  Israel  should  be  ceaselessly
tossed,  that  the  evil  might  be  lust  and  the  good  saved.  The  process  is  still  carried  on.
There  are  testing-times  here,  and  there  will  be  a  testing-time  hereafter.  1.  Preaching,
for  example,  sometimes  so  disturbs  conscience,  that  on  self-examination  ttie  man  sees
what  is  true  and  false  in  his  character.  Many  a  hearer  has  thus  been  led  to  ask,  "  Am
I  as  the  chaff  which  the  wind  driveth  away  ? "  2.  Affliction  is  a  sieve  for  testing
character.  Job  was  an  example  of  this.  His  distresses  revealed  him  to  himself  and  to
his  friends ;  and  not  a  grain  of  wheat  (of  that  which  was  worth  preserving)  was  lost.  Show
how  this  is  still  true  of  the  afBictcd.  Illness,  bereavement,  losses,  etc.,  lead  to  serious
thought,  and  while  they  sometimes  destroy  unfounded  hopes,  they  give  more  conflJence
in  that  "  hope  which  is  the  true  anchor  of  the  soul,  sure  and  steadfast."  3.  Tempta-
tion is  a  revealer  of  character.  Compare  the  text  with  our  Lord's  words,  "Simon,
Simon,  behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you,  that  he  may  sift  you  as  wheat :  but  I
have  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  What  a  revelation  to  Peter  of  his  weak-
ness and  presumption  was  his  denial !  Illustrate  by  the  story  of  the  two  houses,  built,
the  one  on  the  rock,  the  other  on  the  sand  (Matt.  vii.  24 — 27).  Thus  we  may  test
ourselves.  If  the  opportunity  offers  itself  to  gratify  some  passion  secretly,  without
the  least  risk  of  detection,  is  the  reply,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness,  and  sin
against  God?  "  or  is  the  opportunity  gladly  seized  to  enjoy  "  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a
season  "  ?  4.  Persecution  tests  character.  It  is  easy  to  deceive  ourselves  when  all  our
associations  are  religious.  But  let  these  be  changed  for  worldly,  sceptical,  or  immoral
surroundings,  and  the  reality  of  our  religious  life  is  proved.  Then,  either  we  say,  "  We
must  obey  God  rather  than  man,"  and  our  character  is  ennobled  by  the  struggle,  or
the  old  prayer  is  omitted,  the  old  Bible  neglected,  and  the  old  influences  blotted  out
of  memory.  All  such  tests  as  we  have  mentioned  are  sent  in  mercy,  to  lead  to  self-
examination,  and,  if  need  be,  to  repentance ;  but  Christ  draws  the  veil  of  the  future,
and  tells  us  further  of  a  day  when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  disclosed,  and :  6.
When  the  judgment  of  Ood,  according  to  equity,  will  be  declared.  You  may  escape
all  other  trials,  but  you  will  not  escape  that.  Affliction  may  leave  you  untouched.
Amidst  persecution  and  temptation  your  reputation  may  be  unscathed.  Bat  death
will  scatter  all  delusions,  and  from  it,  and  from  that  judgment  to  which  it  leads,  there
is  no  escape  (see  ver.  3,  "  And  though  they  hide  themselves  in  the  top  of  Carmel,"  etc.).
On  that  day  there  shall  be  "  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God ; "  the  secret  life  will
be  commended,  and  the  quiet  service  recompensed.  With  others  the  vain  show  will
be  over,  the  veil  of  outward  respectability  rent  asunder,  and  the  words  will  be  heard,
"  Depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity  1 "  Then  there  will  come  the  separation,  as
between  the  sheep  and  the  goats,  the  tares  and  the  wheat,  the  corn  and  the  chaff.
Men  may  have  met  in  the  same  church,  heard  the  same  gospel,  lived  in  the  same
home,  yet  above  the  portal  of  heaven  is  this  inexorable  law,  "  And  there  shall  in  no
wise  enter  into  it  anything  that  defileth,  .  .  .  but  they  that  are  written  in  the  Lamb's
book  of  life."  Still  the  words  hold  good,  "  Whosoever  believeth  on  him  shall  not
perish,  but  have  everUsting  life ; "  "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  so  great
6alvati(jn  ?  "     "  Among  thy  saints  may  I  be  found,"  etc. !

III.  That  over  the  testing  process  God  watches  and  rules  so  that  nothinq
true  and  nothing  good  mat  be  lost.  "  For,  lo,  1  will  command  .  .  .  yet  shall  not
the  least  grain  fall  upon  the  earth  "  (comp.  Mai.  iii.  3).  Our  text  is  true  in  a  much
broader  sense  than  that  in  which  we  have  attempted  to  deal  with  it.  1.  In  changes
amongst  the  nations,  where  there  seems  little  but  confusion  and  unrest,  God  rules.
He  is  testing  and  purifying  his  own  people.  Not  a  grain  of  his  purpose  will  fall  to
the  earth.  "  Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  but  my  Word  shall  not  pass  away."  2.
Movements  take  place  in  ecclesiastical  life.  One  system  makes  room  for  another.  The
Old  Testament  economy  with  its  ceremonies,  the  apostolic  Church  with  its  simplicity,
the  mediaeval  Church  with  its  superstitions,  etc.,  all  were -changed,  yet  of  all  the  praises
and  prayers  offered  through  past  aijes  not  a  grain  fell  to  the  earth.  3.  In  dogm^Uie
theology  changes  are  still  going  on.  Formularies  and  phrases  die  out,  but  the  truth  in
them  is  not  lost.  Christ  lives  and  reigns  still,  and  "  of  his  dominion  there  shall  be  no
end."  That  which  is  saved  by  God  is  "  the  grain,"  that  which  has  life  in  it ;  and  planted
in  the  earth,  it  shall  be  developed  in  new  forms  of  strength  and  beautv.


OH.  n.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  193

CoNCLTTSiON.  Therefore,  amidst  the  wreck  and  the  fall  of  much  that  seems  precious,
let  your  hearts  as  Christian  men  be  quiet  from  fear  of  evil.  Have  trust  in  God,  who
commands  and  controls,  and  believe  that  amidst  all  his  cares  you  are  not  forgotten,
amidst  all  these  perils  you  will  be  safe.  Because  good  is  stronger  than  evil,  and  Christ
is  mightier  than  our  adversary,  the  words  of  his  promise  are  true  to  all  believers,
"  They  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand." — A.  R.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Great  sins,  great  calamities,  great  efforts.  "  I  saw  the  Lord  standing
upon  the  altar,"  etc.  "  This  chapter  commences  with  an  account  of  the  fifth  and  last
vision  of  the  prophet,  in  which  the  final  ruin  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  is  represented.
This  ruin  was  to  be  complete  and  irreparable ;  and  no  quarter  to  which  the  inhabitants
might  flee  for  refuge  would  afford  them  any  shelter  from  the  wrath  of  the  omnipresent
and  almighty  Jehovah."  The  prophet  in  vision  sees  the  Almighty  standing  upon  the
altar,  and  hears  him  give  the  command  to  smite  the  lintel  of  the  temple  door  that  ths
posts  may  shake ;  in  other  words,  to  destroy  the  temple.  The  temple  here  is  not,  I
think  (though  the  allusion  is  uncertain),  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  the  temple  of  true
worship,  but  the  temple  of  idolatrous  worship.    The  passage  suggests  three  remarks,    i

I.  That  under  the  righteous  goveenment  of  God  great  sin  exposes  to  great
CALAMITY.  How  terrible  the  calamities  here  referred  to!  The  Israelites,  when
threatened  by  the  Assyrians,  would  flock  in  crowds  to  Bethel  and  implore  protection
from  the  golden  calf.  But  the  very  place  where  they  sought  protection  would  prove
their  ruin.  Jehovah  says,  "  Smite  the  lintel  of  the  door,  that  the  posts  may  shake :
and  cut  them  in  the  head,  all  of  them ;  and  I  will  slay  the  last. of  them  with  the
sword,"  etc.  The  sin  of  these  Israelites  in  their  idolatrous  worship  was  great.  They
were  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  the  friend  of  God.  As  a  people,  they  were  chosen  of
Grod  and  blessed  with  a  thousand  opportunities  of  knowing  what  was  right  and  true  in
doctrine  and  in  practice.  Yet  they  gave  themselves  up  to  idolatry.  Hence  these
terrible  calamities.  The  greater  the  sin,  the  greater  the  punishment.  "  Unto  whom
much  is  given  of  him  shall  be  much  required  ; "  "  He  that  knoweth  his  Lord's  will  and
doeth  it  not,  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes ; "  "  It  will  be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom
•nd  Gomorrah,"  etc.

II.  The  consciousness  of  approachino  calamities  will  btimulatb  to  oreat
EFFORTS  FOR  ESCAPE.  "  Though  they  dig  into  hell,  thence  shall  mine  hand  take  them ;
though  they  climb  up  to  heaven,  thence  will  I  bring  them  down."  There  are  here  sup-
posed attempts  at  escape.  There  is  the  supposed  attempt  to  get  into  hell — Sheol,  the
dark  realm  of  shadows,  where  they  could  conceal  themselves.  There  is  an  attempt  to
climb  Mount  Carmel,  twelve  hundred  feet  in  height,  there  to  conceal  themselves  under  the
shadows,  intricacies,  and  the  crowded  forests  of  oak,  pines,  laurels,  etc.,  and  also  in  the
deep  caves  running  down  to  the  sea.  Men  in  view  of  great  dangers  always  seek  refuge.
The  sinner  here,  when  he  finds  death  approaching,  what  strenuous  efforts  does  he
employ  in  order  to  escape  the  monster's  touch  1  On  the  great  day  of  retribution  sinners
are  represented  as  crying  to  the  rocks  and  mountains  to  fall  on  them.

III.  The  GREATEST    EFFORTS    TO    ESCAPE  MUST    PROVE   UTTERLY  FUTILE    WHEN  GOD

HAS  GIVEN  THE  SINNER  UP.  "  Though  they  dig  into  hell,  thence  shall  mine  hand  take
them,"  etc.  There  are  many  similar  passages  to  these  in  the  Bible,  such  aa  the  follow-
ing :  "  If  I  ascend  up  into  heaven,  thou  art  there :  if  I  make  my  bed  in  hell,  behold,
thou  art  there"  (Ps.  cxxxix.  8);  "Though  his  excellency  mount  up  to  the  heavens,
and  his  head  reach  unto  the  clouds ;  yet  he  shall  perish  for  ever  like  his  own  dung :
they  which  have  seen  him  shall  say.  Where  is  he?"  (Job  xx.  6,  7) ;  "  Though  Baby-
lon should  mount  up  to  heaven,  and  though  she  should  fortify  the  height  of  her
strength,  yet  from  me  shall  spoilers  come  unto  her,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  li.  53) ;
"  Though  thou  exalt  thyself  as  the  eagle,  and  though  thou  set  thy  nest  among  the
stars,  thence  will  I  bring  thee  down,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  xlix.  16).  Whatever  the
efforts  of  the  sinner  in  the  prospect  of  approaching  danger,  there  is  no  escape  for  him.
God  is  everywhere,  and  everywhere  all-seeing,  all-just,  and  almighty.

Conclusion.  The  only  way  to  escape  utter  ruin  is  to  renounce  your  sin,  and
eommit  yourself  unto  the  safe  keeping  of  bim  who  is  the  Bedeemer  of  mankind. — D.  T.

Ters.  6 — 10, — Ood  as  the  Administrator  of  justice.    "  And  the  Lord  Gh>d  of  hosts  is  he

AMOS.  O


194  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  [cH.ix.  1— 16.

that  toncVieth  the  land,  ami  it  sliall  melt,  and  all  that  dwill  therein  shall  mourn,"  etc
These  words  present  Grod  to  us  as  the  Administrator  of  justice.

I.  He  does  it  with  the  geeatbst  ease.  The  administrators  of  justice  Ui  connection
with  human  government  have  often  to  contend  with  difficulties  that  hafBe  and  con-
found them.  But  the  Almighty  has  no  difficulty.  "  He  touoheth  the  land,  and  it  shall
melt."  By  a  mere  touch  he  can  punish  a  whole  nation,  nay,  destroy  the  world.  Whence
come  earthquakes  and  volcanoes  ?  Here  is  thei;  cause: "  He  toucheth  the  hills,  and  they
smoke."  Never  can  there  he  any  miscarriage  of  justice  with  God.  He  bears  it  right
home  in  every  case.  He  has  no  difficulty  about  it.  He  toucheth  the  clouds,  and  they
drown  the  world ;  he  kindles  the  atmosphere  and  burns  cities,  etc.

II.  He  does  it  with  all  the  powbes  of  natube  at  hib  command.  "  It  is  he  that
buildeth  his  stories  in  the  heaven,  and  hath  founded  his  troop  in  the  earth."  His
throne  is  on  high,  above  all  the  forms  and  forces  of  the  vmiverse,  and  all  are  at  his
call.  From  those  heights  which  he  has  built,  those  upper  chambers  of  the  universe,  he
can  pour  floods  to  drown  a  world,  or  rain  fires  which  will  consume  the  universe.  Every
force  in  nature  he  can  make  with  ease  an  officer  to  execute  his  justice.

ni.  He  does  it  disreqaedfuIi  of  mebb  bbliqious  profession.  "  Have  not  I
brought  up  Israel  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt?  and  the  Philistines  from  Caphtor,  and
the  Syrians  from  Kir  ? "  Jehovah  here  repels  the  idea  which  the  Israelites  were  so
prone  to  entertain,  that  because  he  had  brought  them  out  of  Egypt  and  given  them  the
land  of  Canaan,  they  werepeculiarly  the  objects  of  his  concern,  and  could  never  be  subdued
or  destroyed.  He  now  regarded  and  would  treat  them  as  the  Cushites,  or  Ethiopians,
who  had  been  transplanted  from  their  primal  location  in  Arabia  into  the  midst  of  the
barbarous  nations  of  Africa.  The  Almighty,  in  administering  justice,  is  not  influenced
by  the  plea  of  profession.  A  corrupt  Israelite  to  him  was  as  bad  as  an  Ethiopian,
though  he  calls  Abraham  his  father.  "  Think  not  to  say  .  ,  .  that  ye  have  Abraham
to  your  father."  Conventional  Christians  are  in  the  eyes  of  God  as  bad  as  infldels  or
lieathen.  He  judgeth  not  as  man  judgeth,  by  the  ontward  appearance;  he  looketh  at
the  heart,

iV.    riE   DOBS   it  with   A  THOEOUGH  DISCRIMINATION  OF   CHABACTEB.      "  Behold,  the

eyes  of  the  Lord  God  are  upon  the  sinful  kingdom,  and  I  will  destroy  it  from  off  the
face  of  the  earth;  saving  that  I  will  not  utterly  destroy  the  house  of  Jacob,  saith  the
Lord."  There  were  some  good  people  amongst  the  Israelites,  men  of  genuine  good-
ness; the  great  Judge  would  not  destroy  them.  "  I  will  not  utterly  destroy  the
house  of  Jacob.  ...  I  will  sift  the  house  of  Israel  among  all  nations,  like  as  corn  is
sifted  in  a  sieve,"  etc.  He  would  burn  up  the  chaff,  but  save  the  wheat.  Evermore
will  the  Almighty  Judge  recognize  and  tenderly  guard  the  virtuous  and  the  good,  how-
ever humble  their  position  in  life.     He  will  not  destroy  the  righteous. — D.  T.

Vers.  11 — 15. —  The  restoration  of  the  true  moral  theocracy.  "In  that  day  will  I
raise  up  the  tabernacle  of  David  that  is  fallen,  and  close  up  the  breaches  thereof;  and
I  will  raise  up  his  ruins,  and  I  will  build  it  as  in  the  days  of  old,"  etc.  In  the  previous
verses  we  have  had  to  notice  the  destruction  of  the  sinful  kingdom ;  in  this  paragraph
we  have  the  establishment  of  the  true  kingdom — the  true  moral  theocracy.  "  In  that
day,"  i.e.  when  the  judgment  has  fallen  upon  the  sinful  kingdom,  and  all  the  sinners  of
the  people  of  Israel  aie  destroyed.  "  The  Israelites,"  says  Dr.  Henderson,  " now  dis-
appear from  the  scene,  in  order  to  give  place  to  a  brief  and  prominent  exhibition  of  the
restoration  of  the  Jews  from  their  repressed  condition  during  their  anticipated  captivity
in  Babylon."  The  Apostle  James,  at  the  first  ecclesiastical  council  at  Jerusalem,  quotes
this  prophecy  (Acts  xv.  16,  17) — not,  however,  in  its  identical  phraseology,  but  in  its
general  meaning — and  applies  it  to  the  establishment  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  world
by  the  admission  of  the  Gentiles  into  it.  The  old  Hebrew  world  was  for  ages  governed
by  a  theocracy.  God  was  their  King.  He  had  under  him  and  by  his  appointment
human  rulers  and  other  functionaries ;  but  they  were  simply  his  instruments,  and  he
was  their  King.  That  form  of  government  has  passed  away ;  but  it  was  symbolical :
it  was  the  emblem  of  a  higher  theocracy  that  is  to  be  established,  not  over  the  Jews
merely,  but  over  the  Gentiles  and  over  the  whole  world.  It  was  to  stand  for  ever.  We
shall  use  these  words  as  an  illustration  of  this  theocratic  government.  Four  thoughts
are  suggested  concerning  it.


CH.  II.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  AMOS.  195


I.  It  rose  from  the  humblest  condition.  "In  that  day  will  I  raise  up  thu
tabernacle  of  David  that  is  fallen."  "  The  fallen  hut  of  David  "  (Delitzsch).  Not  the
magnificent  palace  of  David,  which  the  monarch  built  for  himself  on  Mount  Zion
(2  Sam.  V.  11).  "  It  is  striking  that  Amos,  prophesying  in  Israel,  closes  with  a  promise,
not  to  the  ten  tribes  primarily,  but  to  the  royal  house  of  David,  and  to  Israel  only
through  its  restoration.  Strange  comment  on  human  greatness,  that  the  royal  line  was
not  to  be  employed  in  the  salvation  of  the  world  until  it  was  fallen.  The  royal  palace
had  to  become  the  hut  of  Nazareth  ere  the  Redeemer  of  the  world  could  be  born,  whose
glory  and  kingdom  were  not  of  this,  world,  .  .  .  who  came  to  take  from  us  nothing
but  our  nature  that  he  might  sanctify  it,  our  misery  that  he  might  bear  it  for  us "
(Pusey).  Ay,  this  true  moral  theocracy  had  in  truth  a  humble  origin  !  Its  Pounder,
who  was  he?  The  Son  of  a  poor  Jewish  peasant,  who  commenced  his  life  in  a  stable.
Its  first  apostles,  who  were  they  ?  They  were  amongst  the  poorest  of  the  poor.  In  its
origin,  indeed,  its  symbols  are  the  little  stone,  the  grain  of  mustard  seed,  and  the  few
particles  of  leaven.

n.  Heathens  abe  subject  to  its  authobitt.  "That  they  may  possess  the
remnant  of  Edom,  and  of  all  the  heathen,  which  are  called  by  my  Name,  saith  the  Lord
that  doeth  this."  The  old  theocracy  was  confined  to  the  Jews ;  this  one,  this  moral
theocracy,  is  to  extend  to  the  heathen.  Even  Edom — the  old  and  inveterate  foe  of
the  theocratic  people,  who  may  be  regarded  as  the  representative  of  the  whole  heathen
world — is  to  be  subjected  to  it.  It  shall  "  inherit  the  Gentiles."  It  is  to  have  the
heathen  for  its  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  tbe  earth  for  its  possession.
The  Bible  assures  us,  in  language  most  explicit  and  of  frequent  occurrence,  that  the
time  will  come  when  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  the  going  down  of  the  same  his
Name — that  is,  the  Name  of  this  great  moral  King,  Christ — shall  be  great  among  the
Gentiles.  Or,  in  the  language  of  Daniel,  "  When  the  kingdom  and  dominion,  and  the
greatness  of  the  kingdom  \mder  the  whole  heaven,  shall  be  given  to  the  people  of  the
saints  of  the  most  High,  whose  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,  and  all  dominions
shall  serve  and  obey  him  "  (Dan.  vii.  27).

III,  Abundant  material  peovisions  will  attend  it.  "  Behold,  the  days  come,
saith  the  Lord,  that  the  ploughman  shall  overtake  the  reaper,  and  the  treader  of  grapes
him  that  soweth  seed ;  and  the  mountains  shall  drop  sweet  wine,  and  all  the  hills  shall
melt."  "  The  metaphorical  language  here  employed  is  at  once  in  the  highest  degree
bold  and  pleasing.  The  Hebrews  were  accustomed  to  construct  terraces  on  the  sides  of
the  mountains  and  other  elevations,  on  which  they  planted  vines.  Of  this  fact  the
prophet  avails  himself,  and  represents  the  immense  abundance  of  the  produce  to  be
such  that  the  eminences  themselves  would  appear  to  be  converted  into  the  juice  of  the
grape."  Just  as  this  moral  theocracy  extends,  pauperism  will  vanish.  With  the
kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness  all  necessary  material  good  conies.  "  Godliness  is
profitable  unto  all  things."  Let  this  theocracy,  which  means  the  reign  in  human  hearts
of  Christliness,  extend,  and  the  earth  "  shall  yield  her  increase,  and  God,  even  our  own
God,  shall  bless  us."

IV.  Lost  pbivileoes  abb  restored  as  it  advances.  "  I  will  bring  again  the
captivity  of  my  people  of  Israel,  and  they  shall  build  the  waste  cities,  and  inhabit
them;  and  they  shall  plant  vineyards,  and  drink  the  wine  thereof;  they  shall  also
make  gardens,  and  eat  the  fruit  of  them."  Three  blessings,  which  man  has  lost  through
depravity,  are  here  indicated.  1.  Freedom.  "  I  will  bring  again  the  captivity,"  or
rather,  "  I  will  reverse  the  captivity,"  give  them  liberty.  Man  in  a  state  of  depravity  is
a  slave — a  slave  to  lust,  worldliness,  etc.  This  moral  theocracy  ensures  freedom  to  all  its
subjects.  "  Ye  shall  know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free  "  (John  viii.  32).
2.  Prosperity.  "  Shall  build  the  waste  cities,  and  inhabit  them ;  and  they  shall  plant
vineyards,  and  drink  the  wine  thereof."  One  of  the  sad  evils  connected  with  man's
fallen  depravity  is  that  he  does  not  reap  the  reward  of  his  labours.  He  builds  cities
and  plants  vineyards  and  makes  gardens  for  others.  Through  the  reign  of  social
injustice  he  is  prevented  from  enjoying  the  produce  of  his  honest  labours.  Under  this
theocracy  it  will  not  be  so.  What  a  man  produces  he  will  hold  and  enjoy  as  his  own.
8.  Settledness.  "  I  will  plant  them  upon  their  land,  and  they  shall  no  more  be  pulled
up  out  of  their  land  which  I  have  given  them,  saith  the  Lord  thy  God."  Unregenerate
man  has  ever  been  restless,  homeless,  unsettled.    He  stands  not  on  a  rock,  but  rather


IH  THE  BOOK  OP  AMOS.  [oh.  ix.  1—16,

on  planks  floating  on  surging  waters  ;  he  is  never  at  rest.    All  the  subjects  of  the  true
theocracy  are  established.    "  God  is  their  Refuge  and  Strength."

■Conclusion.  Let  us  have  faith  in  this  predicted  future  of  the  world.  This  faith
can  alone  sustain  us  in  our  arduous  work ;  this  faith  has  ever  been  the  nerve  of  all  the
great  men  who  have  toiled  for  the  world's  good.

"Poet  and  seer  that  question  caught

Above  the  din  of  life's  fears  and  frets ;
It  marched  with  letters,  it  toiled  with  thought,

Through  schools  and  creeds  which  the  earth  forgets.
And  statesmen  trifle  and  priests  deceive.

And  traders  barter  our  world  away ;
Yet  hearts  to  the  golden  promise  cleave,

And  still  at  times  '  Is  it  come  ? '  they  say.

*  The  days  of  the  nations  bear  no  trace
Of  all  the  sunshine  so  far  foretold ;
The  cannon  speaks  in  the  teacher's  place.
The  age  is  weary  with  work  and  gold ;
And  high  hopes  wither,  and  memories  wane^

On  hearths  and  altars  the  fires  are  dead ;
fint  that  brave  faith  hath  not  lived  in  vain,
▲ad  tbis  b  all  that  uur  watcher  said."

(Frances  Brown.)

D.1!


HOMILETICAL   INDEX


THE    BOOK    OF   AMOS.


OHAFTEB  L


A  Voice  from  the  Sheepootea  ...

The  Thnader  that  both  frights  and

Bmites
A  Eezade  of  Woes  ...  ...

The  Woe  against  Damascna  ...

The  Woe  against  Fhiliati»  „.

The  Woe  against  Tyre      ...  ...

The  Woe  against  Edom     ...  ...

The  Woe  against  Ammon :  Bmtalitj'

in  its  Element  ...  ...

Amos  the  Herdsman  ...  ...

The  Voioe  of  Terror  ...  ...

The  Jndgment  on  Damasons  ...

The  Jndgment  on  Fhilistia  ...

The  Tiolation  of  a  Brotherly  Corenant
A  Brother's   Faithlessness   and  In.

justice
Greed  of  Territory  .„  „,

The  Tme  Teacher

Great  Sufferings  following  Great  Sins
The  Enormity  of  the  Sin  of  Ferseoa.

tion   ■«.  ...  ...  ...


OHAFTEB  IL

The  Woe  against  Moab     .«  „

The  Woe  against  Indah    ...  ...

Heredity  and  the  Idol- Taint  ...

The  Woe  against  Israel     ...  ...

The  Manifold  Meroies  of  the  Oorenant

Feople

"Children  that  are  Oormpten"  ...

The  Wrath  of  Outraged  Gbodnesi  ...


6

8
9
10
12
13
14

IB
16
16
17
17
18

18
19
19
21

22


26
27
28
80

81
82
M


THEira  „„

Moab'a  Brutality  arenged  ...  35

The  Frivileged  but  Faithless  ...  35

A  Nation's  Crimea              ...  ...  36

A  Nation's  Frivileges         ...  ...  36

Men's  Sins  a  Divine  Burden  ...  37

Jndgment  IneTitable         ...  ...  38

God  and  Nation!                ...  ...  88


CHAPTBB   III.

The  Judgment  of  Apostates  a  Fore-
gone Conclusion              ...             ...  43

No  Smoke  without  Fire     ...             ...  43

The  Inevitable  Funishment  of  Chris-
tian Sin            ...             ...             ...  45

Communion  and  Concord  Inseparable  46

Calamity  One  of  the  Works  of  God ...  47
The  Hounds  that  bay  before  they

bite    ...             ...             ...             ...  49

The  Frophet  gets   his  Heavy  Com-
mission            ...            ...            ...  60

The  Besidne  of  Israel's  Woe            ...  62

Sin  against  Light  and  Lore              ...  64

Harmonious  Fellowship     ,„             ...  64

Warning  Notes    ...            ...            ...  65

The  Bevelation  of  Secrets               ...  65

The  Cormption  of  Conscience         ...  66
Betribution  upon  the  Altar  and  the

Falace              ...            ...            ...  SS

A  Specially  Blest  Feople  ...            ...  67

Betribution           ...            ...             ...  68

The  Irrepressibility  of  Moral  Truth  68

Beotitude             ...             ...             ,.,  69

National  Judgments          „,            ...  60


INDEX.


OHAPTKB  IT.

rAsi

The  Woes  of  the  Women  at  Base    ...  64
Oormption  and  Beligiosity  in  Unholy

Alliance           ...             ...             ...  66

Judgment    the    Dirine    Aetorl    to

Hnman  Sin      ...             ...            m  68

Burning,  jet  not  Tnrning...             ».  70

The  Great  Preparation      ...             ..<  78

The  God  with  whom  ws  hare  to  do...  74

Hypocrisy            ...             ...             ...  74

National      Calamities     uo      Dirin*

Chastisements                ...             ...  76

Obduracy  reproached         ...             ...  76

The  Brand  snatched  from  the  Bnm-

ing     ...             ...             ...             ...  76

"  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God  "  77,  78

The  Majesty  of  God           ...             ...  77

Worship  abonnding  with  Abonnding

Sin 79

God's  Government  of  the  World  m

Chastising  Goremment                m  80

Preparation  for  meeting  God          m  81


OHAPTKE  T.


88

89
81
92


Iirael's  Blegy      ...  ..>  »<

The  Seeking  that  is  Life  ...  ..

The  Contrast  presaging  the  Conflict
"A  Time  to  be  silent "      ...
The    Nation    with  which    God  will

dwell                ...             ...             ...  94

The  Track  of  the  Destroyer            ...  96
The  Day  of  the  Lord  the  Night  of

the  Impenitent               ...             ...  97

The  Antograph  of  the  Unreal          ...  99
Beal  Calamity  waiting  npon  Unreal

Serrioe             ...             ...             ...  100

Trusting  in  Idols  that  cannot  aare  101
"  Seek  the  Lord  "              ...           102, 106

The  Lord  of  the  Universs ...            ...  103

The  Great  Alteraatire      ...            ...  104

Ceremonialism  disdained  ...             ...  104

The  Biver  of  Bighteonsnesi             ,„  106

A  Divided  Homage  rejected            ...  105

TheMessageof  the  Stan...            ...  108

The  Gloiy  of  Beligion       ...            ».  110

Beligion               ...             ...            ...  110

Selfishnesi  in  Terror         ...            ...  110

The    DiTinely   Abhormt    and    tho

Diviaaly  Demanded       ...            ...  Ill


OHAPTEE  VL

nun  rAoi

Wantonness  the  Way  to  Woe          „.  115

Sorrow  dogging  the  Secnre             ...  117

The  Procrastinator  Family               ...  118

The  Dry  Eye  of  the  Destroyer         ...  120

Wrath  revealing  itself  in  Judgment  120
The  Doomed    People   who  will  not

turn  ...             ...             ...             ...  122

Joy  in  the  Unreal  always  PreoariouB  128
Beligiona     Indifference    and    False

Security           ...             ...             ...  125

Putting  away  the  Evil  Day              .m  125

The  Sin  of  Dissolute  Life  .„            ...  126

"The  Lord  oommandeth"  ...  127
The  Vanity  of  the  Sinner's  Principles

and  Hopes       ...             ...             ...  127

The  Hand  of  Gk)d  seen  In  National

Betribution      ...             ...             ...  128

Woeful  Ease        ...            .»             ...  128

Kan's  Evil  Day  ...             ...            ...  129

Carnal  Indulgence             ...             ...  130

National  Depravity            ...             ...  181

Trying  the  Impossible       ...             ...  182

Man's  Perverting  Power   ...            ...  133

Hnman  Joy  in  the  Unsubstantial    ...  134

God  chastising  Nations  by  Nations  186

OHAPTKB  Vn.

The  Vision  of  Devouring  Loonsfai    ...  140

The  Problem  of  Stability  ...             ...  142

The  Vision  of  Consuming  Fire        ...  144

Bighteonsness  to  the  Plnmb-lin*  ...  146
Machination     foiled     by     Fearless

Candour           ...             ...             ,„  147

Intercessory  Prayer           ...             ...  149

The  Bepentance  of  Jehovah             ,„  150

The  Plumb-line  of  Judgment           ,„  151

The  Herdsman  becomes  a  Prophet ...  161

Prophecy             ...             ...             ...  152

A  Polluted  Land               ...            ...  163

Bevelation  and  Prayer      ...             ...  153

Han's  Moral  Character  .„  ...  155
The  Conventional  and  the  Genoine

Priests  of  a  People        ...            ...  156

CHAPTKB  VIIL

A  Nation  Bipe  for  Buin    ...            ...  169

The  Covetous  Man's  Way ...            ...  161

Confirming  by  an  Oath      ...            .„  162


IKDKX


itt


Carried  away  ai  with  a  Flood  ...  163

A  Sanset  at  Noon              ...  ,.,  164

The    Soarcltj   that     iwallowi  the

Besidae  of  Qood             ...  ...  166

Bipeneas  in  Iniquity          »•  ...  163

"My  People"      .„  169

Ooretonsnegs      ...            .m  ...  170

The  Memory  of  Qod          ...  ...  170

"A  Bitter  Day"...             ...  _  171

Famine  of  the  Word  of  Qod  ...  171

Ripeness  for  Judgment     ...  ...  172

Avarice                ...             ,„  ...  173

Soul-Famina        .«            m  ...  174

Beligioua  Sincerity           .m  ...  175

OHAPTSB  IX.

A  Qneit  which  None  may  elude  ...  179

The  LidlsM  Sy«  ...            ^  ...  180


The  Image  of  the  Deity  in  "  Great

Nature's  Open  Eye"      ...  ...  181

The  Exalted  brought  Low  ...  183

The  Rebuilding  of  the  Waste  Places  183

Out  of  the  Shadow  into  the  Sun     ...  185

Inevitable  Judgment         ...  ...  187

National  Pride  and  Presumption     ...  187

Sifting  and  Salration         ...  ...  188

The  Folly  of  Self-confidenoa  ...  189

The  Beoonstruction  of  the  Tabemaola

of  David  ...  .„  ...  189

The  Golden  Age  ...  ,m  ...  190

The  Winnowing  of  God     ...  ...  191

Great  Sins,  Great  Oalamities,  Great

Efforts  ...  ...  ...  198

God  as  the  Administrator  of  Justio*  19S
The  Restoration  of  the  True  Moral

Theocracy        ...  ^  ^  IM


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED   BY  THE

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D  D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ;

AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

OB  ADIAH.

(Exposition :
By  REV.  W.  J.  DEANE,  M.A.,

RECTOR  OF  ASHEN  ;

i^oiniletics :
By  rev.   professor  J.   R.  THOMSON,   M.A.

jlgomilies  bg  Ourions  Q\ntl)ois :

REV.  A.  C.  THISELTON.  REV.    D.   THOMAS.    D.C


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Tokonto.


THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.


INTRODnOTION.


§1.  Subject  or  the  Book.

The  Book  of  Obadiah  is  occupied  with  one  Eiabject — tbe  pnnisliment  of
Edom  for  its  cmel  and  nnbrotherly  condaot  towards  Jndah  at  tlie  time
of  some  great  national  calamity,  merging  at  the  end  in  a  prophecy  of
the  restoration  of  Israel.  We  must  not  suppose,  however,  that  Obadiah
intends  to  limit  his  utterances  to  a  denunciation  of  the  Edomites.  His
words  are  not  exclusively  intended  for  their  case.  While  what  he  says  con-
cerning their  destruction  is  to  be  regarded  as  literally  true,  they  are  also
taken  as  the  type  of  nations  hostile  to  God,  and  their  overthrow  prefigures
the  universal  judgment  on  Gentiles,  which  should  usher  in  the  establishment
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  the  sovereignty  of  Jehovah  over  all  the  world.  The
work  consists  of  two  parts — one  (vers.  1 — 16)  telling  of  the  destruction  of
Edom,  and  the  causes  thereof ;  the  other  (vers.  17 — 21),  of  the  salvation  and
final  victory  of  Israel.  It  commences  with  a  proclamation  of  Jehovah  to  the
nations  to  come  and  do  battle  against  Edom.  Kelyiug  on  the  impregnable !
nature  of  her  seat  among  the  rocks  of  Petra,  she  fears  no  foe,  yet  thence  the  j
Lord  shall  bring  her  down.  She  shall  sufEer  no  mere  predatory  inroad,  but
shall  be  totally  stripped  and  plundered.  The  allies  in  whom  she  trusted
shall  prove  treacherous,  and  laugh  her  credulity  to  scorn.  The  wise  men
for  whom  she  was  widely  celebrated  shall  fail  to  save  her  in  that  day ;  all
her  valiant  chiefs  shall  become  faint-hearted,  and  utter  desolation  shall  be
her  portion.  Why  ia  Edom  thus  afflicted  ?  It  is  in  retribution  for  the
wrong  which  she  did  to  Israel,  the  covenant  nation,  to  whom  she  was
united  by  closest  ties  of  kindred.  When  Judah  was  reduced  to  low  estate,
Edom  rejoiced  in  her  sister's  calamity,  beheld  her  disaster  with  malicious
satisfaction,  and  sided  with  her  enemies  in  the  plunder  and  murder  of  the
wretched  inhabitants  of  Jerasalem.  Such  conduct  the  Edomites  will,  as
the  prophet  foresees,  repeat  at  the  first  opportunity ;  and  for  this,  when
God  visits  the  heathen,  they  shall  be  marked  out  for  destruction,  and  sball

OBADIAH  b


U  INTKODUOTION  TO


receiTe  the  measure  wbicb  they  meted  to  others.  The  last  five  Terses  com-
prise the  second  part  of  the  prophecy.  On  Mount  Zion  there  shall  be  those
that  escape,  and  deliverance  shall  be  given  to  the  house  of  Jacob.  The
Israelites  shall  be  agents  in  God's  hand  for  the  accomplishment  of  hia
vengeance ;  thej  shall  expel  the  invaders  of  their  country,  and  spread
abroad  on  every  side;  the  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles  shall  return  to
their  fellow-countrymen ;  and  the  great  consummation  shall  arrive  when
"  the  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's."

The  relation  of  Edom  to  Isra«l  had  for  the  most  part  been  of  the
most  unfriendly  character,  Qnarrals  between  relatives  are  proverbially
bitter ;  this  waa  the  case  with  these  two  nations.  The  hostility  showed
itself  in  the  refusal  to  allow  Israel  to  pass  through  their  land  on  the  way
to  Canaan ;  it  led  to  wars  with  Saul  (I  Sam.  ziy.  47)  and  with  David,
who  must  have  had  good  reason  for  his  very  severe  treatment  of  them  when
he  put  to  death  all  the  males  (2  Sam.  viu.  13,  14,  Revised  Version ;  1
Kings  xi.  15,  etc.).  Hadad,  an  Idumean  chief,  was  one  of  Solomon's  most
inveterate  opponents  (1  Kings  xi.  14 — 22) ;  and  though  the  Edomites  were
for  many  years  kept  under  by  stern  measures,  yet  they  rebelled  whenever
they  saw  a  hope  of  success.  Thus  they  joined  with  Moab  and  Ammon  in
an  invasion  of  Judeea  in  the  time  of  Jehoshaphat  (2  Ghron.  xx.  22) ;  under
Jehoram  they  regained  their  independence,  massacred  the  Judseans  who
were  in  their  borders,  and,  in  alliance  with  Philistines  and  desert  tribes,
plundered  the  king's  palace  in  Jerusalem  and  slew  his  sons  (2  Ghron.  xxi.
8,  17;  Joel  iii.  19;  Amos  i.  11).  Some  years  later,  however,  they  were
Buccessf uUy  attacked  by  Amaziah,'their  stronghold  Sela,  or  Fetra,  was  taken,
and  the  population  was  put  to  the  sword,  tweniy  thousand  being  slain
in  battle  or  butchered  afterwards  (2  Kings  xiv.  7 ;  2  Ghron.  xxv.  11,  etc.).
Yet  they  were  never  completely  subdued ;  they  were  always  on  the  watch
to  smite  Jndah  and  to  carry  away  captives  (2  Ghron.  xxviii.  17).  When
Kebuchadnezzar  besieged  Jerusalem,  they  gladly  joined  the  invaders  (Ezek.
xxxv. ;  xxxvi.  5),  helped  to  plunder  the  city  and  to  cut  off  stragglers  who
endeavoured  to  escape.  This  hostile  attitude  of  Edom  towards  God's  people
is  the  ground  of  the  judgment  denounced  by  Obadiah.

The  following  eloquent  passage  from  Dean  Stanley's  '  Lectures  on  the
Jewish  Church '  (ii.  556)  shows  the  attitude  of  Edom,  and  the  feeling
evoked  by  it  in  the  breast  of  the  Jews :  "  Deepest  of  all  was  the  indignation
roused  by  the  sight  of  the  nearest  of  kin,  the  race  of  Esau,  often  allied
to  Judah,  often  independent,  now  bound  by  the  closest  union  with  the
power  that  was  truly  the  common  enemy  of  both.  There  was  an  intoxica-
tion of  delight  in  the  wild  Edomite  chiefs,  as  at  each  successive  stroke
against  the  venerable  wall,  they  shouted,  '  Down  with  it,  down  with  it,  even
to  the  ground  I '  They  stood  in  the  passes  to  intercept  the  escape  of  those
who  would  have  fled  down  to  the  Jordan  vaUey;  they  betrayed  the
fugitives ;  they  indulged  their  barbarous  revels  on  the  temple  hilL  Long
ftnd  loud  has  been  the  wail  of  execration  which  has  gone  ap  from  the


THE  BOOK  OB"  OBADIAH.  Ui


Jewish  nation  against  Edom.  It  is  the  one  imprecation  which  breaks  forth
from  the  Lamentations  of  Jeremiah ;  it  is  the  culmination  of  the  fierca
threats  of  Ezekiel ;  it  is  the  sole  purpose  of  the  short,  sharp  cry  of  Obadiah ;
it  is  the  bitterest  drop  in  the  sad  recollections  of  the  Israelite  captives  hj
the  waters  of  Babylon;  and  the  one  warlike  strain  of  the  evangelical
prophet  is  inspired  by  the  hope  that  the  Divine  Conqueror  should  come
Emee-deep  in  Idnmean  blood."

The  territory  occupied  by  the  Edomites  extended  from  the  southern  end
of  the  Dead  Sea  to  the  Elanitio  Gulf,  and  comprised  an  area  of  about  two
thousand  square  miles.  Though  it  was  a  mountainous  district,  and  well
deserved  its  biblical  names  of  "  the  mount  of  Esau  "  and  "  Mount  Seir,"
there  was  no  want  of  fertile  boU  in  its  valleys  and  terraces.  The  ancient
capital  appears  to  have  beeti  Bozrah,  a  city  that  lay  a  few  miles  south  of
the  Dead  Sea.  But  at  the  time  of  Obadiah's  prophecy  this  had  been  sup-
planted by  the  celebrated  Sela,  or  Petra,  the  peculiar  position  of  which  place,
with  its  difficult  access,  its  rock-hewn  dwellings,  and  natural  defences,  had
tended  to  encourage  in  the  Edomites  a  spirit  of  independence  and  security,
which  taught  them  to  defy  attack  and  to  spurn  all  attempts  at  subjection.

There  has  always  been  great  difficulty  in  visiting  the  modem  repre-
sentatives of  the  Edomites,  though  some  few  enterprising  persons  have
penetrated  their  fastnesses,  and  given  to  the  world  the  results  of  their
investigations.  A  late  traveller  who  has  succeeded  in  inspecting  Petra  has
described  his  visit  in  the  Oentury  Magazine,  November,  1885,  from  which
the  following  extracts  are  taken :  "  Petra  is  identified  with  the  Hebrew
Selah,  '  a  Rock,'  the  Amorite,  Edomite,  and  Maibite  stronghold  (Judg.  i.
36 ;  2  Kings  xiv.  7 ;  Isa.  xvi.  1).  Strabo  (xvi.  663 ;  v.  15,  edit.  Did.)  tells  us
of  Petra  as  a  city  shut  in  by  rocks  in  the  nddst  of  the  desert,  yet  supplied
abundantly  with  water,  and  important  as  a  place  of  transit  for  Oriental
prodactions.  The  cUy  lay  in  a  narrow  valley,  surrounded  by  precipitous
hills.  On  the  eastern  and  western  sides  the  cliffs  rise  almost  perpendi-
cularly to  the  height  of  six  or  seven  hundred  feet.  On  the  north  and  south
the  natural  barriers  are  less  formidable,  and  may,  in  places,  be  passed  by
camels.  Many  recesses,  or  small  lateral  valleys,  open  into  the  main  valley.
The  circuit  of  the  entire  depression,  including  these  lateral  valleys,  is
about  four  miles.  ,  .  .  The  site  of  Petra  lies  half-way  between  the  Gulf
of  Akabah  and  the  Dead  Sea,  about  seventy  miles,  as  the  vulture  flies,  from
each.  It  has  been  said  that  there  is  but  one  entrance  to  Petra.  Yet  there
is  a  '  bfM^k  door,'  so  to  speak,  through  which  some  travellers  have  made
their  way  into  the  city,  and  by  means  of  which  they  have  also  more
suddenly  made  their  departure.  The  real  approach  is  throngh  a  narrow
gorge  (Wady  Mousa)  some  two  miles  long,  of  which  the  gateway  faces  the
east.  This  is  reached  from  Palestine  by  way  of  Moab,  east  of  the  Dead
Sea,  and  from  the  south  by  the  route  I  took  [viz.  across  the  Red  Sea,  a
few  miles  south  of  Suez ;  down  the  desert  to  Mount  Sinai ;  thence  north
kdA  east  to  the  head  of  the  Gulf  of  Akabah].     The  back  door  may  be  gained


INTBODUOnON  TO


from  north  or  sonth  by  way  of  the  Wady  Arabah — ^the  vast  desert  waste
which  lies  between  the  Gulf  of  Akabah  and  the  Dead  Sea,  into  which  it
opens  near  the  base  of  venerable  Mount  Hor.  .  .  .  Breaking  onr  way
through  the  jungle  on  the  further  side  of  the  stream  [the  Sik],  we  found
ourselves  in  the  very  heart  of  the  necropolis  of  Petra.  ...  It  may  be
useful  to  remind  the  reader,  before  we  enter  Petra  proper,  that  all  its
principal  structures,  be  they  tombs,  palaces,  or  temples,  are  excavated  from
the  rock,  and  not  constructed  of  quarried  stone.  The  sides  of  the
mountains  are  cut  to  smooth  perpendicular  faces,  which  ore  occupied  by
unbroken  ranges  of  temples  and  of  homes  for  the  living  and  the  dead.
The  interiors  behind  the  ornate  fronts  are  but  caves  squared  by  the  old
stone-cutter,  and  are  lighted  only  by  their  doors.  Continuing  our  advance,
we  followed  the  stream  a  few  rods,  and  descending  as  the  pass  narrowed,
the  entrance  of  the  frightful  chasm,  seen  afar  ofE  at  sunrise,  was
reached  at  last.  What  an  impregnable  gateway !  Spanning  it  is  a  fine
buttressed  arch,  resting  upon  rock-cut  foundations.  Beneath  this  a  little
stream  gpirgles.  We  followed  it  through  the  only  entrance — the  'front
door '  of  Petra.  The  top  of  the  northern  wall  of  the  defile  was  once  inhabited.
Excavations,  bridges,  terraced  gardens,  and  various  other  evidences  remain
upon  it  of  the  industry  and  artistic  taste  of  a  wonderfully  persevering
people.  When  we  had  come  fairly  inside  the  gorge,  we  found  it  at  times
■o  narrow  that  two  of  us  could  not  walk  abreast.  Its  perpendicular  sides
vary  in  height  from  four  hundred  to  seven  hundred  feet,  and  frequently,
without  absolutely  meeting,  they  overhang  to  such  a  degree  that  the  ekj
is  shut  out  from  the  sight  for  a  hundred  yards  at  a  stretch.  On  every  side,
more  than  a  yard  above  the  stream-bed,  channels  are  cut  in  the  rock  as
conduits  for  water,  and  in  some  places  terra-cotta  pipes  are  found  cemented
in  these  channels.  Tiny  niches  abound  also,  cut  in  the  sides  of  the  gorge^
old  pagan  divinities,  no  doubt.  The  growtb  of  oleanders  becomes  more
dense  as  the  gorge  descends.  Green  caper  plants  dangle  from  the  crevices,
and  here  and  there  a  graceful  tamarisk  is  found  in  the  shade.  The  tiny
brook,  the  Sik,  follows  the  whole  way.  The  quarried  stone  scattered  along
the  path  indicates  that  the  floor  of  the  fissure  was  once  paved.  At  every
turn  we  saw  evidences  of  indefatigable  effort,  and  of  how  lavishly  labour
was  expended  by  the  people  who  lived  in  Petra  in  its  days  of  power.  For
nearly  two  miles  we  followed  the  semi-subterranean  passage.  The  path-
way now  descended ;  the  water  grew  deeper,  the  opposing  thicket  more
impassable,  the  scene  more  grand.  .  .  .  Emerging  from  the  gorge  into  an
open  area,  we  stood  face  to  face  with  the  strange  edifice  (the  Elhuzneh).
.  .  .  The  colour  is  a  delicate  rose-pink,  like  that  of  the  buildings  further  on  in
the  city,  almost  unbroken  by  waves  of  other  hue.  ...  As  the  inner  gate
of  the  city  beyond  the  Khuzneh  was  entered,  to  the  right  and  left  wondrous
architectural  fancies  loomed  up.  On  the  left  is  a  group  of  sqnare-cnt
edifices,  seeming  at  first  like  gigantic  steps,  but  out  of  which  varied  fa^des
appear  upon  a  closer  view.     On  the  right  is  a  trio  of  tombs  and  temples


THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.


hewn  from  the  end  of  a  range  of  cliffs,  the  last  one  looking  like  a  g^eat
grim  warder  at  the  city  gate.  Beneath  are  nnmberless  excaTations,  each
one  of  which,  from  its  appearance,  might  haye  been  need  first  as  a  home  for
the  livipg  before  being  appropriated  as  a  tomb.  .  .  .  Now  emerging  into
the  expanse  of  the  little  valley,  the  full  gloiy  of  the  Edomite  capital  borst
upon  ns.  Nature  built  these  stupendous  walls,  and  man  adorned  them  with
patient  workmanship,  each  artist  vying  with  his  fellow  in  shaping  these
rainbow  cliSs  into  forms  of  beauty."

The  fulfilment  of  Obadiah's  prophecy  may  be  briefly  summarized.  It  is
most  probable  that,  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  and  notwithstanding  the
assistance  which  they  gave  to  Nebuchadnezzar  on  that  occasion,  the
Edomites  were  subdued  by  that  monarch  some  five  years  later.  History  faUs
to  assert  this  fact  in  unmistakable  terms,  but  it  is  satisfactorily  inferred
from  other  considerations.  Jeremiah  prophesies  (xxv.  9 ;  xzvii.  3 — 6)  that
the  Chaldeans  shall  attack  this  country  as  well  as  Egypt  (zliii.  8 — 13),
and  Josephus  ('  Ant.,'  x.  9.  7)  narrates  how  they  warred  against  Ccele-Syria,
the  Ammonites,  and  Moabites,  and  then  proceeded  to  invade  Egypt.  It  is
highly  improbable  that  they  left  Petra  nnconquered  in  their  rear,  more
especially  as  in  all  likelihood  Edom  joined  with  Ammon  and  Moab  in
resisting  this  aggression.  Bather,  the  rain  mentioned  by  Malachi  (i.  3,  4),
"  They  shall  build,  but  I  will  throw  down,"  was  then  inflicted,  and  their
"  mountains  were  made  a  desolation,  and  their  heritage  given  to  the  jackals
of  the  wilderness."  At  this  time  the  Nabatheeans,  an  Arabian  tribe,  and
possibly  sent  thither  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  took  possession  of  Fetra;  and
thus,  according  to  Obadiah's  word,  the  heathen  rose  up  against  her  in
battle,  seized  her  stronghold,  and  brought  her  down  to  the  ground.
Antigonns,  one  of  the  generals  of  Alexander  the  Great,  conquered  this
people  and  despoiled  Fetra,  b.o.  312.  The  Edomites,  who  had  estabhshed
themselves  in  Southern  Falestine,  suffered  heavy  defeats  at  the  hands  of
Judaa  Maccabesus  (1  Maco.  v.  3,  65) ;  John  Hyrcanus  compelled  them  to
submit  to  the  Mosaic  Law  (Josephus,  *  Ant.,'  xiii.  9. 1) ;  Alexander  Jannseus
completed  their  ruin  (ibid.,  15.  4).  The  scanty  remains  of  the  people  which
existed  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem  were  almost  entirely  put  to  the  sword
('  BelL  Jud.,'  iv.  5,  etc. ;  ▼.  6.  1) ;  the  few  survivors  of  the  massacre  took
refuge  among  the  tribes  of  the  desert,  and  were  absorbed  in  their
community,  so  that  Origen  could  say  that  in  his  time  their  name  and
language  had  wholly  perished  ('  In  Job.').

§  n.    AUTHOB,

Of  Obadiah,  the  author  of  this  prophecy,  nothing  whatever  is  known.
Not  even  his  father's  name  is  given  in  the  title  of  the  book,  which  is
simply,  "  the  vision  of  Obadiah."  The  name  itself  (in  Greek,  'A^Siov  or
'OBSiov,  ie.*Opa<nf:  in  Latin,  Abdias)  signifies  "  Servant"  or  "Worshipper
of  Jehovah,"  and  was  common  among  the  Hebrews}  but  the  attempt  to


vi  INTBODXJOnON  TO


identify  the  prophet  with  anj  of  the  persona  so  called  in  H0I7  Writ  ia
entirely  anBacceBsfal,  and  has  arisen  rather  from  the  natural  desire  to
know  more  concerning  this  holj  man  than  from  any  special  eyidence  or
probability.  Persons  of  the  same  name  (though  sometimes  in  different
form)  are  fonnd  in  1  Kings  xyiii.  3 ;  1  Obron.  iii.  21 ;  rii.  3 ;  viii.  38 ;  ix.
16,  44;  xii.  9;  zxyii.  19;  xxxiy.  12;  Ezra  Tiii.  9;  Neh.  x.  5;  2  Ohron.
xvii.  7 ;  xxxiv.  12 ;  but  none  of  these  has  any  pretension  to  be  considered
oTir  prophet.  The  contents  of  his  prophecy  prore  that  he  belonged  to  the
kingdom  of  Jadah,  and  St.  Ephrem  asserts  that  he  came  from  Sichem.
His  tomb  was  shown  at  Samaria  in  St.  Jerome's  time.

S  nL  Dati.

The  age  in  which  Obadiah  lived  and  prophesied  ia  a  matter  of  great
dispute,  and,  after  all  that  can  be  said,  must  be  considered  as  only  probably
ascertained.  The  most  varying  opinions  have  been  held.  While  some
regard  him  as  the  earliest,  or  among  the  earliest,  of  the  minor  prophets,
others  place  him  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  in  the  time  of  Captivity;
and  Hitzig  sets  his  date  as  late  as  B.C.  312.  The  interval  between  the
various  dates  amounts  to  six  hundred  years.  "  That  is,"  says  Dr.  Pnsey
('  Minor  Prophets,'  p.  227),  "just  as  if  men  doubted, /row  tntemal  evidence,
•whether  a  work  were  written  in  the  time  of  William  the  Conqueror  or  in
that  of  Cromwell ;  of  St.  Louis  or  Louis  XVIII. ;  or  whether  Hesiod  was
a  contemporary  of  Callimachus,  and  Ennius  of  Claudian ;  or  the  author  of
the  '  Nibelungen  Lied '  lived  with  Schiller."  The  elements  for  determining
this  controversy  are  not  very  satisfactory.  First,  there  is  the  position  of
the  book  in  the  Hebrew  Bible.  If  this  were  proved  to  be  strictly  chrono-
logical, the  question  might  be  thus  decided,  and  Obadiah  might  be  regarded
as  prophesying  about  the  age  of  Amos,  next  to  whom  he  is  arranged.  The
Septuagint  places  his  book  between  Joel  and  Jonah,  setting  Micah  before
the  former ;  and  this  order  would  give  an  approximately  similar  date.  In
the  Hebrew  arrangement  the  exilian  or  post-exilian  prophets  certainly
occupy  the  last  place;  and  Obadiah,  occurring  among  the  older  seers,
between  Amos  and  Jonah,  would  appear  to  belong  to  an  earlier  age.  But
it  is  objected  that  this  position  is  due  to  his  prophecy  being  an  expansion
of  the  prediction  about  Edom  in  the  concluding  words  of  Amos  (ix.  12),
and  has  no  bearing  whatever  upon  his  date.  Though  we  can  by  no  means
concede  this,  and  are  disposed  to  lay  great  weight  on  the  arrangement  of
the  Hebrew  canon,  we  must  be  guided  by  other  considerations  in  deter-
mining the  question.  The  contents  of  the  book  supply  two  further  aids.
In  ver.  11  Obadiah  alludes  to  the  capture  of  Jerusalem ;  and  if  we  knew
for  certain  to  what  event  he  refers,  we  should  at  once  be  in  a  position  to
settle  the  difiB.culty.  We  gather  from  his  language  that  Jerusalem  waa
taken  and  plundered ;  that  her  soldiers  were  sent  into  captivity ;  that  her
citizens  were  sold  as  slaves ;  and  that  Edom  joined  with  the  invaders,  out


THX  BOOK  or  OBADLIH.  tU

off  ttngglen,  and  rejoiced  in  the  calamitj  of  Jadah.  Nothing  is  laid  of
(he  total  destmotion  of  the  oitj  and  the  temple,  nothing  of  the  people
recovering  their  lost  home ;  they  are  supposed  to  be  still  occupying  their
own  oonntiy  (vers.  17 — 19),  and  thence  extending  their  kingdom.  Now,
we  read  in  the  Old  Testament  of  three,  or  perhaps  four,  occasions  on  which
Jerusalem  was  taken.  The  first  capture  by  Shishak,  in  the  reign  of  Beho-
boam  (1  Eangs  xiv.  25';  2  Ghron.  xii.  2),  was  not  attended  with  such  evils
as  are  noted  in  our  prophecy,  and  took  place  at  a  time  when  the  Edomites,
being  subject  to  Jndah,  could  not  hare  acted  in  the  manner  specified.

The  second  occasion  belongs  to  the  reign  of  Jehoram,  when  the  Philistines
and  Arabians  (the  latter  being  a  loose  designation  of  the  roving  tribes  of
the  wilderness  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  south  of  Jadsea)  invaded
Jndah,  plundered  much  treasure  from  the  house  of  the  king,  and  carried
away  his  wives  and  all  his  children  save  his  youngest  son,  Jehoahaa
(2  Chron.  xxi.  16,  17;  comp.  2  Kings  viii.  20,  etc.).  The  description  is
brief,  and  further  details  are  wanting ;  bat  it  can  scarcely  be  doubted  thai
other  captives  were  taken  besides  the  royal  family ;  and  that  if  the  palace
of  the  king  was  sacked,  the  city  and  its  inhabitants  could  net  have  got  off
scatheless.  Amos  (i.  6,  9,  11)  is  probably  alluding  to  the  same  event
when  he  speaks  of  the  injuries  perpetrated  by  the  Philistines,  Phcsnicians,
and  Edomites ;  and  Joel  (iii.  3 — 6),  when  he  complains  that  the  Phcenicians
sold  the  Judaeans  into  captivity  to  the  sons  of  the  Grecians,  and  (iii.  19)
foretells  the  desolation  of  Egypt  and  Edom  for  their  violence  against  the
children  of  Jndah  in  their  (the  Jews')  land.  It  is  objected  that  "the
house  of  the  king,"  in  2  Ghron.  zzi.  17,  does  not  mean  the  royal  palace,
but  only  the  camp  where  was  the  king's  temporary  abode,  because  in  the
following  chapter  we  read,  "  The  band  of  men  that  came  with  the  Arabians
to  the  camp  had  slain  all  the  eldest "  children.  Bat  this  proves  nothing ;
the  sons  may  have  been  killed  in  the  camp  (though  the  account  does  not
say  so),  and  the  invaders  may  have  gone  on  to  Jerusalem,  now  left
unguarded,  and  plundered  it.  Nor  is  it  likely  that  they  would  have
found  much  substance  in  a  temporary  camp.  It  is  true  that  the  Edomites
are  not  expressly  named  among  the  allied  peoples  who  took  part  in  this
raid ;  but  they  may  well  be  included  in  the  vague  term  "  Arabians ;  "  and
at  any  rate  the  latter  could  not  have  attacked  Jndah  without  their  consent,
which  they  were  ready  to  give  at  this  particular  time,  when  they  had
just  recovered  their  freedom  from  the  rule  of  David's  line,  and  were  glad
of  an  opportunity  of  vengeance.  Of  the  animosity  and  active  hostility  of
Edom  a  further  proof  is  afEorded  by  Ps.  Ixxiiii.,  composed,  perhaps,  in  the
time  of  Hezekiah,  where  among  the  nations  confederate  against  Israel  are
mentioned  "  the  tabernacles  of  Edom  and  the  Ishmaelites."

The  third  occasion  when  Jerusalem  suffered  at  the  hands  of  enemies  was
when  Joash  King  of  Israel  defeated  Amaziah,  and  brake  down  the  wall
of  the  city  (2  Kings  xiv.  8,  etc. ;  2  Chron.  xxv.  17,  etc.).  But  this  cannot  be
the  catastrophe  to  which  Obadiah  refers,  as  he  oaUa  the  invaders  strangers


▼iU  -  INTKODUCTION  TO


and  foreigners,  and  describes  the  calamity  as  mach  greater  than  the  partial
disaster  then  incurred.

The  fourth  capture  of  Jerusalem  is  its  final  destruction  by  the  Chaldeans.
Now,  the  language  of  Obadiah  does  by  no  means  adequately  depict  this
terrible  catastrophe.  There  is  no  mention  of  Assyrians  or  Babylonians.
The  utter  destruction  of  the  city  and  temple,  and  the  dissolution  of  the
kingdom,  are  nowhere  stated  or.  implied.  Compare  our  prophet's  words
with  those  of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel  describing  the  overthrow,  and
how  tame  and  insufficient  they  seem  in  the  face  of  such  utter  ruin  !
Could  any  true  patriot  have  said  only  thus  much,  and  have  omitted
so  many  points  which  added  intensity  to  the  disaster?  What  are  the
strongest  expressions  used  ?  The  fatal  time  is  called  thrice,  "  the  day  of
their  calamity ; "  twice,  "  the  day  of  distress ; "  once,  "  the  day  of  their
destruction  "  and  "  disaster,"  when  "  foreigners  entered  the  gates,  and  oast
lots  upon  Jerusalem,  and  carried  away  her  substance."  Pillage  and  rapine
are  intimated,  but  nothing  more.  Where  is  any  similar  reproach  to  that
of  the  psalmist,  "  Bemember,  0  Lord,  the  children  of  Edom  in  the  day  of
Jerusalem,  who  said.  Base  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  foundation  thereof  I "
(Ps.  cixxvii.  7)  ?  Could  Obadiah  have  failed  to  recall  this  cruel  cry  of
the  Edomites  in  detailing  their  offences  against  his  people,  if  he  were
referring  to  their  conduct  at  the  Chaldean  invasion  ?  Then,  again,  there
is  no  trace  in  our  prophecy  of  any  wholesale  deportation  of  the  people
or  of  the  desolation  of  the  land.  The  nation  is  regarded  as  still  seated  in
its  own  country,  and  adding  to  its  possessions  (ver.  17) ;  not  as  returning
from  captivity.  These  considerations  seem  to  point  to  the  conclusion  that
Obadiah  refers,  not  to  the  final  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  but  to  some
previous  calamity ;  and  none  that  we  are  acquainted  with  coincides  vrith
the  expressions  with  which  he  describes  it,  except  the  capture  by  th«
Philistines  and  Arabians  in  the  time  of  Jehoram,  which  may  possibly
simplify  the  chronological  difficulty  by  affording  a  temUnus  a  quo,  espe-
cially if  any  reason  conld  be  found  for  regarding  this  event  as  recent
when  Obadiah  wrote.

But  if  we  regard  this  calamity  of  Jerusalem  as  the  event  which  the  prophet
has  in  view,  we  cannot,  of  course  from  this  fact  alone,  settle  the  disputed
question  of  his  date.  It  is  plain  that  the  language  employed  in  vers.  11
and  16  implies  that  the  event  is  passed ;  and  our  Authorized  Version,  by  a
mistranslation  of  the  intervening  passage,  emphasizes  this  inference.  Thus
in  vers.  12,  etc.,  we  have,  "  Tbon  shouldest  not  have  looked  on  the  day  of
thy  brother ;  •  .  .  neither  shonldest  thou  have  rejoiced  over  the  children  of
Jadah,"  etc.  It  is  certain  that  this  rendering  is  grammatically  wrong,  and
that  al  with  the  future  can  only  be  prohibitive ;  the  words,  therefore,  onght
to  be  translated,  "  Do  not  look,"  etc.  (M^  cV^s,  Septnagint ;  Non  detpidu,
Vulgate;  "Ne  intnearis,"  Mont.).  This  rendering  makes  the  referencfl
f  atnre ;  and  it  is  said  that,  if  Obadiah  were  speaking  of  a  past  erent,  h«
Would  not  give  an  eightfold  injunction  not  to  do  something  which  had


THE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.


alreadf  been  done.  It  is  not  God's  wont  to  warn  when  it  is  too  late  to
repent.  In  answer  to  this,  to  argue  that  the  prophet,  in  poetical  form,  is
describing  the  past  as  futare,  seems  scarcely  sufficient.  Eather,  the  truth
appears  to  be  this :  In  ver.  11  he  is,  as  we  concluded  before,  alluding  to
a  definite  capture  of  Jerusalem ;  in  the  following  verses  he  is  warning  the
Edomites  not  to  act  in  the  manner  specified  when  calamity  has  overtaken
Jndah.  Judging  from  what  they  had  done  formerly,  he  surmises  that  they
will  repeat  the  same  conduct  whenever  occasion  shall  arise.  He  knows
well  how  bitter  and  unwearied  is  Edom's  hostility  against  Judah ;  he  has
seen  how  she  behaved  in  the  late  invasion,  how  she  sided  with  the  enemy
and  made  her  gain  from  her  sister's  misfortune ;  and  he  urges  her  to  act
not  again  in  this  way.  His  prophetic  eye  looks  forward  to  the  future
calamity  that  shall  befall  his  country ;  from  the  view  of  the  disaster  which
ha  had  witnessed  under  Joram,  he  rises  to  the  vision  of  a  greater  and  more
complete  ruin ;  one  is  a  type  and  prophecy  of  the  other ;  and  the  behavioar
of  Edom  in  the  former  case  is  a  rehearsal  of  what  she  will  do  in  the  latter.
If  the  prophet's  words,  though  nominally  addressed  to  the  Edomites,  were
not  intended  as  a  warning  to  them,  and,  as  is  most  probable,  never  came
under  their  notice,  we  may  regard  them  as  virtually  foretelling  their  action
and  consequent  punishment,  and  hence  imparting  comfort  to  the  faithful
few  with  the  hope  of  a  glorious  future.  The  punishment  which  he  invokes
is,  doubtless,  primarily  the  consequence  of  their  recent  conduct ;  but  the
prediction  embraces  other  crimes  of  a  similar  nature,  which  will  increase
the  penalty  when  the  moment  for  its  judgment  shall  arrive.  Thus  far
we  have  seen  reason  to  decide  that  Obadiah  wrote,  not  directly  after  the
Chaldean  invasion,  but  after  the  raid  of  the  Philistines  and  Arabians,  while
the  catastrophe  was  still  present  to  men's  memory.  Again,  the  enemies  are
an  indefinite  mass  composed  of  heathen  tribes,  not  a  determinate  foe  such
as  the  Chaldeans.  And  the  captives  are  not  taken  to  the  far  east,  but  to
the  north,  to  Phcenioia,  and  to  western  regions.  Of  fugitives  to  Egypt  no
mention  is  made.  With  the  Chaldean  invasion  in  his  view,  Obadiah  could
not  have  used  these  expressions.  There  is  another  consideration  which
makes  for  the  same  inference,  and  that  is  his  relation  to  other  prophets.  The
coincidence  of  thought  and  expression  between  Obadiah  and  Joel  cannot  be
accidental.  One  must  have  been  acquainted  with  the  other;  or  both  must
have  had  recourse  to  a  third  original.  Thus  Joel  says  (ii.  32),  "  In  Mount
Zion  and  in  Jerusalem  there  shall  be  those  that  escape,  as  the  Lord  hath
said;"  and  Obadiah  (ver.  17),  "In  Mount  Zion  there  shall  be  those  that
escape."  Joel  iii.  2,  3,  "Whom  they  have  scattered  among  the  nations,
and  parted  my  land;  and  they  have  cast  lots  upon  my  people;"  Obad.  11,
"  Foreigners  entered  into  his  gates,  and  cast  lots  npon  Jerusalem."  Joel
iii.  4,  7,  "  I  will  return  your  recompense  npon  your  own  head ; "  Obad.  15,
"  Thy  recompense  shall  return  upon  thine  own  head."  "  The  day  of  the
Lord  ia  near  "  (Joel  iii.  14 ;  Obad.  18)  ;  "  Jerusalem  shall  be  holy  "  (Joel
iii  17);  "Mount  Zion  shall  be  holy"  (Obad.  17);  "Edom  aludl  be  a


njTBODUOTION  TO


desolate  vildemeas,  for  the  violence  done  to  the  children  of  Jndah  "  (Joel
iii.  19) ;  "  For  the  violence  done  to  thj  brother  Jacob  shame  shall  coyer
thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  cat  off  for  ever"  (Obad.  10).  That  Joel  borrowed
from  Obadiah,  Keil  considers  proved  by  the  expression  in  Joel  ii.  32  (accord-
ing to  the  numbering  of  the  English  Version),  "  as  the  Lord  hath  said,"
where,  as  we  have  seen  above,  he  repeats  Obadiah's  words,  which  occur
nowhere  else.  This,  however,  is  not  conclnsive,  as  Joel  may  be  merely
asserting  his  own  claim  of  Divine  authority,  and  may  not  necessarily  be
quoting  another  prophet's  utterance.  Many  other  critics  incline  to  the
opinion  that  Joel  rests  on  Obadiah ;  if  this  could  be  demonstrated,  the  dis-
pute concerning  the  date  of  the  latter  might  be  approximately  settled.  Bat
this  opinion  is  at  best  presumptive,  and  depends  on  such  allegations  as
that  Obadiah^  never  imitates  predecessors,  except  in  the  one  case  of  an
allusion  to  Balaam's  prophecy  (vers.  4,  18,  etc.) ;  that  he  is  more  original
than  Joel;  and  that  it  is  not  probable  that  in  his  short  book  he  should
have  had  recourse  to  others  for  ideas  and  expressions.

The  relation  between  Obadiah  and  Jeremiah  is  capable  of  more  satisfac-
tory determination.  There  are  nine  verses  in  the  former  (vers.  1 — ^9)  which
are  found  in  the  latter  (Jer.  xlix.  7 — 22).  In  the  former  these  occur  con-
secutively, and  form  one  connected  whole ;  in  the  latter  they  are  dispersed
over  a  wider  space,  and  disunited  by  the  insertion  of  other  thoughts.  The
prophecy  of  Obadiah  against  Edom  is  an  orderly  and  regnlar  production,
with  a  beginning,  middle,  and  conclusion,  passing  on  naturally  to  the  climax ;
Jeremiah  denounces  Edom  at  various  times  and  in  various  manners,  but
his  prediction  has  no  internal  unity,  and  is  not  worked  up  into  a  perfect
whole.  Jeremiah,  too,  has  on  other  occasions  borrowed  largely  from  his
predecessors.  It  is  impossible  that  Obadiah  should  have  prefaced  his  work
with  the  words,  "  The  vision  of  Obadiah,"  and  "  we  have  heard  tidings  from
the  Lord,"  if  he  was  taking  such  large  extracts  from  previous  writings.
A  careful  inspection  of  the  two  prophets  (noting  especially  how  Jeremiah
has  softened  the  ruggedness  and  changed  the  unusual  expressions  in
Obadiah)  will  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  Obadiah  is  the  original  from
whom  Jeremiah  borrowed,  just  as  he  introduces  verses  from  Isaiah  in
his  denunciation  of  Moab  (comp.  Jer.  xlviii.  43,  44  with  Isa.  xxiv.  17,  18 ;
and  generally  Jer.  xlviii.  with  Isa.  xv.,  xvi.),  and  a  passage  from  Amos
(i.  4)  in  the  judgment  of  Damascus  (Jer,  xlix.  27).  Thus  the  prophecy
of  Obadiah  was  anterior  to  that  of  Jeremiah,  whose  utterance  against
Edom  belongs  to  the  fourth  year  of  Jehoiakim  (Caspari,  pp.  14,  etc.).
The  question  still  remains — How  long  anterior  ?  Some  intimation  of  the
truth  may  be  gleaned  from  the  fact  that  there  are  found  in  Obadiah
phrases  and  sentences  common  to  Amos  and  Joel,  but  nothing  from  writers
later  than  these.  If  these  prophets  cited  Obadiah,  cadit  qtuBstioj  if  he
q  acted  them,  why  did  he  refer  to  no  later  writings  P  The  presumption  ii
that  he  lived  close  to  their  time.

From  what  has  been  said,  we  conclude  that  Obadiah  is  one  of  the  earliest


THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  zi

of  the  minor  prophets,  that  he  lired  aboat  the  time  of  Jehoram,  and
prophesied  at  latest  (as  Dr.  Posey  thinks)  daring  the  minority  of  Joash.

§  IV.     GSNBBAL   CHARAOTEb

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  style  of  Obadiah  is  remarkably  original.
In  his  very  diction  he  deviates  from  the  beaten  track,  using  many  words
and  forms  which  occur  nowhere  else.  Though  his  language  is  simple,  it
is  very  suggestive,  full  of  thought,  and  pregnant  with  meaning.  Pure  and
idiomatic,  it  breathes  a  high  antiquity,  unmixed  with  later  forms,  and  dis-
tinct from  that  of  the  greater  prophets.  There  is  a  vigour,  and  terseness,
and  a  rapidity,  which  carry  the  reader  along,  and  place  him  by  the  prophet's
side  in  fullest  sympathy.  Obadiah  delights  in  interrogation  and  apostrophe,
in  vivid  detail,  and  concise  statement.  He  is  often  highly  poetic,  never
monotonous.  What  force  and  pathos  are  there  in  the  sustained  description
of  the  injuries  inflicted  by  strangers  on  Jerusalem,  ending  in  the  sudden
address  to  Edom,  "  Thou  wast  as  one  of  them  "  (ver.  11)  I  What  power  in
the  warning  against  malicious  pleasure  at  a  neighbour's  disaster,  with  its  oft-
repeated  expression,  "  in  the  day  "  (vers.  12 — 14)  I  What  solemnity  in  the
summing  up  of  the  prophecy,  "  And  the  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's  "  I  A
regular  sequence  of  thought  runs  through  the  whole  book.  To  find  in  this
very  uniform  and  consistent  prophecy  nothing  but  literary  patchwork,  as
Graf  and  Bwald,  for  instance,  have  done,  is  a  groundless  neologian  fancy.
These  critics  suppose  that  the  former  part  of  the  prophecy  (vers.  1 — 10)  was
an  extract  from  an  older  seer — the  true  Obadiah  or  an  unknown  writer ;  that
the  latter  portion  belongs  to  the  time  of  the  Captivity,  and  was  added  by
the  compiler.  The  sagacity  that  thus  arbitrarily  dissects  the  work  is
singularly  at  fault  in  this  case.  It  requires  only  an  unprejudiced  eye  (even
if  we  exclude  a  belief  in  the  predictive  element)  to  see  that  our  book  is  one
whole,  that  its  parts  progress  equably  and  uniformly,  that  the  conclusion
foUovrs  naturally  on  what  precedes ;  so  that  if  we  had  to  find  one  special
characteristic  of  the  prophecy,  we  should  say  that  it  is  distingaished  by  the
close  connection  of  its  members  without  break  or  interruption>

f  V.    LrrEBATUBB.

Among  medisBval  commentatora  upon  Obadiah  we  may  mention  Hugo  4  S.
Victore,  whose  interpretation  is  wholly  mystical.  Ephraem  Syrus  has  left  a  com-
mentary on  this  prophet.  Luther's  '  Enarrationes  in  Abdiam'  are  well  known.  Other
works  are  those  of  Bishop  Pilkington, '  Exposition; '  PfeifFer,  with  a  Latin  translation
of  the  Commentary  of  Arbabanel  (Vittemb.,  1670);  Eaynoldi  0.613) ;  Leusden  (Utrecht,
1657) ;  the  text,  Hebrew  and  Chaldee,  with  the  notes  of  Jarchi,  Aben-Ezra,  and  Kimchi ;
Croctus  (BremsB,  1673),  with  rabbinical  interpretations;  Bishop  Horsley,  'Critical
Notes;'  Hendewerk,  'Obadiw  Proph.  Oraculum'  (1836);  Caspari,  'Der  Prophet
Obadja'  (Leipaig,  1868) ;  Seydel  (Leipzig,  1842) ;  T.  T.  Perowne,  in  '  Cambridge  Bible
for  Schools  and  Colleges.'  An  Armenian  Version  was  published  by  A.  Acoluthus,  in
1680,  and  a  Syriac  by  Grimm,  in  1799.


Ill  INTRODUCTION   TO  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAfl.


{  VL  Abbanoeuknt  IX  Siotioki.

Th«  'book  dlyides  into  two  parts.

Part  I.  (Yen.  1 — 16.)    The  destruction  of  Edom,  and  the  cause  thereof.
S  1.  (Vers.  1— 9.J    The  heathen  nations  are  summoned  to  take  vengeance  on

Edom.     In  spite  of  her  impregnable  position,  they  shall  bring  her  low  and  strip

her  of  her  wealth,  being  aided  and  encouraged  by  her  own  allies.
I  2,  (Vers.  10 — 14.)    This  punishment  falls  upon  her  as  the  result  of  the  malice

and  unfriendliness  which  she  has  displayed  towards  Israel  in  the  time  of  her

calamity,  in  that  she  rejoiced  at  her  sister's  disaster  and  took  part  with  her

enemies.
S  3.  (Vers.  16, 16.)    For  this  cause  Edom  shall  be  remembered  in  the  day  of  the

Lord ;  she  shall  suffer  at  the  hands  of  the  heathen  what  she  inflicted  on  others.
Part.  n.  (Vers.  17—21.)    The  restoration  of  Israel.
f  1.  (Vers.  17—20.)    The  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  delivered,  and  shall  add  to  iti

poiMssions,  and  spread  far  and  wide.
f  2.  (Ver.  21.)    S*lvation  shall  oom«  to  Zion,  and  "the  kingdom  shall  be  iba

LiKd's.'


THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.


EXPOSITION.


Vew.  1 — 16. — ^Part  I.  Thb  Destbdotion
or  Edok,  Ain>  tbm  Oaube  THEBior.

Ten.  1 — 9. — §  1.  The  heathen  nation*  are
tummened  to  take  vengeance  on  Edom.  In
vpite  of  her  impregnable  poHtion,  fhey  ehall
bring  her  lew  and  itrip  her  of  her  wealth,
being  aided  and  encouraged  hy  her  own
aUiet.

Ver.  1.— The  yision  of  Obadiah.  This  is
the  title  of  the  book,  deolaiing  from  whom
and  through  whom  the  levelation  comes
(lea.  i.  1).  Under  the  word  "vision"  in
prophetic  language  is  included,  not  only
what  the  seer  saw,  the  mental  picture  pre-
sented to  his  inner  senses,  but  also  all  that
he  is  commissioned  to  disclose  or  enunciate.
Thus  saith  the  Lord  Qod  oonoeming  Edom.
The  prophet  declares  that  God  speaks
through  him.  One  might  have  expected  that
the  actual  words  of  Jehovah  would  follow
here  instead  of  tidings  heard  from  him.
And  this  difficulty  has  led  some  to  suppose
these  introductory  words  spurious  or  the
insertion  of  a  later  hand,  others  to  include
them  and  the  rest  of  the  verse  in  a  paren-
thesis, BO  as  to  begin  the  "vision"  with
God's  words  in  ver.  2.  But  these  sugges-
tions are  unnecessary.  The  prophet,  as  the
mouthpiece  of  God,  calls  his  own  words
the  message  of  the  Lord — signifies  that
what  had  been  revealed  to  his  mind  he
was  bound  to  communicate  to  others  as  a
direct  warning  from  God.  The  Edomites
were  the  descendants  of  Esau,  and  bound
by  ties  of  blood  to  the  Israelites ;  but  they
had  always  been  their  most  bitter  enemies
(Amos  i.  11).  They  are  regarded  as  a  type
of  the  powers  of  the  world  hostile  to  true
religion,  whose  end  is  destruction.  We  have
beard.  "  We  " — I  myself  and  other  prophets ;
or  the  Judaans,  the  prophet  identifying
himself  with  his  covmtrymen.  Septuagin^
^oM-a, "  I  heard ; "  so  Jer.  zlix.  14 ;  Arable,

OBABTAH.


"  ye  have  heard."  A  nuneni ;  a  report  (Isa
liii.  1) ;  (iicoV  (Septuagint) ;  auditum  (Vul-
gate). It  means  here  "  tidings "  (oomp.
Matt.  zxiv.  6,  axoat  iro\4iiav :  and  Bom.  z.
16,  17).  An  ambassador;  a  meiienger;  as
though  the  prophet  saw  the  minister  of  God's
wrath  going  forth  among  the  heathen  to
rouse  them  to  war  against  Edom.  Perowne
thinks  that  there  is  an  allusion  to  the
composite  character  of  Nebuchadnezzar's
army  with  which  he  attacked  the  Edomites.
The  Septuagint  renders,  vepioxh"  '•  eo  the
Syriao,  Chaldee,  and  Symmachus  translate
"message."  This  rendering  is  explained
by  the  following  clause.  The  heathen
(^oj^tm) ;  the  nationt,  as  vers.  2,  15.  Arise
ye,  and  let  us  rise.  This  has  been  taken
as  if  "  arise  ye  "  were  the  herald's  message,
and  "let  us  rise"  the  response  of  the
nations  echoing  his  words;  but  it  is  more
forcible  to  consider  the  whole  clause  as
the  message,  the  ambassador  joining  him-
self with  the  heathen  as  their  leader  and
comrade  in  the  war  of  vengeance.  Vers.
1 — 9  are  incorporated  in  Jer.  xlix.  7 — 22.

Ver.  2. — Behold,  I  have  made  thee  small
Here  is  the  effect  of  the  summons.  So  in
Jer.  xlix.  15,  "For,  lo,  I  will  make  thee
small."  Jehovah  is  the  Speaker,  and  he
regards  the  future  as  past.  What  he  deter-
mines is  as  good  as  accomplished.  At  this
time  the  Edomites  were  a  powerful  nation,
and  possessed  an  almost  impregnable  seat
at  Fetra.  Small;  in  numbers,  territory,
honour.

Vers.  3,  4. — Edom  had  prided  herself  in
the  strength  of  her  position ;  but  this  shall
not  secure  her  A:om  destruction  when  the
Lord  wars  against  her.

Ver.  8. — Hath  deoeiTed;  Septuagint,
inripe,  "elated;"  Vulgate,  ecetulU.  The
pointing  varies.  In  ver.  7  Jerome  trans-
lates the  word  by  iUudere.     The  elefts;


2


THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.


[1—21.


Septua^iit,oiroTi:  Vulgate,  folMur*.    The
word  occurs  in  the  parallel  paesage,  Jer.
xllx.  16,  and  in  Cant.  ii.  14,  where  it  has  the
meaning  of  "  refuge."    Of  the  rock.    TliM
may  be  Sela,  or  Petra,  M  2  Kings  iiv.  7.
The  country  inhabited  by  the  Edoraites  lay
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Arabah,  and
extended  from  the  south  end  of  the  Dead
Sea  to  the  Elanitio  Gulf.    It  was  a  region
of  mountain  and  valley,  difficult,  and  in
many    parts  vnacceBsible    from    the    west.
Rock-hewn    dwellings    are    found    every-
where in  these  hills,  the  Edomitea,  when
they  expelled  the  aboriginal  Troglodytes
(Deut.  ii.  12, 22),  having  adopted  their  habi-
tations and  excavated  new  ones  on  the  same
model  throughout  the  whole  district   These
were  useful,  not  only  as  being  secure  from
hostile  attack,  but  as  cool  retreats  in  the
summer  of  that  scorching  tract,  and  offer-
ing a  warm   shelter  in  winter  when  fuel
was  scarce.    Petra,  the  capital,  lay  com-
pletely hidden  at  the  end  of  a  rocky  defile
some  two  miles  long,  and   could  easily  be
defended  against  an  enemy  by  a  handful
of  men.    (For  a  description  of  this  remark-
able place,  see  the  Introduction,  §  I.)

Ver.  4. — Though  thou  exalt  thyself  as
the  eagle.  The  Hebrew  gives  "nest"  as
the  subject  of  both  clauses,  thus:  "  Though
thou  exaltest  .  .  .  and  settee*  thy  nest."
Job  (xxxix.  27,  28)  speaks  of  the  eagle
making  its  nest  in  the  highest  rocks.  The
metaphor  is  found  in  Numb.  ixiv.  21;
Hab.  ii.  9.  WiU  I  bring  the*  down  (Amos
ix.  3).  The  seizure  of  Petra  by  the  Naba-
thseans  is  the  judgment  referred  to  in  this
part  of  the  prophecy;  the  complete  ruin  is
mentioned  later  (vers.  18,  etc.).

Vers.  5,  6. — To  prove  the  completeness  of
the  destruction  that  shall  befall  Bdom,  the
prophet  supposes  two  cases  of  despoiling  in
which  something  would  be  left  behind.  It
will  be  far  worse  than  any  mere  raid  of
thieves ;  nothing  will  be  spared.

Ver.  5. — Thieves  . . .  robbers.  The  former
are  ordinary  thieves  who  pilfer  secretly;  the
latter  are  robbers  who  act  with  violence,
or  members  of  a  marauding  expedition.
How  art  thou  cut  off!  An  interposed
ejaculation  of  the  prophet,  sympathizing
with  the  Bdomites  for  the  utter  desolation
which  he  sees  in  vision.  Septuagint,  IIoO
&II  awefifil^vs ;  "Where  wouldst  thou  have
been  cast  away?"  taking  a  diiferent  read-
ing; Vulgate,  Quomodo  eonticuissesi  "How
wouldst  thou  have  been  silent?"  i.e.  for
fear.  TiU  they  had  enough.  Would  they
not  have  taken  such  plunder  as  they
wanted,  and  then  decamped  ?  The  grape-
gatherers  would  leave  some  bunches  un-
touched, whioh  escaped  their  notice.   There


is  no  reference  to  the  charitable  law  in
Lev.  xix.  10;  Deut.  xxiv.  21,  which  would
not  affect,  or  be  known  unto,  these  grape-
plunderers.

Ver.  6. — Obadiah  contemplates  Edom's
ruin,  in  retribution  of  her  plundering  Jeru-
salem, and  speaks  of  it  as  past.  How  are
the  things  of  Esau  searched  out !  literally,
how  are  thy  things  searched  out,  Esau  1  i.e.
the  people  and  property  that  belong  to
Esau.  The  enemy  leave  no  place  unex-
amined. So  in  Zeph.  i.  12  the  Lord  says,
"I  will  search  Jerusalem  with  candles."
(For  "  Esau"  as  equivalent  to  «  Edom,"  see
Gen.  XXV.  30.)  His  hidden  things  {mattpon,
Sn-o£  \ey6iiepov);  hidden  treasures;  Sep-
tuagint, t4  Keicpv/ifiha  avTov.  Jeremiah
(xlix.  10)  gives,  "secret  places."  Keil
notes  that  Petra  was  a  great  emporium
of  the  trade  between  Arabia  and  Syria,
and  that  in  it  gi-eat  treasures  were  stored
(Diod.  Sic,  xix.  95).

Ver.  7. — In   this  dire   calamity  Edom
shall    be   deserted   by   her    fciends    and
allies — a   punishment  for  her   behaviour
to   her   sister  Judah.     The  men  of  thy
confederacy.      The    LXX.    and   the   Vul-
gate annex  these  words  to  the  following
clause.    The  allies  intended  may  be  Moab,
Ammon,  Tyre,  and  Zidon,  who  joined  to-
gether to  resist  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  were
smitten    by  him  (Jer.    xxvii.   3);    or,   as
Perowne  thinks,  the  Chaldeans  themselves,
who,  though  the  Edomites  had  aided   in
the  attack  on  Jerusalem,  afterwards  turned
against  them.    Have  brought  thee  even  to
the  border;    Septuagint,  "Ebj   rav  Splotr
IfoireVreiAtii'  <re,  "  They  sent  thee  forth  unto
thy  borders ; "  Vulgate,  Usque  ad  terminum
emiserunt  ii.    Keil  and  others  explain  this
to  mean  ijiat  tlie  Edomites  send  ambas-
sadors  to   their    allies,  asking   help,  but
these   messengers  are  conducted  back  to
the  frontier  with  their  request  not  granted,
because  the  allies  are  unwilling  to  entangle
themselves  in  the  fate  of  Edom.   It  is  easier
to  understand  the  passage  in  this  way— Thy
very  allies  have  assisted  the  enemy  in  ex-
pelling thee  from  thy  borders,  and  refusing
to  receive  fugitives  who  came  to  them.    The
meii  that  were  at  peace  with  thee.    Either
the   same   as   "tho  men   of  thy  confede-
racy," or  the  neighbouring  Arabian  tribes
who    resorted    to    Petra    for    commercial
reasons  (comp.  Judg.  iv.  17).    The  phrase
here,  literally,  the  men  of  thy  peace,  is  found
in  Ps.  xli.  9  and  Jer.  xxxviii.  22.     Have
deceived   thee,  by  not  bringing   the  ex-
pected help;  and  have  prevailed  against
thee,  by  actual  violence.    They  that  eat
thy  bread.    The  Hebrew  is  simply,  "thy
bread,"  t.e.  the  men  of  thy  bread.  Vulgate,
qui  comedunt  teeum;  the  LXX.  omits  the
woids.    The  expression  (comp.  Ps.  lU.  9)


1— aL]


TUJ5  BOOK  OJf   OiJADiAli.


Implies  the  oloaest  friendBhip,  especially  in
EastoTn  lands,  where  such  a  tie  is  of
general  obligation.  Have  laid  a  wonnd
under  thee;  rather,  lay  a  snare  under  thee;
Septuagiht,  eBtixaii  tveSpa  in-o/caTu  irov,
"  they  set  snares  under  thee ; "  Vulgate,
pcment  insidias  suiter  te  (comp.  Ps.  Ixix.  22).
Another  interpretation  is  this:  "As  thy
bread  (which  they  as  friends  were  bound
to  offer)  they  lay  a  sling  under  thee,"  i.e.
prepare  an  ambush  for  thee,  like  Jael  did
for  Sisera.  Fusey  notes  the  climax  in  this
verse — not  confederates  only,  but  friends;
not  friends  only,  bat  familiar  friends,  in-
debted to  them.  Those  banded  with  them
should  expel  them  fiom  their  oountiy ;  those
at  peace  should  prevail  against  them  in  war ;
those  who  ate  their  bread  should  requite
them  with  treachery.  There  is  none  under-
standing in  him;  i.e.  in  Edom.  The  shock
of  this  defection  of  allies  and  the  sudden
destruction  that  has  overwhelmed  them
have  deprived  the  Edomites  of  their  wonted
sagaoity  and  prudence.  They  know  not
whither  to  turn  or  what  to  do.  The
following  verie  expands  this  thought.

Vers.  8,  9. — Their  vaunted  wisdom  and
their  boasted  courage  shall  fail,  for  Ood
shall  take  them  away.  "  Quem  Deus  vult
perdere,  prius  dementat."

Ver.  8. — In  that  day;  when  Edom  is
abandoned  by  its  friends.  Destroy  the
wiae  men  out  of  Edom.  God  shall  take
their  wisdom  from  them,  so  that  they  shall
be  no  more  able  to  offer  prudent  counsel
or  suggest  plans  of  safety  (Isa.  xii.  11 — 16 ;
xxix.  14;  xlvii.  12,  13).  The  Edomites
were  celebrated  for  wisdom  or  practical
philosophy  (comp.  1  Kings  iv.  30;  Jer.
xliz.  7 :  Baruch  iii.  22, 23).  Uonnt  of  Esau
(vers.  9, 19, 21).  Mount  Seir — a  designation
of  Edom  from  the  nature  of  the  country.

Ver.  9. — 0  Teman;  Septuagint,  oi  ix
exufiiv,  "  those  from  Thssman ; "  Vulgate,  a
meridie,  taking  the  word  as  an  appellative ;
so  the  Chaldee.  The  southern  district  of
Idumea  was  so  called  (see  note  on  Amos  i.
12).  One  of  Job's  friends,  and  the  cleverest
of  them,  was  a  Temanite  (Job  ii.  11).  To
the  end  that.  This  judicial  blindness  is
inflicted  in  order  that  all  may  perish.  By
slaughter.  Murder  at  the  hands  of  the
enemy.  The  LXX.,  Vulgate,  and  Syriao
connect  these  words  with  the  following
verse.  But  the  Masoretio  punctuation,  as
in  the  Anglican  Version,  is  doubtless  correct
(see  Keil).

Vers.  10— 14.— §  2.  The  cause  of  Edom't
deitruetion.  This  punishment  falls  upon
her  as  the  result  of  the  malice  and  un-
friendliness which  she  has  displayed  to-


wards Israel  in  the  time  of  oalamity,  In
that  she  rejoiced  at  her  sister's  disaster  and
took  part  with  her  enemies.

Ver.  10. — Eor  thy  violence  against  thy
brother  Jacob.  The  special  action  to  which
Obadiah  alludes,  and  wliich  he  particu-
larizes in  the  following  verses,  occurred  at
the  time  of  the  invasion  of  Judsea  by  Philis-
tines and  Arabians  during  the  reign  of
Jehoram,  when  the  Edomites  sided  with
the  enemy,  and  acted  as  the  prophet  inti-
mates (2  Chron.  xxi.  16,  etc.;  see  Intro-
duction, §  III.).  The  iniquity  of  such
conduct  is  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the
victim  was  the  "brother  Jacob,"  who  was
commanded  not  to  hate  the  Edomites  (Deut.
xxiii.  7).  This  enjoined  friendship  was  not
reciprocated  by  the  descendants  of  Esau.
Whether  from  envy  at  the  superior  privi-
leges of  Israel,  or  from  other  causes,  the
Edomites,  from  the  time  of  Moses,  had
always  been  actively  hostile  to  the  Israelites.
They  had  been  subdued  by  David,  but  had
lately  rebelled  and  secured  their  indepen-
dence, and  were  always  looking  for  an
opportunity  of  revenging  themselves  on
their  conquerors  (oomp.  Amos  i.  11 ;  Ezek.
XXV.  12;  XXXV.  5).  Shame  shall  coyer
thee.  Shame  for  the  destruction  that  hath
overtaken  thee  (Micah  vii.  10).  Thou  shaft
be  cut  off  for  ever  (oomp.  Mai.  i.  4;  see
Introduction,  §  I.).  Terrible  retribution
fell  on  Idumea  in  the  time  of  the  Mac-
cabees (see  1  Mace.  v.  3 ;  2  Maco.  x.  15,  etc. ;
Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xii.  8. 1).  Before  that  time
they  had  been  dispossessed  of  Fetra  by  the
NabathssauB.

Ver.  11. — The  injuries  complained  of  were
committed  lately,  and  the  prophet  could
speak  of  them  as  well  known  (see  note  on
ver.  10).  In  the  day  that  thou  stoodest;
literally,  in  the  day  of  thy  standing,  without
note  of  time,  but  implying  a  past  event
here.  On  the  other  side.  The  words  may
denote  either  malicious  unconcern,  as  Ps.
xxxviii.  11  (12),  or  hostile  opposition,  as
2  Sam.  xviii.  13.  Besides  the  direct  ap-
plication to  recent  events,  the  clause  inti
mates  the  usual  attitude  of  the  Edomites
toward  Israel.  In  the  day  that  the  strangers
— Philistines  and  Arabians  (2  Chron.  xxi
16) — carried  away  captive  his  forces;  rather,
carried  away  his  substance,  as  ver.  13 ;  Gen.
xxxiv.  29;  Deut.  viii.  17;  Isa.  viii.  4
Foreigners.  The  same  as  "  strangers."
Both  words  are  usually  applied  to  heathen
enemies.  Cast  lots  upon  Jerusalem.  Divided
the  captives  and  spoil  of  Jerusalem  by  lot
(2  Chron.  xxi.  17;  comp.  Joel  liL  3;  Nah.
iii  10).  Nothing  is  said  of  the  total  de-
struction of  Jerusalem  or  the  wholesale
deportation  of  the  inhabitants  to  Babylon,
BO  that  Obadiah  cannot  be  referring  to  tht


THE  BOOK  OF   OBADIAH.


[X— 21


Chaldean  oonqueBt.  Thou  wast  as  one  of
them ;  literally,  thou,  too,  as  one  of  them.  In
this  expiession  the  past  ii  Bet  before  the
mind  aa  present.

Ver.  12. — The  prophet  complains  of  the
malignant  neutrality  of  the  Edomltes.
Thou  shonldest  not  have  looked.  In  this
and  the  two  following  verses,  al  with  the
future  is  wrongly  translated.  It  should
be  rendered  throughout,  "do  not  look,"
"do  not  rejoice,"  etc.  Obadiah,  in  view  of
the  past  behaviour  of  Edom,  and  looking
forward  to  another  and  more  fatal  conquest
of  Jerusalem,  warns  the  Edomites  against
repeating  this  malicious  conduct.  Septua-
gint,  nh  iiriSris.  Gaze  not  with  pleasure,
feast  not  thine  eyes  (Mioah  vii.  10).  The
day  of  thy  brother;  i.e.  when  some  great
event  befell  him — explained  further  in  the
next  clause.  Compare  "the  day  of  Jeru-
salem" (Ps.  cxxxviL  7).  In  the  day  that
he  became  a  stranger ;  Septuagint,  h  Tip-ipif
i\Ju>rplav,  "  in  the  day  of  strangers ; "  Vul-
gate, in  die  peregrinationis  ejus.  The  Angli-
can and  Vulgate  Versions  signify,  "  in  the
day  that  he  was  carried  captive  into  strange
lands ; "  but  most  probably  the  expression
should  be  rendered,  "in  the  day  of  his
calamity."  Bejoioed  over  (comp.  Job  xxxi.
29;  Prov.  xvii.  5;  Micah  vii.  8).  Spoken
proudly;  literally,  make  thy  mouth  great;
Septuagint,  inii  iieya\o^l>r}fioi^,  "  do  not
boast ; "  Vulgate,  non  magnificabu  os  tutim.
Utter  a  flood  of  mocking  words,  probably
accompanied  with  derisive  grimaces.  There
is  a  climax  in  this  verse— first  the  com-
placent look,  then  the  malicious  pleasure,
then  words  of  insult  and  derision.

Ver.  13. — In  this  verse  it  is  the  making
common  cause  with  the  enemy  in  the
plundering  of  Jerusalem  that  is  complained
of.  Thou  shonldest  not  have  entered.  Bo
not  enter;  so  below,  "do  not  look,"  "lay
not  hands  "  (see  note  on  ver.  12).  The  gate
of  my  people ;  i.e.  Jerusalem,  the  capital,  as
Micah  i.  9.  In  the  day  of  their  calamity,
repeated  thrice  with  sorrowful  emphasis,  as
making  the  Edomites'  conduct  more  re-
proachful. Tea,  thon  shonldest  not  have
looked.  Hebrew,  "look  not  thou  also"
— ^thou,  as  well  as  the  alien  enemies.  What
is  natural  in  them  is  a  crime  in  thee  (comp.
Ps.  xxii.  17).  Their  affliction ;  Septuagint,
riiv  avvayary^v  airiSv,  "  their  gathering  " — a
different  reading  from  the  Masoretic.  Sub-
stanoe,  as  in  ver.  11.  This  was  a  further
aggravation ;  they  helped  to  plunder  Jeru-
salem. Septuagint,  Mi(  iruveKiBf  M  tV
iivaiuv  alrriv, "  Do  not  set  upon  their  host ; "
Vulgate,  Et  non  emitteris  adversits  exercitum
ijjuB.  This  implies  a  warning  against  being
instigated  by  the  enemy  to  attack  the  Jewish
forces.  But  the  rendering  in  the  text  is
doubtless  correct


Ver.  14. — The  climax  of  injury  is  the
cutting  off  of  fugitires,  and  delivering
them  into  captivity.  Neither  shonldest  thon
have  stood  in  the  crossway;  and  stand  not
thou  in  the  crossway.  The  Edomites,  at
neighbours,  would  know  all  the  passes  into
the  wilderness  by  which  the  Judasans  would
seek  to  escape.  Neither  shonldest  thon  have
delivered  np;  and  deliver  not  up;  Septua-
gint, liniSi  guyK\fi<rris,  "  shut  not  up ; "
Vulgate,  et  nan  concludes.  So  Pnsey,  "  shut
not  up,"  i.e.  with  the  enemy,  driving  them
back  upon  their  pursneis  (comp.  Ps.  xxxi.
8).  The  Hebrew  word  implies  both  mean-
ings— "  to  deliver  over  to  confinement ; "
and  the  meaning  here  is— do  not  seize  on
the  people  to  give  them  over  into  captivity
(comp.' Amos  i.  6,  9).  Those  of  his  that  did
remain.      Those  whom  the  invaders  had


Vers.  IS,  16. — §  3.  The  warning  given  in
the  first  section  (vers.  1 — 9)  is  supplemented
by  the  annouucement  that  in  the  day  of  the
Lord,  Edom  and  all  the  enemies  of  Israel  shall
he  remembered,  and  shaU  suffer  just  retribu-
tion, meeting  uiith  (Ae  fate  which  they  had
inflicted  on  others.

Ver.  15.— The  day  of  the  Lord,  This  is
not  primarily  the  final  day  of  judgment,  but
the  time  when  "  Jehovah  reveals  his  majesty
and  omnipotence  in  a  glorious  manner,  to
overthrow  all  ungodly  powers,  and  to  oom-

Elete  his  kingdom  "  (Keil).  It  is  announced
y  Joeli  15;  ii.  1,  31 ;  Zeph.  i  14 ;  but  the
notion  of  a  judgment  to  fall  on  Gentile
nations,  and  to  issue  in  the  establishment
of  the  kingdom  of  God,  was  familiar  long
before.  Balaam  had  seen  it  in  dim  vision
(Numb.  xxiv.  17—24);  Hannah  had  antici-
pated the  destruction  that  would  accompany
it  (1  Sam.  ii.  9, 10);  so  had  David  (2  Sam.
xxiii.  5 — 7)  in  his  last  words ;  it  is  dearly
predicted  in  the  Psalms  (see  Ps.  ii.  and  ox.)
(Enabenbauer).  Is  near.  Because  every  such
judgment  upon  individual  nations  is  typical
of  the  great  day  and  preparative  of  it.  As
thon  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee
(comp.  Judg.  i.  7;  Ps.  cxxxvii.  8;  Jer.
1.  15).  This  law  of  retribution  was  the
ideal  of  heathen  justice,  according  to  the
Bhadamanthian  rule,  "If  a  man  should
suffer  what  he  hath  done,  then  there  would
be  strict  justice"  (Aristotle,  'Eth.  Nio.,'  v.
5.3).  Thy  reward  (Joel  iii.  7  [iv.  7,  Hebrew]) ;
better,  that  which  thou  hast  performed — thy
work  or  dealing.  Upon  tlune  own  head.^
Like  a  stone  cast  towards  heaven  (comp.  Ps.
vii.  16 ;  Esth.  ix.  25).

Ver.  16. — As  ye  have  drunk.  There  are
two  interpretations  of  this  passaga  By  th»
first,  the  people  addressed  are  considered
to  be  the  Jews,  and  the  word  "  drunk "  is


1—21,]


THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.


ttiken  metaphorloally  in  both  olaniei  (see
note  on  Ni^  iiL  11).    The  meaning  is  then
this — ^Ab  ye  JewB,  who  are  npon  my  holy
mountain,  the  people  of  election,  have  not
eseaped  from  simering  the  wrath  of  Ood,  bo
all  the  nations  shall  feel  the  Bame,  and  Uiat
to  a  much  more  terrible  extent.  Confirmatory
of  this  explanation  is  the  language  of  Jere-
miah, who  (xxT.  15 — ^29)l>idB  all  the  nations
to  drink  the  cap  of  God's  wrath,  beginning
at  Jerosalem  and  passing  on  to  Edom,  and
then  says,  in  answer  to  any  who  refuse  the
offered  draught,  "  Lo,  I  begin  to  bring  evil
on  the  city  which  is  called  by  my  name,
and  ihould  ye  be  utterly  unpunished?"
The  same  notion  is  found  also  in  Jer.  xllx.
12  and  Lam.  iv.  21,  etc.     But  there  are
objections  to  this  view  of  the  passage.    The
previous  verse  enunciated  the  doctrine  of
retribution ;  this  verse  confirms  the  former
with  tihe  words, "  for  as  ye,"  etc.    It  would
be  no  proof  of  the  Ux  talionii  on   the
Edomites  to  cite  what  had  happened  to
the  Jews.    What  is  wanted  is  an  assertion
that  what  they  had  done  should  be  repaid  to
them  in  like  coin.    Besides,  the  prophecy  is
nominally  addressed  to  the  Edomites,  not
to  the  Jews,  and  it  would  be  most  harsh  to
change  the  subject  suddenly  here.    "Upon
my  mountedn  "  cannot  be  equivalent  to  "  ye
who  are  upon  my  mountain ; "  nor  is  such  an
'   expression  ever  used  to  signify  "  Judaeans."
It  is  best,  therefore,  to  take  the  clause  as
referring  to  the  Edomites  and  their  com-
rades, who,  after  their  victory,  indulged  in
unseemly  revelry,  and  profaned  tbe  mountain
hallowed  by  God's  presence  in  the  temple
with  their  idolatrous  festival.    The  "  drink-
ing" in  this  first  clause  is  literal;  in  the
foUowing  clause  it  is  figurative.     Septua-
gint,  iries, "  thou  didst  drink,"  which  makes
the  connection  of  tbe  subject  here  with  that
in  ver.  15  more  evident,  and  it  has  probably
been  altered  by  the  translators  for  that  pur-
pose. So  shall  all  the  heathen  drink  ooutinu-
ally.  Tbe  prophet  plays  on  the  word  "drink."
The  nations  shall  drink,  not  wine,  but  the
wrath  of  Ood  (Ps.  Ixxv.  8;  Jer.  xxv.  15).
Tbe  nations  are   spoken  of  here  because
Edom  is  taken  as  a  type  of  all  nations  hostile
to  God,  and  the  retribution  that  falls  on  him
is  extended  to  all  who  assume  his  attitude
towards  God's  people  (Keil).     Continually  ;
Vulgate,  jugiter,  perpetually,  in  uninter-
rupted succession.     Tbe  LXX.  has  ohoy,
by  a  mistaken  reading.    They  shall  swallow
down;  drink  a  full  draught;  Septuagint,
Karal^iroin-at,  "they  shall  go  down."    They
■hall  be  as  though  they  had  not  been.
They  shall  drain  the  wrath  of  God  till
they  utterly  perish,  till,  as  nations,  they
exist   no   more    (comp.    Ezek.   xxvi.  21 ;
xxvii.   36).      Septuagint,  xaSiis  ovx  iirif
X*rres,  "as  if  not  being"  (oomp.  Ecclus.


xxxviii.  11 ;  xUt.  9).  (For  the  aooomplish-
ment  of  this  propheoy  against  Edom,  sea
Introduction,  { I.)

Vers.  17— 21.— Part  IL  Tmi  Bestoba-

TION  or  ISRAIL.

Vers.  17— 20.— §  1.  WhOe  judgmeia  faXU
upon  heathen  tuitiont,  (A«  AotMe  of  Jacob  ihall
be  delivered,  thall  add  to  Ui  pouenumi,  and
thread  far  and  wide.

Ver.  17. — ^Upon  Uoimt  Zion.    Onoe  dese-
crated  by  the  idolatrous   revelry  of  the
Edomites  and  the  other  nations,  now  the
seat  of  Jehovah  (Joel  iii.  17)  and  his  king-
dom.    Deliverance  (jpeletah');    Septuagint,
irartipla.    Abstract  for  concrete,  and  to  be
rendered, "  those  that  escape,"  or  "  those  that
are  saved;"  t'.«.  a  remnant  that  shall  escape
destruction  (comp.  Joel  ii.  32 ;  Amos  ix.  8).
There  shall  be  holiness;  rather,  it  (Mount
Zion)   shall   be   holy;    so   Septuagint,  koI
iarai  Sryiov :  Hebrew,  kodesh, "  a  sanctuary,"
where  the  heathen  shall  not  come  (Isa.  lu.
1 ;  comp.  Joel  iii.  17  [iv.  17,  Hebrew] ;  Bev.
xxi.  27).    The  house  of  Jacob.    Judah  and
Benjamin,  the  holy  seed,  in  whom  the  king-
dom of   the  Lord   should  be  established
(comp.  ver.  18).    The  northern  kingdom  is
not  mentioned.    Shall  possess  their  possei-
sious;   Septuagint,    KaraicKiipoyofi'liffovirtv  i
oIkos     'Ittiti>fi      Tsiti      KaTaK\ripovoni\ffavTas
cArois,  "  The  house  of  Jacob  shall  take  for
an  inheritance  those  who  took  them  for  an
inheritance  ; "   Vulgate,  Poisidebit  domai
Jac(A>  eos  qui  te  poieederant.     These  ver-
sions must  have  used  a  different  punctua-
tion   from   that   of  the    Masoretio   text—
morithehem  for  moraihehem  (comp.  Numb
xxiv.  18, 19).    The  Hebrew  pronoun  is  am-
biguous,  and  "  their  possessions  "  may  mean
either  tiiose  that  the  Jews  themselves  had
lost,  or  those  of  the  Edomites.    But  nothing  .
is  said  of  Israel  being  carried  away  captive
and  losing  its  country;  and,  though  the
prophet  may  have  looked  forward  to  such  a
catastrophe  and  to  a  future  restoration,  this
is  not  the  subject  here.    The  possesdont
referred  to  are  those  of  the  enemy  repre-
sented by  the  Edomites,  and  those  which
the  Jews  had  lost  since  the  days  of  David
and  Solomon ;   and  "  the  house  of  Jacob  "
signifies,  not  merely  the  earthly  kingdom
of  Judah,  but  "  tbe  people  of  God,  who  are
eventually  to  obtain  the  dominion  of  the
world"  (Keil);  Mark  ivi.  15.

Ver.  18. — The  last  clause  of  the  preceding
verse  is  here  expanded  and  more  fully  ex-
plained. The  house  of  Jacob  ...  the  house  ot
Joseph,  The  kingdoms  of  Judah  and  Israel,
the  two  and  the  ten  tribes  united  once  more.
In  Fs.  Ixxvii.  15  tbe  whole  people  are  called
"  the  sons  of  Jacob  and  Joseph."  So  else-
where.   The  reunion  of  the  tribes  is  men-


THE   BOOK  OF  OBADlAfl.


[1— 2J,


tioned  In  Hos.  i.  11 ;  Ezek.  xxxvii.  19 ;  Zeoh.
X.  6.  The  fatare  Balvation  is  to  be  for  all.
For  Btabble,  which  the  Israelites  used  rather
than  wood  for  lighting  fires  and  heating
ovens  (Matt.  vi.  30).  (For  the  image  of
fire  consuming  the  ungodly  as  stubble,  see
Exod.  XV.  7;  lea.  v.  24;  Nah.  i.  10.)  They
shall  kindle  in  them.  This  may  mean,
the  Israelite*  "shall  bum  among"  the
Edomites;  but  more  probably  is  merely
a  repetition  of  what  has  gone  before :  the
Jews  shall  consume  the  Edomites.  There
shall  not  be  any  ren^aining.  This  refers  to
the  total  annihilation  of  the  Edomites  under
John  Hyrcanug  (Josephus, '  Ant.,'  xii.  8.  6 ;
xiii.  9.  1),  and  is  a  punishment  quite  dis-
tinct from  their  defeat  at  the  hands  of  the
Nabathnans  predicted  in  vers.  1 — 9  (see
Introduction,  §  I.).  The  LXX.  gives,  ouk
tarea  irvpo<j>6pos  (Trvpip6pos,  Alex.);  St.  Je-
rome reads,  ■itvpo(p6pos,  which  he  translated
frumentaritu.  Many  of  the  Fatliers  read,
irvp<p6pos :  thus,  too,  the  Arabic  and  Coptic
Versions.  Schleusner,  eub  voce,  thinks  that
the  LXX.  had  in  view  the  Greek  proverb,
a'jSe  Trvp(t>6pos,  which  is  used  to  express  the
idea  that  not  even  a  single  survivor  re-
mains (see  Herod.,  viii.  6).  For  the  Lord
hath  spoken  it  (Joel  iii.  8).

Ver.  19. — Judah  and  Benjamin  between
them  shall  possess  the  whole  territory  that
once  belonged  to  the  children  of  Israel.  In
Josh.  XT.  21, 33, 48,  the  inheritance  of  Judah
is  distributed  into  three  portions — the  south,
the  plain,  and  the  mountaiDs;  the  same
divisions  are  noticeable  here  (see  note  on
Zech.  vii.  7).  They  of  the  south.  The  in-
habitants of  the  Negeb,  "  the  dry  country  " —
the  southern  part  of  Judah,  shall  take  pos-
session of  Idumea  (Amos  ix.  12).  They  of
the  plain.  Of  the  Shephelah,  or  "  low  land  "
— ^the  maritime  plain  and  the  country  held
by  the  Philistines  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  18 ;  Zeph.
ii.  7).  And  they  shall  possess.  The  Ju-
dteans  not  already  mentioned,  i.e,  those  of
the  mountains,  shall  take  the  territory  of
the  ten  tribes.  The  fields  of  Bphraim,  and
the  fields  of  Samaria.  The  country  and  the
capital.  Septuagint,  ri  6pos  'Eippai/i  Kal  ri
ireSlov  ia/xapelas,  "the  Mount  of  Ephraim
and  the  Plain  of  Samaiia."  Otliers  trans-
late, "Ephraim  shall  possess  the  field  of
Samaria,"  considering  that  otherwise
Ephraim  would  be  excluded  from  the  re-
stored kingdom,  and  Judah  would  inherit
the  territory  of  Bphraim,  in  violation  of  the
covenant  (Briggs,  'Messianic  Prophecy,'  p.
317).  But  the  Israelites  proper  were  merged
in  the  Judesans  at  the  return ;  and  if  Ben-
jamin possesses  Gilead,  it  is  not  unnatural
that  Judah  should  extend  northward  to
Samaria.  And  Benjamin  shall  possess
Oilead.  Benjamin,  the  other  portion  of  the
house  of  Jacob,  whose  territory  originally


reached  to  the  river,  shall  possess  all  the
territory  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan.  Thus
the  restored  people  shall,  in  accordance  with
the  promise  in  Gen.  xxviii.  14,  "spread
abroad  to  the  west,  and  to  the  east,  and  to
the  north,  and  to  the  south  "  (comp.  Isa.  liv.
1 — S).  Obadi&h  sees  the  twelve  tribes,
once  more  united,  extending  their  territory
on  every  side ;  and^  to  make  this  evident,
he  gives  certain  examples,  using  Judah
and  Benjamin  as  equivalent  to  "  the  people
of  God,"  and  their  enlargement  as  denoting
the  majestic  prt)gres8  of  the  kingdom  of
God.

Ver.  20. — And  the  captivity  of  this  host  of
the  children  of  Israel  shall  possess  that  of
the  Canaanites,  even  unto  Zarephath ;  Sep-
tuagint, Kai  T7JS  fieToiK€(r(as  7/  apx^  aUrT]  Tois
vlois  *I(rpa^A,  yri  ruv  Xavavaluv  eus  ISape-
TTTwv,  "  And  this  shall  be  the  beginning  of
the  captivity  of  the  children  of  Israel,  the
land  of  the  Canaanites  as  far  as  Sarepta."
This  would  imply  that  the  Bphraimites
should  be  the  first  to  go  Into  exile,  and  on
their  return  should  occupy  the  territory  oi
the  Canaanites  on  the  north.  But  apxh
may  mean  "domain."  Vulgate,  Et  tram-
migratio  exerdtus  hujus  filiorum  Israel,
omnia  loca  Ohananseorum  usque  ad  Sareptatn.
The  general  meaning  is  that  Jewish  cap-
tives, who  have  been  taken  to  other  lands,
shall  return  and  possess  the  cities  of  the
south.  The  sentence  in  the  Hebrew  is  in-
complete. Our  translators  supply,  "shall
possess."  Pusey  (in  agreement  with  the
Ohaldee,  and  virtually  with  the  Septua-
gint) renders,  "which  are  among  the  Ca-
naanites ; "  and  this  seems  to  be  correct,
making  "shall  possess  the  cities  of  the
south"  the  predicate  of  both  clauses.  So
the  first  portion  of  the  verse  means,  as
Henderson  says,  the  number  of  Israelitish
captives  which  were  found  in  Phoenicia,
into  which  they  had  been  sold  at  different
times  as  slaves  (comp.  vers.  11,  14 ;  Joel  iii.
6,  7).  This  host.  Not  a  general  deporta-
tion, but  only  the  portion  of  the  people
referred  to.  From  this  expression  some
have  inferred  that  Obadiah  himself  was
one  of  this  body.  This  is  possible,  but  not
necessary.  The  captives  who  are  among
the  Canaanites,  even  unto  Zarephath;  as  far
as  Zarepliath,  were  probably  placed  there
for  safe  keeping  before  being  sold  into
Greece  and  other  countries.  Zarephath
("  Melting-house "),  the  Sarepta  of  St.
Luke  (iv.  26),  now  Surafend  or  Sarafend,
and  celebrated  in  the  history  of  Elijah
(1  Kings  xvii.  9,  eta),  lay  between  Tyre
and  Sidon,  a  little  inland,  and  was  a  town
of  some  importance,  as  its  ruins  prove.  Thi
captivity  of  Jemsalem.  The  captives  from
Jerusalem.  Which  isin  Sepharad;  Septus
gint,  '4m  'EfpaSd,  "as  far  as  Ephratbah;"


1—21.]


THE   BOOK   OF  OBADIAH.


Vulgate,  quiB  in  Bo$phoro  est.  The  name
occurs  nowhere  else  in  the  Bible,  and  its
Ideatification  cannot  be  established.  Jerome
luggests,  in  his  commentary,  that  it  is  the
Assyrian  for  "  boundary,"  and  not  a  proper
aame  at  all.  The  Feshito  and  the  rabbins
ind  modern  Jews  interpret  it  as  "  Spain."
K.eU  supposes  it  to  be  "  Sparta ; "  Pusey,
"Sardis."  b^or  this  last  explanation  some
ground  has  been  found  in  an  inscription
of  Nakshi-Rustam,  where  a  place  called
Qparda  occurs  in  a  list  of  tribes  between
Gappadocia  and  Ionia;  and  ^parda  is  con-
sidered to  be  the  Persian  form  of  Sardia
(see  Schrader, '  Keilinsohr.,'  p.  445,  etc.).  A
further  confirmation  of  this  identification  is
found  in  the  complaint  of  Joel  (iii.  6  [iv.  6,
Hebrew]),  that  the  Phoenicians  had  sold
Israelites  "  linto  the  sons  of  the  Grecians."
Professor  Sayoe,  in  a  note  to  6.  Smith's
'History  of  Babylonia,'  p.  156,  places
"  Saparda "  on  the  Black  Sea.  It  may  be
questioned,  however,  whether  some  town
nearer  Judeea  is  not  intended.  Ewald
would  read  "  Sepharam,"  a  town  in  North
Palestine.  The  two  bodies  of  captives  shall
possess  the  cities  of  the  south.  The  Negeb.
The  cities  are  named  in  Josh.  xix.

Ver.  21. — §  2.  The  prophet  sums  up  his
prediction :  with  the  conquest  of  the  Gen-
tiles salvation  ehall  come  to  Zion  in  all  itt
fulneti.  Saviours.  The  LXX.  incorrectly
takes  the  word  passively,  translating  it
hnurmCinevoi,  "they  that  are  saved;"  so
Aquila,  Theodotion,  and  the  Syriac;  Sym-
macbus  rightly,  (rdi^ovTes:  Vulgate,  edl/Bo-
torei.  The  judges  are  so  called  in  Judg.
iii.  9,  15  (comp.  2  Kings  xiii.  5 ;  Neh.  ix.
27).  The  judges  had  a  twofold  character —
they  were  deliverers  and  governors,  as  in


the  present  case.  Here  the  immediate
reference  is  to  Zerubbabel  and  the  valiant
Maccabees,  who  severely  punished  the  Idu-
means  (2  Mace.  x.  15,  eto. ;  Josephus, '  Ant.,'
xiii.  9.  1).  But  all  these  "saviours"  are
types  and  forerunners  of  the  Messiah,  "  the
Saviour  which  is  Christ  the  Lord."  Shall
come  np.  Not  from  exile,  but  simply  as
ascending  a  hill,  and  taking  their  seat
there,  fflount  Zion.  The  seat  of  the
kingdom  of  God,  in  contrast  with  "the
mount  of  Esau,"  the  type  of  the  enemies  of
Israel  and  of  God.  To  judge;  LXX.,  tou
tKSiKTia-ai,  "to  take  vengeance  on."  But
the  "judging"  is  not  only  the  takinf?  of
vengeance  on  Edom  and  that  which  it  repre-
sents, the  expression  includes  the  notion
of  governing ;  so  that  the  prophet  looks  for-
ward to  the  time  when  the  heathen  shall
submit  themselves  to  the  dominion  of  the
people  of  God,  and,  as  the  following  clause
foretells,  "the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of
his  Christ"  (Rev.  xi.  15).  The  kingdom
shall  be  the  Lord's.  No  earthly  accom-
plishment could  fulfil  this  great  announce-
ment. The  kingdom  can  be  Jehovah's ;
he  can  show  himself  as  Ruler  of  the  world,
and  be  acknowledged  as  such  by  the  nations,
only  under  Olirist.  This  is  "  the  sceptre  of
Judah  "  of  which  Jacob  spoke  (Gen.  xlix.
10) ;  this  is  the  throne  of  David  which  was
to  be  established  for  ever  (2  Sam.  vii.  16) ;
this  is  what  all  the  prophets  foresaw,  what
we  are  etill  expecting,  what  we  daily  pray
for,  as  we  say,  "  thy  kingdom  come  " — when
"  the  Lord  shall  be  King  over  all  the  earth,
and  there  shall  be  one  Lord,  and  his  name
one"(Zeoh.  ziv.  9).


H0MILBTIC8.

Ver.  1. — Z%«  Bervant  of  Jehovah.    The  names  giTen  by  the  Hebrews  were  usually

significant.  The  appellation  of  this  prophet  was  very  commonly  used,  and  is  indicative
of  the  fervid  and  practical  piety  of  the  Israelitish  people.  Obadiah  means  "  the
Servant  or  Worshipper  of  Jehovah."

I.  The  name  is  desobiptive  op  personal  pibtt.  Whilst  the  ungodly  and
irreligious  are  servants  of  sin,  the  pious  are  emphatically  the  Lord's  bondsmen  and
devotees.  1.  Piety  involves  relation  to  a  living  God.  The  personality  of  the  Deity
is  assumed  in  this  designation.  2.  Piety  is  practical  in  its  character.  The  Lord's
people  offer  service  to  him  whom  they  profess  to  revere,  consecrating  their  powers  to
secure  the  ends  which  are  approved  by  liim.  3.  Piety  is  voluntary  and  cheerful  in  its
nature.  In  a  sense  all  men  are  under  Divine  authority.  But  the  giving  of  a  name
like  this  implies  a  distinction  among  men,  a  willing  devotion  on  the  part  of  the  pious
to  the  holy  service  of  the  Supreme.

II.  The  name  is  descriptive  of  officeial  relation  and  activitt.  It  is  true
that  there  are  those  who  are  incapacitated  for  service,  who  yet  are  God's  in  heart.
"  They  also  serve  who  only  stand  and  wait."  Yet,  in  the  case  of  men  possessed  of
ordinary  faculties,  and  enjoying  ordinary  opportunities,  the  felt  obligation  will  express
itself  in  obedience  and  in  zeal  and  energy.     1.  The  servant  of  the  Lord  receives  his


6  'XliK  BUUK  UJT   UiiADiAH.  [1—21.

instructionB  from  his  Master,  with  whom  ho  ii  in  intimate  eommunicstion.  2.  Th«
servant  of  the  Lord  is  the  agent  in  conveying  the  Master'a  will  to  his  fellow-men.
This  was  especially  the  vocation  of  the  prophet,  who  spoke  forth  the  mind  of  the
Almighty  to  the  righteous  and  to  the  wicked,  whether  they  would  hear  or  forbear.

Yer.  1. — I%e  viiion.  The  designation  sometimes  given  to  the  prophet,  "  the  seer,-"
corresponds  with  language  which  is  in  many  places  employed  to  denote  the  act  of
communion  with  Qod,  by  which  the  honoured  servant  was  qualified  for  discharging
his  sacred  office.  The  process  and  its  results  are  thus  brought  very  strikingly  before
our  mind.

I.  The  bevelation.  There  is  something  to  be  seen,  something  which  is  hidden
from  the  minds  of  ordinary  men,  something  from  which,  therefore,  the  veil  must  be
withdrawn,  if  the  spiritual  eye  is  to  gaze  upon  it.  How  Ood  makes  himself,  his
character,  his  purposes,  known  to  those  whom  he  selects  for  this  special  privilege,  we
do  not  know.  But,  unless  Scripture  is  misleading  and  deceptive,  such  a  revelation
has  taken  place.  Especially  to  the  prophets,  things  otherwise  unseen,  unknown,  have
been  revealed.

II.  The  nrsiGHT.  Unless  there  is  an  eye,  the  light  shines  in  vain ;  indeed,  light  is
but  an  imdulation  of  ether  which  it  needs  the  susceptible  optic  nerve  to  appreciate.
And  in  order  that  God  may  make  his  counsels  known  to  men,  there  mast  be  not  only
objective  revelation,  but  subjective  inspiration.  The  spiritual  faculty  needs  to  bis
quickened,  that  in  God's  light  we  may  see  light.  The  action  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon
the  mind  of  the  prophet  brought  that  mind  into  a  receptive  state,  so  that  the  Divine
rays  occasioned  human  illumination.  The  prophet  taw  the  mind,  the  will,  the
intentions,  of  the  Eternal.

III.  Tee  fbopbeoy.  Because  the  spiritual  eye  discerned  the  spiritual  reality,  the
seer  became  the  prophet.  What  his  eyes  had  seeu  he  was  thus  enabled  to  communicate
for  the  information,  the  warning,  the  encouragement,  of  his  fellow-men.

Vers.  3,  4. — The  deceptiveneu  of  human  pride.  The  prophecies  of  Obadiah  were
mainly  addressed  to  the  Edomites,  the  descendants  of  Esau,  a  wild  and  warlike
people  who  inhabited  the  mountainous  region  to  the  south  of  the  Dead  Sea.  Their
hostility  and  treachery  towards  their  kinsmen,  the  descendants  of  Israel,  were  the
occasion  of  the  threatenings  with  which  this  book  abounds.  Fancying  themselves
secure  and  impregnable  in  their  singular  mountain  fastnesses,  they  deemed  their
neighbours  altogether  incapable  of  chastising  their  perfidy  and  enmity.  But  man  is
only  man,  and  not  God;  and  this  lesson  Obadiah  brings  before  the  inhabitants  of
Idumea  in  the  glowing  and  poetical  language  of  the  text.

I.  Self-exaltation.  This  was  the  state  of  mind  in  which  the  Edomites  defied  the
people  of  Jehovah.  Their  homes  were  literally  in  the  clefts  of  the  rocks,  where  caves
sheltered  them  at  an  elevation  above  those  passing  through  the  defile  below,  which
seemed  to  secure  their  exemption  from  the  assaults  of  their  foes.  They  compared
themselves  with  the  eagle,  which  chooses  the  loftiest  peaks  for  his  dwelling-place.
Nay,  they  seemed  to  disdain  the  earth,  and  to  dwell  among  the  stars.  All  this  is
indicative  of  human  pride.  Men  too  often  flatter  themselves  that  physical  strength,
mental  powers,  social  position,  political  alliances,  raising  them  above  the  common
herd,  raise  them  also  above  the  common  lot.

II.  SBLr-coNFiDENOE.  "  Who,"  Say  the  EdomiteSj  "  who  shall  bring  us  down  to
the  ground?"  Men  measure  their  strength  with  their  fellow-men,  and  draw  from  the
comparison  most  delusive  conclusions.  Because  they  are  superior  to  one,  they  fancy
themselves  superior  to  all;  and  because  they  believe  themselves  above  the  reach  of
human  enemies,  they  believe  themselves  above  the  reach  of  God  himself.  It  is  a  si l
to  which  strong  natures  are  especially  exposed.  The  powerful  and  the  prosperous  are
tempted  to  place  confidence  both  in  their  own  wisdom  and  ability  and  in  their  own
good  fortune.     But  "let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."

III.  Humiliation.  We  are  assured  upon  the  highest  authority  that  "a  haughty
spirit  Cometh  before  a  fall."  In  the  plenitude  of  their  power  and  pride,  the  Edomites
heard  a  voice  from  heaven  saying,  "  I  will  bring  thee  down."  A  retributive  providence
is  a  reality.    Even  the  heathen  believed  in  Nemesis,  and  regarded  boastfulues*  «j


1— 2i.J  THE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.  »

tempting  adversity.  The  instrument  employed  in  humbling  the  proud  may  be  human,
as  in  the  case  of  the  Bdomites,  but  the  power  that  chastises  is  Divine.  It  is  ever
true  under  the  government  of  Qod  that  he  abases  the  proud  and  gives  grace  unto  the
lowly.

Ver.  7. — The  treadierout  betrayed.  The  Edomites  had  turned  against  their  own
kinsmen,  the  children  of  Israel,  had  leagued  with  Israel's  enemies,  and  aided  in
bringing  about  Israel's  calamities.  They  had  chosen  for  their  allies  heathen  nations
in  their  own  vicinity,  relying  upon  their  fidelity  and  support.  The  prophet  is  inspired
to  assure  them  that  the  confederacies  they  have  formed  shall  fail  them,  that  the
friends  in  whom  they  have  trusted  shall  prove  false,  and  that  Edom  shall  suffer  the
reward  of  perfidy  in  desertion  and  subjection.

I.  To  DESEBT  AND  TO  INJUBE  THE   FBIENDS   Or  GOD  IB  TO  XNOUB  THE   DISPLEASnBB

or  GU>D.  The  sons  of  Israel  were  the  chosen  and  beloved  people,  and,  notwithstanding
their  frequent  unfaithfulness,  they  were  the  objects  of  Divine  regard  and  interest  and
love.  Those  who  attacked  the  Israelites  attacked  him  who  was  in  reality  their  King,
Israel  was  a  theocracy,  and  the  anger  of  the  King  was  enkindled  against  those  who,
like  these  Edomites,  treated  with  injustice  the  beloved  nation.

II.  To  FOBM  A  LEAGUE  WITH  God's  ENEMIES  WILL  NEVEB  OONDUOB  TO  PEOSPEBITT  :
THET    WILL    BECOME     INSTRUMENTS    OF     DiVINB     BETKIBUTION.      The    BdomiteS    Were

attacked,  wounded,  disgraced^and  despised  by  the  very  people  whose  friendship  they
had  courted  in  preference  to  that  of  God's  own  chosen  nation.  Their  confidence  was
in  vain;  the  prop  upon  which  they  leaned  proved  a  spear  to  pierce  them.  Their
fancied  wisdom  brought  them  to  utter  perplexity  and  ruin.  ...^^

Application.  JJo  alliance  with  wicked  men  can  serve  any  holy  purpose.  J^r^9,y
promise  well,  but  t£e  reality  wui  not  correspond  with  ihe  promise.  The  friendship  of
sinners  is  illusive,  seductive,  and  vain.    "  The  companion  of  fools  shall  be  destroyed,"

Vers.  8,  9,— Wisdom  and  power  of  no  avail  against  God.  Of  all  their  possessions
men  are  most  prone  to  rely  upon  and  to  boast  of  their  physical  prowess  and  their
intellectual  sagacity.  It  is  thought  that  great  power,  directed  by  consummate
prudence  and  wisdom,  is  of  all  things  earthly  the  most  trustworthy,  the  most
unfailing.  Tet  warnings  are  in  Scripture  often  addressed  to  men  to  dissuade  them
from  an  undue  confidence  even  in  gifts  and  qualities  so  rare  and  admirable  as  these.
The  sons  of  Esau  are  In  this  passage  admonished  that,  if  they  trust  to  their  own
wisdom  and  their  own  strength  for  safety,  protection,  and  deliverance,  their  trust
shall  be  disappointed.

I.  Human  poweb  and  wisdom  abe  alwatb  in  themselves  vebt  limited.  What
is  the  might  of  man  when  compared  with  the  great  forces  of  nature — the  earthquake,
the  tempestuous  sea,  etc.  ?  And  before  how  many  speculative  difficulties  and  practical
problems  does  the  wisdom  of  man  confess  itself  utterly  baffled  1  It  is  strange  that
whilst,  looking  at  the  general  law,  men  are  always  ready  to  confess  their  physical  and
hiteUectual  impotency,  when  they  come  to  particular  cases  calling  for  strength  and
wisdom  they  are  so  ready  to  confide  in  that  which  they  have  every  reason  to  distrust.

II.  Human  poweb  and  wisdom  abe  orrBN  mibdibeoted.  Good  in  themselves,
and  admirable  instances  of  the  creative  skill  of  God  himself,  these  qualities  are
especially  liable  to  abuse.  Such  is  the  case  when  power  is  employed  in  the  cause  of
injustice  and  oppression,  when  wisdom  is  misused  to  defeat  the  designs  of  truth  and
charity.  Often  in  the  history  of  other  nations  than  Edom  has  this  misuse  been
exhibited.  We  are  too  prone  to  admire  and  extol  strength  and  sagacity  superior  to
our  own ;  but  it  is  better  to  ask — How  have  these  gifts  been  used  ?  By  what  principles
have  they  been  guided?

III.  Human  poweb  and  wisdom  will  oebtainlt  be  bbouoht  to  nothino  bt
opposed  to  thb  counsels  of  God.  Man's  power  may  be  great ;  God's  is  irresistible.
Man's  wisdom  may  be  profound,  but  God's  is  omniscient.  Hence  when  that  which
is  finite  opposes  itself  to  that  which  is  infinite,  the  result  can  only  be  disastrous  for
man.  Edom  found  this  to  be  so;  and  the  experieace  of  Edom  has  been  the  experience
6f  multitudes  iv  every  age.

Application.    "  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,  neither  let  the  mighty


10  THE  BOOK  GIT  OBADIAH.  [1—21.

man  glory  in  his  might ;  .  .  .  but  let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this,  that  ho  under-
standeth  and  knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving-kindness,  judgment,
and  righteousness  in  the  earth."

Vers.  10 — 14. — A  neighbour's  crudty.  The  prophet  deeply  feels  the  injury  which
Esau  has  inflicted  upon  Israel,  and  the  language  of  this  passage  gives  evidence  of  a
heart  deeply  aggrieved  and  wronged  and  distressed.  We  have,  indeed,  in  these  verses
an  example  of  the  length  to  which  the  cruelty  of  man  can  go.

I.  The  details  of  this  cruelty.  1.  Bdom  is  charged  with  siding  with  foreigners
against  Jerusalem  in  the  day  when  the  city  was  assaulted  and  taken.  2.  And  with
rejoicing  over  Judah's  misfortunes,  and  mocking  at  her  calamities.  3.  And  with
sharing  in  the  spoils  of  the  city  when  the  capture  took  place.  4.  And  even  with
cutting  off  the  retreat  of  the  wretched  fugitives.

II.  The  aggbavation  of  this  obdelty.  If  a  stranger,  a  "  natural  enemy  "  (as
men  say),  had  done  this,  it  would  have  been  bad  enough.  But  the  Edomites  were  of
the  same  descent  with  the  Jews ;  these  being  sons  of  Jacob,  those  of  Esau.  The  point
is  given  to  the  sting  by  this  fact.  It  is  with  "  violence  against  thy  brother  Jacob "
that  Bdom  is  charged.  "Man's  inhumanity  to  man"  is  the  most  sad  and  depressing
spectacle  that  earth  affords.  When  natural  kindred  and  affinity  bind  men  together,
those  who  snap  those  ties  and  assail  their  brethren  are  monsters  of  iniquity.

III.  The  penalty  of  this  .ceuelty.  This  was  plainly  published  by  Obadiah.
"  Thou,"  said  he  to  Edom — "  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  for  ever."  The  laws  of  God  cannot
be  violated  with  impunity.  The  relations  which  Ood  has  fashioned  cannot  be  outraged
without  involving  the  guilty  in  the  awful  consequences, of  their  sin.  "The  way  of
transgressors  is  hard."  .

Vers.  15, 16. — The  "lex  tdMonis."  The  principle  of  government  or  of  retribution
known  as  the  lex  talionis  was  known  to  the  Hebrews  as  well  as  to  other  nations.
"It  was  said  by  them  of  old  time.  An  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth."  Passages
in  Ezekiel  contain  threatenings  of  a  retribution  similar  to  that  which  in  this  passage
is  deiiounced  upon  Edom.

I.  The  Authob  and  the  occasion  of  this  kbtbibution.  "The  day  of  the
Lord"  is  an  expression  frequently  occurring  in  the  prophetic  writings,  and  always
denoting  a  season  of  retribution  appointed  by  a  righteous  God.  The  day  when  iniquity
is  rampant,  when  injustice  is  perpetrated  and  is  apparently  unnoticed,  is  the  day  of
man.  But  as  surely  as  the  universe  is  governed  by  a  Being  of  rectitude,  so  surely
shall  the  cause  of  equity  and  truth  be  vindicated ;  and  the  time  of  such  vindication,
come  when  it  may,  is  the  day  uf  the  Lord,

XL  The  method  and  mbasueb  of  kbtbibution.  "  As  thou  bast  done,  it  shall  be
done  unto  thee."  Edom  had  deserted  her  friends ;  she  should  be  deserted.  Edom  had
spoiled  her  neighbours;  she  should  be  spoiled.  And  this  doom  was  threatened,  not
upon  Bdom  only,  but  upon  "  all  the  heathen,"  t.e.  upon  all  who  shared  Edom's  guilt.
Whether  this  was  to  happen  by  the  working  out  of  what  we  call  a  natural  law,  or  by
a  special  Interposition  of  Providence,  we  are  not  told,  and  this  is  immaterial.  History
records  very  many  instances  in  which  this  principle  has  operated,  in  which  this  doom
has  been  inflicted.

III.  The  hiohbb  Divine  pbinoiple  which  tempers  this  of  bktbibution.  Our
Lord  Jesus  has  taught  us  that  the  lex  talionis  is  not  an  adequate  principle  of  human
conduct.  Much  less  can  it  be  deemed  the  perfect  and  final  law  of  the  Divine
government.  Mercy  triumphs  over  wrath.  Where  there  is  true  repentance  on  man's
part,  tTiere  is  ready  forgiveness  on  God's  part.  If  this  were  not  so,  the  human  race
would  long  ago  have  perished ;  if  this  were  not  so,  we  should  not  now  be  rejoicing  in
the  Saviour  of  our  souls,  the  Saviour  of  mankind.

Ver,  17. — Restoration.  It  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  that,  however
gloomy  might  seem  to  them  the  immediate  future  of  their  nation,  they  ever  saw
beyond  the  darkness  into  the  glorious  light  of  the  future.  Opinions  have  differed,  and
still  differ,  as  to  the  reference  of  many  of  their  predictions  of  coming  prosperity  and
blessedness.    Some  refer  those  visions  to  a  time  not  long  subsequent  to  the  prophet's


I— 2i.j  raa  book  of  obadiah.  ii

own  time.  Others  still  look  for  their  literal  fnlfilment  in  the  political  history  of  Israel
in  the  future.  Whilst  others  believe  that  the  visions  were  not  of  mere  earthly  peace
and  prosperity,  but  of  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  Christ  and  of  the  true  Israel  of  God,
the  Church  of  the  living  God.  Certainly  such  language  as  that  of  the  text,  whatever
be  its  literal  application,  contains  promises  which  Christians  alone  can  fully  realize.

I.  Onb  element  in  bestobation  is  delitebanoe.  The  return  of  the  captives
and  exiles  to  their  native  soil,  their  much-loved  city,  is  a  picture  of  the  restoration  of
sinners  to  the  favour  and  fellowship  of  the  Gt>d  whom  they  had  angered  and  alienated.
God  deviseth  means  whereby  his  banished  ones  shall  return.  Christ  is  the  Redeemer,
and  deliverance  is  his  great  work.  His  people  are  the  saved,  the  rescued,  the
emancipated,  the  restored.

II.  Another  element  nr  bestcbation  is  holiness.  The  captivity  of  the  Jews
bad  removed  them  from  their  metropolis  and  from  their  temple,  the  holy  place  of
their  God.  At  the  same  time,  the  heathen  had  polluted  and  defiled  the  sanctuary  of
Jehovah.  The  return  froin  exile  was  to  be  the  occasion  of  the  restoration  of  the  holy
people  to  the  holy  house,  and  the  restoration  of  the  sanctuary  to  its  sacred  uses.  In
the  Church  of  the  Redeemer  the  Spirit  of  holiness  takes  up  his  abode.  It  is  filled  with
sacred  services  and  observances.     "  Holiness  becometh  thy  house,  O  Lord,  for  ever."

III.  AnOTHEB    element    in    BBSTORATION    is    the    enjoyment    of    8E0UBITT    AND

plenty.  "  The  house  of  Jacob  shall  possess  their  possessions."  The  lands  and  houses
which  the  people  had  inherited  from  tfaeir  forefathers  had  been  occupied  by  strangers.
Bat  upon  the  restoration  the  Hebrews  took  possession  of  their  ancient  homes  and
fields,  and  abode  in  peace  and  enjoyed  plenty.  In  this  their  position  was  an  emblem
of  that  into  which  Christ's  redeemed  people  are  introduced  by  his  grace.  All  things
are  theirs.  They  possess  the  privileges  of  the  gospel  and  the  peace  of  the  Spirit,  and
theirs  is  the  blessed  hope  of  an  inheritance  Incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  unfading.

Ver.  21. — Empire  founded  on  salvation.  The  two  conceptions  which  are  united  in
this  verse  are  united,  not  only  in  the  history  of  Judah,  but  in  the  dispensation  of
Divine  grace  as  revealed  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Israel  had  many  saviours;
Moses  was  the  first  and  greatest ;  the  judges  followed.  In  the  later  periods  of  Jewish
story,  Zerubbabel  and  Judas  Maccabaeus  wrought  somewhat  similar  deliverance  for
their  countrymen.  In  fact,  from  first  to  last  revelation  is  the  history  of  salvations,
all  pointing  on  to  the  one  great  salvation  to  be  wrought,  not  for  one  nation  only,  but
for  all  mankind.  And  as  the  Hebrew  deliverers  established  the  kingdom,  and  brought
about  the  reign  of  righteousness  and  the  prevalence  of  peace,  so  upon  his  great  work
of  deliverance  by  Christ  God  has  founded  that  kingdom  which  is  "righteousness,
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."

I.  Chbist  IB  A  Savioub  with  a  view  to  his  bexno  a  Kino.  His  earthly
manifestation  was  as  a  pitying  Deliverer ;  his  heavenly  session  is  as  al  mighty  Lord.
In  a  sense,  he  purchased  his  dominion  by  his  sacrificial  death.

II.  Cheist's  people  abb  saved  in  obder  that  thet  mat  be  subjects.  In  the
first  instance,  those  who  receive  the  gospel  behold  Christ  as  a  Redeemer.  But  in
saving  them  the  Lord  acquires  rights  over  them;  these  rights  they  recognize,  and
their  subjection  and  obedience  become  the  note  of  their  interest  in  his  redemption.

III.  The  eabth  is  the  scene  of  a  Savioub's  grace  that  it  mat  become  the
SEAT  or  HIS  empibb.  From  Zion  Jehovah  judged  the  mount  of  Esau.  God  gives  to
his  Son  the  heathen  for  his  inheritance.  Not  by  a  physical,  a  military,  but  by  •
moral  conquest  Christ  takes  possession  of  our  humanity.    And  he  is  Lord  of  all.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  vision  of  Oladiah.  "  The  vision  of  Obadiah.  Thus  saith  the  Lord
God  concerning  Edom ;  We  have  heard  a  rumour  firom  the  Lord,  and  an  ambassador
is  sent  among  the  heathen,  Arise  ye,  and  let  us  rise  up  against  her  in  battle.  Behold,
I  have  made  thee  small  among  the  heathen :  thou  art  greatly  despised."  We  are  now
about  to  study  the  smallest  book  in  the  Old  Testament.  It  comes  behind  the  ethers
in  length,  but  in  nothing  else.    In  its  weighty  character  as  an  inspired  writing  it  is


i2  THE  BOOK   OF  OBADIAH,  [1—21.

equal  to  any  of  the  rest.  Let  us,  then,  ponder  it  in  our  hearts.  Maj  the  Holy  Spirit
guide  us  into  all  the  truth  this  sacred  portion  contains  1  May  he  open  our  eyes,  that
we  may  behold  wondrous  things  out  of  this  word  1

I.  We  hay  BsaiN  by  abeinq  who  Obasiah  was.  Some  have  thought  he  waa  the
pious  steward  of  King  Ahab;  but  this  idea  is  not  in  keeping  with  the  evident  date
of  the  prophecy.  There  are  many  other  persons  of  this  name  in  Scripture,  but  the
prophet  cannot  be  identified  with  any  one  of  them.  We  read  of  Obadiah  of  the  tribe
of  Judah  (1  Ohron.  iiL) ;  another  of  the  tribe  of  Issachar  (1  Ghron,  vii.) ;  another  of
Benjamin  (1  Ohron.  viii.) ;  another  of  Levi  (1  Chron.  ix.) ;  another  of  Gad  (1  Ohron.
xii.) ;  another  of  Judah  (2  Ohron.  xvii.) ;  another  of  Zebulun  (1  Chron.  xxyiL).  We
find,  also,  an  Obadiah — a  Levite — in  the  time  of  Josiah  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.) ;  another  a
companion  of  Ezra  (Ezra  viii.) ;  and  yet  another  a  priest  in  the  time  of  Nehemiah
(Neh.  X.).  The  name,  therefore,  was  in  very  common  use  among  the  Jews ;  and  this.
not  only  because  it  bad  been  borne  by  some  who  were  distinguished  for  their  upright
character,  but  because  it  had  a  most  instructive  significance.

IL  Wb  ask  the  meaning  of  the  name.  It  means  "  a  Servant,"  or  "  a  Worshipper
of  the  Lord."  Let  us  note  the  import  of  both  these.  l."A  Servant  of  the  Lord."  Here
we  may  each  long  to  be  similarly  designated.  David  said, "  0  Lord,  I  am  thy  servant ; "
and  the  reason  he  gave  for  this  was  that  his  bonds  had  been  brokoni  by  Qod.  "  Thou
hast  redeemed  me  from  the  slavery  o£  Satan.  Thou  hast  brought  me  into  the  glorious
liberty  of  thy  people.  I  now  yield  myself  to  thee.  I  am  thy  servant."  And  so  Moses
was  called  "  the  servant  of  God/'  And  so,  too,  we  meet  with  such  words  as  these :
"  Abraham,  my  servant ; "  "  David,  my  servant ; "  "  Daniel,  servant  of  the  living  God ; "
"  JaiBSS,  a  servant  of  God ; "  "  Paul,  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  This  blessed  service
is  perfect  freedom.  Christ  himself  came  among  us  as  the  girded  Servant.  "I  am
among  you  as  he  that  serveth."  He  was  Jehovah's  righteous  Servant.  His  disciples,
therefore,  can  never  lise  above  his  example.  They  serve  the  living  and  true  God.
"Ich  dien."  It  was  not  always  so.  Before  the  bonds  were  loosed  there  was  only
slavery  to  sin  and  Satan  and  the  world,  but  the  emancipation  has  come.  The  freed
ones  serve  their  Bedeemer-Qod.  In  faith,  in  love,  in  holiness,  in  patience,  in  meekness,
in  joyfulness,  they  serve,  they  work,  they  wait.  2.  The  second  meaning  of  the  name
is  "a  Worshipper  of  the  Lord"  And  shall  we  not,  every  one,  aim  to  be  this?  It
implies  much.  Let  us  think  about  it.  In  New  Testament  lighl^  worship  means  access
to  Ood.  We  are  brought  near  by  the  blood  of  Christ's  cross.  It  is  filial  nearness.
We  may  come  with  holy  boldness  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  It  includes  prayer  in
Christ's  Name.  "  Whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  the  Father  in  my  Name,  he  wul  give  it
you.  Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive."  Worship  includes  praise.  "  Whoso  offereth  me
praise,  he  glorifieth  me ; "  "  Praise  is  comely ; "  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord."  Worship  includes
the  yielding  of  ourselves  to  Ood.  "1  beseech  you  by  the  mercies  of  Gtod,  that
ye  present  your  bodies  living  sacrifices."  Worship  includes  the  consecration  of  our
substance  to  Ood.  Of  old  his  people  were  told  not  to  come  before  him  empty.  They
were  to  present  their  firstfruits  unto  him.  ITiey  were  first  to  consecrate,  then  enjoy.
Giving  was  therefore  a  part  of  worship.  It  ought  to  be  so  now.  Worship  of  Jehovah
also  involves  a  complete  turning  away  from  idols.  There  are  idols  of  the  heart.
Covetousness  is  idolatry.  There  are  many  idols  besides  those  of  wood  and  stone.  To
be  truly  an  Obadiah,  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah,  we  must  say  with  Ephraim,  "  What
have  1  to  do  any  more  with  idols  ?  "  And  one  thought  more  on  this  point.  In  seeking
to  bear  the  designation  of  our  prophet,  let  us  remember  this  canon  laid  down  by  the
blessed  Saviour :  "  God  is  a  Spirit,  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship  him  in
spirit  and  in  truth."  Thus,  then,  we  see  that  much  is  implied  by  the  designation,
"a  worshipper  of  the  Lord."  May  we  each  be  both  "a  servant"  and  "a  worshipper"
of  the  living  God !

III.  We  may  now  proceed  to  observe  that  the  qbeat  Author  of  the  book  is  God
HIMSELF.  Obadiah  was  the  ambassador,  the  messenger,  but  the  words  are  God's.
Ver.  1,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord  God."  It  is  this  "  Thus  taith  the  Lord"  which  gives
such  supreme  importance  to  every  word  of  the  Bible.  The  histories,  the  prophecies,
the  precepts,  the  invitations,  the  warnings,  the  exhortations,  the  revelations,  the  whole
from  Genesis  to  the  end,  all  come  to  us  with  the  words  of  power,  "  Thus  saith  the
Lord."    Some  minds  may  be  perplexed  as  to  what  is  said  of  creation ;   some  are


1— 21.J  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  Id

exercised  as  to  ivhat  ii  revealed  about  the  judgment  day,  and  of  the  Divine  wrath
upon  the  wicked;  others  have  di£5culty  in  understanding  the  moral  govemment  of  the
world ;  but  the  docile,  humble-minded  belierer  takes  this  book  as  from  the  hand  of
Qod.  On  the  top  of  every  page  he  sees,  as  it  were,  written  in  letters  of  golden  light,
"  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is  there  is  power.  We  have  here
the  words  of  the  King  of  kings.  "By  the  Word  of  the  Lord  were  the  heavens  made,
and  all  the  host  of  them  by  the  breath  of  his  mouth."  That  same  Word  upholds  all
things  by  its  glorious  power.  And  here  we  have  that  Word  in  writing,  and  it  is  God's
great  revelation  of  his  will.  It  is  the  chief  means  by  which  the  Holy  Spirit  quickens
the  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  revives  the  drooping  graces  of  his  saints.  "By  thy
Word  thou  hast  quickened  me."  If  you  want  any  other  proof  of  the  power  of  the
Word;  read  in  the  Revelation  of  the  doings  of  him  who  was  clothed  in  a  vesture  dipped
in  blood,  and  whose  name  is  "  The  Word  of  God."  St.  John  was  inspired  to  write  five
books.  In  the  opening  chapter  of  the  first  he  describes  the  Word  made  flesh,  and
dwelling  among  us.  In  the  closing  chapters  of  the  last  book  he  describes  the  Word  in
the  blood-dyed  vesture.  It  is  the  union  of  these  truths  which  gives  such  power  to  the
written  Word.  God  has  spoken  to  us  by  his  Son.  "  The  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the
spirit  of  prophecy."  Let  us,  then,  take  heed  how  we  hear.  We  all  need  to  be  attentive
to  the  Word.  Oh  that  Christ's  high-priestly  prayer  were  true  of  each  of  us,  "  I  have
given  unto  them  the  words  which  thou  gavest  me,  and  they  have  received  them.  .  .  .
Sanctify  them  through  thy  truth :  thy  Word  is  truth  "  I  Let  us  seek  to  "  receive  "  all
the  words  which  have  been  given  us.  "  ITiey  have  received  them."  May  this  be  true
of  us,  and  may  we  be  tanctified  more  and  more  by  the  Word !  "  Sanctify  them  through
thy  truth:  thy  Word  is  truth."

IV.  And  now  let  us  ask — What  ib  the  subject  of  this  pkophbtio  book  ?  It  is
twofold.  It  tells  of  Judgment  upon  the  house  of  Esau,  and  mercy  upon  the  house  of
Jacob.  We  shall  hope  to  return  to  this  subject  again,  but  for  the  present  let  us  note
what  a  summary  we  have  here  of  all  revelation.  We  have,  as  it  were,  the  pillar  of  the
Lord — a  light  to  Israel,  a  black  cloud  to  the  Egyptians.  "  He  that  believeth  shall  be
saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  condemned."  The  righteous  shall  walk
therein ;  the  transgressors  shall  fall  therein.  Esau,  despising  his  birthright,  barters  it
for  a  mess  of  pottage.  Jacob,  taking  hold  of  God's  strength,  wrestles  with  the  angel
of  the  covenant,  and  is  called  Israel ;  for  as  a  prince  he  has  wrestled  with  God,  and
prevuled.  In  the  one  case  we  see  wickedness  apparently  mighty  and  dominant,
building  on  the  heights,  but  brought  down  and  made  very  smtdl.  In  the  other  we
have  Zion,  once  feeble  and  down-trodden  and  despised,  made  triumphant  and  glorious
by  the  grace,  and  love,  and  wisdom,  and  power  of  him  who  loved  us,  and  washed  us
from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  made  us  priests  and  kings  unto  God.  If  we  notice
the  story  of  Esau,  we  see  him  in  Genesis  despising  his  birthright  and  hating  his
brother.  In  Numbers  we  see  the  two  nations.  Israel  is  marching  to  Canaan.  Esau
withstands  him.  The  King  of  Edom  prevents  the  progress.  In  this  Edom  seems  the
stronger.  In  St.  Matthew's  Gospel  we  note  the  birth  of  Christ  and  the  advance  of  the
spiritual  Israel.  Then  we  find  Herod  the  Edomite  opposing  with  no  little  success.
He  commands  the  destruction  of  all  the  young  children  in  Bethlehem.  A  true  Edomite
— a  red  man — a  man  of  blood.  But  as  we  get  to  the  close  of  the  sacred  Word  we  see
that  the  house  of  Esau  has  disappeared.  Zion  is  all-triumphant.  Within  the  pearly
gates  all  is  joy,  and  light,  and  rest,  and  glory  for  evermore.  Nothing  that  defileth  can
enter.  The  hosts  of  the  true  Israel  are  safe  for  ever.  The  great  "  Thus  saith  the
Lord"  by  Obadiah  the  prophet  has  received  its  complete  fulfilment.  Let  us,  then,
be  sure  of  this — ^that  whatever  seeming  strength  falsehood  and  wickedness  may  possess,
in  the  end  truth  only  shall  prevail ;  the  kingdom  which  is  "  righteousness,  peace,  and
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost "  only  shall  predominate,  and  in  a  little  while  it  shall  be  known
that  "the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth."  "The  kingdom. shall  be  the  Lord's"
(vef.  21).— A.  0.  T.

Vers.  1 — L—Edom  iiibdtud.  "The  vision  of  Obadiah  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God
concerning  Bdom ;  We  have  heard  a  rumour  from  the  Lord,"  etc.  We  have  said  that,
although  there  are  so  many  Obadiahs  mentioned  in  Scripture,  the  prophet  cannot  be
identified  with  any  of  them.    The  sacred  writers  were  never  ready  to  put  themselves


14  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  [1— 2L

into  prominence.  They  had  their  message  to  deliver.  They  had  their  solemn  work  to
perform.  They  had  Jehovah  to  glorify.  They  were  content  to  be  no  more  than  a
voice  crying  in  the  wilderness.  Who  wrote  Joshua?  Who  wrote  Judges?  Who
wrote  the  books  of  Samuel,  or  the  Kings,  or  Chronicles,  or  Esther  ?  It  was  sufficient
for  the  writers  that  they  were  used  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  They  were  ambassadors,  not
kings.  They  were  servants,  not  masters.  They  were  the  instruments,  not  the
musicians.  They  were  the  vessels,  not  the  fountain  of  living  water.  The  ambassador
simply  delivers  the  message  of  the  king.  The  servant  only  waits  on  the  guests  of  the
master.  The  instrument  merely  gives  forth  the  sounds  struck  by  the  musician.  The
vessel  only  bears  the  refreshing  draught  of  the  well  of  life.  Obadiah,  like  John  the
Baptist,  was  ready  to  decrease,  that  Christ  might  increase.  The  morning  star  heralds
the  day,  then  melts  before  the  sunshine.  Herein  is  a  lesson  of  great  importance  to  all
workers  for  Christ.

I.  Let  us  proceed  to  notice  God's  denunoiatioii  or  Edom.  Edom  was  a  great
adversary  of  Israel.  For  instance,  we  find  in  Ps.  cxxxviL  that  Edom  joined  Babylon
in  seeking  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem :  ver.  7,  "  Remember,  0  Lord,  the. children  of
Edom  in  the  day  of  Jerusalem ;  who  said,  Base  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  foundation
thereof!"  The  geographical  position  of  Edom  made  it  a  formidable  enemy,  and
apparently  invincible.  Lying  south  of  the  Dead  Sea,  its  lofty  range  of  red  hills,  called
Mount  Seir,  stretched  a  hundred  miles  from  north  to  south,  by  twenty  east  to  west.
Bozrah  was  the  capital  of  the  eastern  division,  and  Sela,  or  Fetra  (both  names  mean  "  a
rock  "),  was  the  capital  of  the  southern  division.  The  habit  of  the  eagle  to  select  high
and  lonely  pinnacles  for  its  dwelling-place  gives  force  to  the  words  of  our  fourth  verse,
"  Though  thou  exalt  thyself  as  the  eagle,  and  though  thou  set  thy  nest  among  the
stars,  thence  will  I  bring  thee  down."  In  Ps.  Ix.  9  we  are  led  to  a  period  in  David's
history  when  that  king  besieged  Edom.  As  he  looks  up  at  the  fortified  cities  among
impregnable  rocky  heights,  he  seems  to  despair  of  victory.  "  Who  will  bring  me  into
the  strong  city?  Who  will  lead  me  into  Edom?"  Could  he  not  himself  be  the
leader?  Had  he  not  slain  Goliath  and  routed  the  Philistines?  Had  he  not  fought
with  the  lion  and  the  bear  to  save  a  lamb  of  the  fold  ?  Where,  too,  were  his  mighty
men  ? — Joab,  captain  of  the  host  ?  Adino,  who  lifted  his  spear  against  eight  hundred  ?
Eleazar,  whose  sword  imbedded  itself  in  his  hand?  Benaiah,  who, slew  an  Egyptian
with  his  own  spear?  If  the  muster-roll  be  called,  is  there  no  one  to  take  the  lead,  and
scale  the  dizzy  heights,  and  subdue  the  great  strongholds?  David  looks  away  from
himself,  away  from  his  men,  away  from  all  human  strength,  and  he  says,  "  Wilt  not
tJwu,  0  God  ?  "  He  answers  the  question  in  the  best  and  surest  way.  And  we  know
that  God  did  give  David  the  victory  (see  2  Sam.  viii.  14).  We,  too,  have  our  enemies.
We  have  our  fortresses  of  Edom.  Who  will  enable  us  to  conquer?  Where  are  the
weapons  mighty  to  the  pulling  down  of  strongholds  ?  Nay,  where  is  he  whose  goings
forth  are  upon  the  white  horse  of  war,  conquering  and  to  conquer?  The  answer  is
brought  to  us.  The  warfare  is  accomplished.  "  We  are  more  than  conquerors  through
■  him  who  loved  us."  Isa.  Ixiii.  1,  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from  Edom,  with  dyed
garments  from  Bozrah  ?  this  that  is  glorious  in  his  apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness
of  his  strength P"  Then  comes  the  answer.  "I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty
to  save."  Yes,  he  who  is  the  Lord  our  Righteousness  is  the  Lord  our  Saviour — mighty
to  save  to  the  uttermost.  Sin  and  Satan  have  been  conquered.  Edom  is  subdued.
Then  comes  forth  the  Conqueror,  red  in  his  apparel.  "  Who  is  this  .  .  .  with  dyed
garments  from  Bozrah  ?    I  that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save."

IL  I  will  ask  you  now  to  pass  from  the  general  denunciation  of  Edom  to  the
PABTionLAB  8IN  WITH  WHICH  Edom  IS  OHAEQED.  "The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath
deceived  thee."  Building  like  the  eagle  in  the  pinnacles  of  the  rocks,  setting  his  nest
among  the  stars,  Edom  said  in  his  heart,  "Who  shall  bring  me  down  to  the  ground?"
Thus  the  pride  of  his  heart  deceived  him.  And  to  many  individuals,  as  well  as
nations,  does  the  herald  of  Jehovah  bring  the  message,  "  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath
deceived  thee."  Pharaoh,  lifting  himself  high,  asks,  "  Who  is  the  Lord,  that  I  should
serve  him?"  The  answer  comes,  "The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee."
Nebuchadnezzar,  looking  in  self-elation  upon  Babylon,  asks, "  Is  not  this  great  Babyloa
which  I  have  built?"  The  answer  comes,  "The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived,
thee."    Belshazzar,  banqueting  with  his  lords,  and  drinking  wine  from  the  vessels  of


1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  OBADUH.  IS

the  temple,  sees  the  dreadful  handwriting  upon  the  wall,  and  the  message  comes,
"  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee."  Herod  makes  an  oration,  and  gives
not  God  the  glory  due  to  his  Name.  The  silent  death-warrant  comes  to  him,  "  The
pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee."  And  as  with  these  kings,  these  representa-
tives of  multitudes,  so  with  all  classes.  The  commercial  man,  gathering  wealth  and
speculating  in  the  markets,  Buddealy  comes  down  with  a  crash :  the  pride  of  his  heart
hath  deceived  him.  The  professional  man,  scorning  many  an  honest  tradesman,  runs
into  lavish  expense,  and  brings  ruin  to  his  family :  the  pride  of  his  heart  hath  deceived
him.  The  young  man  coming  into  a  small  estate  suddenly  launches  out  into
extravagance.  He  must  be  as  others  who  have  twice  his  income.  He  wants  to  make
a  dash  in  the  world.  He  knows  more  about  horses  than  the  way  of  holiness  and  the
gospel  of  salvation.  He  is  a  stranger  to  grace.  The  throne  of  grace,  the  covenant  of
grace,  the  God  of  all  grace,  he  knows  nothing  about.  With  scarcely  twenty-four  hours'
illness,  he  is  summoned  into  eternity.  He  dies  without  hope.  The  pride  of  his  heart
hath  deceived  him.  The  man  of  high  culture,  priding  himself  upon  his  intellectual
attainments,  ignoring  Bible  revelation,  and  spurning  sermons  and  tracts,  he  is  ready  to
laugh  at  humble  piety.  His  habitation  is  high.  He  dwells  amongst  the  stars.  His
nest  is  with  the  eagles.  He  saith  in  hig  heart,  "  Who  shall  bring  me  down  to  tha
ground  ?  "  But  what  does  God  say  ?  "  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee."
Ay,  and  there  is  a  moral  man,  a  very  Pharisee,  who  thanks  God  he  is  so  much  better
than  the  publicans  and  the  like.  That  man  is  lifted  up  with  his  doings.  How
carefully  he  pays  tithe  of  his  mint,  anise,  and  cummin  I  How  scrupulous  about  his
phylactery  1  What  a  parade  he  makes  of  his  religion  1  He  says  in  his  heart,  "  Who
shall  bring  me  down  to  the  ground  ?"  So  the  pride  of  his  heart  hath  deceived  him.
He  that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased.  We  do  well  to  remember  Edom.  We  must
keep  in  mind  that  pride  of  heart  is  very  deceitful.  Nature's  fortifications,  the  world's
fortifications,  social  fortifications,  moral  fortifications,  are  unavailing  if  we  presume
to  do  without  God.  Edom  built  amons;  the  stars,  but  GK>d  brought  him  down  to  the
ground.  Pride  of  heart  is  the  herald  of  ruin.  It  is  often  so  even  in  this  world.  And
those  proud  ones  who  are  brought  to  the  ground  here  may  thank  God  for  the  valley  of
humiliation.  Let  us  all  learn  to  humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God,
that  he  may  exalt  us  in  due  time.  Let  us  be  clothed  with  humility.  "  God  resisteth
the  proud,  but  giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  The  only  fortress  we  caa  boast  of  is  the
cleft  Bock  of  Ages.  Here  we  have  safety  and  joy  and  peace.  Here  we  may  securely
hide  until  all  calamities  be  overpast.  Happy  those  who  can  say  with  David,  in  Ps.  ix.,
"In  the  Lord  put  I  my  trust:  how  say  ye  to  my  soul,  Flee  as  a  bird  to  your
mountain?"  The  true  believer  needs  no  foreign  helps.  The  Lord  is  an  all-sutficient
Fortress  and  Shield.  The  Christian  knows  whom  he  trusts,  and  therefore  does  not
make  haste.  "  With  Jehovah  I  have  taken  shelter :  how  say  ye  to  my  soul.  Flee,
sparrows,  to  your  hill?"  (Bishop  Horsley).  May  the  Holy  Spirit  give  us  all  to  know
this  happy  security  1 — a  security  which  made  the  Apostle  Paul  speak  with  so  much
meaning,  so  much  force,  so  much  personal  experience,  "  I  knew  a  man  in  Christ."  A
delightful,  peaceful  knowledge.  Only  one  thing  is  better.  "  To  depart  and  to  be  with
Christ ...  is  far  better."— A.  C.  T.

Ver.  6. — "  The  thingt  of  Eiau  learched  out."  "  How  are  the  things  of  Esau
searched  out ! "

I.  We  may  consider  Esau  as  thb  ttpe  of  the  self-confident.  Lifted  up,
dwelling  amongst  the  btars,  wise  in  his  own  eyes,  he  knows  not  his  perilous  condition.
There  are  thousands  and  thousands  like  this.  They  say,  in  the  language  of  Laodicea,
"  I  am  rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and  have  need  of  nothing."  They  little  see
themselves  as  God  sees  them.  They  are  blind,  and  know  not  that  they  are  miserable
and  poor ;  but  God  searches  them  out.  "  I  know  thy  works."  No  one  can  elude  the
all-seeing  gaze  of  the  Omniscient.  "  Adam,  where  art  thou  ?  "  Thus  the  Judge  of  all
men  comes  making  manifest  the  secrets  of  the  heart.  Hiding  like  Adam  in  the  treei
of  the  garden,  or  dwelling  like  Edom  in  the  rocks,  is  only  self-delusion.  Shall  not  God
search  it  out  ?  There  are  many,  like  Saul,  who  are  so  self-complacent  that  they  say, "  I
have  kept  the  commandment  of  the  Lord."  When  the  stern  prophet  asks,  "  What
meaneth  then  this  bleating  of  the  sheep  in  mine  ears,  and  the  lowing  of  the  oxen  which


1«  TEE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.  [1— 2L

I  hear?"  Borne  may  remind  us  of  the  yflung  man  who,  on  hearing  the  command-
ments, said  he  had  kept  them  all ;  but  when  Christ  searched  him  through  and  through,
he  left  Christ's  presence,  preferring  his  earthly  possessions  to  heavenly  riches.  His
heart  was  as  a  great  stone,  which,  when  disturbed,  revealed  numberless  creeping  things
which  at  once  shrank  from  the  light  and  hastened  away  into  new  darkness.  How  are
the  tilings  of  Esau  searched  out !  The  disclosure  must  come.  It  is  inevitable.  "There
is  nothin>;  covered  that  shall  not  be  revealed,  neither  bid  that  shall  not  be  known."  It
may  not  be  in  this  world,  it  may  not  be  until  the  day — the  great  day— of  judgment,
but  it  must  come.  The  things  of  Esau  must  be  searched  out,  the  folly  of  self-confidence
must  be  made  manifest.

II.  In  the  next  place,  we  may  consider  Esatt  as  the  type  of  teg  wobldlt.  We
know  how  the  first  of  the  race  bartered  his  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage.  And  the
race  yet  lives.  There  are  yet  multitudes  carnally  minded,  who  reject  joint  kinship  with
Christ  for  the  sake  of  some  mess  of  pottaae,  or  some  cup  of  pleasure,  or  some  glittering
toy,  or  the  incense  of  human  honour.  How  many  are  ready  to  exclaim,  when  we  offer
them  the  religion  of  Christ,  that  it  would  endanger  their  success  in  the  world  I  So
Demetrius,  the  silversmith,  alarmed  his  fellow-craftsman  by  telling  them  that  Chris-
tianity would  jeopardize  their  profits.  "  Sirs,  ye  know  that  by  this  craft  we  have  our
wealth."  The  world  so  fills  the  vision  of  such  persons  that  they  have  no  eyes  for
Christ,  no  eyes  for  heaven,  no  eyes  for  the  coming  glory,  no  eyes  for  immortality.
They  have  eyes  and  see  not ;  ears  have  they,  and  hear  not.  Like  the  raven  in  the  Flood,
they  prefer  the  dead  carcases  to  the  security  of  the  ark.  Like  Ishmael,  they  are  ready
to  mock  at  those  who  differ  from  them.  They  ridicule  the  walk  of  faith.  The  cross
of  Christ  is  to  them  foolishness.  Shall  not  God  visit  for  these  things  ?  To  be  carnally
minded  is  death.  They  are  like  the  fabled  vessel  drawing  nigh  to  the  loadstone  rock.
They  get  nearer  and  nearer,  when,  lo !  every  bolt  and  nail  is  drawn  out  to  the  magnet,
and  the  ship  is  an  utter  wreck.  "  How  are  the  things  of  Esau  searched  out! "  The  worldly
policy  of  multitudes  may  seem  for  a  while  to  prosper,  but  the  end  of  these  things  is
death.  Some  years  ago  a  \roman  was  executed  for  murder.  The  fatal  deed  had  been
committed  to  obtain  a  five-pound  note.  When  the  coveted  note  was  gained  it  was
found  to  be  only  a  pretence.  It  was  called  a  five-pound  "  Bank  of  Elegance  "  note.
Tet  for  this  poor  sham  the  miserable  young  woman  risked  her  life  and  took  the  life  of
another.  What  an  illustration  of  Esau's  barter — a  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage  I
An  inheritance  incorruptible  is  forfeited  for  some  gilded  toy.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is
death."    "  How  are  the  things  of  Esau  searched  out  1 "

TTT.  In  the  next  place,  we  may  consider  Esau  as  the  type  ot  the  nnsYUPATHiziNa
AND  OBiiEL."  In  ver.  10  the  prophet  says,  "For  thy  violence  against  thy  brother  Jacob
shame  shall  cover  thee,  and  thou  shall  be  cut  off  for  ever."  This  unsyrapathizing,
hard-hearted,  cruel  spirit  is  directly  opposite  to  that  of  Christ.  The  laws  of  the  king-
dom call  to  gentleness,  meekness,  brotherly  kindness,  charity.  Christ  hath  left  us  an
example,  that  we  should  follow  his  steps.  He  is  the  gentle  Jesus.  He  is  the  tender
Shepherd.  He  is  the  Brother  born  for  adversity.  He  gave  himself  for  us.  His  mercy
is  everlasting.  He  is  the  sympathizing  High  Priest.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  sin  of
Esau  was  very  great.  Jacob  from  his  dying  couch  denounced  the  cruelty  of  Simeon
and  Levi,  although  by  grace  the  latter  was  called  to  high  privileges  in  Israel.  "  Instru-
ments of  cruelty  are  in  their  habitations.  0  my  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret ;
unto  their  assembly,  mine  honour,  be  not  thou  united!"  And  in  a  little  while  he
adds,  "  Cursed  be  their  anger,  for  it  was  great,  and  their  wrath,  for  it  was  cruel."  But
here  we  have  the  inveterate  cruelty  of  centuries.  The  hatred  of  Esau  against  Israel
had  survived  many  generations.  An  unyielding,  deadly,  cruel  antagonism  to  the  Jews
had  been  a  leading  characteristic  of  Edom.  Esau's  cruelty  was  of  a  most  unnatural
type.  And  it  had  grown  worse  and  worse.  The  prophet  tells  us  he  first  looked  on
Jacob's  calamity,  then  laughed,  then  insulted,  then  plundered,  and  then  imprisoned
and  murdered.  We  have,  then,  in  Esau  a  type  of  the  unsympathizing  and  cruel.
And  is  not  the  red  hand  of  Esau,  the  cruel,  blood-dyed  hand  of  Esau,  at  work  in  our
own  day?  What  are  the  fearful  atrocities,  the  horrible  cruelties,  the  maimings,  the
murders,  the  hellish  plots,  the  demon-like  machinations?  What  mean  the  heart-
rending tears  and  sorrows  of  widows  and  orphans?  What  mean  the  distress  and
poverty  of  multitudes  of  ladiei — Ireland's  tnations  and  daughters  ?    What  mean  th«


1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  17

blight  an<1  ruin  so  common  In  the  land?  0  mj*  soul,  come  not  thou  into  the  secret  I
Esau's  cruelty  and  blo.id-g;uiltiness  were  never  so  bad  as  the  crimes,  unpunished  and
undetected,  of  our  own  day.  And  shall  not  God  search  them  out  ?  "  Verily  there
is  a  God  that  judgeth  the  earth."  Let  us  for  ourselves  pray  to  be  kept  from  the
beginnings  of  all  hatred,  malice,  and  uncharitableness.  God  is  love.  May  we  have
his  mind  I  May  we  show  ourselves  the  children  of  him  who  maketh  his  sun  to  shine
on  the  just  and  on  the  unjust  1  "  For  if  ye  love  them  which  love  you,  what  reward
have  ye  ?  do  not  even  the  publicans  the  same  ?  ...  Be  ye  therefore  perfect,  even  as
your  Father  which  is  in  heaven  is  perfect." — A.  C.  T.

Ver.  7. — Unholy  alliances.  "All  the  men  of  thy  confederacy  have  brought  thee
even  to  the  border :  the  men  that  were  at  peace  vrith  thee  have  deceived  thee,  and
prevailed  against  thee;  they  that  eat  thy  bread  have  laid  a  wound  under  thee."
Companionship  is  of  Divine  appointment.  The  Lord  God  chose  it  in  his  wisdom  for
himself,  and  so  created  angels  and  men.  He  might,have  lived  in  majestic  solitude,  in
all  the  sublimity  of  his  one  eternal  presence ;  but  no,  he  created  angels  that  excel  in
strength,  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  his  word,  and  he  made  man  in  his  own  likeness.
Companionship,  then,  is  after  the  Divine  mind.  Of  the  first  Adam  God  said,  "  It  is
not  good  for  man  to  be  alone."  Of  the  second  Adam  it  is  written,  "  Of  him  the  whole
family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named."  So  with  wideness  of  meaning  the  psalmist
declares  that  "  he  setteth  the  solitary  in  families."  We  know  the  value  of  association.
Individuals  make  up  households,  households  linked  together  make  up  kingdoms,  and
kingdoms  united  are  a  bulwark  of  society.  But  there  are  two  kinds  of  companionship.
"  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise,  but  a  companion  of  fools  shall  be
destroyed."  Our  text  tells  us  of  Edom's  unholy  alliance,  which  was  probably  with
Arabian  tribes.  "  The  men  that  were  at  peace  with  thee  have  deceived  thee ;  .  .  .
they  that  eat  thy  bread  have  laid  a  wound  under  thee."  The  marginal  reading  ia
more  exact,  "  the  men  of  thy  peace  . .  .  the  men  of  thy  bread."  Here,  then,  was  a  con-
federacy ruinous  to  Edom.  "  All  the  men  of  thy  confederacy  have  brought  thee  even
to  the  border :  the  men  of  thy  peace  have  deceived  thee ;  the  men  of  thy  bread  have
laid  a  wound  under  thee."  Edom  in  extremity  expected  help,  but,  instead  of  that,  the
allies  send  his  ambassadors  back  to  the  frontier,  as  much  as  to  say, "  Shift  for  yourselves.
We  are  not  going  to  help  you.  Look  within  your  own  borders."  And  thus,  too  late,
Edom  sees  the  folly  of  confederacy  with  Arab  tribes.  Now  he  is  held  up  to  us  as  a
beacon  of  warning,  assuring  us  of  the  disappointing  character  of  worldly  confederacy.
"Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and  whose  heart
departeth  from  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  xvii.  5).  Esau  had  been  like  a  weak  clematis  clinging
to  a  broken  reed.  In  the  time  of  the  storm  the  feebleness  of  the  support  was  manifest.
They  only  are  safe  who  can  say,  "  The  Lord  is  my  Stay."  Esau  had  rejected  the  Lord,
and  therefore,  although  exalted  amongst  the  stars,  was  brought  down  to  the  ground.
The  men  of  his  peace  had  deceived  him.  The  men  of  his  bread  had  laid  a  wound
under  him.  Would  that  nations  and  individuals  acknowledged  in  life  and  practice
that  salvation  is  of  the  Lord  1  All  human  alliances  are  poor  and  inadequate.  In  the
time  of  our  greatest  need  this  will  most  be  seen.  Becall  the  dying  words  of  Julius
Caesar  to  Brutus,  whose  wound  had  been  the  worst  of  all.  Becall  the  ISarl  of  Strafford's
words,  when  he  found  the  king  (after  many  assurances  that  he  would  never  do  so)  had
signed  his  death-warrant,  "  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes,  nor  in  any  of  the  sons  of
men."  Becall  Cardinal  Wolsey's  last  words,  "  Had  I  but  served  God  as  faithfully  as
I  have  served  my  king,  he  would  not,  in  mine  old  age,  have  abandoned  me  to  my
enemies."  "  The  men  of  thy  peace,"  says  the  prophet,  "  have  deceived  thee ;  the
men  of  thy  bread  have  laid  a  wound  under  thee."  Men  who  refuse  the  help  and
succour  of  the  everlasting  arm's,  of  everlasting  Love,  and  everlasting  Strength,  will
find  that  wherein  they  trusted  a  festering  wound,  bringing  pain,  and  anguish,  and
dishonour,  and  shame.  True  union  is  strength,  but  it  must  be  with  right  character*
and  on  right  principles.  The  ungodly  are  described  in  Prov.  L  14  as  saying,  "  Cait
in  thy  lot  among  us ;  let  us  all  have  one  purse."  They  allure  to  a  false  confederacy.
Better  haye  no  purse  at  all  than  be  allied  to  the  ungodly.  Look  at  the  lonely  Elijah
How  sternly,  how  heroically,  isolated !  He  refuses  to  share  in  the  one  purse  of  evil
doers.    He  will  trust  God  for  food.    He  who  feeds  the  ravens  can  make  even

OBADIAH.  0


18  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  [1— 2L

ravens  feed  his  prophet.  Elijah  will  not  come  into  the  secret  of  the  wicked.  Unflinch-
iDg  champion,  he  knows  that  the  purse  of  the  ungodly  is  a  bag  with  holes,  and  their
cisterns  hold  no  water,  and  their  hopes  are  bounded  by  time,  and  their  joys  are  gilded
and  unreal ;  and  beyond  death  all  is  darkness,  darkness— densest,  deepest  darkness.
True  wealth,  true  joy,  true  greatness,  true  glory,  are  for  those  who  are  heirs  of  God,
joint-heirs  with  Christ.  "  Woe  to  them  that  go  down  to  Egypt  for  help  .  •  ,  to
strengthen  themselves  in  the  strength  of  Pharaoh,  and  to  trust  in  the  shadow  of
Egypt  1 "  There  are  many  who  do  so ;  but  what  is  God's  message  to  Edom  ?  "  All  the
men  of  thy  confederacy  have  brought  thee  even  to  the  border:  the  men  of  thy  peace
have  deceived  thee ;  the  men  of  thy  bread  have  laid  a  wound  under  thee."  How  truly
has  even  a  heathen  moralist,  as  well  as  an  inspired  apostle,  warned  us  that  "evil  com-
munications corrupt  good  manners  " !  In  the  Book  of  Kings  we  read  of  Jehoshaphat
allying  himself  to  Ahab  in  battle.  It  nearly  cost  Jehoshaphat  bis  life.  But  afterwards
we  see  that  he  had  profited  by  the  dear-bought  experience.  When  he  built  ships  to
go  to  Ophir  for  gold,  Ahaziah  the  son  of  Ahab  said,  "  Let  my  servants  go  with  thy
servants  in  the  ships,"  and  Jehoshaphat  would  not.  If  we  have  been  amongst  those
who  have  had  worldly  associates,  let  us  learn  wisdom.  Let  us  walk  with  the  wise.
Let  us  choose  for  companions  those  who  fear  the  Lord,  and  speak  often  one  to  another,
to  whom  the  Lord  hearkens,  and  concerning  whom  he  says,  "  They  shall  be  mine  in
that  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels."  In  Acts  iv.  we  read  that  the  apostles,  being
released  from  prison,  went  to  their  own  co.mpany.  Their  absence  from  the  godly  wai
by  restraint.  Prison  walls  and  chains  kept  them.  As  soon  as  ever  they  were  free  to
choose  they  went  to  "  their  own  company."  That  company  was  characterized  by  love
to  Christ.  It  was  formed  of  the  disciples  of  the  Crucified.  Men  "  took  knowledge  of
them,  that  they  had  been  with  Jesus."  That  company  had  common  hopes  and  joys
and  interests.  Their  home  was  heaven.  Their  heritage  was  glory.  Their  Father  was
God.  The  company  of  the  Lord's  people  here  on  earth  are  destined  to  inherit  everlasting
felicity.  The  child  of  God,  when  he  is  set  free  from  the  last  ties  that  bind  him  to
earth,  goes  to  his  "  own  company  j "  he  goes  to  heaven,  where  Christ  is  gathering  to
himself  those  who  have  made  a  covenant  with  him  by  sacrifice.  Let  us  ask  ourselves
about  the  companions  of  our  life's  pathway.  Let  us  remember  the  folly  of  Edom,  and
let  us  remember  the  inspired  counsel,  "  My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee,  consent  thou
not."  Let  us  remember,  too,  the  feast  at  Enrogel.  In  1  Kings  i.  we  read  of  the
splendid  entertainment  given  by  Adonijah  to  his  distinguished  guests.  Amongst  those
present  were  some  who  held  the  highest  positions,  military  and  ecclesiastical.  Very
merry  was  the  gathering ;  very  loud  were  the  flatteries ;  very  gratifying  was  everything
to  the  prince.  Surely  with  Joab,  Abiathar,  and  many  others  on  his  side,  he  would
soon  wear  the  crown.  But  the  banqueting  is  suddenly  stopped.  A  messenger  in
breathless  haste  makes  an  announcement.  Those  who  had  just  been  shouting,  "  God
save  King  Adonijah  I "  now  undergo  a  change  of  feeling.  They  all  rise  to  their  feet  and
hasten  away.  The  prince  is  left  alone.  His  so-called  friends  think  not  of  his  safety,
but  only  of  their  own.  They  all  disappear.  Adonijah,  a  short  time  befure  admired,
praised,  flattered,  crowned,  the  centre  of  a  thousand  hopes,  is  now  alone.  His  guests
had  no  true  afi'ection  for  him.  They  had  no  bond  of  love  to  bind  them.  The  confederacy
was  for  their  selfish  ends.  They  fawned  for  place.  Now  they  see  the  prince  cannot
help  them,  and  so  they  pass  away.  The  banquet-hall  is  deserted;  one  solitary  man  is
riveted  to  the  spot.  The  men  of  his  confederacy  have  deceived  him ;  the  men  of  his
bread  have  laid  a  wound  under  him.  Adonijah  learns  too  late  the  folly  and  disappoint-
ment of  worldly  alliances.  May  we  all  profit  by  the  Spirit's  warning  1  Let  us  resolve
to  follow  Jesus,  and  unite  our  irjterests  with  those  who  are  his.  Once  there  came  one
to  the  Saviour,  asking,  "Master,  where  dwellest  thou?."  Jesus  answered,  "Come  and
see."  Let  us  make  for  Christ's  home  in  glory.  Let  us  cast  in  our  lot  with  his  people,
who  through  grace  "come  up  from  the  wilderness,  clear  as  the  sun,  fair  as  the  moon,
and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners."

"  Come,  let  us  join  our  friends  above
That  have  obtained  the  prize.
And  on  the  eagle-wings  of  love
To  joy  celestial  rise.


1—21.]  TffE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  If

•  K'en  now  by  faith  we  join  onr  hands
With  those  that  went  before,
And  greet  the  blood-besprinkled  bands
On  that  eternal  shore.

"  Oh  that  we  now  might  grasp  our  Guide  I
Oh  that  the  word  were  given  !
Come,  Lord  of  hosts,  the  waves  divide,
And  land  ns  all  in  heaven."

(0.  Wesley.)

A.aT.

Veif.  8,  9. — FaUe  eonfidenct*.  "Shall  I  not  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  even
destroy  the  wise  men  out  of  Edom,  and  understanding  out  of  the  mount  of  Esau  ?
And  thy  mighty  men,  0  Teman,  shall  be  dismayed,  to  the  end  that  every  one  of  the
mount  of  Esau  may  be  cut  off  by  slaughter."  The  wise,  the  mighty! — who  shall
stand  when  these  fall  ?  Edom  made  great  boast  of  its  vnse  men  and  its  liiighty  men,
but  it  was  a  vain  confidence.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in
his  wisdom,  neither  let  the  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might,  let  not  the  rich  man  glory
in  his  riches :  but  let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this,  that  he.  understandeth  and
knoweth  me,  that  I  am  the  Lord  which  exercise  loving-kindness,  judgment,  and
righteousness,  in  the  earth :  for  in  these  things  I  delight,  saith  the  Lord."  Edom  was
long  famous  for  its  wisdom.  Eliphaz,  the  principal  friend  of  the  patriarch  Job,  was  a,
Temanite.  This  Eliphaz,  in  some  respects,  was  a  representative  of  human  wisdom.
He  oftentimes  laid  down  false  principles,  or  misapplied  right  ones,  but  was  always
ready  to  boast  that  he  knew  more  than  others.  It  is  great  folly  to  be  wise  in  one's
«v;n  conceits.  God  asks,  "  Shall  I  not  destroy  the  wise  men  out  of  Edom  ?"  In  Jer.
viii.  he  says,  "  The  stork,  the  turtle,  the  crane,  and  the  swallow  observe  the  time  of
their  coming,  but  my  people  know  not  the  judgment  of  the  Lord."  How  do  ye  say,
"  We  are  Wise "  f  The  birds,  when  the  chilly  winds  of  autumn  ci  me,  take  care  to
migrate  to  a  warmer  clirrje  where  winter  will  not  destroy,  but  ye  make  no  preparation
for  the  future.  How  do  ye  say, "  We  are  wise  "  f  Would  it  be  wise  for  a  merchant  never
to  look  into  his  affairs?  Would  it  be  wise  for  a  captain  of  a  ship  to  see  a  great  storm
coming,  and  make  no  preparation  ?  Wonld  it  be  wise  to  proceed,  on  a  long  journey  and
have  no  provision?  How  do  ye  say,  "We  are  wise"f  There  are  multitudes  to  whom
this  question  must  be  put.  The  vainly  wise  men  of  Edom  still  exist; — men  who  might
truly  learn  wisdom  from  the  little  things  spoken  of  in  Prov.  xxx. :  "  The  ants  are
a  people  not  strong,  yet  they  prepare  their  meat  in  the  summer ;  the  conies  are  but
a  feeble  folk,  yet  make  they  their  houses  in  rocks  [they  know  where  to  hide];  the
locusts  have  no  king,  yet  go  they  forth  all  of  them  by  bands  [they  know  that  unity  is
strength] ;  the  lizard  taketh  hold  with  her  hands,  and  is  in  kings'  palaces ; "  it  has
wisdom  of  patient,  painstaking  labour.  The  proud  self-confidence  of  Edom  had  nothing
of  true  wisdom  about  it.  It  was  displeasing  to  the  heart-searching  God.  "  Shall  I
not  even  destroy  the  wise  men  out  of  Edom?"  Then,  too,  we  have  the  mi^hly  men  of
Teman  denounced.  They  were  of  those  who  gloried  in  their  might.  They  trusted  in
nature's  strength.  With  Pharaoh, they  were  reaily  to  ask,  "Who  is  Jehovah?  ...  I
will  pursue,  I  will  overtake,  I  will  divide  the  spoil ...  I  will  draw  my  sword,  my  hand
shall  destroy  them."  "  Thou  didst  blow  with  thy  wind,  the  sea  covered  them ;  they
sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters."  With  Saul,  they  rose,  girt  with  strong  armour
and  sword  and  spear;  but  the  prophet  comes  and  says,  "The  kingdom  is  given  to
another."  With  Samson,  they  shake  themselves  to  put  forth  strength  as  at  other
times,  but  soon  in  the  prison  of  the  enemy  we  hear  the  exceeding  bitter  cry  of  the
blind  captive,  "  My  weakness !  my  weakness ! "  With  the  Assyrian  king,  they
exclaim,  "  With  the  multitude  of  my  chariots  I  am  come  up  to  the  height  of  the
mountains,  to  the  sides  of  Lebanon,  and  will  cut  down  the  tall  cedars  thereof,  and  the
choice  fir  trees  thereof:  and  I  will  enter  into  the  lodgings  of  his  borders,  and  into
the  forest  of  his  Carmel."  But  God  says,  "  I  will  put  my  hook  in  thy  nose,  and  my
bridle-  into  thy  lips,  and  I  will  turn  thee  back  by  the  way  by  which  thou  earnest."
And  thus  we  see  the  vanity  of  the  mighty  man  glorying  in  his  might.  "Thy  mighty
men,  O  Teman,  shall  be  dismayed."    Now,  it  will  be  asked,  if  the  wise  miast  not  glory


20  THE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.  [1— 2L

in  his  wisdom,  nor  the  mighty  in  his  might,  where  shall  we  obtain  a  wisdom  worth
seeking?  Where  shall  we  find  the  secret  of  a  God-giyen  strength?  I  will  now
answer  these  inquiries.

I.  Whebb  shall  wisdom  be  FoirND  ?  That  of  Edom  will  not  do.  The  wisdom  of
this  world  is  insufficient  for  an  immortal  soul.  We  mostly  need,  not  the  wisdom  of
this  world,  nor  of  the  princes  of  this  world,  but  that  wisdom  of  God  which  none  of  the
princes  of  this  world  knew,  for  had  they  known  it,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the
Lord  of  glory.  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found  ?  St.  Paul  tells  us  it  is  a  revelation
ef  the  Spirit  of  God.  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found  ?  The  Scriptures,  by  the  power
of  the  Spirit,  "  make  us  wise  unto  salvation."  Behold  in  Jesus  the  Wisdom  of  God.
Observe,  we  say  not — See  in  him  great  wisdom,  but — See  in  him  infinite  wisdom ;  see  in
him  the  Wisdom  of  God.  All  that  can  come  forth  from  God  is  in  the  blessed  Jesus.
He  is  the  Wisdom  of  God.  In  his  Person  you  have  perfect  God  and  perfect  man — the
heavenly  and  the  earthly,  the  perfect  embodiment  and  revelation  of  Wisdom.  In  his
Person,  his  words,  his  work,  his  life,  death,  and  resurrection,  behold  the  Wisdom  of  God>
And  remember  that  "  he  of  God  is  made  unto  us  Wisdom."  Yes ;  this  is  the  wonder
of  wonders,  this  is  the  gracious  answer  to  the  question,  "  Where  shall  wisdom  be  found  ?  "
"  He  of  God  is  made  unto  us  Wisdom ; "  "  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom,
. .  •  but  let  him  glory  in  the  Lord,"  "  who  is  the  Wisdom  of  God  and  the  Power  of  God."

II.  The  powbb  oV  God.  This  will  bring  us  to  the  reply  to  the  second  inquiry —
Wherein  may  we  find  power?  The  mighty  man  is  not  to  glory  in  his  might.  The
mighty  men  of  Teman,  as  well  as  the  wise  of  Edom,  are  denounced.  What  is  the
source  of  strength  that  cannot  decay  ?  St.  Paul  understood  when  he  said,  "  I  can  do
all  things  through  Christ  who  strengtheneth  me."  In  Christ  we  have  righteousness
and  strength.  When  we  are  weak  in  ourselves,  we  are  strong  in  him.  He  is  not  only
the  Wisdom  of  God,  but  the  Power  of  God.  God's  power  to  save,  God's  power  to
bless,  God's  power  to  raise,  sanctify,  glorify,  is  Christ—"  Christ  the  Power  of  Ood."
Is  there  a  soul  you  want  saved  ?  Christ  is  the  Power  of  God.  Is  there  a  tried  and
a£9icted  one  you  desire  to  be  comforted  ?  Christ  is  the  Power  of  God.  Is  there  one
you  want  taught,  guided,  succoured,  blest?  Christ  is  the  Power  of  God.  Do  you  in
your  own  soul  want  soul-weanedness,  heavenly  mindedness,  spirituality  ?  Christ  is
the  Power  of  God.  Do  you  want  power  to  overcome,  power  to  be  holy,  power  to  be
faithful?  Christ  is  the  Power  of  God.  Do  you  want  fears  banished,  sorrow  healed,
anguish  soothed,  and  death  conquered?  Christ  is  the  Power  of  God.  He  must  be
mighty  to  save.    He  must  be  all — able  to  renew  and  bless.     Christ  is  the  Almighty,

III.  We  may  now  look  again  at  oub  Sceiptueb.  We  have  seen  that-  it  show»
the  evil  of  all  false  confidence.  It  declares  human  wisdom  and  human  power  untrust-
worthy. It  shuts  us  up  to  Christ,  the  Wisdom  of  God  and  Power  of  God.  And  it
presses  upon  our  hearts  this  important  question,  "  What  is  our  hope?"  It  calls  us  to
see  whether  we  are  building  on  the  mountains  of  Esau  or  the  Rock  of  Ages.  We  are
warned  that  every  one  of  the  m6unt  of  Esau  shall  be  cut  off.  All  refuges  of  lies  shall
be  swept  away.  The  foundation  of  God  only  standeth  sure,  and  none  other  foundation
can  any  man  lay  than  that  which  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ.  Oh,  let  us  rejuice  in
the  sure  Foundation  I  Let  us  declare  plainly  that  all  our  hopes  are  founded  on  Jesus
Christ,  that  the  foundation  of  our  trust  is  Christ,  the  foundation  of  our  happiness  is
Christ,  the  foundation  of  our  glorious  expectations  is  Christ.  On  him  as  our  Founda-
tion we  may  rest  secure.  The  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  us.  The  Rock  of
Ages  is  immovable,  the  covenant  is  inviolable,  the  promises  are  unalterable,  and  the
Divine  love  is  eternal,  and  when  the  mountains  of  Edom  and  all  other  false  confidences
shall  for  ever  perish,  "  the  righteous  shall  shine  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their
Father  for  ever  and  ever." — A.  0.  T.

Vers.  10 — 14. — Edam's  cruelty.  Here  one  of  the  great  sins  of.  Edom  is  denounced
in  very  forcible  language.  Notice  the  succession  of  pointed  sentences.  "Thou
sbouldest  not  have  looked  on  the  day  of  thy  brother."  The  eyes  were  in  the  trans-
gression. Hagar,  we  read,  could  not  look  upon  Ishmael  in  his  distress.  But  Edom
could  look  on  afflicted  Jacob.  "  Thou  shouldest  not  have  rejoiced  over  the  children  of
Judah  in  the  day  of  their  destruction."  The  emotions  were  in  the  transgression.  "  Love
rejoiceth  not  in  iniquity."    "  Thou  shouldest  not  have  spoken  proudly  in  the  day  of


1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH,  »1

distress."  The  tongue  was  in  the  transgression.  We  are  told  in  Pb.  cxxxvii.  how  tha
children  of  Edpm  cried,  "  Down  with  it,  down  with  it,  even  to  the  ground  I "  "  Thou
shouldest  not  have  entered  into  the  gate  of  my  people  in  the  day  of  their  calamity."
Their  feet  were  in  the  transgression.  Like  those  whose  picture  the  psalmist  drew,
"their  feet  were  swift  to  shed  blood."  And  as  their  thoughts,  their  emotions,  and
their  words  were  evil,  so  were  their  deerfs.  They  were  all  wrong.  "Thou  shouldest
not  have  looked  on  their  affliction.  Thou  shouldest  not  have  laid  hand  on  their
substance.  Thou  shouldest  not  have  stood  in  the  crossway,  to  cut  o£F  their  escape.
Thou  shouldest  not  have  delivered  up  thy  brother  a  captive  to  his  enemies."  A  solemn
series  of  charges.  One  unbrotherly  act  after  another.  "  Thou  shouldest  not ; "  "  Thou
shouldest  not ; "  "  Thou  shouldest  not."  Contrast  all  these  condemning  words,  "  Thou
shouldest  not;"  "  Thou  shouldest  not,"  with  the  reiterated  words  of  St.  John  in  his  First
Epistle,  "  Let  us  love  one  another,  for  love  is  of  God.  He  that  loveth  not  knoweth  not
God,  for  God  is  love."  We  must  surely  feel  that  we  want  more  of  the  spirit  that  St.
John  inculcates.  Love  does  not  flourish  in  the  Church's  garden  as  it  oughi.  Envy,
hatred,  and  malice  are  ever  springing  up,  marring  the  pknts  of  the  Lord's  own  planting.
What  shall  we  think  of  the  elder  brother  whose  character  is  described  in  Luke  xt.?
Is  not  that  unfraternal,  unsympathetic,  unloving  elder  brother  yet  alive?  Or  tha
priest  and  Levite  of  Luke  x.,  are  they  not  still  amongst  us  ?  And  where  wounded
misery  lies  bleeding,  are  not  the  priest  and  Levite  found  passing  away  on  the  other
side?  Nay,  is  not  Edom — Edom  red  with  blood,  Edom  cruel  as  the  grave,  Edom
fierce  and  imtamed  as  a  leopard — is  not  Edom  still  alive?  Who  will  say  that  the
religion  of  Christ  would  not  make  more  progress  in  heathendom  were  the  whole  of
Christendom  more  under  its  beneficent  power  ?  We  read  in  Numb.  xx.  of  Edom  with-
standing Israel  in  their  march  to  Canaan,  There  is  much  of  this  antagonism  to  tha
progress  of  truth  now.  Then  comes  the  reminder  of  relationship,  and  its  consequent
obligations :  "  Thus  saith  thy  brother  Israel,  Let  us  pass  to  Canaan  through  thy  borders."
But  Edom  opposes :."  Thou  shalt  not  pass  through."  Hatred  instead  of  good  will,
resistance  instead  of  assistance,  antipathy  instead  of  sympathy,  the  spirit  of  Edom
instead  of  the  spirit  of  love, — these  are  the  baleful  hindrances  to  the  Church's  progress.
Contrast  this  character  of  Edom  with  that  of  Christ.  In  Heb.  iv.  15  we  are  told  of  the
fraternal  sympathy  of  our  High  Priest — sympathy  with  our  infirmities,  sympathy  with
our  sorrows,  sympathy  with  our  conflicts,  sympathy  with  our  struggles,  loving,  tender,
brotherly  sympathy.  In  Prov.  xvii.  he  is  called  "  the  Brother  born  for  adversity  " —
bom  for  it.  The  gospel  is  throughout  a  story  of  a  Brother  born  to  sympathize  with
adversity.  Young  man,  he  has  sympathy  with  you.  Child  of  poverty,  he  has  sympathy
with  you.  Bereaved  one,  he  has  sympathy  with  you.  Tempted  one,  he  has  sympathy
with  you.  He  is  the  great  Sympathizer.  In  the  ages  past  he  was  "  afflicted  in  all
their  afflictions ; "  and  now  we  have  not  a  High  Priest  who  cannot  sympathize  with  us.
See  how  he  is  presented  to  us  in  the  Gospels.  See  him  going  about  doing  good;  see
him  drying  the  widows'  tears ;  see  him  healing  poor  lepers ;  see  him  blessing  little
children ;  see  him  opening  blind  eyes ;  see  him  raising  the  fallen  ;  see  him  feeding  the
hungry  ;  see  him  teaching  the  ignorant ;  see  him  casting  out  devils ;  see  him  blessing
the  wretched;  see  him  saving  the  lost.  Oh,  what  sympathy!  Oh,  what  a  "Brother
born  for  adversity  " !  Let  us  follow  in  his  steps.  It  must  not  be  enough  that  we  are
unlike  Nero,  who  sent  Christians  to  the  lions.  It  must  not  be  enough  that  we  are  unhke
Edom,  who  hated  his  brother  Jacob.  It  must  not  be  enough  that  we  are  unlike  per-
secuting Bome  in  the  time  when  God's  faithful  martyrs  were  made  to  seal  their  testi-
mony in  fire  and  blood.  We  are  to  be  Christ-like.  We  are  to  take  as  our  example  tha
loving,  the  forgiving,  the  tender,  the  compassionate,  the  meek,  the  long-suffering  Christ.
Instead  of  being  like  Edom,  whose  every  power  went  out  in  unfraternal  cruelty,  we
muBt  bring  our  powers,  our  faculties,  our  emotions,  our  hearts,  our  lives,  to  be  sanctified,
cootroiled,  and  governed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  Christ. — A,  0.  T.

Ver.  11. — Edom  at  Babylon.  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them."  Edom,  although
claiming  Abraham  and  Isaac  fDr  his  forefathers,  was  so  unfraternal  to  Israel  that  when
Jerusalem  was  captured  by  the  Babylonians,  he  shared  in  the  hostility.  His  cry  was,
"  Rase  it,  rase  it,  even  to  the  ground  1 "  To  this  our  text  makes  reference.  "  Even
thou  wast  as  one  of  them."    And  what  Obadiah  thus  says  to  Edom,  he  migh'  often


2«  THE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.  [1—81.

iitknd  and  say  to  lome  of  tM.  How  many  who  have  been  nursed  In  priyileges  and  taVen
a  place  as  lerrants  of  the  God  of  Abraham,  have  been  found,  like  Balaam,  amongst
the  enemies  of  the  Lord  I  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them."  How  often  the  inquiry
might  come  to  those  who  ought  to  be  bearing  holy  witness  for  God,  "  What  doest
thou  here,  Elijah  ?"  The  wojds  may  well  convey  a  warning  to  us,  for  even  the  most
godly  have  often  fallen  from  their  steadfastness.  Let  us  note  some  examples  by  way  of
fixing  this  warning  upon  our  hearts.

L  Wb  all  denounce  dbdnkenness.  We  all  sadly  mourn  the  condition  of  inebriates.
Alas !  there  was  a  time  when  Obadiah  might  have  stood  in  attitude  of  condemnation
before  the  Patriarch  Noah,  and  said,  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them."

II.  Wk  scobn  the  liab.  But  there  was  a  time  when  Abraham  became  untruth-
fuL  Obadiah  might  have  appeared  before  him,  and  said,  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of
them,"

III.  Wb  abominate  impubitt.  But  there  was  a  time  when  Obadiah  might  have
stood  before  David,  as  did  the  Prophet  Nathan,  and  said, "  Thou  art  the  man  I "  •'  Even
thou  wast  as  one  of  them."

IV.  Wb   DEPLORE  BA8H   8PEAEIN0   AND   HOT   AND   HASTY   W0BD8.       Time   WaS  whcD

Obadiah  might  have  come  to  the  meek  and  holy  Moses,  and  said,  "  Even  thou  wast  as
one  of  them."

V.  We  often  look  with  feelings  of  disdain  upon  the  proud.  And  yet
there  was  a  time  when  Obadiah  might  have  said  to  the  good  King  Hezekiah,  "  Even
thou  wast  as  one  of  them."

VI.  We  are  ever  ready  to  admit  the  tubpitude  of  denying  Chbist.  But
see  Obadiah  standing  before  Simon  Peter,  and  we  catch  his  awful  words,  "  Even  thou
wast  as  one  of  them."

VII.  Contention  amonost  brethren  re  another  evil  which  wb  deprecate.
Obadiah  might  have  pointed  to  Barnabas,  the  "  son  of  consolation,"  and  said  to  him,
"  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them."

VIII.  The  sin  of  unbelief  is  akotheb  feabfdl  evil.  But  all  the  early  disciples
fell  for  a  time  into  this  sin.  Obadiah  might  have  said  first  to  one,  then  another, "  Even
thou  wast  as  one  of  them."

IX.  A  MUBMUBINO  SPIRIT  IS  ANOTHBB  EVIL  WHICH  THE  ChBISTIAN  SHOULD  AVOID.

St.  Paul  learned  in  whatsoever  state  he  was,  therewith  to  be  content.  The  psalmist
says  his  soul  was  as  a  weaned  child.  But  we  turn  to  the  prophet  of  fire.  We  find
the  great  Elijah  imder  a  juniper  tree,  murmuring  at  bis  lot.  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one
of  them."

Enough.  We  see  plainly  that  the  Scriptures  warn  us  of  the  frailty  of  our  nature
and  the  deceitfulnesd  of  our  hearts.  And,  if  we  reflect  at  all,  we  must  see  that
repeatedly  Christian  professors  lack  consistency.  Christian  principle  and  Christian
practice  should  never  be  at  variance.  But  what  is  the  fact  ?  How  often  the
Christian  in  business  walks  so  unworthy  of  his  high  calling  that  our  prophet  seems  to
speak  to  him,  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them."  Or  we  look  into  society,  and  we  find
in  8'>me  Christians  so  much  worldly  conformity,  that  to  one  after  another  Obadiah
might  come,  and  exclaim,  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them."  Let  me  ask  those  Chris-
tians who  spend  several  afternoons  in  the  week  in  visiting,  and  yet  scarcely  ever  drop  a
word  foi-  their  Lord  and  Master — Do  you  think  that  Obadiah's  expostulation  is  not  for
you  :  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them  "  ?

Let  us  loam,  therefore,  these  three  lessons.  1.  First,  to  live  watchfully.  "  Let  him
that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall."  Snares  and  dangers  will  beset  us  as
long  is  we  are  in  the  world.  What  some  may  call  only  the  shadows  upon  the  moun-
tains may  prove  conquering  foes  (Jndg.  ix.  36).  We  all  need  the  restraining  grace  of
Christ.  "  Hold  thou  me  up  in  my  goings,  that  my  footsteps  slip  not."  2.  Secondly,
to  be  careful  about  companionship.  Edom's  unfraternal  antagonism  was  fed  by  the  com-
pany he  kept,  till  he  was  even  "  as  one  of  them."  Those  who  "  mingle  with  the  heathen  "
will  not  be  slow  to  "  learn  their  works."  "  Blessed  is  the  man  that  walketh  not  in  the
counsel  of  the  ungodly  .  .  .  but  his  delight  is  in  the  Law  of  the  Lord."  3.  Lanfly,  to
walk  holily  before  God.  St.  Peter's  exhortation  should  be  kept  in  mind,  "  Giving  all
diligence,  add  to  yuwi  faith  [faith  is  tlie  root — add  to  the  root]  heroic,  manly  courage ;
•nd  to  courage  knowledge  [self-knowledge,  Bible-kauwledge,  the  knowledge  of  Christ ;


1— 2L3  THE   BOOK   OP   OBADIAH.  23

for  knowledge  is  power  for  worldng  and  for  waitini,  for  doing  and  for  sufifeiing];  and
to  knowledge  temperance  [temperance,  or  sell-control,  is  an  ur;;ently  needed  grace] ;
and  to  temperance  patience  [we  are  all  called  to  endure  ;  we  must  not  expect  that  we
can  be  Christians  without  any  trouble ;  Christ's  soldiers  must  learn  to  endure  hardness] ;
and  to  patience  godliness  [piety,  devotion] ;  and  to  godliness  hrotherly  kindness  [Edorc
knew  nothing  of  brotherly  kindness ;  this  brotherly  kindness  is  love  to  the  brethren^
love  to  the  godly]."  And  one  more  grace  is  enjoined,  "  Add  to  brotherly  kindness
charity  [love  to  everybody]."  Thus,  in  walking  holily  before  God,  we  shall,  by  the
power  of  his  Spirit,  keep  from  the  sin  of  Edom,  "  Even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them  " —
one  of  the  Batiylonians ;  and  all  will  take  knowledge  of  us  that  we  are  the  God-Man's
disciples.  The  ointment  of  the  right  hand  bewrayeth  itself.  We  are  Christ's.  His
we  are,  and  him  wo  serve.  He  was  as  one  of  us  (sin  only  excepted),  that  we  might  be
one  with  him  for  ever. — A.  C.  T.

Ver.  15. — Recompense  is  swe.  "  As  thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."
Herein  we  have  an  immensely  important  principle  laid  down.  Sowing  and  reaping
always  correspond.  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  All  actions
are  seeds,  many  of  which  bear  fruit  in  this  woild,  and  many  in  the  next.  "As  thou
hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  Edom  had  been  merciless  and  cruel,  and  the
prophet  says,  "Thy  reward  shall  return  upon  thine  own  head."  In  like  manner  we
find  mystic  Babylon  denounced  in  Rev.  xviii,  6  (I  give  the  new  version  as  more  exact
and  expressive):  "Render  unto  her  even  as  she  rendered,  and  double  unto  her  the
double  according  to  her  works :  in  the  cup  which  she  mingLd,  mingle  unto  her  double."
Here  you  see  the  principle  in  force — rendering  to  Babylon  as  she  rendered;  doubling'
to  her  as  she  doubled ;  mingling  for  her  as  she  mingled.  We  cannot  overestimate  the
immense  importance  of  this  principle.  In  this  life  nations  and  individuals  are  constantly
exemplifying  the  solemn  truth  which  it  involves.  We  should  therefore  all  carefully
remember  that  we  are  seed-sowing,  and  sooner  or  later  must  come  the  harvest.  God
told  Edom,  "  Thy  reward  shall  be  upon  thine  own  head.  For  as  ye  have  drunk  upon
my  holy  mountain,  so  shall  all  the  heathen  drink  continually."  So  Edom  drank  the
cup  at  the  hands  of  Babylon;  Babylon  drank  it  at  the  hands  of  the  Medes;  the  Medes
and  Persians  drank  it  at  the  hands  of  the  Macedonians ;  the  Macedonians  drank  it  at
the  hands  of  the  Romans;  the  Romans,  in  their  turn,  drank  it  at  the  hands  of  the
barbarians  (Dr.  Pusey).  Thus  as  tiiey  had  done,  it  was  done  to  them.  Their  reward
returned  upon  their  own  head.  In  Ezek.  xxxv.  15  we  have  a  similar  denunciation  of
Edom :  "  As  thou  di<lst  rejoice  at  the  inheritance  of  the  house  of  Israel,  because  it  was
desolate,  so  will  I  do  unto  thee:  and  thou  shalt  be  desolate,  0  Mnunt  Seir,  and  all
Idumes,  even  all  of  it."  It  is,  you  will  notice,  exactly  the  same  kind  of  denunciation.
In  Prov.  xxvL  27  God  says,  "  Whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall  therein :  and  he  that
rolleth  a  stone,  it  will  return  upon  him."  And  in  Ps.  ix.  15  we  are  told,  "  The  heathen
are  sunk  down  in  the  pit  that  they  made :  in  the  net  which  they  hid  is  their  own  foot
taken."  In  Numbers  we  find  Moab  plotting  to  curse  Israel,  and  the  curse  came  upon
himself.  In  Judges  we  read  of  Adoni-bezek  taken  in  battle,  and  maimed  in  his  hands
and  feet.  Adoni-bezek  acknowledged  that  he  bad  himself  maimed  three  score  and  ten
petty  princes.  His  words  are  not  dissimilar  to  our  text,  "As  I  have  done,  so  God  hath
requited  me."  He  confessed  that  the  law  of  Nemesis  had  reached  him.  The  end  of
Hainan  will  occur  to  us.  Haman  due;  a  pit,  and  fell  therein  himself.  He  set  a  stone
rolling,  and  it  returned  upon  him.  He  perished  upon  the  gallows  which  he  prepared
for  Mordecai.  In  Ps.  xviii.  David  says,  "  With  the  froward  thou  wilt  show  thyself
froward."  He  clearly  means  that  Jehovah  will  be  sternly  opposed  to  the  sinner's
frowardness.  A  similar  passage  is  in  Lev.  xxvi.,  "If  ye  walk  contrary  unto  me,  then
will  I  walk  contrary  unto  you."  The  stubborn  will  gain  nothing  by  their  obstinacy.
God  will  render  to  nations  and  individuals  according  to  their  ways.  They  shall  be
fiUed  with  the  fruit  of  their  own  doings.  The  enemies  of  Daniel  were  devoured  by  the
lions  which  they  intended  for  his  destruction.  The  accusers  of  the  three  Hebrews
were  consumed  by  the  fiery  furnace  which  they  kindled  for  them.  The  plotters  of
mischief  were  taken  in  their  own  wickedness  and  filled  with  their  own  ways.  "  As
thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  In  the  case  of  Jezebel  we  have  a  terrible
•xuaple  of  this  kind.     In  the  place  where  Jezebel  caused  the  dogs  to  lick  the  blood  of


24  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  [1—21.

Naboth,  the  dogs  licked  her  blood.  Well  said  Eliphaz,  "I  hare  seen  that  they  who
plough  iniquity,  and  sow  wickedness,  reap  the  same."  The  Jews,  who  were  made  to
serve  "  strange  "  masters,  were  told  that  it  was  for  serving  "  strange  "  gods.  And  our
Lord  himself  has  said,  "  With  the  same  measure  that  ye  mete  it  shall  be  measured  t«
you  again."  Society  has  been  likened  to  the  echoing  hills.  It  gives  the  speaker  his
words  back  again,  doleful  groan  for  groan,  and  joyous  song  for  song.  Thus  "  with  the
same  measure  that  ye  mete  it  shall  be  measured  to  you  again."  Jacob,  who  deceived  his
father,  was  in  turn,  and  similarly,  deceived  by  his  sons.  The  Egyptians  killed  the  Hebrew
ehildren;  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  slew  the  firstborn  of  Egypt.  "As  thou  hast  done,
it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  The  words,  we  know,  were  addressed  to  Esau,  and  we  have
had  abundant  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  principle  which  they  involve.  But  let  us  briefly
notice  the  converse.  "Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  If  the
ungodly  cannot  sow  hemlock,  nightshade,  and  darnel,  without  reaping  the  same,  lo
God's  servants  cannot  sow  seeds  of  kindness,  seeds  of  truth,  seeds  of  light,  seeds  of
heavenly  blessing,  without  reaping  in  due  season.  The  great  harvest  of  well-doing,
like  that  of  evil-doing,  is  indeed  hereafter,  but  it  has  its  tokens  and  firstfruits  even
now.  Let  us  notice,  for  example,  our  adorable  Bedeemer's  beatitude,  "  Blessed  are  the
merciful :  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy."  We  know  that  the  mercifiil  are  those  who
upon  gospel  principles  are  sympathetic,  helpful,  loving,  and  kind.  We  know  also  that
hereafter  Christ  will  say  to  those  on  his  right  hand, "  Gome,  ye  blessed, . .  .  inherit  the
kingdom.  ...  I  was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  meat :  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave
me  drink :  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in ;  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me :  I  was  sick,
and  ye  visited  me :  I  was  in  prison,  and  ye  came  unto  me. . . .  Terily  I  say  unto  you.
Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it  unto  one  of  these  my  brethren,  even  these  least,  ye  did  it  unto
me."  Hereafter,  it  is  clear,  the  merciful  will  obtain  mercy.  But  at  present  the  like
principle  is  at  work.  "  As  thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  The  kind  and
merciful  now  enjoy  much  blessedness;  the  unmerciful  are  nowunblest.  A  man  whose
sympathies  are  all  dried  up  lives  in  a  region  of  wintry  blight.  He  walks  in  no  glorious
sunshine  and  in  no  joyous  liberty.  He  knows  nothing  of  the  bliss  that  comes  from
open-hearted  sympathy.  There  is  darkness  within.  Darkness  covers  the  face  of  the
deep,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  move  on  the  face  of  the  waters.  But  the  merciful
man,  the  man  who  is  kind  and  sympathizing,  the  man  who  is  forgiving  and  for-
bearing, the  man  who  has  a  kind  excuse  for  others,  the  man  who  looks  cm  the  charitable
side  of  a  case,  the  man  who  thinketh  no  evil, — that  man  will  reap  here  as  well  as  here-
after. In  his  straits  and  afflictions  he  will  find,  as  a  general  rule,  the  stream  of  kindness
flow  back  again.  The  world  will  learn  mercy  by  his  mercy,  and  show  some  feeling  for
one  whose  wont  was  to  sympathize  with  adversity.  "  The  merciful  man  doeth  good  to
his  own  soul"  (Prov.  li.  17).  The  widow  of  Sarepta  and  the  woman  of  Shunem,  for
kindness  to  the  Lord's  prophets,  received  a  prophet's  reward.  The  alms  of  Cornelius
brought  good  to  his  own  souL  God  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget  your  work  and  labour
of  love.  "  As  thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  Now  this  is  one  of  the  original
principles  of  the  creation  of  God.  God  said,  "  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  grass,  the  herb
yielding  seed,  and  the  fruit  tree  yielding  fruit,  after  his  kind."  The  vine  yielded  grapes;
the  fig  tree,  figs ;  the  olive  tree,  olives.  The  principle  was  universal.  So  it  is  in  the
moral  world.  "  What  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  There  is  no  altering
the  law  naturally,  morally,  or  spiritually.  If  a  mother  spoils  a  child,  we  know  what
the  harvest  will  he.  If  a  man  takes  to  intemperate  habits,  we  know  what  the  harvest
will  be.  And  we  all  expect  an  idle,  indolent  man  to  come  to  disgrace  and  shame.  Let
no  one  be  deceived.  "  God  is  not  mocked  . . .  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he
also  reap."  Often  and  often  souls  have  been  deceived.  Eve  was  deceived,  Jacob  wag
deceived,  Ahab  was  deceived,  David  was  deceived;  but  as  they  sowed,  they  reaped.
God  was  not  mocked.  And  so  with  us.  Our  words,  our  actions,  otir  habits,  are  seeds
— seeds  that  will  spring  up.  Oh,  what  will  the  harvest  be  J  In  this  life  there  is,  as  I
have  shown,  no  little  reaping  ever  going  on.  Nations  and  individuals  are  constantly
leairning  the  meaning  of  God's  words  to  Edom, "  As  thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto
thee."  But  the  great  harvest  is  at  the  end  of  the  world.  The  Lord  of  the  harvest  is
•t  hand.  My  text,  which  I  have  said,  has  a  present  fulfilment,  especially  amongst
nations,  will  have  its  complete  accomplishment  with  regard  to  individuals  when  Christ's
judgment-throne  is  set  up.    Then  shall  every  man  receive  the  things  done  in  the  body.


1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.  ZS

Every  one  Bhall  receive — that  ie,  carry  away  with  him — the  things  done  in  the  body,
according  to  that  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  The  bad — the  sina — must
each  be  as  a  scorpion-sting  throughout  eternity.  Every  sinner  will  be  his  own  hell.
The  memory  of  his  sins  will  be  perpetual  torment.  In  days  when  men  argue  against
a  future  hell,  it  may  be  asked — Who  will  argue  that  justice  must  extinguish  the  memory
and  take  away  the  remorse  of  the  sinner's  wilful  transgressions?  The  recollection  of
the  unpardoned  sins  of  a  lifetime  will  in  itself  be  terrible.  Let  us,  in  this  day  of
grace,  when  Jesus  of  Nazareth  passeth  by,  offeving  salvation  and  everlasting  life,  let  us
every  one  come  to  liim  without  delay.  Let  us  accept  his  forgiving  mercy,  that  our
sins  may  be  blotted  out.  Let  us  yield  to  the  guidance  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  And  let  ui
put  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  may  be  able  to  stand  in  the  judgment.  Hence-
foTth  may  this  be  our  language —

"  Jesus,  thy  blood  and  righteousness
My  beauty  are,  my  glorious  dress;
'Midst  flaming  worlds  in  these  arrayed,
With  joy  shall  I  lift  up  my  head"  t

A.O.T.

Ver.  17. — Safety,  lanctity,  and  sufficiency.  "But  upon  Mount Zion  shall  be  deliver-
mnce,  and  it  shall  be  holy;  and  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  possess  their  possessions."
What  a  burst  of  heavenly  sunshine  1  What  an  effusion  of  joyous  light  1  What  music
from  the  throne  of  God  I  What  an  evangel  at  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night !  What
a  smile  of  Divine  love  for  the  cast-down  and  sorely  afflicted  captive  I  Safety,  sanctity,
sufficiency.  The  inspired  prophet  here  sets  forth  some  of  the  richest  treasures  of  the
grace  of  God.  They  tell  of  deliverance  from  Babylon  and  restoration  by  Cyrus ;  they
expand  to  the  later  deliverance  from  the  Idumeans  by  the  Maccabees ;  and,  what  espe-
cially applies  to  us,  they  stretch  to  the  glorious  salvation  wrought  for  captive  sinners
by  the  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Safety,  sanctity,  and  sufficiency, — these  are
fully  set  before  us  in  the  gospel.  They  are  the  heritage  of  those  who  have  come  to
Mo'mt  Zion,  to  the  city  of  the  living  God.     Let  us  prayerfully  study  them.

I.  Safety.  "  Upon  Mount  Ziun  shall  be  deliverance."  1.  This  is  delivm-ance  from
the  Law.  "  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  "  The  law  of
the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus  hath  made  us  free  from  the  law  of  sin  and  death."  The
ten  thousand  condemning  voices  of  the  Law  are  silenced  by  the  Deliverer.  Christ  has
met  the  Law's  requirements.  His  people  are  free.  They  are  free  indeed.  The  old
handwriting  against  them  was  cancelled  by  the  cross.  The  debt  is  paid.  We  are  not
under  Law,  but  under  grace.  2.  This  is  deliverance  from  sin.  "  He  shall  be  called
Jesus  :  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins."  Yes,  from  the  penalty,  from  the
power,  and  from  the  presence  of  their  sins.  What  a  glorious  deliverance  1  3.  This  is
deliverance  from  Satan.  "  The  Seed  of  the  woman  has  bruised  the  serpent's  head."
Christ  has  vanquished  our  deadly  foe.    Now,  if  we  resist  the  devil,  he  will  flee  from  us.

"  Captivity  is  captive  led,
Since  Jesus  Uveth  who  was  dead."

4.  This  is  delivera/Mxfrom  the  world.  He  who  said,  "  Be  of  good  cheer ;  I  have  over-
come the  world,"  prayed  that  his  people  might  be  kept  from  the  evil  in  the  world.
Through  him  we  are  more  than  conquerors.  "  This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the
world,  even  our  faith."  5.  This  is  deliverance  from  death.  "  O  death,  where  is  thy
sting?"  He  that  trusteth  in  Christ  shall  never  die.  That  which  we  call  death  is  to
the  servant  of  God  the  gate  of  life.  The  Christian  is  promised  that  he  shall  not  taste
of  death.  The  death  he  undergoes  is  only  the  death  of  pain,  of  sickness,  of  sorrow,  of
sin,  of  death.  To  depart  is  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better  than  remaining  here
— far  better.

"  For  ever  with  the  Lord :

Ameii,  80  let  it  lie.
Life  from  the  dead  is  in  that  word,

'Tis  immortality."

"Upon  Mount  Zion  shall  be  deliverance."


M  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  [1—21.

II.  In  the  next  place,  we  find  sanctity  pbomised.  "  It  shall  be  holy."  In  its
prQsent-day  application  this  promise  sets  forth  the  sanctification  of  God's  Israel.  It  is
not  sufficient  to  realize  deliverance ;  we  are  to  seek  holiness.  Joshua's  captains  were
not  only  to  put  their  feet  upon  the  necks  of  the  five  kings  of  the  enemy,  but  they  were
to  go  forward  and  possess  the  whole  of  Canaan.  Deliverance  from  foes  in  the  cave  of
the  heart  is  only  preparatory  to  further  conquests  and  higher  attainments.  We  are
delivered  from  our  enemies  that  we  may  serve  God  without  f<  ar, "  in  holiness  and  right-
eousness all  the  days  of  our  life."  "  It  shall  be  holy."  The  Christian's  sanctification
is  twofold.  1.  He  is  sanctified  as  set  apart  for  Qod.  Like  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,
he  is  consecrated  to  holy  uses.  It  was  Belsbazzar's  great  sin  that  he  took  the  vessels
of  the  temple  and  put  them  to  a  profane  use.  God's  people  are  to  be  vessels  unto
honour,  meet  for  the  Master's  service,  resting  on  the  heavenly  Eliakim.  Not  their
own ;  a  separate  people ;  sanctified  or  set  apart  by  God  the  Father.  2.  The  other  view
of  the  Christian's  sanctification  is  the  blessed  hallowing  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  This  is  a
progressive  work.  We  are  to  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and
Saviour.  We  are  to  add  to  our  faith.  We  are  to  be  going  from  strength  to  strength.
We  are  to  press  towards  the  mark.  We  are  to  be  changed  from  glory  to  glory  by  the
Spirit  of  the  Lord.  "  Upon  Mount  Zion  shall  be  deliverance,  and  it  shall  he  holy."
May  we  now  seek  to  be  filleii  with  the  Spirit  of  holiness  I

III.  The  third  great  promise  of  my  text  is  sufficienot.  "  The  house  of  Jacob  shall
possess  their  possessions."  Here  is  all-sufficiency  in  all  things.  It  is  as  the  heir  entering
upon  his  inheritance.  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his ; "  "  All  things  are  ours,
the  world,  life,  death,  things  present,  things  to  come, — all  are  ours."  In  possessing  our
possessions  we  enter  upon  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  His  salvation  ours ;  his
pardon  ours;  his  joy  ours;  his  rest  ours;  his  kingdom  ours;  his  angels  ours;  his
home  ours ;  his  glory  ours.  Christ  himself  ours ;  Christ  in  us  the  Hope  of  glory ;  Christ
for  us  the  Pledge  of  glory ;  crucified  together  with  him ;  raised  together  with  him ;
seated  together  with  him;  glorified  together.  Oh,  the  unsearchable  riches  of  the
Christian  I  May  we  learn  to  possess  our  possessions,  to  use  our  talents,  to  enjoy  our
privileges,  to  rise  to  our  dignity,  to  realize  our  standing,  to  pass  through  the  length
and  breadth  of  our  Canaan!  Ours  a  righteousness  which  is  Divine;  a  peace  which
Burpasseth  understanding;  a  joy  which  is  unspeakable;  a  love  which  passeth  know-
ledge; a  kingdom  which  cannot  he  moved;  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away.
Oh,  let  us  go  up  and  possess  I  Safety,  sanctity,  sufficiency.  Eternal  safety,  Divine
sanctity,  all-sufficiency  in  all  things.  "  Upon  Moimt  Zion  shall  be  deliverance,  and  it
shall  be  holy;  and  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  possess  their  possessions." — A.  C.  T.

Ver.  18. — Truth  triumphant.  "  And  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a  fire,  and  the
house  of  Joseph  a  flame,  and  the  house  of  Esau  for  stubble,  and  they  shall  kindle  in
them,  and  devour  them ;  and  there  shall  not  be  any  remaining  of  the  house  of  Esau ;
for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."

I.  What  is  herb  pbomisbd  concebnino  God's  hbbitaoe  applies  to  the  whols
Chuech  of  the  Pirstboen.  Truth  may  appear  to  lose  many  a  battle,  but  in  the  end
it  will  assuredly  prevail.  Edom,  long  hostile  to  God's  ancient  Israel,  is  likened  to
stubble  before  the  flames.  Happy  the  people  who  are  on  the  conqueror's  side.  When
Israel  was  in  Egypt,  captive  and  down-trodden,  it  seemed  impossible  that  they  could
ever  march  forth  to  liberty  and  Canaan^  But  the  time  came  when  they  sang  of  victory,
and  Pharaoh  and  his  captains  were  as  stubble  before  the  flame.  When  Asa  found  the
vast  hosts  of  the  Ethiopians  coming  against  him,  it  might  have  appeared  impossible  to
subdue  them.  But  Asa  knew  the  secret  of  power.  The  Ethiopians  were  soon  as  stubbla
before  the  flame.  When  the  Moabites,  Ammonites,  and  Edomites  were  confederate
against  Jehoshaphat,  it  seemed  as  if  the  might  and  greatness  were  on  the  side  of  the
enemy,  but  good  King  Jehoshaphat  gave  himself  to  prayer  and  praise — believing  prayer,
and  joyous  and  confiding  praise.  The  en<  mies  were  soon  as  the  stubble  before  the  flame.
And  so  in  the  end  truth  itself  shall  prevail.  Foes  may  be  mighty  and  gospel  doctrines
may  seem  to  make  slow  progress,  but  the  time  must  come  when  "  the  earth  shall  be  full
of  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea."  That  was  a  wondrous  vision
once  seen  by  St.  John :  war  in  heaven — Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against  the
dragon  and  his  angels,  and  the  dragon  was  cast  out,  and  his  angels  with  him.     "  So  let


1— 2L]  THE  BOOK  ©F  OBADIAH.  27

all  thine  enemies  perish,  O  Lord:  but  let  them  that  love  thee  be  as  the  sun  when  he  goeth
forth  in  his  might."  The  Church  of  God  has  often  been  likened  to  a  worm,  yet  it  is  to
thresh  the  mountain,  and  is  seen  in  sacred  song  as  "  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,
and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners."  Thus  weakness  is  girt  about  with  strength,
because  God  himself  fights  his  people's  battles,  and  is  one  with  them.  "  He  that  seeketh
thy  life  seeketh  my  life;"  "He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  mine  eye."
All-conquering  oneness.  This  secret  of  conquest  may  be  seen  by  comparing  our  text
with  Isa.  X.  17.  In  our  text  the  word  is,  "  The  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a  fire,  and  the
house  of  Joseph  a  Same,  and  the  house  of  Esau  for  stubble ; "  but  the  word  in  Isaiah  is,
"  The  light  of  Israel  shall  be  for  a  fire,  and  his  Holy  One  for  a  flame :  and  it  shall  bum
and  devour  his  thorns  and  his  briers  in  one  day."  Thus  the  Lord  espouses  the  cause
of  his  people ;  so  that  in  all  things  they  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  who
loved  them.

II.  What  is  threatened  in  ouh  text  bbspectino  Esau  applies  to  ali.  the
EKEMIBS  OP  God.  As  it  is  said  that  the  house  of  Esau  shall  be  as  stubble  oonsimied
by  the  flame,  so  in  New  Testament  language  the  ungodly  are  likened  to  chaff  which
shall  be  burned  with  imquenchable  fire.  It  is  a  dreadful  thing  to  be  found  amongst
the  enemies  of  God.  St.  Paul,  we  read,  wept  because  there  were  men  who  were  enemies
of  the  cross  of  Christ.  A  man  who  is  hostile  to  the  atonement  of  the  Saviour  shows  he
refuses  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  The  message  of  reconciliation  has  come  to  us.  The
way  of  peace  is  proclaimed  to  us.  The  gospel  of  God's  grace  is  set  before  us.  The
path  of  life  is  revealed.  Salvation  is  offered  without  money  and  without  price.  When
we  were  enemies  Christ  died  for  us.  Now,  the  promise  is,  "  peace  by  the  blood  of  the
cross."  And  some  spurn  the  cross.  The  apostle  might  well  weep.  Angels  might  well
weep.  The  Saviour  himself  wept  over  such.  There  cannot  be  hope  for  a  iijan  who
remains  au  enemy  of  the  cross  of  Christ.  The  house  of  Esau  shall  be  as  stubble.  The
ungodly  are  as  the  chaff.  There  cometh  One  "  whose  fati  is  in  his  hand,  and  he  will
throughly  purge  his  floor,  and  gather  his  wheat  into  his  garner,  but  hwrn  up  the  chaff
with  unquenchahle  fire."  And  not  only  is  this  part  of  our  text  applicable  to  all  the
enemies  of  God ;  it  reminds  us  of  the  overthrow  of  all  that  is  evil.  Every  plant  that
the  Father  hath  not  planted  shall  be  rooted  up.  Truth  shall  prevail  over  error.  Light
shall  conquer  darkness.  Eternal  day  shall  chase  away  the  shades  of  night.  Gooduess
shall  prove  stronger  than  sin.  The  Seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head.
All  things  shall  be  subdued  unto  Christ.  "  He  must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies
under  his  feet.  The  last  enemy  that  shall  be  destroyed  is  death."  Ere  a  little,  and  the
song  shall  be  heard,  "  The  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth."  Voices  as  of  many  waters,
voices  as  of  mighty  thundeis,  voices  loud  and  strong,  voices  of  angels,  voices  of  the
redeemed  of  men,  joyous  coronation-voices,  shall  soon  unite  in  proclaiming  the  once
despised  Man  of  sorrows  "  Kino  of  kinos  and  Lobd  of  lobds.  And  he  shall  reign  for
ever."    "  For  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."— A.  C.  T.

Vers.  19,  20. — " Rehoboth."  "And  they  of  the  south  shall  possess  the  mount  of
Esau;  and  they  of  the  plain  the  Philistines:  and  they  shall  possess  the  fields  of
Ephraim,  and  the  fields  of  Samaria :  and  Benjamin  shall  possess  Gilead.  And  the
captivity  of  this  host  of  the  children  of  Israel  shall  possess  that  of  the  Canaanites  [or
rather,  '  the  captivity,'  etc., '  which  are  among  the  Canaanites '  (Pusey,  following  the
Chaldee,  etc.)],  even  unto  Zarephath;  and  the  captivity  of  Jerusalem,  which  is  in
Sej)harad,  shall  possess  the  cities  of  the  south."  Here  we  have  wideness  at  last;
Eehohoth  after  narrowness,  strife,  contention,  and  hatred  (Gen.  xxvi.).  The  house
of  Jacob  is  shown  us  stretching  forth  in  all  directions — north,  south,  east,  and  west ;
the  promises  long  looked  for  fulfilled ;  Jacob,  long  pent  in,  now  enjoying  a  large  room.
The  cries  in  narrowness  have  been  answered  in  wideness.  Eehohoth  is  inscribed  on
Judah's  banner,  and  little  Benjamin  shares  the  plenteousness.  They  of  the  south  have
BO  Edomite  enemy;  nay,  the  mount  of  Esau  is  their  possession.  They  of  the  plain
have  no  Philistine  foe;  their  own  borders  reach  to  the  coast.  Over  Philistia  they
triumph.  The  giants  of  Oath  lie  in  the  dust.  The  men  of  Ashdod  and  Ekron,  who
sang  the  praise  of  Dagon,  are  no  more.  Ashkelon  and  Gaza  are  silent  in  death.  They
of  the  plain  possess  the  whole  territory  of  the  Philistines,  with  the  sea  for  their  only
border.    But  much  more  than  this.    They  extend  northward.    They  take  in  Ephraim.


28  THE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.  [1—21,

No  more  shall  Ephraim  vex  Judah.  They  also  take  in  Samaria.  No  more  shall  it
be  heard  that  the  Samaritans  have  no  part  with  the  Jews.  And  more  still.  Benjamin
shall  possess  Gilead,  thus  stretching  to  the  east.  It  shall  have  a  portion  on  both  sides
of  Jonian.  And,  further,  Judah  shall  receive  into  fellowship  those  who  were  carried
away  captive  from  them.  Some  in  Zarepfaath  in  Zidon,  labouring  as  slaves  in  the
smelting-house,  and  the  captivity  of  Jerusalem  shall  possess  the  cities  of  the  south.
Thus  the  inspired  prophet,  from  the  sacred  mount  of  vision,  amongst  other  blessings,
notices  these  five :  (1)  liberty  after  captivity ;  (2)  peace  after  war ;  (3)  wideness  after
straits ;  (4)  a  portion  on  both  sides  of  Jordan ;  (5)  unity  after  divisions  and  discord.
With  what  joy  must  Obadiah  have  seen  all  these  rich  blessings  unfolded  before  him  I
Liberty  I  Oh  what  a  history  of  captivity  and  bondage  was  that  of  the  Jews  I  Peace  I
Their  national  life  hitherto  had  been  one  of  war.  Wideness  I  Up  to  this  they  had
been  sorely  straitened  and  hemmed  in  in  veriest  narrowness.  A  portion  on  hoth  sides
of  Jordan  I  Hitherto  they  had  had  their  lot  on  the  western  side  only.  Unity!  They
had  been  torn  by  divisions.  They  had  been  weakened,  impoverished,  and  desolated  by
divisions.  How  pleasant,  therefore,  the  prospect  of  Judah  receiving  into  its  bosom
multitudes  of  the  captivity  of  Israel  I  All  one  at  last.  One  fold  under  one  Shepherd.
A  delightful  prospect.  Obadiah,  like  another  Moses,  must  have  viewed  the  scene  with
patriotic  joy  and  hallowed  fervour  and  gratitude.  And  now  for  the  spiritual  application
of  the  passage  to  ourselves.

I.  Glorious  libertt  is  peoclaimkd  to  us.  Christ  sets  his  people  free.  He  came
to  lead  captivity  captive.  He  opens  the  prison  to  those  who  were  bound.  His  Word
is  the  perfect  law  of  liberty.  The  Apostle  Peter's  deliverance  from  prison  is  like  a
picture  of  the  deliverauce  wrought  for  the  soul  of  man.  We  were  in  the  dark  dungeon,
fast  bound  in  misery  and  iron.  Light  shone  in  the  prison.  A  friendly  hand  smote
us.  A  voice  bade  us  arise.  The  fetters  fell  off.  We  were  led  forth  from  the  darkness
of  death  into  the  light  and  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.  Or  we  may  say,  in  the
lanjiuage  of  David  (Ps.  cxxvi.  7),  "Our  soul  is  escaped  as  a  bird  out  of  the  snare  of
the  fowlers :  the  snare  is  broken,  and  we  are  escaped."  Joyous  liberty,  blessed  liberty,
glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God.

II.  Peace  m  dubs.  The  peace  of  the  very  God  of  peace.  Secure  tranquillity
through  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant.  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,
saith  your  God.  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and  cry  unto  her,  that  her  war-
fare is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned ; "  "  Peace  to  him  that  is  far  ofT,  and
to  him  that  is  near."     Peace  always  and  by  all  means.

III.  WiDKNEBS  18  0UE8.  ""Thou  hast  known  my  soul  in  adversities; . . .  thou  hast
set  me  in  a  large  room."  The  Lord  brings  his  people  into  a  wealthy  place.  "  Eehoboth  "
is  wiitten  on  the  gospeL  "  Eehoboth  "  is  written  on  the  work  of  Christ.  "  Eehoboth '"
is  written  on  the  wells  of  salvation.  On  the  joys,  the  glories,  the  promises  of  covenant
grace,  the  letters  are  written  as  with  Calvary's  blood — "  Eehoboth."  Boom  enough  and
to  spare  (Job  xxzvi.  16).

IV.  A  PORTION  ON  BOTH  SIDES  OP  JoBDAN  IS  ODBS.  The  Christian  has  the  promise
of  the  life  that  now  is  as  well  as  that  which  is  to  come.  All  things  are  ours.  The
world,  life,  death,  things  present,  things  to  come,  the  blessings  of  the  throne  and  the
blessings  of  the  footstool,  the  upper  springs  and  the  nether  springs, — all  are  ours.  Oh,
let  us  pity  the  men  who  have  their  portion  only  in  this  lifel  Let  us  pray  for  those
whose  hearts  and  treasures  are  where  the  rust  and  moth  are.  Let  us  seek  to  influence
for  good  all  those  who  have  no  portion  on  both  sides  of  Jordan.

V.  Finally,  the  Church  is  oalled  to  unity.  We  are  to  endeavour  to  keep  the
unity  of  the  Spirit.  There  are  many  stones,  but  one  temple.  There  are  many  children,
but  one  household — one  family.  There  are  many  branches,  but  one  Vine,  There  are
many  members,  but  one  body.  The  Communion  feast  teaches  this  oneness.  Our  Lord's
great  intercessorial  prayer  was  that  his  people  all  might  be  one.  The  Holy  Spirit,  the
Spirit  of  love  and  concord,  calls  us  to  oneness.  The  divisions  of  Christians  must  grieve
the  Spirit.

"  Our  little  systems  have  their  day ;

They  have  their  day,  and  cease  to  be|
They  are  but  broken  lights  of  thee,
And  thou,  O  Lord,  ait  more  than  they."


1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.  29

Oh  for  another  Pentecost,  that  the  Church  of  to-day  might  be  as  the  Church  of  the
first  days,  and  the  Eedeemer'a  words  be  exemplified,  "  That  they  all  might  be  one,  that
the  world  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me  "  1 — A.  0.  T.

Ver.  21. — Saviows  and  Judges.  "  And  saviours  shall  come  up  on  Mount  Zion  to  judge
the  mount  of  Esau."  "  Saviours  and  judges ;  "  "  Mount  Zion  and  the  mount  of  Esau : "
what  contrasts  1  And  note  the  saviours  are  made  the  judges.  The  saviours  on  Mount
Zion  are  made  the  judges  of  the  mount  of  Esau.  If  we  follow  up  these  lines  they  biing
us  to  the  true  centre  of  full  salvation  and  perfect  judgment.  Almighty  and  most  merci-
ful Saviour,  thou  most  worthy  Judge  eternal,  give  us  now  of  thy  Holy  Spirit  that  we
may  profitably^  study  thy  Word.

I.  "  Savioubs  beall  come  up  on  Mount  Zion  to  judge  the  mount  of  Bbau."
Temporal  deliverance  liad  often  been  wrought  for  Israel,  and  still  greater  things  would
God  accomplish.  In  Judg.  iL  16  we  have  an  early  use  of  two  words  of  our  text.
"  Nevertheless  the  Lord  raised  up  judges,  which  saved  them  out  of  the  hands  of  those
that  spoiled  them."  In  Judg.  iii.  9  we  read,  "When  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto
the  Lord,  the  Lord  raised  up  a  deliverer  [saviour]  to  the  children  of  Israel,  even  Othniel."
Again,  in  ver.  15,  "  When  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord,  the  Lord  raised
them  up  a  deliverer,  Ehud  the  son  of  Gera."  In  Neh.  ii.  27  we  read,  "  In  the  time  of
their  trouble,  when  they  cried  unto  thee,  thou  heardest  them  from  heaven ;  and  accord-
ing to  thy  manifold  mercies  thou  gavest  them  saviours,  who  saved  them  out  of  the  hand
of  their  enemies."  Here,  then,  we  see  that  in  temporal  deliverances  the  twofold  office
was  entrusted  to  one  individual.  The  judges  were  often  called  saviours,  and  the  saviours
were  often  called  judges.  Thus  we  see  the  primary  meaning  of  Obadiah's  prophecy,
"  Saviours  shall  come  up  on  Mount  Zion  to  Judge  the  mount  of  Esau."  In  the  deliver-
ance wrought  by  such  as  Judas  Maccabasus  and  others  we  see  the  primary  fulfilment  of
the  words.

II.  In  another  view  of  the  text  we  may  remark  that  as  topically  Mount  Zion

BTOOD  OVKB  AOAINBT  THE   MOUNT  OF  EbAU,  SO  SPIRITUALLY   God's   HOLY  HILL  BTAKDB

OPPOSED  TO  THE  MOUNTAINS  OF  THIS  WOBLD — the  mountains  of  human  pride,  the
mountains  of  human  misery,  the  mountains  of  error,  the  mountains  of  unbelief,  all  the
dark  mountains  of  sin.  And  every  such  mountain  shall  be  judged  and  brought  low,
even  to  the  dust.  A  time  is  coming  when  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be
established  upon  the  tops  of  the  mountains.  At  present  great  mountains  of  evil  may
seem  to  overshadow  Zion,  but  ere  long  they  shall  become  a  plain.  Our  God  can  make
even  the  worm  to  thresh  the  mountain — the  least  of  his  servants  to  "  leap  from
Bashan,"  to  "  overcome  troops,"  and  "  out  of  weakness  "  to  become  strong.  "  Saviours
shall  come  up  on  Mount  Zion  to  judge  the  mount  of  Esau."

III.  Another  reflection  is  this :  the  ohildbbn  of  Zion  abb  to  _be  savioubs  now  ;
THEY  SHALL  BE  JUDOES  HEBEAFTBE.  1.  Saviours.  We  are  called  to  rescue  tlie  perish-
ing. "  He  which  converteth  the  sinner  from  the  error  of  his  way,  shall  save  a  soul  from
death  "  (Jas.  v.  20).  But,  as  saviours,  we  must  see  well  to  our  own  souls.  St.  Paul'a
words  to  Timotliy  are  very  weighty:  "Take  heed  unto  thyself,  and  unto  the  doctrine:
continue  in  them,  for  in  doing  this,  thou  shalt  both  save  thyself,  and  them  that  hear  thee."
In  seeking  to  win  souls  we  must  take  care  that  our  own  souls  are  won.  In  caring  for
others'  vineyards,  we  must  not  neglect  our  own.  This  said,  we  return  to  the  doctrine
that  the  saved  are  to  le  saviours.  We  once  had  our  part  vfith  the  destroyer ;  now  we  are
to  be  a  blessing.  We  are  to  seek  to  save  the  lost.  Moses  calls  to  Hobab ;  Andrew
finds  Peter ;  Philip,  Nathanael ;  the  woman  of  Sychar  brings  her  neighbours  to  Christ.
Thus  the  saved  are  saviours.  Noah  calls  others  into  the  ark.  Abraham  invites  Lot  to
Canaan.  Ealiab  brings  her  relations  under  the  shelter  of  the  scarlet  line.  Joshua  com-
mands his  household.  Job  sacrifices  and  prays  for  his  friends.  Isaiah  lifts  up  his
voice  for  the  remnant.  Jeremiah  weeps  and  prays.  Daniel  fasts  and  makes  supplica-
tion. The  mothers  of  Salem  bring  their  children  to  Christ,  that  he  sliould  bless  them.
Saviours  ascend  on  Mount  Zion.  May  we  all  know  what  it  is  thus  to  rise — thus  to
ascend,  and  walk  on  God's  high  places !  2.  Ttie  children  of  Zion  shall  hereafter  be
Judges.  They  shall  "  judge  the  world."  They  shall  "judge  angels."  They  shall  sit
with  Christ  on  his  throne.  They  shall  not  only  be  manifested  at  the  judgment-seat  of
Christ,  but  shall  share  in  the  decisions  of  the  Lamb.    For  the  present  they  "judge  not,'*


30  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  [1—21.

unless  it  be  thenuelve$,  or  in  the  sense  of  testimony  as  regards  the  evil  that  is  in  the
world.  Through  the  cross  of  Christ  the  world  has  been  crucified  to  them,  and  they
are  crucified  to  the  world.  "  And  this  is  the  judgment,  that  the  light  is  come  into  the
world,  and  men  loved  the  darkness  rather  than  the  light ;  for  their  works  were  evil."
The  Christian  has  How  to  bear  witness  to  this  judgment,  but  the  full  and  great  assize
is  future.

IV.  We  may  now  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Cheibt.  He  is  the  almighty
and  most  merciful  Saviour ;  he  is  the  most  worthy  Judge  eternal.  1.  Let  us  think  of
him  as  a  Savumr.  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and  knock."  He  comes  to  the  sinner's
heart.  He  knocks  by  his  VVord,  by  his  providence,  by  his  Spirit.  He  has  knocked
long.  The  heart,  like  the  inn  at  Bethlehem,  has  no  room  for  Christ,  or  the  bolts  of
ignorance  and  unbelief  bar  him  out.  How  long  shall  he  be  kept  away  ?  He  may  have
given  his  last  knock.  You  and  I  need  a  Saviour.  Shall  we  not  welcome  him  ?  Shall
we  not  accept  his  offer  ?  Oh,  "  how  shall  we  escape,  if  we  neglect  so  great  salvation  ?  "
2.  Let  us  think  of  him  as  a  Judge.  "Behold,  the  Judge  standeth  at  the  door."  If  we
open  not  to  the  Saviour,  we  must  open  to  the  Judge.  I  have  read  of  a  man  of  immense
wealth  who  built  for  himself  a  magnificent  mansion,  and  then  shut  himself  up  in  it.
His  sovereign,  passing  that  way,  asked  for  admission.  He  refused  it.  Time  went  on.
A  change  took  place.  There  had  come  a  great  depreciation  of  West  Indian  property.
The  proud  man,  who  would  not  receive  his  king,  saw  his  gates  yield  to  the  law-ofiScers
of  the  crown.  "  Behold,  the  Judge  standeth  at  the  door."  If  we  welcome  not  the
knocking  Saviour,  how  can  we  meet  the  Judge  ?  May  the  Holy  Spirit  be  our  Helper,
that  we  may  have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment,  and  not  be  ashamed  at  Christ's
appearing  t    May  we  say  with  Luther —

"Beneath  the  cross  I  view  the  day
When  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away.
And  so  prepare  to  meet  him  "  I

A.aT.

Vet.  21. — The  kingdom.  "  The  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's."  What  fulness  of  brightest
morning  glory  after  a  long  night  of  blackest  darkness  I  The  kingdom  longed  for,  the
kingdom  prayed  for,  the  kingdom  promised,  the  kingdom  prophesied  of,  shall  be  the  king-
dom come.  The  kingdom.  Not  many  kingdoms,  bat  one.  Now  there  are  many,  and
these  diverse  from  each  other,  and  often  at  war  one  with  another.  The  Prophet  Daniel
spoke  of  this  when  he  said,  "The  Lord  God  shall  set  up  a  kiagdom  which  shall  never
be  destroyed."  The  fulfilment  is  presented  to  us  in  Rev.  xi.  15,  "  The  seventh  angel
sounded;  and  there  followed  great  voices  in  heaven,  and  they  said.  The  kingdom  of
the  world  is  become  the' kingdom  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ :  and  he  shall  reign  for
ever  and  ever."  "The  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's."  ^"ow  the  woild  lieth  in  the
wicked  one.  The  kingdom  is  Satan's.  Look  at  its  sins,  its  miseries,  its  darkness,  its
degradation,  its  ruin.  The  kingdom  is  Satan's.  See  the  heathen  world  bowing  to
wood  and  stone,  or  worshipping  devils.  Look  at  the  vast  millions  carried  away  by  the
Mohammedan  delusion.  Turn  to  the  multitudes  hardened  by  Jewish  infidelity.  View
so-called  Christendom,  with  teeming  myriads  rejecting  the  truth.  See  also  the  millions
that  have  not  so  much  as  the  profession  of  any  religion.  Is  not  Satan  the  prince  of  this
world  ?  Is  not  the  great  euemy  of  souls  tistirping  the  seat  of  power  ?  Oh,  then,  as  we
think  of  Israel  not  gathered  home ;  as  we  think  of  Babylon  drunk  with  the  blood  ot
saints ;  as  we  think  of  the  infidelity  and  ignorance  which  stalk  abroad  in  the  professing
Church  fcnd  in  the  world ;  as  we  think  of  war  and  bloodshed  deluging  the  earth ;  as  we
think  of  nations  discomfited  by  the  frailties  of  human  governments ;  as  we  think  of  the
Churcli  torn  by  contentions;  as  we  think  of  Rachels  weeping  for  their  lost  ones;  as  we
think  of  the  tears  which  bedew  the  cheeks  of  orphans  and  widows ;  as  we  think  of  the
sorrows  in  our  hospitals ;  as  we  think  of  the  bitter  poverty  in  our  large  cities ;  as  we
think,  too,  of  the  groans  of  the  poor  brute  creation ;  and  as  we  think  of  the  sad  partings,
the  great  disappointments,  the  strong  animosities,  and  the  cruel  wrongs  common  to
earth ; — shall  we  not  pray  for  the  fulfilment  of  our  text  ?  shall  we  not  cry,  "  Thy  kingdom
come  "  ?  shall  we  not  exclaim,  with  St.  J  onn,  "  Come,  Lord  Jesus :  come  quickly  "  ?  It
i.s  a  cry  for  the  end  of  toil,  the  end  of  suifering,  the  end  of  tears,  the  end  of  temptations,
the  end  of  sin,  the  end  of  gloom,  the  end  of  darkness,  the  end  of  death.     It  i>  a  loud


1— 21.j  THE   BOOK   OF  OBADIAH.  81

cry  for  the  song  of  heaven  to  be  heard,  "  Now  is  come  salvation  and  strength,  and  the
kingdom  of  God,  and  the  power  of  his  Christ."  It  is  an  earnest  longing  to  join  in  the
Hallelujah  chorus  of  the  great  multitude,  as  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  voice
of  mighty  thunderings,  saying,  "Alleluia:  for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reignethi"
"  The  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's."  At  present,  although  the  kingdom  of  nature  is
his,  creation  groans,  being  burdened.  At  present  the  kingdom  of  providence  is  his,  but
man  keeps  blotting  the  pages  of  history,  and  thinsis  are  not  as  they  ought  to  be.  At
present  the  kingdom  of  gr'tee  is  his,  but  his  grace  is  often  frustrated,  and  the  subjects
of  his  grace  live  far  below  their  privileges  and  high  calling.  Ere  long,  ami  the  three
kingdoms  shall  be  no  more  imperfect.  They  shall  be  consummated  in  the  full  Ghristo-
nracy— "  the  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's."  The  kingdom  of  glory  shall  come,  and  shall
have  no  end.  In  closing  our  study  of  the  Book  of  Obadiah  let  us  carry  with  us  the
sweet  echoes  of  its  last  words.  May  the  Holy  Spiiit,  in  all  the  vicissitudes  of  earth,
keep  us  in  mind  that  "  the  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's  "  I  Ere  long,  and  he  shall  come
whose  right  it  is  to  reign.  In  the  interval  before  the  advent  let  us  be  alive  to  our
duty.

I.  Lkt  ns  BB  READY  FOB  IT.  Ko  One  who  is  impenitent  and  unbelieving  can  be
ready.  Like  Ethelred,  he  is  all  unready.  To  be  prepared  for  Christ's  coming,  we
must  be  washed  in  his  blood,  justified  by  his  righteousness,  and  sanctified  by  the  Spirit
of  holiness.

II.  Let  US  be  LOOKma  fob  it.  Let  us  say  with  St.  Paul,  "We  wait  for  the
Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  shall  fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humiliation,
that  it  may  be  conformed  to  the  body  of  his  glory."  Let  us  mount  our  heimwdtfiuh  in
longing  expectation  and  hope.  Christ's  disciples  are  to  be  not  only  servants,  but  like
unto  servants  who  wait  for  their  lord.  The  servant  who  expects  his  lord,  has  him  in
mind,  and  is  on  the  look-out,  lest,  coming  suddenly,  his  lord  finds  him  sleeping.

III.  Let  ns  be  woRSiNa  fob  it.  The  absent  Saviour  has  given  to  every  man  his
work.  Each  one  has  something  to  do.  Every  true  disciple  is  a  worker,  called  to
prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord — to  make  some  crooked  path  straighter,  some  rough  place
smoother,  some  mountain  lower,  some  valley  higher.  "The  kingdom  shall  be  the
Lord's."

IV.  Let  us  be  living  fob  it.  "  What  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be? "  How
weaned  I  How  unworldly!  How  heavenly-minded  J  How  Christ-like  I  For  "the
kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's."

v.  Let  us  be  pbating  fob  rr.  "  That  it  may  please  thee  shortly  to  Mcomplish
the  number  of  thine  elect,  and  hasten  thy  kingdom."

"Come,  then,  and  added  to  thy  many  erowns
Receive  yet  one,  the  crown  of  all  the  earth.
Thou  who  alone  art  worthy."

VT.  Let  us  be  olad.  We  ought  to  rejoice.  We  ought  to  lift  up  our  heads.  Advent
bells  are  ringing.  The  sound  of  the  bells  on  our  High  Priest's  robe  may  be  heard  as  he
comes  forth  to  bless.    Hallelujah  I    "  The  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord's." — A.  0.  T.

Ver.  1. — Cfod  and  had  men.  "  The  vision  of  Obadiah.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God
concerning  Edom ;  We  have  heard  a  rumour  from  the  Lord,  and  an  ambassador  is  sent
among  the  heathen.  Arise  ye,  and  let  us  rise  up  against  her  in  battle."  Of  the  history
of  Obadiah  we  literally  know  nothing.  His  name,  which  signifies  "Worshipper  of
Jehovah,"  and  his  short  prophecy  afford  the  only  information  concerning  him.  From
vers.  11  to  14,  which  are  thought  to  contain  an  allusion  to  the  exultation  of  the  Edomites
over  the  final  capture  and  plunder  of  Jerusalem,  we  might  with  some  confidence  infer
that  he  flourished  after  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans.  In  all  probability
he  must  have  lived  near  the  time  of  Jeremiah ;  and  indeed  there  is  almost  a  verbal  agree-
ment between  his  utterances  in  vers.  1 — 8  and  those  contained  in  Jer.  xlix.  If  we  take  this
view  we  might  suppose  that  lus  prophecy  was  delivered  between  the  year  B.o.  688,  when
Jerusalem  was  taken  by  the  Chaldeans,  and  the  termination  of  the  siege  of  Tyre  by
Nebuchadnezzar.  As  to  his  prophecy,  it  is  the  shortest  in  the  Bible :  one  chapter  com-
prehends all.  Its  lubj'ect  is  the  destruction  of  Edom  on  account  of  its  cruelty  to  Judah,
Edom's  brother,  and  the  restoration  of  the  Jews.    Its  style  is  marked  by  animation.


82  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  [X-21

regularity,  and  clearness.  These  words  of  the  first  Terse  suggest  two  thoughts  concera-
Ing  Qod  and  bad  men.

L  That  Goo  hakes  a  bevelation  conoebnino  bad  ubn.  Here  is  a  revelation
concerning  Edom,  the  enemy  of  God  and  his  people.  Isaac  had  two  sons  by  Eebekah —
Esau  and  Jacob.  Esau  was  called  Edom,  "  red,"  In  memory,  it  is  said,  of  the  red
pottage  for  which  he  sold  his  birthright  (Gen.  xxv.  30).  Observe  :  1.  Ihe/orms  of  the
revelation.  (1)  As  a  vision.  "  The  vision  of  Obadiah."  The  prophet  was  a  seer.  The
Eternal  revealed  himself  to  the  eyes  of  his  soul.  He  who  would  be  a  true  minister  of
God  must  see  the  thing  before  he  speaks  it.  "  That  which  we  have  seen  and  handled,"
says  the  apostle.  Man  has  other  eyes  than  those  that  are  in  his  forehead.  He  has  a
faculty  for  seeing  the  invisible  and  the  eternal ;  this  distinguishes  him  from  the  brute.
(2)  As  a  report.  "We  have  heard  a  rumour  from  the  Lord."  The  word  "rumour"
means  "  report."  "  We  have  heard  a  report  from  Jehovah."  He  heard  as  well  as  saw.
The  soul  has  ears  to  catch  the  echoes  of  eternal  thought.  God  in  times  past  spake  to
the  fathers  by  the  prophets ;  and  now,  as  in  olden  times,  speaks  by  symbols  and  sayings,
by  appealing  to  the  eye  and  the  ear.  2.  The  character  of  this  revelation — a  message.
"An  ambassador  is  sent  among  the  heathen."  Did  he  mean  by  the  ambassador,
himself,  or  any  other  prophet  or  prophets,  or  some  celestial  minister?  It  does  not
matter.  The  message  is  the  thing — a  message  from  Jehovah  to  the  nation.  God
sends  his  messages  to  the  nations  in  many  ways  and  by  many  agents.  3.  The  subfect
of  the  revelation.  "  Arise  ye,  and  let  us  rise  up  against  her  in  battle."  The  object  of
the  message  was  to  stir  up  the  Assyrians,  and  afterwards  the  Chaldeans,  against  Edom.
But  our  proposition  is  that  God  makes  a  revelation  concerning  bad  men ;  and  the  subject
of  that  revelation  embraces  at  least  two  things.  (1)  l%it  their  sins  will  ruin  them.
This  the  Almighty  has  revealed  over  and  over  again  in  the  Bible,  and  in  every  chapter
of  human  history  and  experience.  The  burden  of  all  is,  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."
(2)  7%at  evoMgelical  repentance  will  save  them.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and
the  unrighteous  man  his  thoughts :  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have
mercy  upon  him ;  and  to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon  "  (Lsa.  Iv.  7).  These
two  subjects  are  the  great  burden  of  God's  revelation  to  bad  men.

II.  That  God  punishes  bad  men  bt  bad  hek.  He  now  sent  a  messenger  amongst
the  nations.  What  for?  To  stir  up  the  Assyrians  and  Chaldeans — both  bad  people —
to  wreak  vengeance  on  corrupt  Edom.  Why  does  he  employ  bad  men  for  this  awful
work  of  retribution  ?  He  could  do  it  withou  t  any  secondary  agency  at  all,  or,  if  he  chose
to  employ  any  instrumentality,  could  use  the  forces  of  nature  and  the  monsters  of  the
forest  alone  to  do  the  work ;  why  employ  bad  men  to  punish  bad  men,  fiend  to  punish
fiend  ?  By  doing  so  :  1.  He  reveals  in  the  most  power/id  way  to  the  victim  the  enormity
of  his  sin.  The  torture  which  his  fellow-man  brings  on  him  he  is  made  to  feel  is  but  a
slight  stroke  of  that  fiend  of  depravity  which  has  set  his  own  soul  against  his  Maker.  2.
He  reveals  his  own  absolute  power  over  the  workings  of  the  human  heart.  Thus  he
maketh  "  the  wrath  of  men  to  praise  him,"  etc.  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  He  makes  even  the  devil
himself  to  carry  out  his  will.  But  though  God  employs  bad  men  to  punish  bad  men  by
rapine,  plunder,  and  bloody  wars,  it  is  .not  by  his  instigation ;  they  act  by  their  own
free  will.  He  is  not  the  Author  of  evil.  All  good  proceedeth  from  him,  and  all  evil  is
overruled  by  him  for  the  order  and  blessedness  of  the  universe.  The  devil  is  not  less  a
devil  because  he  inflicts  the  penalties  of  justice  on  men. — D.  T.

Vers.  2 — 5. — Pride.  "  Behold,  I  have  made  thee  small  among  the  lieathen ;  thou
art  greatly  despised.  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee,"  etc.  These  words
may  be  taken  as  suggesting  and  illustrating  one  of  the  chief  sins  of  all  sinners,  viz.
pride,  that  which  poets  tell  us  "  peoples  hell  and  holds  its  prisoners  there."  The  words
suggest  three  facts  in  relation  to  pride.

I.  That  the  most  despicable  people  abe  often  the  most  disposed  to  pride.
Edom,  which  is  charged  with  the  sin  of  pride,  is  here  described  as  "small  among  the
heathen "  and  "  greatly  despised."  Not  only  were  they  a  small  people,  small  com-
paratively in  numbers,  wealth,  and  influence,  but  despised.  They  became  contemptibl*
in  the  estimation  of  their  contemporaries.  Small  things  and  small  men  are  not  always
despicable,  for  God  made  the  small  as  well  as  the  great.  It  is  the  moral  character  that
creates  and  deserves  contempt.     Now,  small  and  despicable  as  were  these  Edomites,


1— 2L]  THE   BOOK   OF   OBADIAR  83


they  wen  neTertheless  proud.  It  is  often,  if  not  ever,  so.  The  smaller  the  men  the
more  diipoaed  to  pride.  The  man  small  in  hody  is  oftea  swollen  out  with  ideas  of  the
comeliness  of  his  person ;  the  man  small  in  intellect  is  the  same.  The  men  who
rate  themselves  as  great  thinkers,  scholars,  authors,  preachers,  are  invariably  small-
brained  men.  Men  of  great  intellect  and  lofty  genius  are  characteristically  humble.
An  old  writer  has  observed  that  "  where  the  river  is  the  deepest  the  water  glides  the
smoothest.  Empty  casks  sound  most ;  whereas  the  well-fraught  vessel  silences  its  own
sound.  As  the  shadow  of  the  sun  is  largest  when  his  beams  are  lowest,  so  we  are
always  least  when  we  make  ourselves  the  greatest."

II.  That  fbide  evebuobb  disfosbs  to  bblf-deceftion  akd  fbesumftion.  1.  To
le^-decqttion.  "  The  pride  of  thine  heart  hath  deceived  thee,"  Pride  is  a  wonderful
artist ;  it  magnifies  the  small ;  it  beautifies  the  ugly ;  it  honours  the  ignoble ;  it  makes
the  truly  little,  ugly,  contemptible  man  appear  large,  handsome,  dignified  in  his  own
eyes.  It  is  said  that  Acoius,  the  poet,  who  was  a  dwarf,  would  have  himself  painted
•8  tall  and  commanding  in  stature.  In  truth,  it  makes  the  man  who  is  a  devil  at
heart  appear  to  himself  a  saint.  Witness  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple.  2.  To  presump-
tion, "  Thou  that  dwellest  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  whose  habitation  is  high ;  that
suth  in  his  heart,  Who  shall  bring  me  down  to  the  ground  ? "  The  Edomites  are
here  taunted  with  the  confidence  that  they  placed  in  their  lofty  and  precipitous
mountain,  and  the  insolence  with  which  they  scouted  any  attempt  to  subdue  them.  A
Moud  man  always  presumes  on  strength,  reputation,  and  resources  which  he  has  not.
Whilst  he  stands  on  quicksand  he  fancies  himself  on  a  rock.  "  Thou  sayest  thou  art
rich,  and  increased  with  goods,  and  hast  need  of  nothing;  whereas,"  etc.  (Bev.  iii.  17).
Ah  1  self-deception  and  presumption  are  the  twin  ofispring  of  pride.

in.  That  the  host  btbinuoub  effobts  to  avoid  punishment  dxts  to  fbide  wilii
raoTB  Funut.  Two  things  are  taught  here  concerning  its  punishment.  1.  Its
eerttUnty,  "Though  thou  exalt  thyself  as  the  eagle,  and  though  thou  set  thy  nest
•mong  the  stars,  thence  will  I  bring  thee  down,  saith  the  Lord."  Here  these  sinners
•re  assured,  by  a  bold  hyperbole,  that  whatever  attempts  they  made  to  avoid  retribu-
tion, they  would  fail.  If,  like  the  eagle,  they  towered  high  into  the  air,  far  up  among
the  clouds,  nestled  among  the  stars,  and  made  the  clouds  their  footstool,  the  fowler  of
retribution  would  bring  them  down.  All  attempts  on  behalf  of  the  impenitent  sinner
to  avoid  punishment  must  fail  when  the  day  for  justice  to  do  its  work  has  come.  2.
Its  compUtenett.  "  If  thieves  came  to  thee,  if  robbers  by  night  (how  art  thou  cut
o£ri),  would  they  not  have  stolen  till  they  had  enough?  if  the  grape-gatherers  came  to
thee,  would  they  not  leave  some  grapes  ?  "  The  spoliation  which  thou  shalt  suffer
•hall  not  be  such  as  that  which  thieves  cause,  bad  as  that  is ;  for  these,  when  they  have
seised  enough,  or  all  they  can  get  in  •  hurry,  leave  the  rest ;  nor  such  as  grape-
gatherers  cause  in  •  vineyard,  for  they,  when  they  have  gathered  most  of  the  grapes,
leuve  gleanings  behind;  but  it -shall  be  utter,  so  as  to  leave  thee  nothing.  The
exclamation,  "How  art  thou  cut  off!"  bursting  in  amidst  the  words  of  the  image,
mark*  strongly  excited  feeling.  The  contrast  between  Edom,  where  no  gleanings
shall  be  left,  and  Israel,  where  at  the  worst  a  gleaning  is  left,  is  striking  (Isa.  xvii.  6 ;
xxiv.  13).  Retribution  strips  tbe  sinner  of  everything;  nothing  is  left  but  sheer
existence,  and  that  existence  intolerable.

OoNOLVSioN.  Beware  of  pride,  then.  The  primal  cause  of  all  rin,  all  pain,  and  all
woe  to  come,  thg  great  fountain-head  of  evil,  is  pride.  It  must  lead  to  min.  "  Pride
goeth  before  destruction,  and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall."

*■  He  that  is  proud  eats  up  himself.    Pride  is
His  own  glass,  his  own  trumpet,  his  own  ohroniele^
And  whaSever  praises  itself  but  in
The  deed,  devours  the  deed  in  the  praise."

(Shakespeare.)

D.T.

Vara.  9— 9*— CM  in  retribution.  "  How  are  the  things  of  Esau  searched  out  I  how
■re  his  hidden  things  sought  up!  All  the  men  of  thy  confederacy  have  brought  thee
•ven  to  the  border,"  etc  Man  is  essentially  a  dependent  being.  Tbe  ineradicable  and
•Ter«pei«tive.sen8e  of  his  dependence  urges  him  to  lean  his  being  on  some  object  for

OBADIAH.  '


M  THE  BOOK  OF  OBAUUU.  [1— 2L

rest  Mid  safety.  His  sin  is  tlitt  he  pats  Us  oonfidence  on  objects  nawortlij  tod
uiHsie,  "  Some  trust  in  cliariots,  some  In  horses  "  etc.  The  Gdomites,  it  ia  snggested
here,  trusted  to  the  insecure.  Here  we  have  Gkid  in  retrHmtion  deitroj/ing  the  grwmdt
of  At  tinnei't  conMtnee,

L  Dh>  thet  tbust  to  their  matebial  defences  :  these  webe  wobthless.  "  How
are  the  things  of  Esau  searched  out  1  how  are  his  hidden  things  sought  up  I "  The
relerence  is  to  the  hiding-places  to  which  they  resorted  in  cases  of  danger.  The  country
of  the  Edomites  was  pre-eminently  favourahle  Tor  such  concealment  and  shelter.  The
cities  of  Edom  consisted  of  houses  mostly  cut  in  the  rocks.  "  The  great  feature  of  the
moontains  of  Edom  is  the  mass  of  red  hald-headed  sandstone  rocks,  intersected,  not  by
valleys,  but  by  deep  seams.  In  the  heart  of  these  rocks,  itself  inrisible,  lies  Petra  "
(Stanley).  "  Petra  is  unique.  The  whole  Edomite  country,  from  Eleutheropolis  to
Petra  and  Selah,  hath  small  habitations  (habitaUunculm)  in  caves.  And  on  account  of
the  oppressire  heat  of  the  sun,  as  being  a  southern  province^  hath  underground  cottages.
Henee  the  aborigines  whom  Edom  expelled  were  called  Horites,  i.e.  dwellers  in  caves."
Nations  may  trust  to  their  material  defences,  their  armies,  navies,  fortifications ;  but
they  ore  as  stubble  to  the  raging  fire  when  justice  begins  its  work.  Individuals  may
trust  to  their  wealth,  to  material  science  and  mediutl  skill,  to  preserve  their  bodily
lives;  but  when  justice  sends  forth  its  emissary,  death,  what  are  these  defences?
Nothing,  less  than  nothing,  vanity.

n.  Did  tbet  tbost  to  theib  fledoxd  oomiDEBATEB:  these  webe  wobthless.
*  All  the  men  of  thy  confederacy  have  brought  thee  even  to  the  border :  the  men  that
were  at  peace  with  thee  have  deceived  thee,  and  prevailed  against  thee ;  they  that  eat
thy  bread  have  laid  a  wound  under  thee :  there  is  none  understanding  in  him."  Those
confederates  were  probably  Moab,  Ammon,  Tjrre,  and  Zidon,  with  whom  the  Edomites
joined  in  resisting  Nebuchadnezzar;  but  these  failed  them,  probably  turned  against
them ;  and  even  their  friends  who  were  at  peace  with  them  and  ate  their  bread  deceived
them  in  their  hour  of  trial,  "  To  no  quarter  could  the  Idumeans  look  for  aid.  Their
allies,  their  neighbours,  their  very  dependants,  so  far  from  assisting  them,  would  act
treacherously  towards  them,  and  employ  every  means,  both  of  an  open  and  covert
nature,  to  effect  their  n^"  How  often  it  happens,  that  when  men  get  into  adverse
eiwumstances,  their  old  allies,  professed  friends,  those  who  have  often  partaken  ot
their  hospitality,  not  only  fail  them,  bat  turn  against  them  I  "  Cursed  be  the  man  that
trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm "  (Jer,  zvii.  6).  He  that  trusteth  even
lo  his  firmest  friends  leaneth  on  a  broken  reed.

in.  Did  thet  tbcbt  to  the  wisdom  of  thbib  obeat  hen:  this  was  woBTHLne.
"  Shall  I  not  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  even  destroy  the  wise  men  out  of  Edom,  and
imderstanding  out  of  the  mount  of  Esau?"  "The  Idumeans  confided  not  only  in  the
natural  strength  of  their  country,  but  in  the  superiority  of  their  intellectual  talent.
That  they  excelled  in  the  arts  and  sciences  is  abundantly  proved  by  the  numerous
traces  of  them  in  the  Book  of  Job,  which  was  undoubtedly  written  in  their  country.
They  were  indeed  proverbial  for  their  philosophy,  for  the  cultivation  of  which  their
intercourse  with  Babylon  and  Egypt  was  exceedingly  favourable,  as  were  likewise
their  means  of  acquiring  information  from  the  numerous  caravans  whose  route  lay
through  their  country,  thus  forming  a  chain  of  communication  between  Europe  and
India^  (Henderson).  Yet  what  is  the  wisdom  of  man  to  trust  in  ?  "  He  taketh  the
wise  in  their  own  craftiness."  The  wisdom  of  the  wise  is  but  foolishness;  it  is  a
miserable  thing  to  trust  in.  Trust  not  in  human  wisdom;  not  in  the  wisdom  of
statesmen,  scientists,  ecclesiastics,  theologians.

lY.  Did  thet  tbust  to  the  foweb  of  theib  miqhtt  ken  :  this  was  wobthless.
"  Asd  thy  mighty  men,  0  Teman,  shall  be  dismayed,  to  the  end  that  every  one  of  the
mount  of  Esau  may  be  cut  off  by  slaughter."  Delitzsch  renders  this,  "  And  thy  heroes
despur,  0  Teman."  Teman  was  the  proper  name  of  the  southern  portion  of  Idumea,
called  BO  after  Tema,  a  grandson  of  Esau.  Men  trust  in  their  heroes.  At  the  banquets
of  pabyc  societies,  companies,  corporations,  how  does  this  confidence  come  out  in  the
inflated  cant  of  the  speakers  on  the  occasion,  in  relation  to  the  army  or  the  navyl  A
false  confidence  this  also!  God,  by  a  breath  of  pestilence,  can  wither  all  the  •mues
uf  Europe  in  an  instant.

CeNOLnBioii.    There  is  nothing  in  which  the  sinner  trusts,  nothing  in  matter  or


1—21.]  THE   BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  35

mind,  in  force  or  skill,  that  can  stand  for  one  instant  before  the  retributive  stroke  of
justice.  Though  some  trust  in  chariots  and  some  in  horses,  let  us  trust  in  the  Name
of  the  Lord.  Men  who  trust  in  anything  short  of  God  are  like  the  man  who  in  a
thunderstorm  takes  shelter  under  a  tree,  whose  tall  branches  attract  and  receive  the
shock  of  the  lightning  which  scorches  him  to  ashes. — D.  T.

Vers.  10 — ^16. — Social  cruelty :  1.  A  sin  against  the  Oreator,  "  For  thy  violence
against  thy  brother  Jacob  shame  shall  cover  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  for  ever,"
etc.  Social  cruelty  is  the  grand  subject  of  these  verses,  and  the  cruelty  is  that  which
one  brother  perpetrates  on  another — ^Bsau  on  Jacob.  "  Wrong  or  violence  is  all  the
more  reprehensible  when  it  is  committed  against  a  brother.  The  fraternal  relation  in
which  Edom  stood  towards  Judah  is  still  more  sharply  defined  by  the  name  Jacob,
since  Esau  and  Jacob  were  twin  brothers.  The  consciousness  that  the  Israelites  were
their  brethren  ought  to  have  impelled  the  Edomites  to  render  helpful  support  to  the
oppressed  Judssans.  Instead  of  this,  they  not  only  revelled  with  scornful  and  malignant
pleasure  in  the  misfortune  of  the  brother  nation,  but  endeavoured  to  increase  it  still
further  by  rendering  active  support  to  the  enemy.  This  hostile  behaviour  of  Edom
arose  from  envy  at  the  election  of  Israel,  like  the  hatred  of  Esau  toward  Jacob  (Gen.
xxvii.  41),  which  was  transmitted  to  his  descendants  and  came  out  openly  in  the  time
of  Moses  in  the  unbrotherly  refusal  to  allow  the  Israelites  to  pass  in  a  peaceable  manner
through  their  land  (Numb,  xx.)  "  (Delitzsch).  These  verses  present  to  us  social  cruelty
in  three  different  features — as  a  sin  against  the  Oreator ;  perpetrated  against  a  Ir other,
specially  offensive  to  Qod;  as  working  in  various  forms  from  generation  to  generation.
We  shall  devote  a  brief  homiletical  sketch  to  each  of  these.  This  passage  implies,  first,
that  social  cruelty  is  a  sin  against  the  Creator;  and  the  truth  of  this  will  appear  from
four  subjects  of  though*„

I.  The  constitution  of  tsb  EtrxAN  sonL.  Social  cruelty  is  opposed  to  the  normal
condition  of  th»  human  spirit.  He  who  will  study  his  own  spiritual  constitution  will
not  fail  to  observe  three  great  facts  in  relation  to  this  subject.  1.  The  existence  of
social  love.  Social  sympathy  is  one  of  the  primary  elements  of  our  nature  :  its  instinct
is  to  render  service  to  others  and  to  seek  their  good  will  and  fellowship.  The  malign
is  not  inherent  in  man.  Cruelty  in  him  is  not  innate,  as  in  the  tiger  and  the  bear.
We  are  made  to  love  and  to  be  loved.  2.  The  instinctive  condemnation  of  cruel  act*.
.Never  in  the  history  of  a  soul  has  it  instinctively  approved  of  acts  of  cruelty  as  per-
petrated either  by  itself  or  others.  Conscience  thunders  against  all  such  deeds :  on  the
benevolent,  and  on  the  benevolent  only,  it  smiles.  3.  Innate  craving  for  social  approba-
tion. The  soul  not  only  deprecates  the  ill  will  and  loathing  of  society,  but  yearns
deeply  and  always  for  its  approbation.  But  this  can  only  be  attained  by  benevolent
deeds.  Now,  inasmuch  as  the  constitution  of  the  soul  is  an  expression  of  the  Divine
will,  and  that  constitution  is  against  cruelty,  cruelty  is  an  outrage  on  the  Divine
«rder.

II.  The  common  belation  of  atj>  to  God.  He  is  the  Father  of  all  men.  No  one
of  the  human  race  is  nearer  to  him  than  another.  Each  is  his  offspring  and  bears  his
image.  And  between  all  there  is,  therefore,  the  relationship  of  brotherhood.  It  cannot
be  the  will  of  the  great  Father  that  his  children  should  act  as  wild  beasts,  inflicting
cruelty  on  each  other,  and  thus  harass  his  benevolunt  ears  with  the  groans  and  shrieks  of
his  offspring.  What  human  father  does  not  deprecate  one  of  his  children  inflicting  an
injury  on  another,  and  does  not  ardently  desire  that  each  should  work  for  the  other?
Are  we  more  loving  than  he  who  made  us?  Does  the  brooklet  contain  more  than
the  ocean  ?

IIL  The  common  interest  of  Chkst  in  the  bacb.  Christ  took  on  him  the
nature  of  man.  He  was  the  Son  of  man,  not  the  Son  of  Jew  or  Gentile,  rich  or  poor,
bond  or  free,  but  the  Son  of  man.  The  nature  of  all  men  was  in  him.  He  wore  the
nature  of  every  man,  he  propounded  doctrines  for  every  man,  he  enacted  laws  for
every  man,  he  tasted  death  for  every  man.  He  was  not  ashamed  to  call  us  brethren.
He  loved  the  world,  and  gave  himself  for  it.  How  abhorrent,  then,  must  it  be  to  him
and  to  his  blessed  Father  for  one  man  to  inflict  cruelty  upon  another  I

IV.  The  UNrvBESAL  tbachino  of  the  Bible.  The  whole  Decalogue,  as  reduced
and  enforced  by  Christ,  consists  in  loving  God  with  all  our  hearts,  and  our  nai^biraur


36  THJi   BUOK  OF   OBADIAH,  [1—21.

fts  ourselveB.    And  everywhere  in  the  New  Testament  are  we  exhorted  to  "  be  kindly
affectioned  one  to  another,"  to  "  recompense  to  no  man  evil  for  evil."

CoNOLnsiON.  How  obvious  it  is,  then,  that  social  cruelty  in  all  its  forms  is  a  lin
against  the  Creator  1  The  man  who  injures  his  fellow-creature  is  a  rebel  against  the
government  of  the  universe. — D.  T.

Yers.  10 — Uj—An  old  sin.  "  For  thy  violence  against  thy  brother  Jacob  shame  shall
cover  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  cut  off  for  ever.  In  the  day  that  thou  stoodest  on  the
other  side,  in  the  day  that  the  strangers  carried  away  captive  his  forces,  and  foreigners
entered  into  his  gates,  and  cast  lots  upon  Jerusalem,  even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them,*
etc.     These  words  present  to  us  an  old  sin  in  one  or  two  aspects.

I.  Hebe  is  an  old  sin  working  in  the  histoby  of  postebitt.  "  For  thy  violence
against  thy  brother  Jacob,"  etc.  What  was  the  sin  ?  "  And  Esau  hated  Jacob
because  of  the  blessing  wherewith  his  father  blessed  him :  and  Esau  said  in  his  heart,
The  days  of  mourning  for  my  father  ave  at  hand ;  then  will  I  slay  my  brother  Jacob  "
(Gen.  xxvii.  41).  Envy  was  the  sin ;  and  this  envy  towards  Jacob,  or  Israel,  was
transmitted  from  generation  to  generation^  The  spirit  of  envy  that  was  kindled  in  the
heart  of  Esau  towards  his  brother  Jacob  glowed  and  flamed  with  more  or  less  intensity
for  ages  in  the  soul  of  Edom  towards  the  descendants  of  Jacob.  Edom  continued  to  be
the  inveterate  foe  of  Israel.  Neither  a  man's  sinful  passion  nor  his  deed  stops  with
himself.  Like  a  spring  from  the  mountain,  it  runs  down  posterity,  often  gathering
volume  as  it  proceeds.  No  sinner  liveth  to  himself.  One  man's  sins  may  vibrate  in
the  soul  of  another  a  thousand  ages  on.  This  is  shown  in  almost  every  chapter  of
the  history  of  nations.  The  fire  of  vengeance  which  the  cruelty  of  one  nation  kindles
in  its  victim  will  not  expire  at  the  conquest.  It  will  burn  on  until  it  breaks  out  in
fury,  and  wreaks  vengeance  upon  its  own  conqueror.  Hence  he  that  taketh  the  sword
always  perishes  by  the  sword.  This  fact  should :  1.  Impress  us  vnth  the  aw/ulness  of
our  existence.  It  is  triie  that  in  one  sense  we  are  little  beings,  occupying  but  a  small
space  in  the  universe,  and  soon  pass  away  and  are  forgotten ;  still  there  goes  forth
from  us  an  influence  that  shall  never  end.  We  throw  seed  into  the  mind  of  the
world  that  will  germinate,  grow,  and  multiply  indefinitely,  and  yield  harvests  of
misery  or  joy.  2.  Impress  us  with  the  duty  of  every  lover  of  the  universe  to  protest
against  sin  in  individuals.  A  man  may  say,  "  What  does  it  matter  to  you  that  I
sin  ?  "  My  reply  is,  "  It  does  matter  to  me  as  a  benevolent  citizen  of  the  universe. .
If  your  sin  merely  damned  yourself,  it  is  sad  enough ;  but  it  does  not  end  there ;  iti
periicious  influence  on  the  universe  is  inconceivably  great  and  calamitous."

II.  Hebe  is  an  old  sin  eeprobated  by  God  in  the  histoby  of  postbbity.  God's
eye  traced  it  from  Esau  down.  How  does  he  treat  it?  He  reprobates  it.  "  For  thy
violence  against  thy  brother  Jacob  shame  shall  cover  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  out  off  for
ever.  In  the  day  that  thou  stoodest  on  the  other  side,  in  the  day  that  the  strangers
carried  away  captive  his  forces,  and  foreigners  entered  into  his  gates,  and  cast  lots  upon
Jerusalem,  even  thou  wast  as  one  of  them.  But  thou  shouldest  not  have  looked  on  the
day  of  brother,"  etc.  Delitzsoh  renders  the  words, "  Look  not  at  the  day  of  thy  brother,"
and  regards  vers.  12 — 14  as  a  prohibition ;  others  do  not  acknowledge  the  authority  for
that  rendering.  These  Bdomites,  it  would  seem  from  the  words,  did  stand  on  the  other
side  without  rendering  help  in  the  day  when  the  stranger  entered  Jerusalem ;  they  did
"  rejoice  "  over  the  children  of  Judah  at  that  period ;  they  did  "  speak  proudly  "  in  the
day  of  distress ;  they  did  "  enter  into  the  gate  "  of  God's  people  in  the  "  day  of  calamity ; "
they  did  "  lay  hands  on  their  substance  "  on  that  day ;  they  did  stand  in  the  "  cross-
way  "  and  "cut"  those  off "  that  did  escape."  The  omniscient  eye  saw  all  this.  The
.Tews  appeal  to  him  to  recompense  the  cruelty  of  these  Bdomites.  "  Bemember,  0
Lord,  the  children  of  Edom  in  the  day  of  Jerusalem ;  who  said,  Ease  it,  rase  it,  even
to  the  foundation  thereof  I "  (Ps.  cxxxviL  7).  For  all  this  God  says  shame  should  come
on  them,  and  shame  did  come.  They  are  blotted  from  the  history  of  the  living.  Ged
condemns  sin  wherever  it  is,  however  it  comes,  and  whatever  its  pedigree.  _  It  may  be
asked — If  it  were  the  envy  of  Esau  that  thus  came  down  from  age  to  age  in  his  posterity,
and  worked  these  deeds  of  crime,  where  is  the  justice  of  God  in  reprobating  them?
They  only  Inherit  the  iniquities  of  their  fathers.  We  answer :  1.  Sin  is  essentially
abhorrent  to  Jehovah.     It  is  the  "abominable  thing"  which  he  hates;  2.  The  very


1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAU.


essence  of  sin  is  its  freeneas.  Sin  is  not  a  forced  act ;  no  deed  performed  by  a  maa
against  his-  will  has  any  moral  character,  or  can  in  a  moral  sense  be  either  good  or  bad>
The  posterity  of  Esau  were  not  compelled  to  cherish  and  develop  the  envy  of  their  great
progenitor.  Each  one  could  have  quenched  it.  Each,  no  doubt,  felt  it  to  be  contrary
to  bis  moral  nature,  and  that  it  onght  to  be  expelled.  The  Almighty  knew  that  each
man  was  free ;  hence  his  reprobation  of  sin  wherever  found. — D.  T.

Vers.  10, 11. — Soeiai  cruelty :  2.  Perpetrated  against  a  brother,  specially  ojfenaive  io
Qod.  "For  thy  violence  against  thy  brother  Jacob  shame  shall  cover  thee,  and  thou
shalt  be  cut  off  for  ever,"  etc.  The  cruelty  here  is  not  the  cruelty  merely  of  one  man
against  another,  but  of  one  who  is  in  close  natural  relationship  to  the  other — children
of  the  same  parents.  Strange  as  it  may  be,  it  is  nevertheless  a  fact  that  a  brother's
enmity  is  often  the  most  savage  and  unrelenting.  How  cau  this  fact  be  accounted  for?
From  the  greater  amount  of  his  natural  love.  True,  the  greater  amount  of  love  a  man
has  in  him,  the  greater  capacity  he  has  for  wrath.  Wrath  is  but  love  in  flames.  The
measure  of  a  creature's  love  determines  his  power  of  anger.  The  little  shallow  lake
cannot  yield  that  amount  of  boiling  steam  which  the  ocean  can  produce.  Ko  lore,  no
hatred;  small  love,  small  hatred;  large  love,  large  hatred.  A  brother  is  supposed
naturally  to  have  more  love  in  him  towards  his  brother  thau  any  other.  Hence,  when
this  love  is  kindled  into  wrath,  it  is  often  terribly  furious.  But  the  truth  contained
in  the  text  is  this,  that  a  brother's  cruelty  is  specially  offensive  to  Jehovah.  It  is  for
"thy  violence  against  thy  brother  Jacob  shame  shall  cover  thee,, and  thou  shalt  be  cut
"off  for  ever."    But  why  should  it  be  specially  offensive  ?

I.  Beoausi!  the  obuqation  to  love  is  strongeb.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  men  to  love
one  another,  but  more  especially  the  duty  of  a  brother  to  love  his  brother.  Children
of  the  same  parents  are  specially  bound  by  nature  to  be  one  in  sympathy  and  in  heart.

II.  Because  the  chiep  human  institution  is  outbaged.  What  is  the  chief
human  institution  ?  That  of  a  family.  Schools,  governments,  Churches,  are  not  to
be  compared  to  the  family  institution.  The  government  of  the  I'amily  is  the  model
government;  the  school  of  the  family  is  the  model  school;  the  Church  of  the  family  is
the  model  Church.  But  when  the  members  of  this  family  become  cruel  to  each  other,
this  human  institution  is  outraged.

III.  Because  the  tendbebst  human  loves  abe  wounded.  When  brother  inflicts
injury  on  brother,  parental  hearts  bleed,  and  sisters  are  struck  with  an  agony  of  giief.

Conclusion.  We  wonder  ^ot,  then,  that  cruelty  towards  brothers  is  more  offensive
to  God  than  any  other  cruelty.  Solomon  has  said  that  a  •'  brother  offended  is  harder  to
be  won  than  a  strong  city :  and  their  contentions  are  like  the  bars  of  a  castle  "  (Prov.
xviii.  19).  The  closer  the  relationship,  in  case  of  dispute,  the  wider  the  breach  and  the
more  difficult  the  reconciliation.  A  really  offended  brother  is  often  harder  to  win  hack
to  friendship  than  the  taking  of  a  strong  city  or  the  breaking  of  the  bars  of  a  castle.
Take  the  case  of  Cain  and  Abel,  Joseph  and  his  brethren,  Absalom  and  Amnon.  In
all  these  cases  nothing  less  than  death  was  plotted  and  sought.  Why  is  this  ?  Why
is  a  brother's  anger  so  implacable  ?  1.  Great  love  has  been  wounded.  The  more  love,
the  greater  capability  of  indignation.  How  strong  the  love  of  a  real  brother  1  2.
Great  services  have  been  ill  requited.  What  attentions  a  true  brother  shows!  how
numerous,  delicate,  and  self-sacrificing  I  If  the  object  of  all  has  proved  utterly
unworthy  of  them,  how  intense  his  chagrin,  how  poignant  his  distress  I  3.  Great
hopes  are  frustrated.  The  offended  brother  anticipated  a  brother's  sympathy,  counsel,
friendship,  through  all  the  checkered  scenes  of  life.  These  hopes  are  shattered,  and  the
wreck  is  vexatious  beyond  measure.  4.  Great  reluctance  on  the  offender's  side  to
acknowledge  the  fault  and  seek  reconciliation.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  it  is  yet  true
— a  man  would  sooner  offer  an  apology  to  any  one  than  to  his  relations,  especially  to
brothers.— D.  T.

Vers.  12 — 16. — Soeiai  cruelty ;  3.  As  working  in  various  forms  from  generation  to
generation.  "  But  thou  shouldest  not  have  looked  on  the  day  of  thy  brother  in  the
day  that  he  became  a  stranger,"  etc.  Here  we  have  a  sketch  of  the  workings  of  this
cruelty  towards  Judah  when  he  was  in  great  distress,  suffering,  and  peril.

L  Cbueltt  has  vabious  fobmb  of  woeking.    Look  at  the  forms  here.    L  The


88  THE   BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  [1—21.

lack  of  sympathy  when  Judah  was  in  distress.  "  Thou  shouldest  not  have  looked,"  etc.
Greatly  did  Judah  need  Edom's  sympathy  at  this  time.  "  Strangers  carried  away  captive
their  forces ; "  Babylon  entered  their  country  and  their  city  and  carried  them  away  as
captives.  Foreigners  entered  into  his  gates  and  cast  lots  upon  Jerusalem.  The  city,
after  a -long  siege,  was  broken  up;  and  the  great  officers  of  the  King  of  Babylon  came
and  sat  at  the  gates  and  cast  lots  on  the  spoils  of  Jerusalem.  It  was  indeed  a  "  day  oi
calamity,"  as  it  is  three  times  expressed  in  these  verses.  Terrible  and  never  to  be
forgotten  was  that  day  when  Babylon  came  vnth  all  its  forces  into  Judaea,  entered  the
city,  and  bore  away  as  captives  the  inhabitants.  Now,  in  their  distress,  how  did  Edom
their  brother  act  ?  They  stood  and  looked  carelessly  on.  Want  of  sympathy  with
suffering  is  a  sin  in  the  sight  of  God.  Heaven  denounces  men,  not  only  for  the  evil
they  actually  perpetrate,  but  for  the  neglect  of  the  good  they  ought  to  accomplish.
These  Edomites  were  like  the  priest  and  the  Levite.  2.  Positive  rejoicing  when
Judah  was  in  distress.  It  is  said,  "  they  rejoiced  over  the  children  of  Judah  in  the  day
of  destruction,"  they  "  spoke  proudly  in  the  day  of  distress."  They  seem  to  have
gloated  over  their  afflictions.  3.  Participation  in  the  worh  of  their  enemies.  They
laid  their  hands  on  their  substance,  they  cut  off  those  that  did  escape,  they  delivered
up  those  that  did  remain  in  the  day  of  their  distress.  Social  cruelty  ever  has  had,  and
still  has,  many  forms  of  working.  Cold  indifference,  malignant  rejoicing,  as  well  as
positive  inflictions.  See  the  charge  brought  against  the  Edomites  on  this  occasion
(Ps.  cxxxvii.  7 ;  Ezek.  xxv.  12).

II.  Omnisoibnoe  obsbevbs  it  in  all  its  forms.  God's  eye  was  on  the  Edomites,
noted  not  only  their  positive  acts,  but  the  workings  of  their  inner  souls.  Sin  in  all  its
operations  Is  evermore  under  the  eye  of  Omniscience.  He  knows  the  way  each  spirit
takes.  He  searcheth  all  hearts,  and  understandeth  all  their  thoughts.  The  ways  of
man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  he  pondereth  their  doings ;  they  "  are  in  every
place,  beholding  the  evil  and  the  good."  This  fact,  for  an  incontrovertible  fact  it  is,
should  be  practically  realized.  And  if  practically  realized  it  will  have  a  fourfold
effect  on  the  jsoul.  1.  It  will  stimulate  to  great  spiritual  activity.  When  the  eye  of
an  intelligence  falls  right  on  us,  the  glance  stirs  the  soul.  What  soul  could  sleep  if  it
felt  the  eye  of  God  ever  resting  on  it  ?  2.  It  will  restrain  from  the  commission  of  sin.
Did  we  feel  his  eye  ever  on  us,  should  we  yield  to  temptation  ?  "  Thou  God  seest
me"  is  a  powerful  preventive.  3.  It  will  excite  the  desire  for  pardon.  God  has  seen
all  the  errors  and  sins  of  the  past,  and  they  aie  great  in  number  and  enormity.  Since
he  sees  them,  they  must  be  either  punished  or  absolved.  4.  It  will  brace  the  soul  in
the  performance  of  duty.  Moses  "endured  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."  He  knows
our  trials  and  our  difficulties.  Tl^erefore  let  us  be  magnanimous  under  trial  and
brave  in  danger.  Of  God  all-seeing,  "What  can  escape  his  eye,  deceive  his  heart
omniscient?"

IIL   A  JUST  AND  TEBBIBLE   EBTBIBDTION  AWAITS  IT  IN  ALL  ITS  FORMS.      "  The  day

of  the  Lord  is  near  upon  all  the  heathen :  as  thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto
thee:  thy  reward  shall  return  upon  thine  own  head,"  etc.  Retribution  is  a  settled
law  in  the  material  universe.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to
you  again."  There  is  a  rebound  in  every  sin.  No  crime  has  ever  been  committed
that  does  not  come  back  with  a  terrible  rebound  on  the  soul  of  the  author.  "They
shall  drink,  and  they  shall  swallow  down."  To  swallow  up  and  to  be  swallowed  up  is
the  world's  destiny.— D.  T.

Ver.  15. — SocuA  retribution.  "  For  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  near  upon  all  the  heathen :
as  thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee :  thy  reward  shall  return  upon  thine  own
head."  We  have  above  furnished  outlines  of  three  homilies  on  the  first  sixteen  verses
of  this  chapter.  Social  cruelty  we  considered  as  the  grand  subject  of  the  whole.  This
was  presented :  1  .^s  a  sin  against  the  Creator.  And  this  was  proved  by  the  consti-
tution of  the  human  soul ;  the  common  relation  of  the  race  to  God ;  the  common  interest
of  Christ  in  the  race  ;  and  the  universal  teaching  of  the  Bible.  2.  .48  when  perpetrated
against  a  brother,  specially  offensive  to  Qod,  And  three  reasons  were  mentioned  for  this
— the  obligation  to  love  a  brother  is  stronger;  the  chief  human  institution  is  outraged;
and  the  tenderest  human  loves  are  wounded.  3.  As  working  in  various  forms  from
generatum  to  generation.    In  this  view  it  was  shown  that  cruelty  has  various  forms  of


1—21.]  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  W

worUng ;  that  Omniscience  observes  it  in  all  its  workings ;  and  that  a  terrible  retribution
awaits  it  in  all  its  forms.  Now  tooldl  retribution  is  the  subject  before  us,  and  this
subject  we  have  touched  on  already.  There  are  two  great  popular  errors  concerning
the  subject  of  retribution.  1.  That  retribution  is  reserved  entirely  for  the  future  state.
That  the  future  state  will  be  a  state  of  retribution — a  state  in  which  every  man  shall
be  rewarded  according  to  his  works — ^must  be  admitted  by  every  thoughtful  student  of
the  Bible.  But  retribution  is  not  only  future;  it  is  here;  retribution  is  an  eternal
principle  of  the  Divine  government ;  it  follows  sin  at  all  times  and  for  ever.  The  men  and
nations  whose  acts  are  registered  in  the  Bible  proclaim  the  grand  truth,  "  Behold,  the
righteous  shall  be  recompensed  in  the  earth:  much  more  the  wicked  and  the  sinner"
(I^ov.  xi.  31).  "  Bishop  Butler,  in  accordance  with  the  same  doctrine,  lays  it  down  as  an
axiom  that  this  life  is  the  allotted  and  appointed  period  of  retributive  justice.  Having
assumed  this  as  an  undoubted  fact,  he  proceeds  to  infer  therefrom  the  certainty  of  the
future  judgment.  How  many  masters  in  Israel  arrive  at  the  same  wholesome  conclusion
on  quite  opposite  premisses — the  entire  absence  of  systematic  retributive  justice  during
this  life  1  '  We  find,'  he  says, '  that  the  true  notion  of  the  Author  of  our  nature  is  that
of  a  Master  or  Governor,  prior  to  the  consideration  of  his  moral  attributes.  The  fact
of  our  case,  which  we  find  by  experience,  is  that  he  actually  exercises  dominion  or
government  over  us  at  present,  by  rewarding  and  punishing  ua  for  our  actions  in  as
strict  and  proper  a  sense  of  these  words,  and  even  in  the  same  sense,  as  children,  servants,
subjects,  are  rewarded  and  punished  by  those  who  govern  them.' "  Did  not  retributive
justice  strike  our  first  parents  and  Cain  at  once  ?  Did  it  not  strike  the  antediluvian  world,
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  etc.  ?  Another  popular  error  concerning  retribution  is :  2.  That  it
is  a  special  infliction  of  Ood.  We  do  not  say  that  God  may  not  break  through  the
established  order  of  things  to  inflict  punishment,  nor  that  he  has  not  done  so ;  for  the
Bible  furnishes  us  with  instances  to  the  contrary.  All  we  say  is — this  is  not  the  general
rule.  Divine  punishments  are  natural  events.  Divine  justice  works  as  naturally  as
Divine  goodness.  Sin  and  punishment  are  indissolubly  linked  as  cause  and  efieot.  The
text  suggests  two  thoughts  in  relation  to  sociai  retribution.

L  That  it  is  oftentimes  a  BETimN  to  the  offendbb  or  tbe  baub  kins  of
BCFTKBiNa  AS  HE  iNFiiioTED  OS  BIS  VICTIM.  "  As  thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done
unto  thee :  thy  reward  shall  return  upon  thine  own  head."  The  bitter  cup  thou  hast
given  to  thine  enemy  shall  come  round  to  thee,  and  of  its  dregs  thou  shalt  drink.  This
principle  is  stated  by  Christ.  "  With  what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to
you  again."  The  Bible  is  full  of  examples  of  this  principle.  Isaac  told  a  lie,  affirming
that  his  wife  was  his  sister ;  and  he  is  told  a  lie  by  his  son  Jacob,  who  declared  himself  to
be  Esau.  Jacob  had  deceived  his  aged  parent  in  relation  to  Esau ;  his  sons  deceive  him
with  regard  to  Joseph.  He  had  embittered  the  declining  years  of  his  aged  sire ;  his
children  embittered  his.  Again,  Joseph  was  sold  by  his  brethren  as  a  bond-servant  into
Egypt ;  in  Egypt  his  brethren  are  compelled  to  resign  themselves  as  bond-servants  to
him.  All  history  is  full  of  examples,  and  everywhere  in  modem  society  illustrative
cases  may  be  selected.  The  deceiver  himself  is  deceived,  the  fraudulent  is  himself
cheated,  the  hater  is  himself  hated,  the  cruel  is  often  ruthlessly  treated.  Thus  "  as
thou  hast  done,  it  shall  be  done  unto  thee."

"  Hear  the  just  law,  the  judgment  of  the  skies ;
He  that  hates  truth  shall  be  the  dupe  of  lies."

(Oowper.)

IL  That  it  often  appeabs  to  dome  as  a  bfeoial  tibitation  of  AuaoHTT  Gk>D.
"  The  day  of  the  Lord  is  near  upon  all  the  heathen."  All  days  are  his  days.  But  it
is  not  until  the  guilty  conscience  is  smitten  with  a  sense  of  sin  that  it  sees  him  and  feels
that  the  day  is  full  of  Qoi.  Electricity  pervades  the  universe,  is  ubiquitous ;  but  men
become  conscious  of  it  and  talk  of  it  only  when  it  flashes  in  lightning  and  sounds  in
thunder.  So  with  God's  justice.  It  is  everywhere ;  but  when  the  guilty  conscience
feels  its  punitive  touch  it  calls  it  the  day  of  judgment.  The  righteous  are  now  gomg
into  life  eternal,  every  righteous  deed  is  a  step  onward ;  the  wicked  are  now  going  into
everlasting  punishment,  with  every  sin  they  tramp  downward.

Conclusion.  Learn  that  no  soul  can  sin  with  impunity ;  that  eveiy  sin  carries  with
it  puidshment.    "  The  gods  are  just,  and  of  our  pleasant  vices  make  whips  to  scourtre  us."


40  THE  BOOK  OP  OBADIAH.  [1—21.

It  nuy  be,  indeed,  through  the  deadness  of  your  conscience  and  the  niperabuiidftnt
mereki  of  this  life,  that  you  feel  not  the  retributive  lash  as  you  will  ftel  it  sf  loine  future
tiiiM{  bat  retribution  is  working  here.

"  We  Btill  have  judgment  here  that  we  but  teaoh
Bloody  instruotioDS,  which,  being  taught,  return
To  plague  the  inrentor.    This  eyen-lianded  justice
Oommends  the  ingredients  of  our  poisoned  ohalioe
To  onr  own  lipa."

(Bhakespeue.)

D.T.

Ver.  17. — 2^  true  Chwchi  or,  the  eommtmity  of  the  good:  L  A  benejicent  power.
"  But  upon  Mount  Zion  shall  be  deliverance,  and  there  shall  be  holiness ;  and  the  house
of  Jacob  shall  possess  their  possessions."  Obadiah  here  commences  his  predictions
respecting  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  from  Babylonish  captivity,  their  reoccupation  of
Caanan,  and  the  reign  of  the  Messiah.  While  the  surrounding  nations  were  to  disap-
pear, the  Jews  should  regain  possession  of  the  land  of  their  fathers.  Mount  Zion  may  be
taken  here  as  the  symbol  of  the  true  Church  of  God,  that  is,  the  community  of  godly
men  existing  on  this  earth.  In  this  sense  it  is  referred  to  in  Hebrews.  Here  the  whole
passage  may  be  taken  as  representing  this  true  Church,  or  godly  community,  in  three
aspects — as  a  beneficent  power ;  a  consuming  power ;  and  an  aggressive  power.  The
subject  of  the  sketch  is  on  the  Church  as  the  beneficent  power,  which  we  have  in  the
seventeenth  verse.  Three  thoughts  are  suggested  by  the  words  concerning  the  Church
as  a  beneficent  power.

I.  It  is  oonkeoted  with  deltvebanoe.  "Upon  Mount  Zion  shall  be  deliverance.''
Mount  Zion  was  the  asylum  for  those  who  had  escaped.  In  Mount  Zion  shall  be  the
escaped.  From  Babylonian  captivity  and  suffering  they  returned  to  Mount  Zion,  or
Jerusalem,  and  were  safe.  There  they  enjoyed  their  old  protection.  In  the  true  Church
there  is  spiritual  safety ;  it  is  a  refuge  that  is  built  upon  a  rock,  and  the  gates  of  hell
cannot  prevail  against  it.  It  is  watched  by  the  infinite  love  and  guarded  by  the
almighty  power  of  Christ ;  its  blessed  Keeper  never  slumbers  nor  sleeps.  Oh,  ye
imperilled  spirits  pursued  by  the  powers  of  hell,  led  by  the  devil  captives,  and  sold
under  sin,  flee  to  this  Mount  Zion,  this  true  Church  of  G-od,  this  community  of  godly
men,  which  is  at  once  the  organ  and  the  residence  of  Christ.

II.  It  IB  CONNECTED  WITH  PUEiTy  "  There  shall  be  holiness."  Moral  pollution,
or  sin,  is  the  source  of  all  the  calamities  that  befall  men.  Mount  Zion  is  a  consecrated
spot.  If  there  is  holiness  anywhere  it  is  in  connection  with  that  community  of  men  called
the  Church,  which  embraces  the  principles,  cherishes  the  spirit,  follows  the  example  of
the  Son  of  God.  True,  the  members  are  not  perfect  yet;  but  they  are  in  the  process  of
cleansing,  and  are  already  holy  as  compared  with  the  pollutions  of  the  ungodly  world.

III.  It  is  CONNECTED  WITH  ENjOTiiENT.  "  And  the  house  of  Jacob  shaJl  possess
their  possessions."  "Though  the  houses  of  Jacob  and  Joseph  are  here  spoken  of
separately,  it  was  not  the  intention  of  the  prophet  to  teach  that  the  two  kingdoms  of
Judah  and  Israel  would  he  re-established.  Tet  the  special  mention  of  Joseph  clearly
shows  that  the  ten  tribes  were  to  return  at  the  same  time,  and  jointly  with  Judah  and
Benjamin,  to  possess  the  land  of  Palestine  and  the  neighbouring  regions  (see  Isa.  xi.
12 — 14 ;  Hob.  i.  11).  The  restored  Hebrews  would  unitedly  subdue  the  Idumeans ;
which  they  did  in  the  time  of  John  Hyrcanus,  who  compelled  them  to  be  circumcised,
and  so  incorporated  them  with  the  Jews  that  they  henceforward  formed  part  of  the
nation."  The  word  "  possess  "  here  means  enjoy — enjoy  their  possessions.  The  com-
munity of  the  true  Church  alone  enjoy  their  possessions.  They  are  a  happy  people ;  all
things  are  theirs ;  they  are  full  of  joy ;  they  even  glory  in  tribulation.  "  Blessed  are
the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound  1 "  (Ps.  Ixxxiz.  15). — D.  T,

Ver.  18. — The  true  Church ;  or,  the  community  of  the  good :  2.  A  contuming  power.
"  And  the  house  of  Jacob  shall  be  a  fire,  and  the  house  of  Joseph  a  fiame,  and  the  house
of  Esau  for  stubble,  and  they  shall  kindle  in  them,  and  devour  them ;  and  there  shall
not  be  any  remaining  of  the  house  of  Esau ;  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  There  is  •
ire  in  the  true  Church.    Notice —


1— 2L]  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH..  41


I.  Thb  OHABAOTSBIBTI08  WHiOH  THIS  mtK  siBPLATB.  What  la  the  fire?  The  fire
of  truth,  that  bums  up  error ;  the  fire  of  right,  that  bnrng  up  wiokednesg ;  the  fire  of  love,
that  bums  up  selfishness.  «•  I  am  come,"  said  Christ, "  to  kindle  a  fire  upon  the  earth,"
•'  Is  not  my  Word  like  a  fire  ?  "  1.  The  fire  in  the  Church  is  a  ttrong  fire.  It  has
burnt  an  enormous  amount  of  wickedness  in  every  form,  age,  and  land.  It  has  burnt
through  the  fiercest  storms  of  centuries.  2.  It  is  on  extending  fire.  Its  flames  are  ever
advancing,  they  reach  farther  to-day  than  ever.  The  most  splendid  systems  of  men,
ethical,  theological,  and  philosophic,  however  brilliant,  have  been  but  sparks  compared
to  this ;  they  have  burnt  on  a  little  and  gone  out  in  darkness.  3.  It  is  a  tteadyfire.
It  does  not  flare  and  flash,  but  burns  its  way  silently  wherever  it  goes.  4.  It  is  an
tmqvmvchahlefire.  Men  have  tried  to  put  it  out,  oceans  of  infidelity  and  depravity  have
been  poured  upon  it,  but  it  bums  on.

II.  Thb  matebials  which  thib  fieb  cohbumbs.  "Stubble."  What  is  moral  depravity
in  all  its  forms — theoretical  and  practical,  religious,  social,  political  ?  What  is  it,  how-
ever old,  however  decorated  with  worldly  power  and  grandeur  ?  What  is  it  ?  "  BttMle."
It  is  not  a  rock,  that  stands  fixed  amidst  the  surges  of  time ;  not  a  tree,  that  has  roots
that  may  grow  for  ever  j  it  is  mere  stubble,  dry,  sapless,  worthless  "  stubble,"  ready  for
the  fire.    Error  to  tmth,  wrong  to  right,  malice  to  love,  is  but  stubble  to  fire,

CoNOLiTSioN.  Clod  speed  this  fire  until  the  whole  world  of  wickedness  shall  be
destroyed,  until  its  heavens  be  dissolved,  its  earth  burnt  up,  and  its  elements  melt  with
fervent  heat,  and  there  come  out  of  it  "•  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth
righteousness  "  1 — D.  T.

Vers.  19, 20.'^  27ie  true  Church ;  or,  the  community  of  the  good :  S.An  aggretiive  power.
"  And  they  of  the  south  shall  possess  the  mount  of  Esau ;  and  they  of  the  plain  the
Philistines :  and  they  shall  possess  the  fields  of  Ephraim,  and  the  fields  of  Samaria :
and  Benjamin  shall  possess  Gilead,"  etc.  By  the  "  south  "  or  southern  part  of  Palestine
is  here  meant  those  who  should  occupy  it ;  and  by  the  "  plain,"  those  who  should  occupy
the  low  country  along  the  shore  of  the  Mediterranean,  "  According  to  the  relative
positions  ot  those  who  should  take  possession  of  the  different  parts  of  the  Holy  Land  was
to  be  the  enlargement  of  their  territory  by  the  annexation  of  the  adjoining  regions  which
had  formerly  been  occupied  by  allies  or  hostile  powers.  As  there  is  no  subject  specified
before  the  country  of  Edom  and  the  country  of  Samaria,  it  seems  to  be  intimated  that
the  regions  of  Ephraim  and  Samaria  were  to  be  occupied  by  the  Jews  and  the  Israelites
jointly,  without  any  regard  to  tribal  distinctions ;  and  the  reason  why  the  tribe  of
Benjamin  is  mentioned  is  merely  on  account  of  the  proximity  of  G-Uead  to  the  territory
which  it  originally  possessed  "  (Elzas),  "The  promise  here,"  says  an  old  expositor,
"  no  doubt  has  a  spiritual  signification,  and  had  its  accomplishment  in  the  setting  up  of
the  Christian  Church,  the  gospel  Israel,  in  the  world ;  and  shall  have  its  accomplishment
more  and  more  in  the  enlargement  of  it,  and  the  additions  made  to  it,  till  the  mystical
body  is  completed.  When  ministers  and  Christians  prevail  with  their  neighbours  to
come  to  Christ,  to  yield  themselves  to  the  Lord,  they  possess  them.  The  converts
that  Abraham  had  made  are  said  to  be  the  souls  that  he  had  gotten  (Gen.  xii.  6).  The
possession  is  gained,  not  vi  et  armis — ^by  force  and  arms ;  for  the  weapons  of  our  warfare
are  not  carnal,  but  spiritual ;  it  is  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  the  power  of
Divine  grace  going  along  with  it,  that  this  possession  is  got  and  kept."  That  the
true  Church  is  an  aggressive  power  wiU  appear  from  considering  the  gospd,  which  is  at
once  its  inspiration,  its  life,  and  its  instrument.    Consider,  therefore —

L  The  eleubnts  of  which  the  gospel  is  composed.  It  is  made  up  of  two  great
elements,  "  grace  and  truth,"  that  is,  eternal  reality  and  Divine  benevolence.  "  Grace
and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  To  show  the  aggressiveness  of  these  two  principles,
two  facts  may  be  stated.  1.  That  the  human  soul  is  made  to  feel  their  imperial  force.
It  is  true  that  the  soul  in  its  unregenerate  state  is  ruled  by  directly  opposite  elements
—error  and  selfishness.  But  even  error  has  power  over  it  only  so  long  as  it  regards  it
•B  reality,  and  selfishness  influences  it  imder  the  guise  of  love.  It  is  the  trath  when
made  clear  to  it  that  comes  with  a  conquering  power ;  it  is  love  or  grace  that  transports
its  heart.  The  human  soul  is  made  for  these  two  elements.  2.  That  the  human  soul
u  bound  to  yearn  after  these  elements  as  its  highest  good.  Its  deep  hunger  is  for  trath
and  for  resJity,  for  benevolence,  or  love.    It  has  no  natural  hunger  for  error,  do  natural


42  THE  BOOK  OF  OBADIAH.  [X— 21.

hunger  for  MlfislmeBa.  S.  That  the  human  loul  U  everywhere  reaUeu  wtthout  thttt
tlemenU.  It  is  only  aa  the  soul  gets  truth  and  grace^  into  it  that  it  becomes  lettled,
calm,  self-united.  These  are  facts  connected  with  the  human  soul,  and  these  facts  show
the  aggreasiveness  of  the  gospel.

II.  The  FBosELTTiznra  spirit  which  the  oosfel  xnoendebb.  As  soon  as  ever
the  gospel  takes  real  possession  of  a  soul,  that  soul  becomes  intensely  solicitous  to
cpread  it  abroad.  It  becomes  what  Jeremiah  describes  as  a  "  fire  in  the  bones."  Peter
said,  "  We  cannot  but  speak  the  things  which  we  hare  seen  and  heard."  Paul  said, "  The
love  of  Christ  constraineth  us ;  because  we  thus  judge,"  etc.  "  Necessity  is  laid  upon
us."  Every  genuine  recipient,  then,  of  the  gospel  becomes  a  missionary,  a  propagandist,
a  moral  knight,  to  battle  against  the  mighty  hosts  of  error  and  selfishness.  Each
member  of  the  true  Church,  or  godly  community,  becomes,  by  •  moral  necessity,  a
soldier  of  the  cross.

III.  The  TBnjMFHB  which  the  oobpel  has  albeadt  achieved.  Compare  the
Infiuence  of  the  gospel  in  the  world  now  to  what  it  was  when  Christ  was  on  earth.  It
was  then  confined  to  one  lonely  soul,  the  soul  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth ;  it  is  now  in  the
possession  of  millions.  The  springlet  has  become  an  Amazon  ;  the  grain  has  covered
islands  and  continents ;  the  little  stone  has  grown  into  a  mountain  that  bids  fiiir  to  fill
the  earth.

CoNOLUsioH.  Such  thoughts  as  these  tend,  we  think,  to  demonstrate  the  essential
aggressiveness  of  the  true  Chiirch.  It  will  one  day  take  possession  of  all  heathendom,
with  ito  "  mount  of  Esau,"  the  "  plains  of  the  Philistines,"  the  "  fields  of  Ephraim,"  aai
tk*  "  fields  of  Samnrla."  aod  what  Canunites  there  are  as  &r  ss  Zarepbath.^— B.  T.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


THE    BOOK    OP    OBADIAH.


WMMMt  rASB

The  Servwat  of  JehoTik       ».  m.  7

TheYiBion            8,11

The  DeoeptiTeneH  of  Hnman  Pride  ...  8

The  TieaoheMniB  betrayed  ...  ...  9

Wisdom  and  Power  of  no  Arail  against

UCu            •••                     ...                     cat  •••  V

A  Neighbour's  Omelty         m<  ...  10

The^LezTalioniB"            ...  ...  10

Bestoration             ...           ...  ...  10

Empire  founded  on  Salvation  ...  11

Bdom  subdued        ...           ...  ...  13

"  The  Tilings  of  Esau  searohed  out "...  15

Unholy  Alliances  ...           ...  ...  17

False  Confidences  ...           _  ...  19

Edom's  Omelty      .m           ...  «.  20

Edom  as  Babylon   ...           ...  „,  21

Beoompense  is  Snre             ...  —  23

Safety,  Sanctity,  and  Sufiadenogr  ~.  25

Tmtb  Trinmphant...           ...  ...  26

"Behoboth"          ...           m  ...  37

Savioiira  Knd  JadgM            m*  m.  W


The  Kingdom  ...
Ood  and  Bad  Men  .m
Pride        ...  ,m


FAGI
.       30

.    31

.    32


Ood  in  Betribntion

Social  Cruelty:  1.  A  Sin  against  the

Creator...

An  Old  Sin

Social  Cruelty :  2.  Perpetrated  against

a  Brother,  specially  OfiensiTe  to  God
Social    Cruelty :    3.    As    working    in

Various  Forms  from  Generation  to

Generation         ...  ...  ...

Social  Retribution  ...

The  True  Ohuroh ;  or,  the  Community

of  the  Good :  1.  A  Beneficent  Power
The  True  Church ;  or,  the  Community

of  the  Good  :  2.  A  Consuming  Power
The  True  Churoh;  or,  the  Community

of  the    Good:    8.   An   Aggressive

Power  M.  M  M.  M.


33

35
36

37


37
38

40

40


41


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EDITED   BY  THE

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER  ;
AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

JONAH.

®5£position :
By  REV.  W.  J.  DEANE,  M.A.,


RECTOR  OF  ASHEN  ;


-  fomilctirs :
By  rev.   professor  J.   R.  THOMSON,   M.A.

^omiUes  bg  tiarious  ':antl)ors :

REV.  J.  E.  HENRY,  M.A.  REV.  G.  T.  COSTER.

REV.  W.  G.  BLAIKIE,  D.D.,  LL.D.  REV.  A.  ROWLAND,  B.A.,  LL.B.

REV.    D.   THOMAS,    D.D.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  Yoek  and  Toronto.


THE   BOOK   OF   JONAH.

INTRODUCTION.


§  I.  Subject  op  thb  Book.

Thb  Book  of  Jonah  is  not  a  prophecy,  bat  an  acconnt  of  the  prophet's
mission  to  Nineveh  to  annonnce  its  speedy  destruction.  It  is  concerned
ohiefly  with  Jonah's  own  personal  feelings  and  history  in  relation  to  this
mission.  Possessed  with  the  national  hatred  of  idolatrons  Gentiles,  and
fearing  that  God,  in  his  great  long- suffering,  might,  after  all,  spare  these
Assyrians  to  whom  he  was  sent,  and  that  thus  his  prediction  would  be
discredited  and  a  heathen  nation  saved,  he  attempted  to  escape  the
unwelcome  errand.  Mingled  with  this  apprehension  there  may  have  been
a  personal  dread  of  ill  treatment  at  the  hands  of  the  cruel  and  ferocious
Assyrians,  who  would  have  little  respect  for  an  alien  prophet,  and  would
probably  punish  his  pretensions  with  torture  and  death.  But  this  con-
sideration would  haye  had  small  influence  had  his  heart  been  right.  Ha
is  bold  enough  when  he  comes  to  himself.  He  knew  his  duty,  but  at  the
present  moment  determined  to  avoid  its  fulfilment.  Accordingly,  he  fled
to  Joppa  and  took  ship  for  Tarshish.  The  providence  of  God  followed  him.
A  violent  storm  arose,  and  the  crew  of  the  vessel,  surmising  that  it  was  sent
by  Heaven  as  a  judgment,  cast  lots  in  order  to  discover  who  was  the  guilty
person  among  them.  Jonah,  being  thus  designated,  confesses  the  truth,  and
at  his  own  earnest  request  is  cast  into  the  sea.  He  is,  however,  not  drowned.
A  huge  fish  swallows  him,  and  after  three  days  vomits  him  forth,  and  he
lands  safely  on  the  shore.  He  then  humbly  obeys  the  will  of  God,  seta
out,  and  executes  his  mission  to  Nineveh.  The  king  of  that  city,  having
heard  probably  of  his  strange  deliverance  from  the  deep,  and  believing
him  to  be  a  messenger  from  Heaven,  ordered  a  general  fast,  and  by  timely
repentance  averted  the  threatened  doom.  Jonah,  from  national  idiosyn-
crasies, grudging  the  mercy  thus  conceded  to  a  heathen  nation,  showed  hia
displeasure  in  a  marked  manner.  A  better  lesson  was  taught  him  by  a
little  incident.     A  gourd,  under  whose  grateful  shade  he  had  sat  the  live-

JOHAH.  i


INTRODUCTION  TO


long  day,  withered  away,  and  left  him  exposed  to  the  boming  Eastern
son ;  and  he  grieved  bitterly  over  the  gourd.  Then  Qoi  shows  him  how
nnreasonable  he  is  in  lamenting  for  this  plant,  in  whose  growth  he  had  no
hand,  which  rose  in  a  night  and  perished  in  a  night,  and  yet  in  being  angry
that  he,  the  Gk>d  of  mercy,  should  have  pity  on  this  great  city  filled  with
half  a  million  of  Bonis.

Of  the  moral  corraption  of  Ninereh,  which  was  the  occasion  of  the
threatened  punishment,  other  prophets  speak.  "  Woe  to  the  bloody  city ! "
says  Nahum  (iii.  1)  ;  "  it  is  all  fxill  of  lies  and  robbery ;  the  prey  departeth
not;"  "Upon  whom  hath  not  thy  wickedness  passed  continually?"  (iii.
19).  "This  is  the  joyous  city,"  cries  Zephaniah  (ii.  15),  "that  dwelt
carelessly,  that  said  in  her  heart,  I  am,  and  there  is  none  else  beside  me."
"  The  annals  of  Assyria,"  says  Layard  ('  Nineveh  and  Babylon,'  p.  631),
quoted  by  Trochon,  "  are  nothing  but  a  register  of  military  campaigns,
spoliations,  and  cruelties.  Their  monuments  display  men  of  a  calm  and
unmoved  ferocity,  whose  moral  and  mental  qualities  are  overborne  by  the
faculties  of  the  lower,  brutal  nature."

In  the  book  before  us  we  can  trace  three  stages  leading  to  the  final
lesson.  The  first  is  Jonah's  conversion,  with  its  various  scenes,  ending  in
his  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  call  and  his  second  mission.  Then  follow
the  solemn  annunciation  to  Nineveh,  and  the  repentance  of  king  and  people.
Lastly  we  have  Jonah's  displeasure  at  the  non-accomplishment  of  the
predicted  overthrow,  and  the  better  lesson  which  God  vouchsafes  to  teach
him.  These  parts,  and  every  portion  of  them,  are  replete  with  most
important  truths  and  types  and  figures.  It  is  this  didactic  &XLd  symbolical
character  that  has  caused  the  book  to  be  inserted  among  the  prophets.  In
its  history  there  is,  indeed,  concealed  prophecy  of  the  highest  importance
which  our  eyes  are  open  to  discern.  To  the  Jew,  perhaps,  the  chief  lesson
which-it  was  meant  to  teach  was  the  capacity  of  the  Gentiles  for  salvation,
and  that  God  designed  to  make  them  partakers  thereof.  This  was  a  truth
hard  to  be  learned.  The  Israelites  had  been  often  warned  that  the  Gentiles
were  ordained  to  be  the  punishers  of  their  disobedience  and  apostasy;
hence  they  looked  upon  them  as  bitter  enemies,  incapable  of  salvation,
and  cherished  all  the  prophecies  concerning  their  final  overthrow,  over-
looking or  misinterpreting  those  that  spoke  of  their  conversion  and
entrance  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  possibility  of  the  admission  of
aliens  to  the  privileges  of  Abraham's  seed  had  now  to  be  enforced.  Other
prophets  enunciated  this  great  truth  in  plain  words  or  under  dark  sayings ;
Jonah  acted  it,  expressed  it  in  action.  He  was  forced  to  show  that  it  was
his  duty  to  sympathize  with  others  who  wished  to  turn  to  God ;  to  help,  not
to  impede,  their  eSorts.  He  is  made  to  exhibit  the  unreasonableness  and
impiety  of  a  spirit  like  that  of  the  elder  brother  in  the  parable  of  the
prodigal  son,  who  is  jealous  of  the  mercy  bestowed  upon  the  returning
penitent.  In  his  great  candour  he  places  even  the  heathen  sailors  in  the
category  of  possible  believers :  they  cry  to  the  Lord,  fear  him,  offer  saoru


THE  BOOK  OP  CONAH.  U

fice,  and  make  vows  unto  him.  So,  in  this  view,  the  history  is  levelled
against  the  bigotry  and  ezclasiveness  of  the  Jews  which  come  forward  so
prominently  in  later  times.  God  has  compassion  on  all  men ;  "  In  every
nation  he  that  feareth  him,  and  worketh  righteousness,  is  accepted  with
him  "  (Acts  X.  36).

Another  object  of  the  history  is  to  teach  the  nature  and  efficacy  of  true
repentance.  Under  this  head  we  are  presented  with  the  examples  of  Jonah
himself  and  the  Ninevites.  Not  that  the  prophet  takes  any  pains  to
explain  his  own  conduct  or  to  soften  its  asperities.  He  deals  with  facts
and  results.  The  storm,  and  the  lot  that  points  him  out  as  the  guilty  person
on  board  the  ship,  awaken  in  him  a  sense  of  his  crime  in  fleeing  from  his
appointed  work;  the  wonderful  deUveranoe  vouchsafed  fills  him  with
gratitude  and  remorse,  and  makes  him  ready,  when  restored  to  his  office,
to  execute  the  renewed  mission  as  God  commanded.  The  repentance  of
the  people  at  the  mere  announcement  of  Jonah  is  used  by  Ohrist  himself
to  accentuate  the  obstinate  impenitence  of  the  Jews  under  unusual  privi-
leges and  advantages  (Matt.  xii.  41).  And  to  his  own  contemporaries  the
prophet,  by  this  history,  read  a  solemn,  if  silent,  warning;  he  contrasts
the  submission  of  these  Gentiles,  who  had  so  little  light  and  knowledge,
with  the  hardness  and  obstinacy  of  the  Israelites,  who  had  the  Word  of
God  and  the  light  of  his  presence  among  them.  It  is  as  though  he  was
using  to  them  the  words  of  Christ,  "  I  tell  you,  except  ye  repent,  ye  shall
all  likewise  perish  "  (Luke  xiii.  3),  or  enforcing  the  sad  comparison  that
Isaiah  (Ixv.  1,  2)  makes,  "I  have  spread  out  my  hands  all  the  day  long
nnto  a  rebellions  people ; "  and  "  I  am  sought  of  them  that  asked  not  for
me;  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  me  not."  But  there  is  another
object  in  this  history.  It  is  a  type  and  prophecy  of  the  resurrection  of
Ohrist  and  the  issues  of  that  momentous  fact.  On  this  feature  the  Saviour
himself  shed  clear  light.  "  As  Jonas  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in
the  whale's  belly,  so  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  three  days  and  three  nights
in  the  heart  of  the  earth  "  (Matt.  xii.  40).  The  Jews  themselves  taught
from  this  history  the  resurrection  of  the  body.  "We  can  see,  however,  much
more  in  it.  Not  merely  the  resurrection  of  the  flesh,  nor  merely  the  resur-
rection of  Christ,  are  here  adumbrated;  the  Divine  plan  of  salvation  ia
unfolded,  as  expressed  in  the  words  of  St.  Paul  before  Festus  (Acts  xxvi.
23),  "  That  Christ  should  suffer,  and  that  he  should  be  the  first  that  should
rise  from  the  dead,  and  should  show  light  unto  the  people,  and  to  the
Gentiles."  It  was  not  till  Jonah  had,  as  it  were,  died  and  risen  again
that  he  preached  repentance  to  the  Nine  rites.  So  Christ  had  said,  "  Except
a  grain  of  wheat  fall  into  the  earth  and  die,  it  abideth  by  itself  alone ;  but
if  it  die,  it  beareth  much  fruit "  (John  xii.  24)  ;  "  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up
from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  myself"  (John  xii.  32).  Thus
after  his  resurrection  Christ  went  forth  in  his  Church  to  make  disciples
of  all  nations,  and  to  embrace  both  Jew  and  Gentile  in  the  kingdom  of
God.    The  mission  of  Jonah  has  its  place  in  the  gradual  development  of


INTRODUCTION  TO


thU  dtdgn;  it  gives  a  aketoh  of  that  piotare  which  was  one  Aaj  to  be
filled  up  to  perfection.  B7  it,  on  the  one  hand,  the  Oentile  learned  some-
thing of  the  attributes  of  the  true  Ood — his  omnipotence,  jnstice,  and
mercy ;  and,  on  the  other,  the  Jew  was  taught  tolerance  and  charity,  and
the  rigid  spirit  of  pride  and  exclnsiveness  received  a  plain  rebuke.

Some  critics  consider  the  book  to  have  been  written  with  an  apologetic
purpose,  to  show  a  correct  view  of  the  functions  of  the  prophet  and  the
chatacteristics  of  prophecy.  Many  prophecies  had  remained  unfulfilled;
many  had  received  a  very  partial  and  indefinite  fulfilment.  Jonah's  history
emphasices  the  truth  that  all  such  pre-announcements  are  conditional,
and  their  issues  are  liable  to  be  modified  and  altered  by  circumstances,
and  that  such  ▼ariatious  detract  nothing  from  the  Divine  nature  of  the
prediction.

It  remains  to  mention  another  view  of  the  mission  of  Jonah  which
considers  it  to  have  been  of  a  political  rather  than  a  religious  character
(see  Dr.  Smith's  '  Student's  Old  Testament  History,'  p.  468 ;  and  Kalisch,
'Bible  Studies,'  pt.  ii.).  According  to  this  supposition,  Jonah  was  sent
to  Nineveh  to  warn  the  king  against  attacking  or  interfering  with  Israel.
The  Assyrians  at  this  time  had  made  frequent  inroads  upon  Syria,  and  it
was  probable  that  they  would  ere  long  turn  their  arms  against  Samaria.
God's  forbearance  with  his  rebellious  people  had  been  markedly  exhibited ;
lately  he  had  given  assurance  that  "he  woald  not  blot  out  their  name
from  under  heaven  "  (2  Kings  ziii.  23),  and  now  he  sends  a  prophet  to  urge
Assyria  to  desist  from  its  meditated  enterprise  against  Israel.  In  support
of  this  notion  it  is  argued  that  the  crime  of  which  Nineveh  repented  could
not  have  been  idolatry ;  for  this  certainly  was  not  abandoned  on  account  of
the  preaching  of  Jonah ;  and  there  is  no  evidence  whatever  of  any  religious
reformation  at  this  period.  The  only  effect  that  is  admissible  is  the
relinquishment  of  a  design  which  the  king  had  learned  was  displeasing
to  a  Divinity  whom  he  saw  reason  to  reverence.  But  all  this  is  pure
assumption.  There  is  not  a  trace  of  any  political  bearing  in  the  whole
transaction.  Jonah  is  bidden  (ch.  i.  2)  to  "  go  and  cry  against  Nineveh ;
for  their  wickedness  is  come  up"  unto  the  Lord.  And  when  at  length
he  executes  his  mission,  his  only  word  is,  "  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh
shall  be  overthrown  "  (ch.  iii.  4).  What  need  was  there  of  fasting  and
sackcloth,  if  the  only  change  desired  was  the  abandonment  of  a  certain
military  expedition  P  How  could  this  people  be  held  up  as  an  example
of  repentance,  if  they  only  altered  the  direction  of  their  arms  at  the
prophet's  request  P  No  doubt  the  lust  of  conquest,  and  the  cruelty,  spolia-
tion, and  injustice  to  which  it  gave  occasion  were  some  of  the  sins  which
called  for  vengeance;  but  we  have  no  ground  for  narrowing  Jonah's
mission  to  a  prohibition  of  a  threatened  attack  on  Israel.  The  vices  of
a  g^eat  and  luxurious  city,  drunk  with  conquest  and  exalting  in  its
material  strength,  were  flagrant  enough  to  draw  down  the  vengeance  of
Heaven  j  and  the  providence  of  God  is  grandly  displayed  in  offering  a  hope


THB  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


of  repentance  to  tliis  great  people  by  tbe  word  of  a  prophet  from  liu  own
chosen  nation.

§  II.  Author.

There  is  no  good  reason  to  donbt  that  the  hero,  if  not  the  author,  of  this
book  w%B  that  Jonah,  eon  of  Amittai,  the  prophet  whose  comforting  prophecy
was  recounted  in  the  days  of  Jeroboam  the  Second  (2  Kings  xiv.  25).  The
names  of  Jonah  and  Amittai  oocnr  nowhere  else  in  the  Old  Testament,  and
it  is  incredible  that  there  should  have  been  two  distinct  persons  named
Jonah,  both  prophets,  both  sons  of  Amittai.  Jonah  means  "  a  Dove ; "
Amittai,  "  Tme."  Jerome,  in  his  commentary,  interprets  Jonah  to  mean
"  Ghrieving ; "  bnt  the  former  explanation  is  correct.  From  the  significa<
tion  of  Amittai  arose  the  yery  improbable  opinion  that  onr  prophet  was
the  son  of  the  widow  of  Sarepta,  whom  Elijah  raised  to  life,  because  she
said,  on  receiving  him  restored  at  the  prophet's  hands,  "  Now  I  know  that
thou  art  a  man  of  God,  and  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  thy  mouth  is  truth
(^emeth)  "  (1  Kings  zvii.  24).  Other  suggestions,  equally  unfounded,  are  that
he  was  the  boy  who  attended  Elijah  to  the  wilderness,  or  the  young  man
who  was  sent  .to  anoint  Jehu,  or  the  husband  of  the  Shunammite  woman
who  extended  hospitality  to  Elisha.  Of  the  facts  of  Jonah's  life  nothing
is  known  but  what  his  own  book  supplies.  The  notice  in  Kings  adds  the
only  other  piece  of  information  about  him  which  we  possess,  viz.  that  he
was  bom  at  Gath-hepher,  a  place  in  Zebulnn  (Josh.  xix.  13),  about  three
miles  north-east  of  Nazareth,  separated  by  a  wady  from  the  traditional
Cana  of  Galilee.  It  is  identified  with  the  modem  village  of  Methed,  and
the  monument  of  Neby  Tunas,  the  Prophet  Jonah,  is  still  shown  there.
Another  tradition  places  his  tomb  at  Nineveh,  but  there  is  no  ground  for
supposing  that,  after  his  mission  was  accomplished,  he  stayed  on  and  died
there.

As  to  the  actnal  writer  of  the  book,  a  grave  controversy  exists.  Most
modem  critics  of  the  advanced  school  unhesitatingly  deny  the  traditional
view,  which  regards  the  prophet  as  the  author,  though  their  arguments  are
not  thoroughly  convincing.  For  instance,  doubts  have  been  thrown  on
the  genuineness  of  the  book  because  it  is  written  throughout  in  the  third
person.  Bnt  there  is  nothing  unusual  in  this.  Classical  scholars  will  recall
the  '  Anabasis '  of  Xenophon  and  the  '  Commentaries '  of  Ceesar,  concerning
whose  genuineness  no  question  has  ever  been  raised,  though  they  are
written  in  the  third  person.  The  same  may  be  said  of  Thucydides,  and
Josephus,  and  Frederick  the  Great,  as  Hengstenberg  has  pointed  out
('Aath.  de  Pent.,'  ii.  107,  etc.).  We  have  many  instances  of  the  kind
close  at  hand.  Amos,  in  the  midst  of  his  prophecy,  inserts  the  historical
interlude  concerning  his  persecution  at  the  hands  of  Amaziah,  in  the  third
person  (vii.  12,  etc.).  There  are  many  passages  in  other  prophets  where
the  same  use  may  be  noticed;  e.g.  Isa.  vii.  8;  xz.  2,  8;  Jer.  xx.  1,  3;
xxvi  7,  etc.;  Dan.  i.— vii.;   Hag.  i.  1,  3, 12;  ii.  1, 10,  20.    Besides  this,


I>rT]iODUOT10N  TO


the  candonr  of  the  history  shows  it  to  haye  been  written  bj  the  persoo
whose  story  it  relates.  It  is  true  that  the  book  does  not  profess  to  have
been  written  by  Jonah  himself ;  but  snrely  a  Jewish  writer,  imbued  with
the  national  respect  for  the  prophetical  character,  would  never  have  allowed
himself  to  exhibit  a  seer  ih  such  an  unfavourable  light.  The  bigotry,
selfishness,  petulance,  and  disobedience,  which  are  so  plainly  attributed  to
Jonah,  could  have  been  set  forth  by  no  one  but  by  himself.  His  -weak-
nesses and  errors  are  allowed  to  remain  unexplained  and  unsoftened;
the  writer  makes  no  attempt  to  put  a  favourable  construction  upon  his
failings ;  he  leaves  the  prophet  lying  under  God's  reproof.  Surely  no  one
but  himself  would  have  done  this ;  no  one  but  himself  could  have  shown
this  unique  impartiality,  this  holy  indifference  to  men's  praise  or  blame.
The  calm,  dispassionate  narrative  betrays  one  who  is  telling  the  story  of
his  own  actions,  accurately  and  hambly,  in  order  to  teach  a  great  lesson.
The  personality  is  wholly  absorbed  in  this  design.  He  writes  for  the
instruction  of  others.  He  records  his  own  weaknesses  and  prejudices  as  a
warning  to  other  prophets  who  should  be  placed  in  like  circumstances.  If
v?e  can  get  over  other  difficulties  connected  with  language,  history,  etc.,  we
shall  not  be  unreasonable  in  regarding  Jonah  as  responsible  f oi;  the  narrative,
though  it  may  have  been  modified  by  a  subsequent  editor.  We  may  thus
regard  the  story  as  being  the  confession  of  his  repentance,  the  token  that
he  sincerely  grieved  for  his  faalt,  and  desired  to  make  amends  by  exhibit-
ing it  in  its  full  heinousness  with  its  punishment  and  consequences.

We  gather  the  character  of  Jonah  from  his  own  words  and  actions.  He
is  narrow-minded  and  prejudiced ;  a  bigoted  patriot,  incapable  of  taking
a  comprehensive  view  of  his  unexampled  mission.  He  thinks  more  of
himself  and  his  own  reputation  than  of  the  moral  good  of  those  to  whom
he  is  sent ;  he  would  rather  let  the  heathen  perish  than  see  them  repent
and  spared,  and  so  bring  discredit  upon  his  prediction.  So  that  his  pro-
phecy held  good,  he  cared  nothing  for  the  fate  of  the  Ninevites ;  compared
with  the  maintenance  of  the  veracily  of  the  prophetical  utterance,  the
overthrow  of  a  heathen  city  was  of  small  account.  Instead  of  at  once
obeying,  he  reasons  and  looks  to  consequences.  With  the  utmost  trust  in
God's  mercy  and  loving-kindness,  he  is  not  satisfied  with  blindly  follow*
ing  the  Divine  leading,  but  must  interpose  his  own  self-willed  action,  as
though  he  had  more  zeal  for  God's  honour  than  God  himself  had.  It  is
not,  perhaps,  fear  for  his  own  safety  that  holds  him  back,  i  He  is  bold  enough
to  be  willing  to  incur  death  as  an  atonement  for  his  fault.  But  in  his  eager
desire  to  uphold  the  honour  of  God,  he  shrinks  from  a  task  which  may
give  occasion  for  the  heathen  to  exult  over  a  God  who  threatens  but
does  not  strike.  Yet,  with  all  his  faults,  his  narrow  insularity,  his  rash
impetuosity,  his  hasty  anger,  Jonah's  is  a  gr&nd  character,  and  may  be
compared  with  that  of  St.  Peter,  which  in  many  respects  it  greatly
resembles.  His  faults  were  those  of  his  era  and  his  country ;  his  virtuei
were  such  as  God  loves  in  every  age,  such  as  we  Christians  do  well  to


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  tU


leam  and  to  emnlate.  We  may  grieve  for  his  self-will  and  capriciousness
and  bigotry ;  we  may  strive  to  imitate  his  trath  and  honesty,  his  conraga
and  zeal.

§  m.  Datx.

The  date  of  the  historical  Prophet  Jonah  is  determined  chiefly  by  internal
evidence.  "We  have  seen  that  he  is  the  prophet  whose  message  is  mentioned
in  2  Kings  xiv.  25.  Speaking  of  Jeroboam  II.,  the  historian  says,  "  He
restored  the  coast  of  Israel  from  the  entering  of  Hamath  unto  the  sea  of
the  plain,  according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  which  he  spake
by  the  hand  of  his  servant  Jonah,  the  son  of  Amittai,  the  prophet,  which
was  of  Gath-hepher."  Of  this  "  word  "  we  have  no  further  knowledge  ;  but
it  seems  to  have  been  uttered  or  remembered  at  a  time  of  great  national
distress  ;  for  the  account  proceeds  (vers.  26,  27),  "  For  the  Lord  saw  the
affliction  of  Israel,  that  it  was  very  bitter :  for  there  was  not  any  shut  up,
nor  left  at  large,  nor  was  there  any  helper  for  Israel.-  And  the  Lord  said
not  that  he  would  blot  out  the  name  of  Israel  from  under  heaven :  but  he
saved  them  by  the  hand  of  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Joash."  "Whether  the
afQiction  named  belongs  to  Jeroboam's  time  or  to  a  period  antecedent,  it  is
plain  that  Jonah  prophesied  either  in  the  very  early  part  of  that  king's
reign  or  before  his  accession.  The  date  of  Jeroboam's  reign,  as  now
corrected  by  Assyrian  chronology,  is  B.C.  799 — 759,  or,  as  others  say,  B.C.
790 — 749 ;  and  he  seems  to  have  won  his  great  victories  over  the  Syrians
soon  after  he  came  to  the  throne,  when  that  people  were  weakened  by
the  constant  attacks  of  the  Assyrians.  The  state  of  things  depicted  in
ver.  26  of  the  above-cited  chapter  is  found  to  have  existed  in  the  time  of
Jehoahaz,  when  the  King  of  Syria  oppressed  the  Israelites :  "  Neither  did
he  leave  of  the  people  to  Jehoahaz  but  fifty  horsemen,  and  ten  chariots,  and
ten  thousand  footmen ;  for  the  King  of  Syria  had  destroyed  them,  and  had
made  them  like  the  dust  by  threshing  "  (2  Kings  xiii.  4,  7).  Such  a  crisis
called  for  an  assurance  of  God's  protection;  and  it  may  well  be  believed
that  the  prophecy  of  Jonah  was  then  uttered  to  comfort  the  despairing
people  in  their  dire  necessity.  It  is  thus  parallel  to  the  celebrated  pre-
diction of  Elisha,  when,  in  his  last  sickness,  he  sent  for  Joash,  the  father
of  Jeroboam,  and  gave  him  promise  of  three  victories  over  the  Syrians
(2  Kings  xiii.  14—19).  Probably  after  Elisha's  death  Jonah  came  into
greater  prominence  as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  and  his  words  were  treasured
up  and  remembered.  Prom  these  considerations  we  are  warranted  ia
setting  his  date  at  B.C.  800  or  a  little  earlier,  among  the  first  of  the  minor
prophets,  somewhat  senior  to  Amos  and  Hosea.

As  to  the  time  of  his  arrival  in  Nineveh,  nothing  can  be  exactly  settled.
The  Assyrian  annals  record  no  event  which  throws  light  on  the  matter.
From  B.O.  810  to  781  the  throne  was  occupied  by  Vul-nirari,  or  Iva-lush,
or  Rimmon-nirari,  as  his  name  is  variously  read  by  different  interpreters.
This  monarch  made  various  military  expeditions,  which  he  recounts  in  his


Tiii  INTEODUCfTION  TO


annals.  Among  tliem  be  mentions  the  conquest  of  the  land  of  the  Hittites,
Phoenicia,  the  cities  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  the  land  of  Omri,  the  Idngdom  of
Israel,  Edom,  and  the  Philistines.  These  probahly  merely  acknowledged
his  superiority  hj  the  payment  of  an  annual  tribute.  His  successor,  Shal-.
maneser  III.  (B.C.  781 — 770),  had  great  difficulty  in  maintaining  his  position
against  the  rising  power  of  Armenia,  though  he  found  time  for  one  attack
on  Syria.  The  following  period,  during  the  reigns  of  Asshur-danil  and
Asshur-nirari,  or  Asshur-lnsh,  up  to  B.C.  750,  was  one  of  internal  commo-
tion and  distress,  and  allowed  no  leisure  for  foreign  conquest.  It  is  very
probable  that  Jonah's  mission  was  executed  towards  the  close  of  Jeroboam's
reign,  when  the  Assyrian  monarchy  was  weakened  by  revolt,  and  the
country  was  suffering  from  plague  and  famine.  Both  king  and  people
were  thus  more  disposed  to  listen  to  the  warning  of  a  man  of  God,  and  to
endeavour  to  avert  imminent  ruin  by  timely,  though  superjQcial,  repentance.
Possibly,  too,  the  preaching  of  Jonah  may  have  synchronized  with  the
famous  eclipse  which  happened  on  June  15,  B.o.  763,  as  mentioned  in  the
Assyrian  records,  and  which  was  regarded  as  a  very  evil  omen.

Some  critics,  who  cannot  away  with  the  miraculous  portion  of  this  book,
have  endeavoured  to  throw  discredit  upon  it  by  assigning  to  it  a  date  later
than  Jonah's  time,  some  giving  it  a  post-exilic  origin,  others  assig^ng  it  to
the  Maccabean  age.  They  seek  for  proof  of  this  assertion  in  the  language
employed,  and  in  the  use  made  of  the  Psalms  in  Jonah's  prayer.  The
complete  refutation  of  this  hypothesis  may  be  seen  in  Keil's  and  Dr.  Pusey's
commentaries.  We  here  need  only  say  that  the  so-called  late  Aramaisma
cannot  be  proved  to  be  unknown  to  the  earlier  Hebrew,  and  the  only  non-
Hebraic  word,  taam,  is  a  Syriac  expression  which  Jonah  heard  at  Nineveh
in  the  sense  of  "  decree,"  and  introduced  into  his  own  narrative.  The
phrases  in  the  prayer  (ch.  ii.),  which  are  also  found  in  the  Psalms,  are
either  taken'  from  those  written  by  David  and  his  contemporaries,  which,
of  coarse,  were  well  known  long  before  Jonah's  day,  or  (in  the  case  of  the
two  in  ver.  7  and  ver,  2)  may  have  been  borrowed  by  the  authors  of '  the
Psalms  (Ps.  cxlii.  3 ;  cxx.  1)  from  Jonah.  And  as  to  the  statement  in
ch.  iii.  3,  that  "  Nineveh  was  an  exceeding  great  city,"  from  which  Kuenen
deduces  the  inference  that  the  book  was  written  after  its  destruction,  we
need  only  remark  that  the  observation  is  introduced  parenthetically,  to'
explain  the  reason  for  the  time  that  the  prophet  took  in  traversing  it,  and
that  it  merely  asserts  that,  at  the  period  of  Jonah's  visit,  Nineveh  was  of
large  extent.  Such  criticisms  have  no  weight,  and,  as  Dr.  Pusey  says,  per-
haps somewhat  too  harshly,  "  are  founded,  not  on  the  study  of  the  language,
but  on  unbelief."

§  IV".   Gbneeal  Character.
The  Book  of  Jonah  is  a  history,  not  a  prophecy ;  it  is  inserted  among
the  prophets,  partly  because  its  author  bears  this  title  (2  Kings  xiv.  25),  but
chiefly  because  of  its  didactic  and  symbolical  purpose.     But  in  it  there  ii


THE  BOOK  OF  JJONAH.


no  moralizing,  no  reflection ;  it  !■  simple  narrative,  verging  here  and  there
into  poetry,  as  in  the  prayer  from  the  fish's  belly,  and  where  the  subject
Baits  snch  variation.  The  tale  is  told  graphically,  and  has  qnite  a  dramatic
interest,  advancing  in  regular  stages  to  tbe  conclasion,  and  leaving  an
impression  upon  the  mind  as  though  its  various  scenes  had  been  enacted
before  the  eyes  of  the  reader.  There  is  not  a  word  too  much ;  all  that  is
essential  to  the  understanding  of  the  transaction  is  said,  and  nothing  more.
There  is  no  trace  of  additions,  interpolations,  various  authorities.  The
prayer  (oh.  ii.)  bears  the  stamp  of  genuineness,  being  not  a  cry  of  repent-
ance or  a  petition  for  preservation,  which  a  forger  or  romancer  would  have
introduced,  but  a  thanksgiving,  an  expression  of  hope  and  trust,  which  alone
suits  tbe  prophet's  character  (Scbegg).  There  is  a  wonderful  simplicity
in  the  narrative,  though  it  deals  largely  vrith  the  supernatural.  The
miracles  of  the  fish  and  "  the  gourd  "  are  introduced  naturally.  Snch  inter-
positions of  God  need  no  explanation  in  Jonah's  view;  they  are  the  not
unusual  workings  of  Providence,  such  as  he  had  heard  of  in  the  case  of
Elijah,  such  as  happened  often  to  the  great  Prophet  Elisha.  All  is  unforced,
uniform,  plain;  vivid,  indeed,  and  picturesque,  but  without  effort,  and
effective  rather  from  its  truth,  reality,  and  naturalness,  than  &om  elevation
of  language  or  rhetorical  artifice.

The  miraculous  element  in  tbe  book  has  led  many  critics  to  doubt  its
historical  character,  and  to  consider  it  as  romance,  allegory,  or  parable.
The  miracles,  they  say,  are  so  prodigious,  so  wanting  in  sufficient  motive,
as  to  be  utterly  incredible,  and  to  prove  that  the  writer  manifestly  intends
his  work  to  be  regarded  as  a  fiction  with  a  didactic  purpose,  like  some  of
those  writings  which  are  preserved  in  our  Apocrypha.  Others  see  in  it
only  a  dream ;  others,  again,  regard  it  as  a  Jewish  adaptation  of  a  Greek
or  Babylonian  myth ;  others  explain  away  the  supernatural  portion  of  the
story,  as  e.g.  that  Jonah  was  saved  by  a  vessel  which  was  called,  or  bore  as
its  emblem,  a  sea-monster.  Against  all  these  suggestions  we  must  place
the  fact  that  the  work  comes  before  us  as  history ;  and  we  need  very  strong
arguments  to  dislodge  us  from  this  position.  Such,  however,  are  not  pro-
duced; and  we  should  have  heard  nothing  of  them  were  it  not  for  the
unbelief  in  the  supernatural  which  underlies  all  such  criticism,  or  a
tendency  to  reject,  prima  fcusie,  all  narratives  which  do  not  meet  the
standard  of  evidence  which  modem  critics  set  up  and  worship.  Of  course,
there  is  in  itself  nothing  repugnant  to  reverence  in  considering  tbe  book
as  an  inspired  allegory  intended  to  set  forth  certain  great  spiritual  truths,
as,  for  instance,  the  temporary  death  of  the  Jewish  nation  and  its  resurrection
anew  to  a  national  existence  (Wright,  *  Biblical  Essays,'  p.  70) ;  but  does
the  work  confirm  such  view  P    We  think  not.

In  the  first  place,  it  is  plain  that  the  Jews  themselves  regarded  the  book
•s  historical.  Tobit  (xiv.  4—6,  16)  bases  his  advice  to  his  son  upon  the
certainty  of  the  fulfilment  of  Jonah's  prediction.  Josephns  ('AJat.,'  ix.
10.  1,  2)  recounts  the  story  as  containing  all  that  is  known  of  the  Prophet


INTRODUCTION  TO


Jonah.  The  details  are  quite  in  keeping  with  the  localities  and  the  dat«
of  the  narrative.  This  will  appear  in  the  course  of  the  Exposition.  Th«
mention  of  the  size  of  Nineveh  and  the  extent  of  its  population  is  proved
by  recent  investigations  to  be  perfectly  correct.  Gonld  our  blessed  Lord
have  referred  to  Jonah's  incarceration  in  the  fish's  belly  as  a  sign  of  hia
own  three-days'  sojonrn  in  the  grave,  had  the  story  been  an  allegory  and
nothing  more?  Gould  he  further  have  nsed  the  comparison  of  the
Ninevites'  conduct  with  that  of  the  men  of  his  own  time,  had  the  former
been  an  imaginary  people  existing,  for  the  nonce,  only  in  fiction  ?  Critics
may  say  that  Christ  was  speaking  uncritically  and  merely  using  an  illus-
tration from  a  well-known  allegory  (comp.  Ladd,  '  Doctrine  of  Scripture,'
i.  67,  etc.),  but  they  forget  the  fall  bearing  of  this  reference.  As  Perowno
puts  it  forcibly,  "  The  future  Judge  is  speaking  words  of  solemn  warning
to  those  who  shall  hereafter  stand  convicted  at  his  bar.  Intensely  real
he  would  make  the  scene  in  anticipation  to  them,  as  it  was  real,  if  then
present,  to  himself.  And  yet  we  are  to  suppose  him  to  say  that . . .  the
fictitious  characters  of  a  parable  shall  be  arraigned  at  the  same  bar  with  the
living  men  of  that  generation."

Again,  if  the  book  is  a  parable,  why  is  the  didactic  purpose  not  presented
more  prominently  and  directly  ?  K  an  allegory,  can  any  example  be  pro-
duced of  a  sacred  canonical  writer  nsing  prodigious  miracles  as  the  vehicls
of  his  teaching  ?  In  a  narrative  of  facts  the  psalm  (ch.  ii.)  is  introduced
naturally ;  it  is  given  as  composed  by  Jonah  nnder  the  ciroumstanoeB
related.  In  an  allegory  it  is  qnite  out  of  place,  marring  the  unity  of  the
work,  and  intruding  an  element  which  does  not  harmonize  with  the  other
parts.  And  if  a  person  had  to  be  selected  on  whom  to  hang  this  fictitious
narrative,  is  it  conceivable  that  the  Jewish  author  should  have  fixed  on  an
eminent  and  well-known  prophet  to  represent  in  so  unfavourable  a  light  P
Would  he  have  been  so  wanting  in  common  reverence  as  to  affix  to  a
celebrated  man  of  God  these  traits  of  disobedience,  waywardness,  folly,
narrowness,  and  peevishness  ?  Plainly,  the  only  way  to  account  for  the
prophet  being  represented  in  this  light  is  to  consider  that  he  acted  in  the
way  mentioned,  and  that  the  book  is  the  plain  narrative  of  his  conduct,
whether  in  its  present  form  written  wholly  by  himself,  or  partly  by  some
later  editor  from  his  record.

Lastly,  the  miraculous  portion  of  the  story  is  not  dragged  in  unneces-
sarily, and  is  not  unparalleled  by  other  transactions  in  Holy  Scripture.
Jonah's  mission  was  unusual  and  most  important;  both  the  prophet
himself  and  those  with  whom  he  was  brought  into  contact  needed  to  be
convinced  that  God's  providence  was  ordering  aU  things,  and  that  the
powers  of  nature  and  the  destinies  of  men  were  at  his  absolute  disposal.
The  storm,  the  fish,  the  repentance,  the  gourd,  are  parts  of  this  Divine
lesson;  and  where  God  interferes  there  must  needs  be  the  supematuraL
We  must  donbt  the  miraculous  element  in  the  histories  of  Elijah  and
Elisha,  if  we  dispute  the  reality  of  the  wonders  in  the  biogfraphy  of  Jonah.


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


That  was  an  age  of  miraoles.  God  was  manifesting  hia  power  against
idolatry,  and  showing  himself  aa  ths  Guide  and  Support  of  his  servants.
Some  prophets  proclaimed  him  hj  word,  some  hj  action.  Among  the
latter  Jonah  takes  his  natural  place.  Assyria  had  a  great  future  before  it.
It  is  not  improbable  that  on  its  repentance  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah
depended  its  continued  existence  and  its  subsequent  pre-eminence.  It  was
ordained  that  the  Semitic  people  of  Assyria  should  prevail  oyer  the  children
of  Ham  in  Egypt.  This  would  not  have  been  the  case  had  Nineveh's  fall
not  been  postponed  for  a  time.  Though  Jonah  saw  not  the  full  bearing  of
his  mission,  and,  regarding  it  in  a  narrow,  prejudiced  spirit,  tried  to  avoid
its  execution,  really  it  was  a  factor  in  the  world's  history,  and  momentous
issues  hung  thereon.  Hence  arose  the  extraordinary  exhibition  of  super-
natural agencies.  As  in  the  era  of  Moses  and  Elijah,  and  in  the  early
days  of  Christianity,  a  great  crisis  demanded  a  baring  of  the  Almighty's
arm  and  evident  tokens  of  his  interference  ia  the  affairs  of  men.

S  V.    LiTBBATUBB.

The  Book  of  Jonah  has  heen  published  in  Ohaldee,  Syriac,  ^thiopio,  and  Arabic,
with  glossaries  by  Professor  W.  Wright.  Amons  commentaries  on  the  hook  may  he
mentioned  those  of  Ephraem  Syrus;  Basil;  Theophylact;  Calvin,  'Lectures;  J.
Brentius;  Luther;  J.  Perua  (1554,  often  reprinted);  Dereser  (Bonn,  1786);  Kaulen,
'Lib.  Jonso  Proph.'  (1862);  Bishop  Hooper,  'Sermons;'  Archbishop  Abbott,  'An
Exposition '  (1600,  1845) ;  Gerhard,  '  Annotationes '  (Jena,  1676);  Pfeiffer,  'Prseleo-
tiones'  (Leipzig,  1686);  Leusden,  with  the  commentaries  of  Jarohi,  Ahen-Ezra,
Kimchi,  and  Jophi  (Utrecht,  1692) ;  Von  der  Hardt,  '  iEiiigmata  Prisci  Orbis;'  Helm-
stad  (1723);  Grimm, '  Der  Proph.  Jon.  tibersetzt '  (Dusseldorf,  1789) ;  H.  Martin  (London,
1866);  W.  Drake,  'Notes;'  Red  ford,  'Studies'  (1885);  Kleinert  CBonn,  1871);  Arch-
deacon Perowne,  in  '  The  Cambridge  Bible  for  Schools.'

§  YI.    ABBAHrOEMENT  OF  THB  BoOK  IN  SeOTIOHB.

The  four  chapters  into  which  the  book  is  divided  make  four  natural  divisions  of  tht
whole  work.
Part  I.  (Ch.  i.)    The  mission  of  Jonah.    His  disobedience  and  punishment.
S  1.  (Ch.  i.  1 — 3.)    Jonah  is  sent  to  Nineveh ;  he  tries  to  avoid  the  mission,  and

takes  ship  to  Tarshish.
§  2.  (Ch,  i.  4 — 10.)    A  great  storm  arises,  which  the  crew  discover  to  have  heen

sent  on  account  of  Jonah's  sin.
§  3.  (Ch.  i.  11 — 16.)  At  his  own  request,  Jonah  is  cast  into  the  sea,  which  imme-
diately becomes  calm.
§  4.  (Ch.  i.  17.)    He  is  swallowed  alive  by  a  great  fish,  and  remains  in  its  belly
three  days  and  three  nights.
Part  IL  (Ch.  ii.)    Jonah's  prayer  and  deliverance.
§  1.  (Ch.  ii.  1—9.)   Jonah,  in  the  belly  of  the  flsh,  offers  a  prayer  of  thanksgiving
for  his  rescue  from  death  by  drowning,  in  which  he  sees  a  pledge  of  further
deliverance.
§  2.  (Ch.  ii.  10.)    The  fish  casts  him  up  on  the  shore.
Part  in.  (Ch.  iii.)    Jonah's  preaching  in  Nineveh ;  the  repentance  of  the  Ninevites.
$  1.  (Ch.  iii.  1 — 3.)    Sent  again  to  Nineveh,  Jouah  obeys  the  command.
{  2.  (Ch.  iii.  4.)    He  delivers  his  message.
$  3.  (Ch.  iii.  5—9.)     The  Ninevites  believe  God  and  repent
$  4.  (Ch.  iii.  10.)     The  threatened  destruction  is  averted.


xii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.

Part  IV.  (Ch.  iv.)    Jonah's  lUspleasure,  and  its  correction.

§  1.  (Ch.  ir.  1—4.)    Jonah  is  grieved  at  this  result,  and  complaint  of  Qod'a

clemency.
§  2.  (Ch.  iv.  6.)    He  makes  a  hut  outside  the  city,  and  waits  to  sea  the  issne.
§  3.  (Ch.  iv.  6,  7.)    God  causes  a  plant  to  spring  up  in  order  to  shade  him  from

the  sun ;  but  it  soon  withers  away,  and  leaves  him  exposed  to  the  scorching  rays,
S  4.  (Ch.  iv.  8 — H.)    His  grief  for  the  loss  of  the  plant  is  made  the  occasion  hv

GKid  of  showing  his  inconsistency  and  pitilessness  in  murmuring  against  Ood  ■

oompcssion  for  Nineveh  with  it«  multitude  of  inhabitants.


THE   BOOK   OF   JONAH.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  I.


Vers.  1—17.— Part  I.  The  Missios  of
Jonah.  HibDmobediekob  and  Punishment.

Vers,  1 — 3. — §  1.  Jonah  it  teat  to  Nineveh
to  ery  against  it;  hvt  he  triet  to  avoid  the
miation,  and  to  this  end  taket  ihip  to  Tar-
ihUh.

Ver.  1. — ^Npw;  or,  and.  Some  have  argued
from  this  commencement  that  the  Book  of
Jonah  is  a  fragment,  the  continuation  of  a
larger  work ;  but  it  is  a  common  formulary,
linking  together  revelations  and  histories,
and  is  continually  used  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment at  the  beginning  of  independent
works ;  e.g.  Josh.  i.  1  j  Judg.  i  1 ;  1  Sam.  i.
1 :  Estb.  1. 1 :  Ezek.  L  1.  Jonah  the  son  of
Amittai  (2  Kings  xiv.  25).  (See  Introduc-
tion, §  IL)

Ver.  2. — ^Nineveh,  the  capital  of  the  king-
dom of  Assyria,  is  first  mentioned  in  Gen.
X.  11,  as  founded  by  Nimrod.  It  stood  on
the  left  bank  of  the  river  Tigris,  where  it  is
joined  by  the  Khosr,  opposite  to  the  present
town  of  Mosul.  The  Assyrians  had  already
become  known  in  Syria.  In  b.o.  854  Shal-
maneser  II.  had  defeated  at  Karkar  twelve
kings  confederate  against  liim,  among  whom
is  reckoned  Ahab  King  of  Israel.  Long
before  his  time,  Tiglath-Pileser  I.  had  made
a  great  expedition  to  the  west,  captured  a
town  at  the  foot  of  Lebanon,  and  reached
the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean  Sea.  Jehu
was  compelled  to  pay  tribute  to  the  Assy-
rians; and  Bimmon-nirari,  who  reigned
from  B.O.  810  to  781,  held  the  suzerainty  of
Fhcanicia,  Samaria,  Edom,  and  Philistia.
Jonah,  therefore,  knew  well  what  his  coun-
try might  expect  at  the  hands  of  this  people.
That  great  oity.  It  is  thus  called  in  ch.  iii.
2,  3 ;  It.  11 ;  and  the  epithet  is  added  here
In  order  to  show  to  Jonah  the  importance  of
hia  mission.    The  siie  of  Nineveh  is  vari-

JOKAH.


ously  estimated  according  (o  the  isnia
attached  to  the  name  "Nineveh."  Thi*
appellation  may  be  restricted  to  Nineveh
proper,  or  it  may  comprise  the  four  cities
which  lay  close  together  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  each  other,  and  whose
remains  are  now  known  as  the  mounds  of
Kouyunjik,  on  the  south-west,  directly  oppo-
site to  Mosul;  iVt'mruiJ,  about  eighteen  mile*
to  the  south-east;  KaramXett,  twelve  miles
to  the  north;  and  Khorsdbad,  the  most
northerly,  about  the  same  distance  both
from  EaramlesB  and  Kouyunjik.  Khorsa-
bad,  however,  was  not  built  till  some  hun-
dred  years  after  Jonah's  time  (Sohrader,
'  Keilinschr.,'  p.  448).  These  cities  are
contained  In  an  irregular  parallelogram  of
some  sixty  miles  in  circumference.  The
following  account  of  Nineveh  proper  is
derived  from  Professor  Eawlinson, '  Ancient
Monarchies,'  i.  252,  etc. :  "  The  ruins  consist
of  two  principal  mounds,  Nebbi-yunus  and
Kouyunjik.  The  Kouyunjik  mound,  which
lies  nearly  half  a  mile  north-west  of  the
others,  is  very  much  the  more  considerable
of  the  two.  Its  shape  is  an  irregular  oval,
elongated  to  a  point  towards  the  north-east.
The  surface  is  nearly  flat;  the  sides  slope
at  a  steep  angle,  and  are  furrowed  with
numerous  ravines  worn  in  the  soft  material
by  the  rains  of  some  thirty  centuries.  Tlie
greatest  height  above  the  plain  is  ninety
feet,  and  the  area  is  estimated  at  a  hundred
acres.  It  is  an  artificial  eminence,  computed
to  contain  14,500,000  tons  of  earth,  and  on
it  were  erected  the  palaces  and  temples  of
the  Assyrian  monarchs.  The  mound  of
Nebbi-yunus  is  at  its  base  nearly  triangular,
and  covers  an  area  of  nearly  forty  awes.
It  is  loftier,  and  its  sides  are  more  pre-
cipitous than  Kouyunjik,  especially  on  the
west,  where  it  abutted  on  the  wall  of  the
city.  The  mass  of  earth  is  calculated  at
six  and  a  half  millions  of  tons.  These  two
i  Tut  mounds  are  both  in  the  same  line,  and

B


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


[oh.  1 1—17.


abutted  on  the  western  wall  of  the  city,
which  was  Bome  two  and  ii  half  miles  in
length.  Anciently  it  seems  to  have  imme-
diately overhung  the  Tigris,  but  the  river
has  now  receded  to  the  weyt,  leaving  a  plain
of  nearly  a  mile  in  width  between  its  bank
and  the  old  rampart  which  evideutly  once
followed  the  course  of  the  river-bank.  The
western  wall  is  joined  at  right  angles  by
the  northern  rampart  which  runs  in  a
straight  line  for  seven  thousand  feet.  At
its  other  extremity  the  western  wall  forms  a
very  obtuse  angle  with  the  southern,  which
impends  over  a  deep  ravine,  and  runs  in  a
straight  line  for  about  a  thousand  yards,
when  it  meets  the  eastern  wall,  which  is
the  longest  and  the  least  regular  of  the  four.
The  entire  length  of  this  side  is  sixteen
thousand  feet,  or  above  three  miles.  It  is
divided  into  two  portions  by  the  stream  of
the  Khosr-Bu;  which,  coming  from  the
north-west,  finds  its  way  through  the  city
and  then  across  the  low  plain  to  the  Tigris.
The  town  is  thus  of  an  oblong  shape,  and
the  circuit  of  its  walls  ia  somewhat  less
than  eight  miles,  and  the  area  which  they
include  ia  e'ighteen  hundred  acres.  This,
at  the  computation  of  something  less  than
one  hundred  inhabitants  per  acre,  would
ascribe  to  Nineveh  a  population  of  one
hundred  and  seventy-five  thousand  souls"
(Bawlinson,  'Ano.  Mon.,'  i.  ch.  i.).  Cry
against  it.  The  message  is  given  in  ch.  iii.
4.  Thus  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  is
made  known  among  the  Gentiles.  Their
wickedness ;  i.e.,  as  Fusey  notes,  their  evil-
doing  towards  others,  as  in  Nah.  iii.  19  (see
Introduction,  §  I.).  Is  come  up  before  me,
and  appeals  for  punishment,  as  Gen.  iv.  10;
xviii.  20,  21 ;  Septuagint,  'Avefiri  i)  xpavyii
TTJs  KUKias  aiiT-fis  irphs  /x4,  "The  cry  of  its
wickedness  is  come  up  unto  nie."

Ver.  3. — Tarshish;  probably,  Tarteems,
a  Phoenician  city  on  the  south  coast  of
Spain,  and  therefore  in  the  opposite  direc-
tion to  Nineveh.  He  was  sent  to  the  far
east;  he  flees  to  tlie  distant  west.  From
the  presence  of  the  Lord ;  literally,  from
the  /ace  of  Jehovah.  This  may  mean,
from  God's  special  presence  in  Jerusalem
or  the  Holy  Land,  as  banishment  from
Canaan  is  called  "casting  out  of  his
sight"  (2  Kings  xvii.  20,  23;  xxiii.  27);
or,  from  serving  the  Lord  as  his  minister
(Deut.  X.  8),  Jonah  preferring  to  renounce
his  offiue  as  prophet  rather  than  execute
his  missioa.  The  former  seems  the  most
natural  explanation  of  the  phrase.  Eimchi
says  that  Jonah  supposed  that  the  spirit  of
prophecy  would  not  extend  beyond  the  land
of  Israel.  He  could  never  have  thought  to
escape  from  God's  all-seeing  eye.  His  re-
pugnance to  the  duty  imposed  upon  him
•lose  partly  from  national  prejudice,  which


made  him  loth  to  interfere  in  Gentile
business,  and  purtly,  as  he  himself  says  (oh.
iv.  2),  because  he  feared  God's  compassion
would  spare  the  Ninevites  on  their  repent-
ance, and  that  thus  his  prediction  would  be
discredited,  and  mercy  shown  to  heathens
already  inimical  to  Israel,  if  not  known  to
him  as  the  future  conquerors  of  his  people.
Joppa.  _  This  is  the  modern  Jaffa  (called
Japlio  in  Josh.  xix.  46),  a  town  on  the  sea-
coast  thirty  miles  in  a  north-westerly  direc-
tion from  Jerusalem.  "Jaffa,"  says  Dr.
Thomson  ('  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  p.  8,
etc.),  "is  one  of  the  oldest  cities  in  the
world.  It  was  given  to  Dan  in  the  distri-
bution of  the  land  by  Joshua,  and  it  has
been  known  to  history  ever  since.  It  owes
its  existence  to  the  low  ledge  of  rooks  which
extends  into  the  sea  from  the  extremity  ot
the  little  cape  ou  which  the  city  stands,
and  forms  a  small  harbour.  Insignificant
as  it  is,  and  insecure,  yet,  there  being  no
other  on  all  tliis  coast,  it  was  sufficient  to
cause  a  city  to  spring  up  around  it  even
in  the  earliest  times,  and  to  sustain  its  life
through  numberless  changes  of  dynasties,
races,  and  religions,  down  to  the  present
hour.  It  was,  in  fact,  the  only  harbour  of
any  notoriety  possessed  by  the  Jews  through-
out the  greater  part  of  their  national  exist-
ence. To  it  the  timber  for  both  the  temples
of  Jerusalem  was  brought  from  Lebanon;
and  no  doubt  a  lucrative  trade  in  cedar  and
pine  was  always  carried  on  through  it  with
the  nations  who  had  possession  cf  that
goodly  mountain.  Through  it,  also,  nearly
all  the  foreign  commerce  of  the  Jews  was
conducted,  until  the  artificial  portof  Ctesarea
was  built  by  Herod.  .  .  .  The  harbour,
however,  is  very  inconvenient  and  insecure.
Vessels  of  any  considerable  burden  must
lie  out  in  the  open  roadstead — a  very  uneasy
berth  at  all  times;  and  even  a  moderate
wind  will  oblige  them  to  slip  their  cables
and  run  out  to  sea,  or  seek  anchorage  at
Haifa,  sixty  miles  distant.  .  .  .  The  road-
stead is  liable  to  sudden  and  unexpected
storms,  which  stir  up  a  tumultuous  sea  in
a  very  short  time.'  .  .  .  The  landing  also  is
most  inconvenient,  and  often  extremely  dan-
gerous. More  boats  upset,  and  more  lives
are  lost  in  the  breakers  at  the  north  end  of
the  ledge  of  rocks  that  defend  the  inner
harbour  than  anywhere  else  on  this  coast."
Went  down  into  it;  &v4Pt,  [_h40n,  Alex.]  eU
aiT6,  "went  up  into  it"  (Septuagint).
Went  on  board ;  or,  as  Jerome  says,  sought
a  hiding-place  in  the  ship  (comp.  ver.  5).
With  them.  With  the  crew.  Jonah  had
told  them  (ver.  10)  that  he  was  flying  from
God's  service,  but,  knowing  and  oaring
nothing  about  Jehovah,  they  took  him  on
board  when  he  paid  his  fare,  and  thought
nothing  nf  hia  private  reasons  for  joining  them.


OH,  I,  1—17.]


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


Vers.  4 — 10. — §  2.  Jonah't  foolish  flight
is  arrested.  In  the  midst  of  bia  fancied
security  God  sends  a  great  storm,  and  the
ship  is  placed  in  imminent  jeopardy.  The
crew  try  all  means  to  save  the  ship,  and  at
length  cast  lots  to  discover  by  this  means
for  whose  sake  the  tempest  has  been  sent.
The  lot  points  out  Jonah  as  the  gaUty
person.

Ver.  4. — Sent  out;  Septuagint,  ll,iiyetpt,
"  raised ; "  literally,  cast  forth,  of  hurled,  a
great  wind,  like  the  Euroolydon  of  Acts
xxvii.  14,  and  what  is  called  nowadays  a
Levanter.  Pusey  quotes  Josephns's  account
of  the  harbour  of  Joppa  and  the  neigh-
bouring sea,  which,  he  says,  is  rendered
rery  dangerous  by  the  sudden  rise  of  "  the
black  north  wind"  ('Bell.  Jud.,'  iii.  9.  3).
Here  we  see  wind  and  storm  fulGlling  Ood'a
word  (Fs.  cxlviii.  8).    As  TertuUian  says —

"Si  Dominum  in  terris  fugiens,  invenit  in

undis."
"  Flying  the  Lord  on  earth,  he  found  him

in  the  sea."

Was  like  to  he  broken;  literally,  (Aou^At  to  be
dashed  in  pieces.  Wordsworth  contrasts  the
living  consciousness  and  apprehension  of
the  ship  with  the  lethargy  of  the  prophet
now  lying  fast  asleep  in  the  hold  (ver.  5).
Septuagint,  'sKtv^iiveve  rod  ffuVTpi^rivat,  '*  was
in  danger  of  being  broken  up."

Ver.  5. — The  mariners  (mallachim').  Those
who  have  to  do  with  the  salt  sea.  The
word  is  used  by  Ezekiol  (xxvii.  9,  27,  29).
Cried  every  man  unto  his  god.  They  were
either  Phoenicians  from  different  localities,
or  men  of  various  nations ;  hence  the
multiplicity  of  their  gods.  The  heathen  are
represented  throughout  the  book  as  devout
and  sincere  according  to  their  lights.  They
east  forth  the  wares ;  Septuagint,  IxPoKiiv
itrotiitTavTO  tuv  (TKevwv,  "  cast  out  the  furni-
ture, or  wares,"  as  Acts  zx  vii.  18, 19 ;  Vulgate,
miterunt  vasa.  They  threw  overboard  pro-
bably both  all  spare  tackling  and  movables,
and  the  cargo.  The  freight  may  have  been
corn,  which  was  exported  in  considerable
quantities  from  Joppa  (comp.  Ezek.  xxvii.
17),  or  mauufactured  articles  from  Tyre,
whicli  were  exchanged  with  Spain  for  silver
and  other  metals.  To  lighten  it  of  them ;
literally,  to  lighten  from  against  them;  i.e.  to
ease  the  ship  of  its  burden,  or  to  ease  them
of  their  trouble,  as  Exod.  xviii.  22.  The
LXX.  takes  the  former  interpretation,  roS
KavipurBrivat  &ir'  avTWf,  "that  it  might  be
lightened  of  them ; "  Vulgate,  ut  alleviaretur
aheit.  The  sides  of  the  ship.  The  innermost
parts  (interiora,  Vulgate)  of  the  ship ;  tV
KoUijiv  (Septuagint) ;  "  the  hold  "  (comp.  1


Sam.  zxiv.  3).  Jonah  bid  himself  there
before  the  storm  arose.  The  Hebrew  word
for  "  ship  "  (sephinah)  is  found  nowhere  else,
and,  probably  from  its  derivation  (jopAan, "  to
cover  "),  implies  that  the  vessel  was  decked.
He  lay,  and  was  fast  asleep ;  ixdeeuSe,  Kal
^ptyx^t  "was  asleep  and  snoring"  (Septua-
gint); dormiebat  sopore  gravi  (Vulgate).
The  word  used  implies  a  very  deep  sleep,
as  that  of  Sisera  (Judg.  iv.  21)  or  of  the
Assyrians  (Ps,  Ixxvi,  6).  He  was  fatigued
and  worn  out  with  mental  anxiety,  and  now
being,  as  he  thought,  secure,  and  longing
for  solitude,  he  lay  down  to  sleep,  uncon-
scious of  danger.  Contrast  this  sleep  in  the
storm  with  that  of  Christ  (Mark  iv.  38),  and
that  of  the  apostles  who  slept  for  sorrow
(Luke  zxii.  45).

Ver.  6. — The  shipmaster;  literally,  the
chief  of  the  ropemen;  Vulgate,  gubemator;
Septuagint,  6  npupeh,  "the  look-out  man."
The  captain.  What  meanest  thou,  0
sleeper)  How  canst  thou  sleep  so  soundly
when  our  danger  is  so  imminent?  If  thou
canst  help  us  in  no  other  way,  at  least  ask
the  aid  of  Heaven.  It  was  the  duty  of  a
prophet  of  the  Lord  to  take  the  lead  in
prayer;  but  here  the  prophet's  stupor  is
rebuked  by  the  heathen's  faith.  Call  apou
thy  God.  The  sailors'  prayers  had  not
been  answered,  and  they  arouse  Jonah,
noting  something  special  about  him,  perhaps
his  prophet's  dress,  or  observing  that  he
was  an  Israelite,  and  therefore  a  worshipper
of  Jehovah,  of  whose  power  they  had  heard.
If  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us.  They
use  the  word  "  God  "  with  the  article,  ha
Elohim,  as  if  they  had,  in  spite  of  their
polytheism,  a  dim  notion  of  one  supreme
Deity.  Vulgate,  Si  forte  recogitet  Deus  d»
nobis;  Septuagint,  Siras  Siairii(ni  d  @ehs
Jllicis,  "  that  God  may  save  us."  From  the
apparent  use  of  the  Hebrew  word  (ashath)
in  Jer.  v.  28  in  the  sense  of  "shining,"
some  translate  here,  "  if  perchance  God  wUl
shine  upon  us,"  i.e.  be  favourable  to  us.
But  the  meaning  given  in  the  Anglican
Version  is  best  supported.  So  the  psalmist
says,  "The  Lord  thinketh  upon  me"  (Ps.
xl.  17),  implying  that  God  succours  and
defends  him.

Ver.  7 — Finding  the  storm  still  violent,
the  crew  come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is
sent  by  Heaven  in  punishment  of  some
crime  committed  by  one  on  board ;  and  tliey
proceed  to  ciist  lots  to  discover  the  guilty
person.  Jonah  doubtless  had  meantime
complied  with  the  captain's  request,  but,  aa
the  sailors  saw,  without  visible  effect.  The
belief  that  temporal  calamities  are  often
connected  with  the  presence  of  culprits,  and
are  sent  in  judgment,  is  found  in  classical
authors.  Thus  Plautus,  'Budens,'  ii.  6.
21—


THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.


[oh.  h  1—17.


"Pol  minnme  mlror,  narls  ri  fracta  est  tibi,
Scelus  te  et  ncoleste  parts  qua  vexit  bona."

"  Little  I  wonder  if  the  ship  is  wrecked
Which  earriea  thee  and  thy  ill-gotten
wealth."
(Comp.  ^schylns,  'Eleetr.,*  1354;  'Theb.,'
598;  Herat., '  Oarm.,'  iii.  2.  26,  etc.)  The
midfortune  of  the  Israelites  at  Ai  was  con-
sequent on  tlie  sin  of  Achan  (Josh,  vii.).
Let  us  cast  lots.  (On  the  Christian  view  of
"  lots,"  see  Dr.  Pusey's  Commentary,  pp.  270,
271.)  Jerome  says  here,  "  The  fugitive  was
taken  by  lot,  not  by  virtue  of  the  lots,
especially  of  the  lots  of  heathen  men,  but  by
the  will  of  him  who  guided  the  uncertain
lots."  For  whose  cause;  Septuagint,  rlifos
fviKev.  The  unusual  nature  of  the  tempest
showed  them  that  it  was  sent  in  judgment.
Commentators  cite  the  atory  of  Diagoras  told
by  Cicero  ('  De  Nat.  Deor.,'  iii.  37).  The  lot
fell  upon  Jonah.  Prov.  ivi.  33,  "The  lot
is  cast  into  the  lap;  but  the  whole  disposing
thereof  is  of  the  Lord  "  Ccomp.  1  Sam.  x.
20,  etc. ;  liv.  41 ;  Acts  i.  26).

Ver.  8 The  mariners  having,  us  tliey  sup-
posed, discovered  the  culprit,  proceed  calmly
to  investigate  his  guilt ;  amid  the  roaring  of
the  tempest  and  the  peril  that  surrounded
them,  they  give  him  every  opportunity  of
clearing  himself  or  confessing  his  crime.
For  whose  cause.  Some  manuscripts  of  the
Hebrew  and  the  Greek  oiuit  this  elauao  as
unnecessary ;  but,  as  Keil  remarks,  it  is  not
superfluous,  the  sailors  thereby  wishing  to
induce  Jonah  to  con  less  his  guilt  with  his
own  mouth.  In  their  excitement  thi  y  crowd
question  upon  questhjn,  asking  him  about
his  business,  his  journey,  his  country,  his
parentage.  Jerome  notes  the  pregnant
brevity  of  these  inquiries,  and  compares
Virgil,  '.aineid,'  viii.  112,  etc.—

"  Juvenes,  quss  causa  subegit
Ignotas  tentarevias?  quo  tenditis?  inquit.
Qui  genus?  undo  dome?  paeemne  hue  fertis
an  arma  ?  "

'-  Warriors,  what  cause  constrained  you  thus

to  tempt
A  path  untrodden  ?  Whither  are  ye  bound?
What  is  your  race?    Where  dwell  ye?

Peace  or  war
Come  ye  to  bring?"

(Comp.  H.  m., '  Od..'  1. 170.)  What  is  thine
occupation}  His  occupation,  they  thought,
might  have  been  one  to  excite  the  wrath  of
the  gods ;  or  his  country  and  family  might
have  been  exposed  to  the  hatred  of  Heaven  j
hence  th<  inccceding  questions.

Yer.  9.--'X  am  an  Hebrew.  This  is  the
name  used  by  foreigners  in  speaking  of
Israelites,  or  by  Israelites  in  speaking  of
themselves  to  Gentiles  (see  Gren.  xiv.  13;
xxxix.  14 ;  xli.  12;  Exod.  i.  16;  1  Sam.  iv.


6,  for  the  former  uBe;  and  for  tbe  latter,
Oen.  zl.  15;  Exod.  iL  7;  iii.  18).  Con-
vinced that  Ood  had  miraculously  pointed
him  out  as  the  culprit  on  whose  account  the
storm  was  sent,  and  goaded  by  the  stings
of  conscience,  Jonah  loses  all  nig  previous  ,
indecision  and  spiritual  stupor,  and  in
a  manly  and  straightforward  way  confesses
the  truth  without  disguise.  The  LXX.,
reading  differently,  renders,  AovAos  Kvptou
«iiul  iyd,  "A  servant  of  Jehovah  am  L"
This  makes  a  tautological  statement  with
the  next  words,  and  leaves  one  of  the
sailors'  questions  unanswered.  I  fear  the
Lord.  I  worship,  reverence  {aifioiiai,  Septua-
gint) Jehovah,  who  is  not  a  local  deity  like
the  false  gods  whom  you  adore,  but  the
Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Maker  and
Buler  of  sea  and  dry  land.  So  Abraham
calls  the  Lord  the  God  of  heaven  (Gen.
xxiv.  7),  and  Daniel  (ii.  37,  44)  uses  the
same  expression  (comp.  Ps.  zcvi.  5;  Jer.
X.  11).

Ver.  10. — Exceedingly  afraid.  They  under-
stand now  the  greatness  of  Jehovah  and  the
terrible  risk  incurred  by  one  who  offends
him.  There  was  a  widespread  acknowledg-
ment of  the  power  of  Jehovah  among  the
heathen  (see  Kxod.  xv.  15;  Josh.  v.  1;
1  Sam.  iv.  7 ;  and  comp.  Judith  v.  21).  Why
hast  thou  done  this  \  better,  What  is  this  that
thou  hast  donel  (Gen.  iii.  13).  This  is  not
a  question  of  inquiry,  for  he  had  already
told  them  that  he  had  fled  from  the  pre-
sence of  the  Lord ;  but  rather  an  exclama-
tion of  horror  and  amazement  at  his  folly
and  sin.  That  one  who  worshipped  the
Almighty  Creator  should  disobey  bis  com-
mand seemed  to  them  outrageous  and
inexcusably  criminal.  The  prophet  does
not  spare  himself  in  giving  the  history  of
the  transaction.  To  be  thus  rebuked  by
heathen  sailors  must  have  added  to  the
poignancy  of  his  remorse.  The  presence
of  the  Lord  (see  note  on  ver.  3).

Vers.  11 — 16. — §  3.  On  hearing  Jonah' i
eonfession,  the  sailors  appeal  to  him,  as  «
worshipper  of  Jehovah,  to  teU  them  what  to
do  to  him  that  the  storm  may  cease.  He
hide  tJiem  east  him  into  the  sea,  which,  after
some  demur  and  after  renewed  efforts  to
escape,  they  proceed  to  do.  Upon  this  the
storm  immediaiely  abates.

Ver.  11.— What  shall  we  do  unto  theet
They  recognize  that  the  tempest  was  sent
as  a  judgment  on  account  of  Jonah's  sin ;  at
the  same  time,  believing  him  to  be  a  prophet
of  Jehovah,  under  whose  wrath  they  were
suffering,  they  ask  his  advice  in  this
emergency ;  if  it  was  a  crime  to  receive  him,
what  shall  they  do  to  him  to  expiate  the
offence  and  to  appease  the  anger  of  God?


CH.  I.  1—17.]


THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.


That  the  sea  may  be  calm  unto  ns ;  literally,
may  be  tilentfrom  upon  u«,  bo  as  no  longer
to  bear  down  upon  ub  (comp.  Mark  iv.  39).
Wrought,  and  was  tempestuous;  literally,
mat  going  and  tnu  tempentuous ;  Septuagint,
'ETTopeiifTO  (1  li  e^iiyeipi  fiaWop  K\iSava,  "The
sea  was  moving  and  lifting  the  surge  still
more ; "  Vulgate,  ibat  et  intumescebat.  That
is,  according  to  the  Hebrew  idiom,  "  grew
more  and  more  tempestuous "  (comp.  Exod,
xix.  19 ;  Prov.  iv.  18).

Ver.  12. — Jonah,  brought  to  a  better
mind,  perhaps  divinely  inspired,  pronounces
his  own  sentence.  "  I  know,"  he  says,
"  that  the  fault  is  mine,  and  deserves  death,
therefore  take  me  up,  and  cast  me  forth  into
the  sea."  He  will  not  be  his  own  executioner,
but  will  patiently  bear  a  death  righteously
inflicted  by  others,  whose  safety  he  was  en-
dangering by  his  continued  presence.

Ver.  13. — The  generous  sailors,  however,
ore  loth  to  execute  this  sentence  on  a  pro-
phet of  the  Lord,  and  make  a  supreme
effort  to  reach  the  land,  and  thus  obviate
this  severe  alternative.  Bowed  hard ;  lite-
rally, digged  (Job  xxiv.  16 ;  Ezek.  xii.  7) ;
Septuagint,  iTape0iA{ovTo,  "used  violent
efforts."  They  endeavoured  to  force  their
way  through  the  waves  with  oars,  as  the
use  of  sails  was  impracticable.  The  ex-
pression is  like  the  classical  phrases,  infin-
dere  aulcos,  ecindere  freta,  arare  aquas,  and
our  "  to  plough  the  main."  To  the  land ;  to
get  thrnn  back  to  land.  The  wind  was  off
shore,  and  they  had  taken  down  the  sails,
and  ixiei  to  row  back  to  the  harbour.  ToD
iiriirTp4\fiai  Tphs  t^v  yriv,  "  to  return  to  the
land  "  (Septuagint).  The  sea  wrought  (see
note  on  ver.  11).

Ver.  14. — ^They  oried  unto  the  Lord.  They
prayed  no  longer  to  their  gods,  as  before
(ver.  5),  but  unto  Jehovah,  the  God  of
Jonati.  Let  us  not  perish  for  this  man's  life.
Let  us  not  incur  death  for  taking  this  man's
life.  They  seem  to  know  something  of  the
Noachio  law  that  punisbed  murder  (Gen.  ix.
S,  6).  Lay  not  upon  us  innocent  blood.
Charge  us  not  with  the  guilt  of  shedding
innocent  blood  (Deut.  xxi.  8).  For  thou,  0
Lord,  hast  done  as  it  pleased  thee  (1  Sam.
iii.  18).  The  whole  affair  has  happened  ac-
cording to  thy  will.  The  tempest,  the  lot,
the  sentence,  are  all  the  working  of  thy
providence.  The  prophet  throughout  brings
into  prominence  the  contrast  between  the
behaviour  of  these  heathen  and  his  own,
and  would  teach  his  nation  a  lesson  thereby.

Ver.  15. — They  took  up,  with  a  certain
reverence.  Ceased  from  her  raging;  literally,
etood  from  its  anger;  Septuagint,  eo-Tij  ix
Tov  ird\ov  avT^s,  "stood  from  its  tossing."
The  sudden  cessation  of  the  storm  sliowed
that  it  had  been  sent  on  Jonah's  account,
and  that  the  crew  had  not  sinned  by  exe-


cuting the  sentence  upon  him.  Dinally  it
takes  some  time  for  the  swell  to  cease  after
the  wind  has  sunk :  here  there  was  suddenly
a  great  calm  (Matt.  viii.  26).

Ver.  16. — Feared  the  Lord.  They  recog-
nized the  supernatural  element  in  the
transaction,  and  conceived  an  awe  and  feai
of  Jehovah,  who  had  wrought  these  wonders.
Offered  a  saorifioe  unto  the  Lord.  Many
commentators  think  that  they  saoriflced  on
reaching  shore,  as  they  had  thrown  the
cargo  overboard,  and  would  have  had  no
animal  to  offer.  The  Ghaldee  renders
accordingly,  "They  said  that  they  would
offer  sacrifices."  But  the  text  implies  that
they  sacrificed  immediately  on  the  cessation
of  the  storm.  They  may  naturally  have  had
some  animal  on  board  fit  for  offering.  And
made  vows.  Vowed  to  make  other  offerings
when  it  was  in  their  power.  Henderson
compares  Virgil,  '  Mueii,'  iii.  403,  etc. —

"Quin,    ubi    transmisses    steterint     trans
tequora  classes
£t  positis  aris  jam  vota  in  litore  solves.*'
"And  when  thy  fleet  hath  safely  crossed
the  seas.
And,  raising  altars  on  the  shore,  thy  vows
Thou  shalt  perform."

It  has  been  supposed  tliat  these  sailor*
embraced  Judaism  and  became  proselytes.
At  any  rate,  they  showed  themselves  in  the
light  of  believers  on  this  occasion.

Ver.  17.— §  4.  Cast  into  the  sea,  Jonah  ii
swallowed  alive  by  a  great  fish,  in  whose  belly
he  remains  unharmed  three  days  and  thret
nights.  Had  prepared;  Septuagint,  Trpo<r4-
Ta|e,  ".appointed;"  so  in  oh.  iv.  6,  7,  8
(comp.  Job  vii.  3;  Dan.  i.  10,  11).  The
fish  was  not  created  then  and  there,  but  God
so  ordered  it  that  it  should  be  at  the  place
and  should  swallow  Jonah.  The  prophet
seems,  from  some  expressions  in  his  psalm
(ch.  ii.  5),  to  have  sunk  to  tlie  bottom  of  the
sea  before  he  was  swallowed  by  the  fish.
A  great  fish;  Septuagint,  KrjTos  (Matt.  xiL
40).  There  is  nothing  in  th  e  word  to  identify
the  intended  animal,  and  to  call  it  "  a
whale"  is  simply  a  mistranslation.  The
white  shark  of  the  Mediterranean  (Carcha-
rias  vulgaris),  which  sometimes  measures
twenty -five  feet  in  length,  has  been  known
to  swallow  a  man  whole,  and  even  a  horse.
This  may  have  been  the  "great  fish  "  in  the
text  (see  Dr.  Pusey  on  Jonah,  pp.  257,  etc.).
Was  in  the  belly  of  the  fish.  God  used  the
natural  agency  of  the  fish,  but  the  preserva-
tion of  Jonali's  life  in  the  animal's  belly  is
plainly  supernatural.  It  is,  indeed,  analo-
gous to  the  life  of  the  child  in  its  mother's
womb;  but  it  has  besides  a  miraoulouB
element  which  is  unique,  unless  it  was  an
actual  death  and  revivification,  as  in  the
case  of  Lazarus.     Also  God  ordained  this


6  THE  BOOK  OF  JO^'AU.  [oai.  1— 1..

transaction  as  a  type  of  the  resurrection  of  r  rence  ia  gnbstantiated  by  Cliiist's  refereuc«

Ctirist.    Three  days  and  three  nights;  te.,  ;  to  it  as  a  figure  of  his  own  barial  and

according  to  Hebrew  usage,  parts  of  tbe  days  {  resurrection.     The  antitype  confirms  the

and  nights ;  i.e.  one  whole  day,  and  pjrts  truth  of  the  type.    It  is  not  credible  that

of  the  day  before  and  after  this.    Jonah  was  I  Christ  wonld  use  a  mere  legendary  tale,

rekaacd  on  the  third  day  (comp.  Matt.  xii.  '  with  no  historical  basis,  to  oonflrm  his  mosS

40  with  1  Cor.  xv.  4;  and  Esth.  iv.  16  with  |  solemn  statement  concerning  themomentonj

r.  1).    The  historical  natnre  of  this  occar-  i  fact  of  his  resurrection.

HOMILETICS.

Ver,  2. — A  cily't  tin.  By  its  very  nature  sin  is  individual,  personal ;  for  it  is  the
estrangement  of  the  spiritual  being  and  life  from  Gkid.  Yet,  as  men  live  in  communi-
ties, and  as  these  communities  possess  moral  qualities  and  habits  determined  by  the
character  of  the  component  units,  tliere  is  such  a  thing  as  the  sin  of  a  tribe,  of  a  dty,
of  a  nation.  This  is  more  obvious  when  it  is  remembered  that  states  are  personified
in  their  mlers  and  representatives,  whose  words  and  actions  must  be  taken  as  those  of
the  community  at  large.  The  Scriptures,  from  tlie  record  of  the  Tower  of  Babel  down-
wards, exhibit  national  responsibility  as  connected  with  national  error  and  unfaithful-
ness. Among  the  lessons  of  this  Book  of  Jonah,  this  lesson  regarding  a  nation's  moral
life  and  accountability  is  not  the  least  valuable.

I.  A  cjity'b  snj  is  compatible  with  its  political  obsatbess.  Nineveh  was  "that
great  city."  It  was  situated  upon  the  noble  river  Tigris;  it  boasted  a  splendid  and
ancient  history;  it  was  of  enormous  extent,  being,  according  to  the  historians,  eighteen
leagues  in  circuiuference ;  it  had  a  population  reckoned  by  hundreds  of  thousands;  in
short,  it  was  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  famous  of  the  cities  of  the  ancient  East,  and
was  the  capital  of  one  of  the  most  powerful  of  kingdoms.  Recent  discoveries  have
familiarized  us  with  the  civic  life  of  the  population  of  the  city  of  Nineveh.  Yet  the
wickedness  of  Nineveh  was  great.  Magnitude,  population,  wealth,  luxury,  splendour,
power, — all  are,  alas  I  consistent  with  forgetfulness  of  God,  and  vrith  rebelUon  against
his  authority  who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  all  the  nations  upon  earth.  How
signally  was  this  the  case  with  pagan  Romel  And  are  there  not  cities  in  professedly
Christian  lands,  the  abodes  of  power  and  of  pleasure,  whose  sin  cries  aloud  unto  God?

n.    A  OITT's  8IN  18  OFTEN  DI8BEGABDED  BY  HOMAN  OB8EBVBB8,  AKD  EVEN  BY  BCLEBS.

The  citizens  take  pride  in  their  "gorgeous  palaces,"  their  "solemn  temples,"  in
magnificent  public  works,  in  stately  ceremonies,  in  all  the  complicated  apparatus  of
civilization,  luxury,  refinement,  and  enjoyment.  The  men  in  authority  are  content  if
outward  order  is  observed,  if  regulations  of  police  are  respected,  if  the  reports  of  health
are  satisfactory,  if  trade  flourishes.  But  it  is  often  forgotten  that  beneath  this  outward
show  of  prosperity  there  may  exist  mcral  corruption  and  religious  indifference,  or  even
defiant  infidelity.  God  may  not  be  glorified ;  he  may  be  hated  and  disobeyed.  And
yet  no  concern  may  be  awakened,  no  contrition  felt.

IIL  A  city's  8IN  18  OBSERVED  BY  THE  ALL-SEEING  GoD.  What  graphic  language
is  this,  "Their  wickedness  is  come  up  before  me"l  Under  this  old  Hebrew  idiom
a  great  religious  truth  is  discernible.  Nothing  escapes  the  notice  of  him  who  searcheth
the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men.  Not  only  so.  (Jod  looks  upon  the  sins  of  the
citizens,  not  as  a  statistician  or  a  politician  might  look.  He  is  grieved  with  men's
irreligion;  he  is  "angry,"  i,e.,  "  with  the  wicked  every  day."  We  must  not  attribute
to  the  Deity  any  emotions  which  would  be  unworthy  of  a  human  ruler.  But  it  is  not
derogatory  to  God,  it  is  honouring  him,  to  think  of  him  as  distressed  and  dissatisfied
with  human  rebellion,  and  to  remember  that  his  regard  is  that  of  a  wise  and  righteoui
Buler,  who  is  concerned  for  the  spiritual  state  of  those  whom  he  rules  for  their  own
good  and  for  his  glory.

IV.   A  city's  sin   MUST  BE  MET  BY  A  BIOHTEOUS  TESTIMONY,  EEBDKB,  AND  WABNINO.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  men's  sins  are  often  attributable  to  evil  example,  to
common  custom,  to  the  force  of  habit,  to  forgetfulness  and  carelessness.  For  this
reason  is  it  needful  that  the  preacher  of  righteousness  should  exhibit  a  just  and  lofty
standard  of  national  and  individual  virtue ;  that  he  should  faithfully  expose  and
denounce  prevailing  errors,  follies,  and  injustice ;  and  that  he  should  remind  men  of


0H.tl— 17,J  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.


their  amenability  to  the  tribunal  of  an  Omniscient  and  Almighty  Ruler.  There  it  too
little  of  this  frank  and  fearless  treatment  of  social  corruption ;  the  pulpit  is  to  Uame
for  this ;  and  it  is  to  be  desired  that  Christian  preachers  should  hear  the  Woid  of  the
Lord  bidding  them  go  a^^d  "  cry  against "  the  wickedness  of  great  cities,  and  warn  the
citizens  of  the  ruin  they  are  bringing  upon  themselves.  And  above  all  is  it  important
that  the  wicked  should  be  summoned  to  repentance,  and  that  the  penitent  should  be
directed  to  that  Saviour  who  is  the  assurance  of  Divine  pity,  and  the  channel  of  Divine
forgiveness,  to  all  who  come  to  him  with  contrite  sorrow  and  with  lowly  faith,

Ver.  3, — Fleeing  from  the  Lord,  There  is  something  wonderfully  simple  in  this
language,  and  something  wonderfully  childish  and  naive  in  the  action  here  described.
Yet  when  Jonah,  who  should  have  gone  eastward,  turned  his  face  towards  the  west,
when  he  went  down  to  the  port  of  Joppa  and  took  ship  for  Tarshish,  though  he  was
acting  in  a  way  sinful  in  itself  and  most  disastrous  for  him,  he  was  teaching  for  all
time  and  for  all  readers^  of  Scripture  a  lesson  of  human  infirmity  which  is  to  us
chiefly  precious  as  preparing  the  way  for  a  lesson  of  human  repentance  and  of  Divine
forgiveness  and  acceptance.

L  The  hotivb  which  leads  men  to  wish  to  flee  fbom  the  pbebenoe  of  the
LoBD  IB  BAD.  There  are  various  impulses  which  may  tend  to  drive  men  away  from  the
all-searching  eye  of  the  Supreme.  Some,  like  Jonah,  may  wish  to  avoid  a  service
to  which  they  cherish  repugnance,  for  which,  perhaps,  they  feel  personally  disqualified.
Others  may  wish  to  hide  their  sins  from  One  who,  they  know  well,  must  regard  them
with  displeasure.  In  any  case,  though  the  degree  of  culpability  may  vary,  the  motive
is  unworthy.  .  The  child  should  hide  nothing  from  the  Father ;  the  Christian  should
never  ask — Where  shall  I  hide  from  thy  presence?  but  should  rather  rejoice  In  the
nearness,  the  interest,  the  favour,  of  his  Maker  and  Saviour.

II.  The  method  which  men  adopt  in  obdeb  to  flee  fbou  the  fbesenok  of  the
LoBD  IS  absurd.  Change  of  place  cannot  take  us  out  of  the  territory  of  the  Omni-
present King.  Jacob  found  that  when  at  Bethel ;  the  Lord  was  in  that  place,  though
he  knew  it  not.  Jonah  learned  that  God's  hand  held  in  its  hollow  the  raging  sea;
the  same  hand  that  fashioned  the  dry  laod  from  which  he  fled.-  It  is  now  more
common  for  those  who  would  flee  from  God  to  betake  themselves  to  the  society  of
the  profane,  the  licentious,  the  ungodly ;  thus  they  seek  at  least  to  banish  the  thought
of  God,  if  they  cannot  escape  from  his  all-regarding  eye.

IIL  The  imfossibilitt  of  fleeing  fbom  the  fbesence  of  the  Lobd  is  obvious.
That  is  to  say,  obvious  to  all  who  reflect  upon  the  nature  and  the  attributes  of  the
Eternal.  And  it  is  well  that  all  who  are  tempted  to  wish  that  relations  between
themselves  and  their  Creator  were  suspended  should  reflect  upon  this  impossibility.
In  God  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being.  We  may  forget  him,  but  he  does  not
overlook  us.  We  may  be  out  of  harmony  with  his  highest  purposes,  bnt  we  cannot
cease  even  for  one  moment  to  be  subjects  of  his  kingdom,  whether  contented  or
discontented,  loyal  or  rebellious.

IV.  The  consequences  of  ENDEAvouBiNa  TO  flee  fbou  the  fbesence  of  thx
Lobd  abb  afflicting.  In  his  favour  is  life.  It  is  well  to  walk  in  the  light  of  the
Lord.  They  who  depart  from  God  forsake  their  true  happiness.-  The  presence  of  the
Lord  of  all  is  necessary  in  order  to  strength  and  success  in  our  work.  A  messenger
from  God  above  all  men  needs  the  consciousness  of  the  Divine  favour ;  for  him  to  flee
from  God  is  to  sacrifice  his  life,  to  throw  up  his  vocation,  and,  except  G-od  have  mercy
upon  him,  to  destroy  his  spiritual  prospects.

V.  God's  fobbeabancb  and  compassion  mat  bbino  back  those  who  tbt  to  flee
FROM  him.  The  Darrative  tells  not  only  how  Jonah  fled,  but  how  God  followed  him ;
how  God  did  indeed  chasten  his  servant,  but  did  not  forsake  him ;  how  Providence
overruled  his  sinful  conduct  and  secured  his  spiritual  good.  We  need  not  despond,
even  if  we  have,  as  it  were,  turned  our  back  upon  God.  "  He  restoreth  our  soul."  He
■0  reveals  his  grace  that,  instead  of  fleeing  from  his  presence,  we  come  to  find  in  that
presence  fulness  of  joy.

Yer.  i. — Nature  and  Ood.  There  is  a  Hebrew  directness  and  energy  in  thii
language  dewsribing  the  storm  which  overtook  the  unfaithful  prophet.    &me  wonld


8  THK   BOOK  Of  JONAH.  [cH.  1. 1— 17.

■ ' 1^ — —

be  satisBed  to  say  that  we  have  here  simply  a  poetico-theological  expression  descriptive
of  a  natural  phenomenon.  But  surely  the  Hebrew  idiom  here  employed  is  the  vehicle
of  a  great  truth.  The  Lord  does  send  the  wind  and  raise  the  tempest;  and  the  Lord
also  calms  the  waters  and  stills  the  storm.

L  The  atheistic  view  is  that  Natube  ib  a  bealitt  akd  God  a  notion.  Many
scientific,  and  non-scientific,  readers  too  will  say — The  storm  did  arise,  but  this  was  in
accordance  with  natural  laws,  and  there  is  no  room  and  no  need  for  the  hypothesil
of  a  Deity.  Facts  are  facts,  and  regularities  and  uniformities  are  undeniable;  but
with  explanations,  with  personal  agencies,  we  have  nothing  at  all  to  do.

IL  The  pagan  view  is  that  Natube  ib  the  outwaed  expbbssion  or  the
FBE6ENCE  AND  ACTIVITIES  OF  iNNUMEBABLE  DEITIES.  According  to  the  heathen,  the
sea  and  the  land,  tl:ie  woods  and  the  fountains,  had  their  several  deities,  whose  actions
accounted  for  all  changes.  In  the  tempest,  Jonah's  fellow-voyagers  cried  every  man
unto  his  god.     The  mood  of  the  deity  might  vary,  his  purpose  might  change.

III.    The    8TTPBB8TITI0US    VIEW    IB    THAT    NaTCBE    IB   GENERAIiLT    INDEPENDENT    0»

God,  but  is  sometimes  visited  by  a  Divine  intebfebence.  When  all  things  proceed
in  an  even  course,  it  U  supposed  that  there  is  no  need  to  presume  a  Divine  presence.
But  when  anything  happens  which  is  unusual,  this  is  taken  to  be  an  evidence  of  the
interposition  of  a  superior  Power.  The  calm  is  Nature's  work,  the  storm  is  God's.  A
capricious,  arbitrary  Providence  is  the  superstitious  man's  deity.

lY.  The  bational  and  beliqious  view  seeb  God  in  and  behins  Natitbb  in  all
HER  CHANGES.  God  is  the  Author  of  Nature's  laws.  "The  sea  is  bis,  and  he  made  it;
and  his  hands  formed  the  dry  land."  Divine  purpose,  intelligence,  wisdom,  beneTO-
lence,  are  to  the  thoughtful  and  pious  mind  manifest  in  all  the  scenes  and  operations
which  Nature  presents  to  us.  We  need  not  be  pantheists,  and  identify  God  and
Nature,  in  order  to  see  and  to  glorify  God  in  all  his  works.

Yer.  6. — Da/ager  and  devotion.  The  conduct  of  the  seamen,  who  themselves,  when
encompassed  by  danger  and  when  threatened  by  death,  both  called  upon  their  gods
and  besought  Jonah  to  imitate  their  prayers  and  vows,  may  have  been  superstitious  in
its  accessories,  but.  it  was  certainly  right  in  principle.

L  Dangeb  bemdtdb  us  of  oub  own  poweblessness.  In  the  presence  of  the  great
forces  of  nature — the  hurricane,  the  earthquake,  the  volcano — man  feels  his  own
physical  feebleness  and  helplessness.  He  is  mightier  than  all  these  forces  in  that  he
can  think  and  feel,  purpose  and  act,  whilst  they  blindly  and  unconsciously  work  out
a  higher  will.  But  in  his  body  he  is  incapable  of  resisting,  of  measuring  himself
against,  these  tremendous  powers.

II.  Dangeb  beminds  us  of  the  dncebtaintt  and  bbevity  of  human  lite.  By
some  "accident"  from  without,  or  by  some  "disorder"  within,  the  life  of  the  body  wiU
certainly  be  brought  to  a  close.  The  lightning  may  smite  or  the  waves  may  swallow
up  the  healthiest  frame — ^may  close  the  most  useful  and  beneficent  life.  The  treacherous
sea,  as  in  this  narrative,  threatens  to  engulf  the  mariner  and  the  passenger.

*To  thee  the  love  of  woman  has  gone  down,
Brave  hearts  and  true  are  gathered  to  thy  breast."

III.  Dangeb  dbiveb  the  sinneb  to  seek  God's  meboy.  To  many  the  hour  of
peril  is  the  only  hour  of  prayer.  Lips  that  have  only  used  the  name  of  the  Eternal
Majesty  in  ribald  profanity,  when  white  with  fear  utter  that  name  in  earnest  entreaty
for  pity  and  for  deliverance.  When  human  help  is  vain,  then  the  godless  call  upon
the  great  Helper,  God.  How  wortliless  such  prayer  often  is  experience  sadly  teaches,
"The  river  past,  the  saint  forgot."  Yet  it  is  well  that  men  should  be  awakened,
however  rudely,  from  their  self-sufficiency  and  false  security.

IV.  Dangeb  dbaws  fobth  the  confidence  and  the  pbayebb  op  the  pioub.  How
many  are  the  records  of  shipwreclj  which  tell  of  the  peace  and  trust,  the  fortitude  and
hope,  of  the  true  Christian,  when  those  around  have  abandoned  themselves  to  despair!
He  who  believes  the  gospel  knows  that  God  "  thinks  upon  him,"  and  knows  that  he
so  thinks  upon  his  own  for  good.  It  may  be  that  an  imexpected  deliverance  will  be
wrought;  but  it  will  be  the  case  that,  whatever  the  Father  above  may  suffer  to  hwapea
to  the  body,  the  soul  ghaU  be  safe  in  heavenly  keeping  unto  life  eternal.


OH.  1.1—17.]  TllJi   BOOK   OF   JuJSaH.


Ver.  9. — A  good  confession.  What  an  insight  this  story  gives  us  into  the  life  and
habits  of  travellers  in  ancient  times  I  Curiosity  is  always  entertaining;  but  the
inquisitivenesB  of  these  seamen  bound  for  Tarshisb,  as  they  questioned  their  passenger
regarding  his  occupation,  his  race,  and  his  reli<;ion,  is  a  revelation  of  their  character,
and  affords  an  opportunity  to  the  prophet  to  avow  his  religious  faith.  Jonah  was  not
willing  to  obey  God ;  yet  he  was  not  slow  to  confess  God.  There  is  much  to  admire
in  his  language.

I.  It  was  ah  intelligent  confession.  God  is  to  many  little  more  than  a  name ;
religion  merely  a  form  of  words.  There  are  those  who  are  satisfied  to  name  the  name
of  their  hereditary  deity.  Jonah's  acknowledgment  was  accompanied  by  statements
which  prove  his  faith  to  have  been  something  more  than  traditional.  He  described
the  Jehovah  whom  he  worshipped  as  the  God  of  heaven,  the  Maker  of  the  sea  and
of  the  land.  The  words  remind  us  of  the  opening  of  the  Apostles'  Creed.  To  confess
Ood  truly  is  to  recognize  his  attributes  and  his  method  of  dealing  with  the  sons  of
men.     It  ia  not  enough  to  utter  mechanically  a  form  of  words.

II.  It  was  a  bold  confession.  Instead  of  being  alarmed  by  the  dangers  of  the
deep,  the  prophet  seemed  now  to  recover  the  self-possession  which  he  had  lost.  In  the
presence  of  the  angry  elements  and  the  anxious  sailors,  and  above  all  in  the  presence
of  the  Lord  of  nature  and  of  man,  Jonah  confessed  his  God.  Was  there  in  this
conduct  something  of  the  spirit  embodied  in  the  words,  "Though  he  slay  me,  yet
will  I  trust  in  him  "  f

III.  It  was  a  bevbbbnt  confession.  "  I  fear  the  Lord ; "  i.e.  revere,  worship,  and
honour  him.  They  who  know  him  aright  may  well  offer  to  him  the  veneration  and
adoration  which  angels  delight  to  present.  Who  would  not  fear  his  great  Name  ?
Alas !  that  the  name  of  God  should  ever  pass  irreverent  lips  I

IV.  It  was,  however,  a  confession  which  was  inconsistent  with  the  fbofext's

CONDUCT,   AND    WAS    THEBBFOHE    HIS    CONDEMNATION.       HoW   was   it   that   he,    who   80

honourably  confessed  his  God  iu  the  tempest,  liad  fled  from  that  God,  and  disobeyed
bis  plain  commands?  Could  he  use  this  language  and  not  feel  that  it  censured  himself
iw  so  acting  as  he  had  done?  It  is  well  that  we  should  verbally  acknowledge  God,
that  we  should  sincerely  confess  his  right  over  us.  But  it  may  be  that  when  we
recite  our  Greed,  and  make  our  confession,  we  shall  learn  to  think  of  our  frequent
inconsistencies  with  the  profession  which  we  avow.  The  knowledge  of  God  may
bring  us  to  the  knowledge  of  ourselves ;  and  confession  may  lead  to  penitence,  and  so
to  reconciliation.

■  Ver.  12. — Set/sacrifice.  Whatever  difficulties  the  facts  of  this  narrative  may
occasion  in  the  mind  of  the  reader,  it  must  be  admitted  that  it  abounds  with  principles
of  the  deepest  interest  and  value.  How  could  the  lesson  of  self-devotion,  of  self-
sacrifice,  be  more  impressively  taught  than  in  the  language  of  Jonah  recorded  in  this
verse?  The  unquestionable  realities  of  federal  human  life,  and  of  substitutionary
Buffering  and  sacrifice,  are  brought  before  us  in  a  vivid  and  impressive  form.

I.  Divine  peovidehce  appointb  that  the  wronq-doinq  of  men  should  involvb
8UFFEBINO  TO  THBIB  FELLOW-ORBATDKBS.  *'  For  my  Sake,"  Said  Jonah,  "  this  great
tempest  is  upon  you."  No  observer  of  human  life  can  doubt  that  the  greatest
sufferers  are  not  always  the  greatest  sinners;  they  are  often  those  who  are  brought  into
trouble,  sorrow,  and  afSiction  through  the  conduct  of  those  connected  with  them.  The
child  suffers  for  the  father's  sins;  the  wife,  for  the  husband's  improvidence;  the
people,  for  their  rulers'  selfishness  and  negligence.  We  may  not  be  able  to  explain
this  fact,  we  may  not  be  satisfied  with  explanations  of  it  which  other  people  accept  j
but  it  would  show  an  ignorance  of  human  life  to  question  its  reality.

II.  The  same  providenob  appoints  that  suffeeinqs  willingly  undbboone  bt
MEN  should  be  THE  MEANS  OF  BENEFIT  TO  OTHERS.  "  Cast  me  forth,"  Said  Jouah,
"into  the  sea;  so  shall  the  sea  be  calm  unto  you."  Here  again  we  are  brought  into
contact  with  an  undoubted  fact  in  human  society.  The  sufferings,  hardships,  and
self-denial  of  parents  are  the  means  of  comfort,  culture,  and  well-being  to  their
children.  Great  men  benefit  society  by  means  of  their  labours,  their  self-sacrifice.
Few  persons  reap  a  harvest  of  gladness  and  peace  and  prosperity,  the  seed  of  which
has  not  been  sown  with  toil  and  with  tears.    It  is  the  highest  exercise  of  patriotism


10  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  1. 1—11

to  devote  one's  self  to  death  for  the  country's  weal;  and  the  highest  exercise  of
benevolence,  when  called  upon  by  duty,  to  die  for  the  welfare  of  humanity.

III.  Both  these  principles  aee  most  oonspicuoublt  exemplified  in  the  bacbi-
FicE  OF  OUB  Divine  Ebdeembr.  1.  The  sins  of  men  brought  Jesus  to  the  cross  of
Calvary.  2.  The  sufferings  of  Jesas  bring  men  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  Divine  favour.
"  By  his  stripes  we  are  healed."

Vers.  13,  14. — Effort  and  prayer.  It  has  always  been  acknowledged  that  there  was
in  the  conduct  of  these  heathen  sailors  something  peculiarly  generous.  Although
they  believed  themselves  to  have  been  brought  into  danger  by  the  companionship  ot
Jonah,  although  he  himself  invited  them  to  cast  him  overboard  and  so  secure  their
safety,  this  they  would  not  do  until  they  had  exhajisted  every  means  of  deliverance.

I.    In    times  of   DIFFIOULTT   and    danger   we   are    summoned   to    EXEBT   all  OUB

POWERS  FOB  OUB  ESCAPE  AND  PRESERVATION.  There  is  a  false  piety  which  is  true
fatalism,  which  is  content  with  prayer  and  indisposed  to  effort.  But  such  is  not  the
piety  sanctioned  in  Scripture.  Courage,  effort,  perseverance, — these  are  the  qualities
which  are  always  mentioned  with  commendation.  In  fact,  effort  is  the  use  of  the
natural  powers  with  which  our  Creator  has  endowed  us,  the  employment  of  the  means
which  Providence  has  put  within  our  reach.  In  striving  for  safety  and  for  success
men  are  honouring  God,  Endeavours  may  be  unsuccessful, -but  it  is  better  to  fail
while  doing  our  very  best  than  to  fail  by  sloth  and  negligence.

IL  In  times  of  difficulty  and  danger  thebe  is  no  eesourob  so  pbopee  and
BO  PBECI0U8  AS  PBAYER.  The  conduot  of  these  heathen  sailors,  as  here  described,  is
beyond  all  praise.  What  they  did  was  to  put  forth  every  effort  for  their  own  anii
their  fellow-voyager's  safety,  and  then  to  commend  themselves  to  the  guidance  and
the  mercy  of  the  Most  High.  With  their  slender  knowledge  they  could  not  have
prayed  with  much  intelligence ;  but  they  prayed  with  much  good  feeling  towards  man,,
with  much  submission  towards  God,  and  with  much  fervour.  The  lesson  is  obvious.
Whilst  we  can  work  it  is  well  to  work  in  a  prayerful  spirit,  with  dependence  upon
Gcd.  When  we  can  no  longer  work,  when  human  effort  is  of  no  avail,  then  it  is  well
to  call  upon  God  and  to  leave  ourselves  entirely  in  his  hands.

Ver.  16. — Fear,  sacrifice,  and  vows.  Times  of  danger  are  often  times  of  devotion ;
but  times  of  deliverance  are  not  always  times  of  thanksgiving.  It  is  to  the  credit  and
honour  of  these  seamen  that  when  the  storm  ceased  they  acknowledged  Jehovah  as
the  Author  of  the  calm,  as  the  God  of  salvation.  Three  aspects  of  religious  exercise
are  here  presented  to  us.

I.  Bevebence.  We  cannot  say  that  there  was  no  superstition  in  the  feelings  and
the  conduct  of  these  mariners.  Probably  the  piety  of  most  good  men  has  an  element
of  superstition.  In  any  case,  they  feared  the  Eternal,  feeling  themselves  to  be  in  the
presence  and  at  the  disposal  of  him  who  holds  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand.

II.  Sacrifice.  It  was  a  thank  offering,  no  doubt,  which  they  presented.  If  the;
were  sincere,  this  sacrifice  was  a  symbol  of  the  consecration  of  their  whole  nature,
their  whole  life,  unto  God.

III.  Vows.  Mercy  experienced  in  the  past  should  lead  to  the  expectation  of  mercy
in  the  future.  The  season  of  deliverance  is  a  suitable  season  for  resolutions  and  for
vows.  But  be  it  remembered,  "Better  is  it  that  thou  shouldest  not  vow,  than  that
thou  shouldest  vow  and  not  pay."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 3. — A  despicable  deserter.  "  God  looketh  on  the  heart."  And  none  but
God  can.  It  is  an  obscure  and  tortuous  place — '.'deceitful  above  all  things,  and
desperately  wicked :  who  can  know  it  ?  "  Its  chaos  and  darkness,  transparent  to  the
Divine  Spirit,  are  impenetrable  to  any  creature's  eye.  Even  the  new  heart  is  not  all
aew.  Persistent  among  the  grace-germs  are  bacteria  of  sin,  inseparable  and  morbific.
In  Jonah  this  baneful  combination  is  obvious.  He  neither  loved  God  supremely  noi
his  neighbour  as  himself.    If  he  had,  the  action  here  recorded  could  never  have  been


CH.1. 1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  11

done,  nor  the  feelings  which  prompted  it  have  found  a  home  in  bis  heart.  To  &y  from
&o(Fs  service  because  it  inTolved  the  helping  of  men  is  a  course  consistent  it  may  be
wilh  grace,  but  only  with  grace  alloyed,  inchoate,  and  overlaid  with  the  mind  of  flesh.
T.  In  God's  abut  it  is  eitheb  desebtion  ob  duty.  "  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  from
the  presence  of  the  Lord."  There  was  a  Divine  presence  &om  which  Jonah  was  not
so  ignorant  as  to  attempt  escape.  He  shows  familiarity  with  the  Book  of  Psalms
(ch.  iL  2 — 9),  aod  doubtless  knew  with  the  psalmist  (Ps.  exxxix.  7 — 10)  that  there
was  no  place  outside  God's  omnipresence.  But  there  was  a  special  presence  of  God
in  the  land  of  Israel.  He  was  present  in  gracious  hearts,  and  in  the  ordinances  and
ofBces  of  the  Church.  This  special  and  gracious  presence  Jonah,  like  Jacob  (Gen.
xxviii.  16),  seems  to  have  considered  peculiar  to  the  Holy  Land.  He  had  a  notion
probably  that  the  institutions  arising  out  of  it  were  purely  local  also,  and  that  flight
to  heathen  Spain  would  break  the  spiritual  connection  and  void  hi«  prophetic  ofSce.
His  flight  was  "  not  from  God's  presence,  but  from  standing  before  him  as  his  minister
...  he  renounced  his  office "  (Fusey).  And  the  act  was  logical  in  one  aspect,  how-
ever criminal.  Enlistment  in  God's  service  means  something.  It  is  not  playing  at
campaigning.  It  is  not  a  kind  of  spiritual  autumn  manoeuvres,  which  merely  give
spice  to  a  periodical  outing.     It  incurs  responsibility  and  involves  obedience.

"I  slept,  and  dreamed  that  life  was  beauty.
I  woke,  and  found  that  life  was  duty."

That  all  must  find  who  are  spiritually  awake.  There  is  work  for  all,  and  his  task  for
each.  And  it  has  got  to  be  done.  In  the  Divine  code  stand  the  regulations  of  the
service,  and  they  aie  not  to  be  trifled  with.  Idleness  is  out  of  the  question ;  insub-
ordination is  not  to  be  named.  Jonah  felt  this.  "  He  rose  up  to  flee."  He  could  not
point-blank  refuse,  and  stand  his  ground.  Do  something  he  must,  when  the  word
went  forth.  He  will  not  preach,  and  so  he  has  got  to  fly.  It  is  so  always.  A  man
cannot  remain  at  his  post  and  strike  work.  The  eye  of  the  Master  would  look  him
through,  and  his  presence  compel  obedience.  The  mutineer  is  in  the  same  hour  a
deserter.  He  can  maintain  the  one  character  only  by  adopting  the  other.  Our
spiritual  duties  arise  out  of  our  spiritual  relations,  and  are  at  the  same  time  their
necessary  expression.  The  alternative  with  us  is  "  both  or  neither."  Befuse  God's
work,  and  you  put  yourself  out  of  his  service.

II.    BiQOTBT    IB    AN    INEVITABLE    WEAKENEB    OF    THE    UOBAL    SENSE.        Some    think

Jonah  refused  to  summon  the  Ninevites  to  repentance  for  fear  they  might  take  him
at  his  word.  Thfiix  reformation  just  now  would  not  have  suited  his  views.  As
heathen  he  disliked  them,  and  as  wicked  he  could  use  them  as  a  foil  for  wicked  Israel.
Nineveh  penitent,  on  the  other  hand,  after  one  Divine  warning,  would  have  contrasted
strongly  with  Israel  impenitent  after  centuries  of  prophetic  appeal,  and  he  dreaded  the
repentance  which  would  have  been  the  occasion  of  such  a  damaging  comparison.  But
this  is  clearly  an  exaggeration  of  Jonah's  feeling  in  the  matter.  No  prophet  of  God,
no  servant  of  God,  could  connive  at  sin  against  God  in  order  to  the  destruction  of  men.
To  do  so  would  be  incompatible  altogether  with  the  religious  character.  Still,  Jonah
would  have  been  more  or  less  than  a  Jew  if  he  had  not  been  a  bigot.  He  would  not
wantonly  have  compassed  Nineveh's  ruin.  But  being  a  bigot,  and  an  egoist  as  well,
he  was  so  indifierent  to  the  fate  of  the  heathen  city  as  to  be  ready  to  sacrifice  it  rather
than  risk  the  lowering  of  his  own  prophetic  reputation.  In  all  this  we  see  the  tokens
of  a  weakened  moral  sense.  Bigotry  is  an  unequalled  hardener  of  the  heart.  It  is
narrow,  cold,  sour,  and  carping.  It  denies  or  belittles  all  good  outside  its  own  ecclesi-
astical circle.  Whilst  blind  to  extern  religious  excellence,  it  is  indifferent  to  extern
religious  attainment.  It  takes  covert  pleasure  in  the  sins  and  weaknesses  of  rival
Churches ;  it  would  regard  their  failure  and  collapse  with  mean  complacency ;  and  it
would  almost  as  lief  see  men  remaining  in  sin  as  reformed  by  effort  not  its  own.  The
tendency  to  look  every  man  and  Church  on  our  own  things  is  a  natural  one,  and
grows.  And  it  necessarily  involves  the  other  tendency,  its  obverse,  to  look  away  from
the  things  of  others.  This  is  the  very  antipodes  of  the  "  mind  of  Christ."  That
believes  in  the  dignity  of  man  as  man.  It  sets  a  unique  value  on  human  life.  It
regards  the  question  of  a  human  destiny  as  one  of  stupendous  interest.  It.makes  the
securing  of  it  a  personal  concern.    It  never  asks, "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  1"  for  the


12  THK  BOOK  OF  JONAIL  [oh.  1. 1—17-

fact  is  with  it  an  axiomatic  truth.  Loving  its  neighbour  as  itself,  its  moral  attitude
inspires  its  active  one — "  do  good  to  all."  It  regards  life  as  wasted  if  not  lived  for  i^en,
and  the  time  as  lost  in  'which  it  does  not  "  save  some."

III.   IHGLOBIOUS  duty  IB   MOST  IN   DANQBB  OF   BEING  LEFT  UNDONE.      Jouah  had  an

idea  how  his  mission  would  end.  As  a  prophet,  he  knew  that  Nineveh  would  repent,
and  on  repentance  be  spared,  his  prophecy  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding  (ch.  iv.  2).
And  the  prospect  was  humbling  to  his  self-love.  The  affair  could  bring  him  little
credit.  He  was  simply  to  deliver  an  empty  threat,  a  threat  the  utterance  of  which
would  serve  God's  purpose,  and  so  prevent  the  necessity  of  carrying  it  out.  How  was
he  to  get  up  a  prophetic  reputation  by  performing  such  a  task?  Warnings  heeded
and  predictions  fulfilled  are  the  chief  credentials  of  a  prophet.  The  first  'a_  both  in
itself  and  in  its  practical  results,  by  far  the  more  important.  But  the  second  is  more
of  a  personal  interest  to  the  prophet  as  involving  his  credibility  more  directly.  Hence
in  proportion  as  he  is  "  yet  carnal "  and  self-seeking  it  will  bulk  more  largely  in  his
regard.  A  Paul  could  say,  "  We  preach  not  ourselves,  but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,"  and
mean  it  thoroughly.  But  the  perfect  self-sinking  of  the  apostolic  rule  was  an  unsealed
height  to  the  egotistic  prophet.  He  wanted  a  name  and  official  distinction  more  than
the  exhibition  of  God's  mercy  and  the  reformation  of  wicked  men.  Accordingly,  he
refused  to  assume  an  equivocal  position,  although  he  knew,  and  because  he  knew,  it
would  lead  to  these  prime  results.  And  servants  his  counterparts  are  still  found  in
,  God's  work.  The  men  who  "  do  good  by  stealth,  and  blush  to  find  it  fame  "  no  doubt
exist.  But  the  blushes  traceable  to  this  source  are  a  small  proportion  of  the  blushes
current.  He  has  reached  a  high  spiritual  level  who  so  lives  to  God  that  personal
considerations  are  as  nothins;  in  his  work.  Position  and  visibility,  to  say  nothing  of
considerations  more  sordid  still,  are  elements  in  the  situation,  hard  to  keep  subordinate,
harder  still  to  ignore,  when  the  Christian  worker  is  making  choice  of  fields.  A  place
in  the  most  distant  mission  field  may  single  out  a  worker  from  the  crowd,  and  the
missionary  pioneer  finds  temptations  to  pose  before  the  Church  as  strong  as  beset  the
brightest  metropolitan  star.  The  large  giver,  moreover,  or  the  great  organizer,  has  as
many  temptations  to  self-seeking  as  either.  It  is  so  thiough  all  departments  of
activity  and  in  all  the  walks  of  life.  The  work  that  brings  fortune  and  fame  will
have  thousands  competing  for  a  chance  to  do  it.  The  only  duty  in  practical  danger
of  being  shirked  is  the  duty  to  be  followed  into  obscure  places,  and  done  with  only  the
eye  of  God  to  note  our  faithfulness.

IV.  Eetkbat  from  God  is  resolute,  and  aims  at  entire  isolation.  Jonah
started  at  a  run.  He  evidently  meant  to  get  away,  and  threw  all  his  energy  into  the
effort.  He  went,  too,  in  a  direction  exactly  the  opposite  of  the  one  in  which  he  had
been  sent.  God  had  said,  "  Go  north-east,"  and  he  went  south-west.  He  set  out,  more-
over, for  the  remotest  place  he  knew  of,  Spain  beiiig  the  "  far  West "  of  those  early  times.
He  went  about  it  also  in  the  most  business-like  way,  going  to  Joppa,  the  great  seaport,
and  booking  a  berth  on  one  of  the  great  ships  of  Tarshish,  to  break  which  was  the
magnum  opus  of  the  east  wind  (Ps.  xlviii.  7).  All  which  things  are  no  doubt  an
allegory.  The  sinner's  drawing  near  to  God  is  done  at  a  snail's  pace.  Loving  this
sinful  world,  he  hangs  back  long  before  he  starts.  Answering  feebly  as  yet  to  the
drawing  of  grace,  and  breaking  cord  after  cord  in  the  tearing  of  himself  away,  the
motion  toward  God  at  first  is  slow  and  painful,  like  that  of  a  weak  oarsman  against  a
rapid  stream.  But  like  a  stone  down  hill,  and  drawn  by  mighty  gravitation,  the
motion  away  from  God  is  by  leaps  and  bounds  (Eom.  vii.  19,  22,  23).  Tou  have
seen  at  the  docks  the  seamen  straining  at  the  windlass,  as,  after  minutes  of  strenuous
effort,  they  have  pulleyed  a  bale  of  merchandise  liigh  in  air.  And  yon  have  seen,  when
they  let  go  the  winch,  how  swiftly  the  handle  files  and,  as  the  rope  unrolls,  the  bale
comes  rushing  down.  And  such  is  retrogression  in  contrast  to  progress  in  the  religious
sphere.  So  much  more  quickly  do  men  fall  than  rise,  that  a  few  days'  backsliding  is
enough  to  neutralize  the  growth  of  years.  Then  so  opposite  tp  God  is  the  sinful  heart
that  its  departure  from  him  is  absolute  turning  back.  Swerving  would  be  bad,  aberra-
tion would  be  worse,  but  regression  is  worst  of  all ;  and  such  is  religious  backsliding.  It
is  spiritual  tergiversation.  The  renegade  turns  his  back  on  right,  and  takes  a  way  the
very  opposite.  He  obeys  Satan  and  follows  sin,  the  antipodes  respectively  of  God  and
good.    If  God's  way  be  light,  his  is  darkness;  if  upwards,  his  is  downwards  infallibly


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  13

Thea  there  is  no  spiritual  half-way  house.  God  in  his  mercy  may  arrest  him  on  the
way,  but  the  renegade  starts  fur  Tarshish,  ttie  spiritual  remotest  point.  A  stone
detached  from  the  house-top  has  no  stopping-place  short  of  the  ground.  Turn  your
back  on  God  and  heaven,  and  Satan  and  heil  are,  humanly  speaking,  your  destination.
Moreover,  defection  from  God  is  not  an  aimless  drifting,  but  intelligent  and  of  purpose.
It  is  a  course  wittingly  taken  and  studiously  kept.  The  deteriorated  moral  nature
presses  head  and  hand  into  its  service,  to  survey  and  construct  the  road  by  which
it  would  reach  the  shrine  of  its  chosen  idol.  At  the  Joppa  of  occasion,  advisedly
Bought,  is  chartered  the  ship  of  ways  and  means,  to  bring  us  to  the  Tarshish  of
accomplished  sin,  the  goal  of  our  godless  hearts.

V.   A  MAN  WILL  ALWAYS  FIND  CIHCUMSTAN0B8  FAVOnBABLB  TO  THE  OOUBSE  HE  HAS

BEBOLVED  TO  TAKE.  Jonah  fouud  a  ship  about  to  sail  to  his  destination,  got  accommo-
dation on  board,  and  had  the  means  to  provide  a  berth.  Things  seem  as  if  arranged
on  purpose  to  facilitate  his  flight.  Had  it  been  othervrise,  we  sometimes  think  the
prophet  s  "  Hegirah "  might  have  been  stopped  earlier,  and  a  good  deal  of  suffering
saved.  But  that  would  be  a  shallow  philosophy  of  human  action.  Physical  surround-
ings cannot  thus  shape  our  moral  course.  Intelligence  makes  its  own  use  of  them  all.
Purpose  is  formed ;  action  is  decided  on ;  and  then  the  circumstances  are  examined  to
see  what  mode  of  action  they  can  most  easily  be  made  to  help.  The  ship,  the  berth,
and  the  passage-money  to  Tarshish  were  available  to  many  besides  Jonah,  yet  he
only  prostituted  them  to  the  purpose  of  shirking  duty.  They  lent  themselves  to  his
project,  because  the  project  had,  in  the  first  place,  been  adjusted  to  them.  So  if  a  thieT
finds  an  open  window,  and  no  policeman  in  sight,  the  circumstances  are  said  to  favour
a  burglary.  If  a  would-be  murderer  finds  the  same  state  of  things,  then  we  say  the
circumstances  favour  assassination.  But  if  a  man  who  would  neither  kill  nor  steal
finds  them  so,  they  favour  no  project  of  his,  and  so  are  either  put  right  or  passed
unheeded.  Circumstances  favour  neither  good  nor  evil  particularly,  but  each  man
makes  use  of  those  that  fit  his  own  purpose,  and  passes  the  others  by.  We  hear  often
of  wicked  men  who  are  the  victims  of  circumstance.  And  there  are  some  sucb,  no
doubt.  But  the  cases  are  fewer  and  logically  weaker  than  you  might  think.  Here
are  two  country  youths  apprenticed  in  town  among  a  godless  set.  One  turns  out  a
profligate,  and  friends  pity  him  and  say,  "  He  got  into  bad  hands  :  what  better  could
we  expect  in  such  a  place?"  But  the  other,  with  the  same  surroundings  exactly,
turns  out,  as  often  happens,  an  honest  tradesman  and  a  godly  man.  And  if  you
exan)ine  you  will  find  that  he  has  honest  men  for  his  friends,  and  Christian  people  for
his  associates,  and  enjoys  beneficial  influences  in  every  relation  of  life.  In  other  words,
he  is  in  a  new  set  of  circumstances  altogether,  favourable  to  the  religious  life,  and
which  his  own  conduct  has  drawn  around  him.  The  circumstances  have  not  made
the  men,  but  the  men  have  practically  made  the  circumstances.  And  so  we  reason
out  the  truth  which  God  reveals,  "  To  the  pure  all  things  are  pure,"  etc.  (Titus  i.  15).
We  are  greater  than  our  environment.  "  Each  man  creates  his  ovra  world.  .  .  .  The
soul  spreads  its  own  hue  over  everything ;  the  shroud  or  wedding  garment  of  nature
is  woven  in  the  loom  of  our  own  feelings.  This  universe  is  the  image  and  counterpart
of  the  souls  that  dwell  in  it.  Be  noble-minded,  and  aU  nature  replies — I  am  divine,
the  child  of  God ;  be  thou  too  his  child  and  noble.  Be  mean,  and  all  nature  dwindles
into  a  contemptible  smallness "  (Robertson).  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new
creature :  old  things  are  passed  away ;  behold,  all  things  are  become  new."  To  you  and
me  the  world  will  be  a  new  world  when  we  are  new  creatures  in  Christ.  It  is  not
what  it  was,  but  a  transfigured  thing,  when  we  view  it  "  the  eyes  of  our  understand
ings  being  enlightened,"  and  make  all  its  elements  tributary  to  a  new  life  in  Christ. —
J.  E.  H.

Vers.  4 — ^10. — An  effective  hue  and  cry.  We  see  here  a  man  who  ought  to  run
for  God  endeavouring  to  run  away  from  him,  and  also  how  he  speeds.  The  flight  wm
illogical,  a  fatuous  attempt  to  get  outside  the  sphere  of  omnipresence,  as  much  of  our
sin  is  a  practical  endeavour  to  get,  or  imagine  ourselves,  beyond  the  cognizance  of
omniscience.  And  it  wag  made  in  the  blindness  of  egoism  and  carnal  self-will — the
qualities  which  are  generally  to  be  found  at  the  bottom  of  ministerial  unfaithfulness
to  the  measao-e  of  God.    A  lorry  off  the  lines  attracts  attention,  when  a  whole  train  on


U  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  i  1—17

them  might  pass  unnoticed.  A  large  proportion  of  the  heterodoxy  extant  originates
in  or  is  exaggerated  by  a  desire  to  catch  the  public  eye.  The  evil  it  does  to  the  souls
of  men  will  go  on  so  long  as  there  are  nominal  servants  who  have  a  private  interest
dearer  to  them  than  the  Master's  work.  And  the  personal  disappointment  and  saffer-
ing  and  failure  of  the  prophet  are  the  experiences  bound  to  be  repeated  in  all  cases  of
spiritual  renegadism  like  it.

I.  Thky  bum  hard  whom  God'b  jTjDaMBNTS  CANNOT  ovsBTAKB.  Jonah  icarcely
hoped  to  get  away  from  God.  But  he  did  expect  to  get  away  from  his  work.  It  lay
north-east,  and  he  went  south-west.  He  was  determined  not  to  be  near  the  place
where  duty  lay,  lest  by  any  chance  he  should  be  compelled  to  do  it.  In  this  he
succeeded  for  the  time,  and  he  succeeded  still  more  fully  in  getting  morally  and
spiritually  away  from  the  Most  High.  Not  depths  of  sea  or  wilds  of  desert  could
have  taken  him  so  far  from  God  as  the  moral  elements  implied  in  that  flight.  But  he
found  that  desertion,  however  possible,  can  never  be  satisfactory.  God's  authority  is
not  to  be  run  away  from.  He  makes  storms  his  artillery,  and  thunders  after  the  run-
away. He  makes  heathen  sailors  his  officers,  and  captures  him  in  his  flight.  He
makes  a  fish's  belly  his  dungeon  keep,  and  puts  him  in  durance  there.  Do  not  for  a
moment  dream  of  evading  God.  If  you  run  away  from  his  spade,  yon  run  against  his
sword.  You  can  run  away  from  sobriety,  but  not  from  the  white  liver  and  empty
purse  and  premature  grave  that  drunkenness  brings.  You  can  run  away  from  purity,
but  not  from  the  debilitated  frame,  and  the  cloyed  appetite,  and  the  hell  of  a  strengthen-
ing lust  with  failing  power  to  feed  it.  You  can  run  away'from  charity,  but  not  from
the  heart-hardness  and  bitterness  and  gnawing  unrest  of  all  loveless  soiils.  Disobedi-
ence accomplished  means  judgment  on  tlie  way,  and  judgment  on  the  way  means
judgment  ahead  of  the  transgressor,  and  waiting  for  him  as  the  angel  for  wretched
Balaam  (Rom.  ii.  3).

II.  The  judgmbnts  sent  after  the  ouimt  often  fall  on  the  innocent  ab
WELL.  "Sin,"  says  Chrysostom,  "brings  the  soul  into  much  senselessness."  It
brought  Jonah  to  think  that  he  could  play  6ff  nature  against  its  God,  and  escape  him
by  the  help  of  his  own  winds  and  tides.  It  brought  him  to  pit  one  of  the  great  ships
of  Tarshish — the  East  Indiamen  of  that  time — against  God's  east  wind  (Ps.  xlviii.  7).
But  mighty  merchantman  or  tiny  skiff,  it  is  all  one  to  the  huvricane's  blast.  The
prophet,  so  far  from  getting  out  of  trouble  himself,  got  others  into  it  (vers.  4,  5).  The
sailors  suffered  fatigue  and  alarm;  the  ship-owners  suffered  loss  of  freight;  other
vessels  near  suffered  dilapidations ;  indeed,  many  interests  were  harassed  before  Jonah
himself  was  reached.  That  is  the  rule  with  all  sin.  In  almost  every  offence  against
the  second  table  of  the  Law  our  neighbour  suffers  fir.st.  Then,  after  the  offender  begins
to  suffer,  his  suffering  in  turn  involves  the  family  and  social  circles  in  which  he  is.
The  spendthrift's  poverty,  the  debauchee's  disease,  the  felon's  disgrace,  go  down
infallibly  to  children,  and  it  may  be  children's  children.  Sinning  against  God  you
are  indirectly  sinning  against  man,  and  sinning  against  one  man,  you  are-  practically
sinning  against  all  his  friends  and  all  your  own.  Such  a  following  of  evils  does  the
transgressor  drag  after  him  in  an  ever-lengthening  train.

III.  Those  who  have  been  the  occasion  of  great  pdblio  evil  abb  often  the
least  concebned  aboot  it.  Jonah  was  the  coolest  man  on  board  while  the  big  storm
was  raging.  It  was  due  to  him,  sent  after  him,  meant  to  arrest  his  thought  and  step,
and  yet,  when  hardy  sailors  were  frightened,  and  ignorant  heathen  were  driven  to
pray,  the  erewhile  God-fearing  landsman  was  making  himself  comfortable  below,  and
curled  up  fast  asleep.  So  the  men  who  provoked  the  Flood  were  cool  and  calm  about
it,  even  when  Noah  and  his  family  were  flying  to  the  ark.  To  the  Sodomites  also
righteous  Lot,  preparing  to  fly  the  coming  doom,  seemed  but  as  one  that  mocked.
The  hardness  produced  by  recent  rebellion  had  not  yet  worn  off.  The  murderer  does
not  regret  his  crime  nor  fear  the  gallows  while  his  blood  is  up.  The  excitement
sustains  him  for  a  time  in  reckless  disregard  of  both.  But  when  he  has  had  time  to
cool  down  and  think,  when  he  gets  the  cold  iron  on  his  wrists,  and  sees  the  outer  world
through  iron  bars,  when  dreams  recall  his  victim's  death-struggle  or  forecast  the
scaffold  and  the  dangling  rope,  then  his  crime  begins  to  look  like  itself,  and  his  doom
to  put  on  its  proper  terrors.  Jonah  was  still  in  the  earlier  stage.  He  did  not  see  his
6.n  yet,  and  he  was  too  hot  and  rebelUous  to  fear  the  punishment.    After  sin  and


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  18

before  repentasce  there  U  an  interval  of  unnatural  inBensibility,  and  in  thia  interN  al
JoDsh's  sleep  was  taken.  It  is  a  horrid  sight  to  see  judge  and  jury  and  the  court
affected  io  tears,  and  the  crimioal  as  hard  as  iron.  Yet  that  is  the  analogue  of  a  state
into  which  we  have  only  to  defy  God  in  order  to  fall.

ly.   A  PRATEBLESB  BACEBLID£B  IS  AN  ASTONISHMENT  EVEN  TO  A  HEATHBH.      (Yer.

6.)  The  skipper,  a  responsible  man,  and  pious  according  to  his  lights,  thinks  Jonah,
sleeping  there  in  the  crash  of  the  storm,  must  be  either  sick  or  mad.  Prayer,  whether
to  false  gods  or  the  true,  is  a  universal  and  instinctive  religious  act.  And  so  when
the  great  wind-guns  began  to  boom  and  the  billowy  mitrailleuses  to  roar  in  chorus,
when  the  helpless  vessel  tossed  like  a  log  anri  creaked  and  strained  as  about  to  break,
then  began  every  man  to  cry  unto  his  god.  Even  the  heathen  could  see  that  it  was
the  thing  to  do,  and  the  time  to  do  it ;  and  when  the  only  worshipper  of  the  true  God
aboard  lies  silent  and  indifferent,  the  captain  and  crew  are  alike  astonished.  Yet  it  ii
just  what  a  little  knowledge  of  the  human  character  in  its  relation  to  spiritual  things
would  lead  us  to  expect.  The  iron  that  has'  been  heated  soft,  and  cooled  again  in
water,  is  harder  than  ever.  The  process  has  simply  tempered  it.  So  the  man  who
has  been  softened  in  the  fires  of  grace,  and  plunged  again  into  the  waters  of  sin,  is  a
harder  man  than  ho  was  at  first  (Heb.  vi.  4).  There  are  Canas  and  Chorazins  among
us,  and  it  will  be  more  tolerable  for  the  Tyres  and  Sidons  in  the  judgment  than  for
them.

V.    It  is  in  THE  CRISES  or  LIFE  THAT   TALSE  CONriDENCES   FAIL  AND  THE  TBUX  GoD

COMES  TO  TBS  FRONT.  The  Captain  sees  appeal  to  his  own  gods  to  be  vain,  and  he
surmises  that  prayer  to  the  God  of  Israel  might  be  more  successful.  "  Call  upon  thy
God,  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us."  He  knew  of  the  true  God  as  distinguished
from  the  gods  many  whom  he  served,  but  only  in  extremity  does  he  think  of
approaching  Mm  in  prayer.  The  other  gods  were  fair-weather  deities,  good  enough  so
long  as  yuu  wanted  nothing  from  them.  But  ouly  the  God  who  holds  the  winds  in
his  fists  will  serve  now.  And  thus,  tn  a  new  sense,  the  extremity  of  man  is  the
opportunity  of  God.  Beliefs,  moralities,  observances,  are  made  so  many  substitutes
for  the  Christ  of  God.  And  they  do  to  live  with  after  a  fashion.  But  you  never  knew
a  man  to  die  comfortably  with  them.  The  last  hour  is  apocalyptic.  It  unveils  things.
The  bubble  of  conceit  in  personal  merit  bursts.  The  filthy  rags  fall  off.  The  soul
is  flung  naked,  loathsome,  undone,  before  the  majesty  of  God.  Take  God  in  Christ
for  your  trust  this  hour,  and  you  will  never  know  the  withering  curse  on  him  that
"  maketh  flesh  his  arm." — J.  E.  H.

Vers.  11, 12. — A  vdvmiary  wrrender.  Matters  so  anomalous  up  to  this  point  are
beginning  now  to  resume  their  normal  aspect.  The  prophet  had  been  behaving  In  a
most  inconsequential  and  erratic  way.  His  flight  had  been  utterly  out  of  character.
He  ran  away  from  a  duty  in  the  doing  of  which  piety  would  have  met  philanthropy,
and  both  have  had  ample  scope.  His  sleep  through  the  storm  which  his  own  sin
provoked,  when  death  was  imminent,  and  even  the  heathen  sailors  called  in  terror  on
their  gods,  was,  if  possible,  more  eccentric  still.  Most  unaccountable  of  all,  perhaps,
was  the  declaration,  "  I  fear  the  Lord,"  so  sincerely  made  when  in  the  very  act  of
setting  his  command  at  naught.  But  now  the  craze  is  passing  off.  Like  the  prodigal
at  a  corresponding  stage  of  his  career,  we  see  the  prophet  coming  to  himself.  The
reign  of  law  is  coming  back,  and  mind  and  conscience  and  will  fall  into  line  and  begin
to  act  by  rule.  These  verses  exhibit  to  us  the  workings  of  the  backslider's  mind  in  his
return  to  God.    We  see —

I.  That  calamity  has  compelled  him  to  think.  The  sinner  is  seldom  logical.
If  he  were,  he  would  be  a  sinner  no  longer.  There  are  no  valid  premisses  to  which
a  sinful  act  will  stand  in  the  relation  of  a  conclusion.  If  Jonah  had  reasoned  out  the
matter  before  he  started  on  his  flight,  he  would  not  have  started  at  all.  He  adopted
on  impulse  a  course  the  folly  of  which  a  single  moment's  consideration  would  have
shown.  And  he  avoided  this  consideration  as  long  as  he  could.  It  was  only  the
impossibility  of  getting  further  that  compelled  him  to  face  the  question,  "  Why  did  I
come  so  far  ?  And  was  it  wisely  done  ?  "  It  is  almost  invariably  the  practical  results
of  a  line  of  conduct  that  lead  us  to  examine  as  to  its  intrinsic  wisdom.  We  consult
our  taste  in  the  first  mstanoe.     What  promises  immediate  pleasure  or  profit  comes  to


16  THE  BOOK   OF  JOJ^AU.  [ofl.  L  1— 11


our  judgment  so  highly  recommended  by  the  fact,  that  few  questions  are  asked.  No
one  supposes  that  the  drunkard  takes  the  moral,  economic,  or  hygienic  measure  of  his
disastrous  habit  before  he  forms  it.  He  has  a  lively  feeling  that  it  is  pleasant,  and
suits  his  taste,  and  he  waives  the  consideration  of  other  points  till  a  more  convenient
season.  It  is  only  when  his  habit  has  brought  misfortune  that  he  really  faces  the
question  whether  it  is  a  good  one  or  not.  With  his  mouth  full  of  the  bitter  fruit,  he
naturally  begins  to  form  an  idea  of  the  character  of  the  tree.  If  the  fruiting  bad  never
come,  tlie  appraising  would  have  been  left  undone.  There  is  to  every  sinner  a  day
when  he  cannot  but  think.  He  Is  happy  if  the  needs-be  overtakes  him  at  the  outset  of
his  straying  ere  yet  return  has  become  impossible.

II.  Thouoht  has  convinced  him  op  sin.  We  can  read  a  sense  of  guilt  in  eveiy
word  of  the  arrested  fugitive.  His  mind  has  awaked.  In  thought  he  has  faced  the
situation.  And  his  thought  has  not  been  barren.  It  has  brought  forth  conviction.
It  would  have  been  weak  indeed  if  It  had  not.  The  fact  of  sin  is  patent  to  ordinary
intelligence.  And  so  to  a  certain  extent  is  its  demerit.  To  declare  its  existence  and
quality  is  the  function  of  natural  conscience;  and  what  is  conscience  but  reason  dealing
with  moral  truth  ?  Of  course,  its  diagnosis  of  sin  is  inadequate.  The  awful  demerit  of
sin  done  against  an  infinite  and  holy  God  cannot  be  reached  by  mere  force  of  think-
ing. It  takes  an  enlightened  eye  to  see  it  as  it  is,  an  opened  heart  to  realize  the  whole
truth  regarding  it.  You  must  know  God,  in  fact,  in  order  to  know  sin,  which  is  an
offence  against  him.  This,  no  doubt,  Jonah  did.  There  was  a  mote  for  the  time  being
in  his  spiritual  eye,  but  it  had  been  opened  once  for  all  to  see  God.  He  came,"  there-
fore, to  the  contemplation  of  his  sin  with  a  measure  of  spiritual  insight.  And  all  may
come  to  it  similarly  furnished.  Obey  the  call  of  Scripture  to  "  consider."  Make  •
sincere  attempt  to  examine  yourself.  Turn  your  eye  inward,  desiring  honestly  to  know
yourself  as  sinful  in  God's  sight.  You  won't  be  left  to  your  own  unaided  efforts  and
to  failure.  God  awaits  the  beginning  of  such  action  to  strengthen  it.  He  awaits  the
attempt  at  such  action  to  help  it.  He  waits  the  aim  at  such  action  to  move  to  attempt
it  in  the  strength  of  grace.  It  follows  from  the  connection  between  wanting  and
getting  in  the  spiritual  sphere — "  examine,  and  you  shall  know  ; "  for  the  Spirit  con-
vinces the  world  of  sin,  and  that  by  guiding  into  all  truth  the  searchers  after  its
hidden  treasures.

III.  Conviction  has  driven  him  to  confess.  There  is  a  natural  egoism  in  men
that  is  unfavourable  to  confession.  You  get  it  out  of  them  only  by  a  difficult  process
as  men  get  water  out  of  a  still.  And  the  reasons  of  this  are  obvious.  One  is  that  men
are  more  or  less  unconscious  of  their  own  moral  state.  They  do  not  realize  sin.  They
deem  it  an  outrage  to  have  guilt  charged  home.  In  the  impudence  of  their  uncon-
sciousness they  would  bandy  words  with  God  himself  (Mai.  iii.  8).  Here  is  evident
failure  to  discern  the  sinfulness  of  sin.  And  failure  is  due  as  much  to  pride  as  to
incapacity.  Men  are  naturally  prejudiced  in  their  own  favour.  Faults  that  others  see
well  enough  they  ignore,  or  weakly  disapprove  what  others  utterly  condemn.  They
abide  in  darkness  because  they  hate  the  light  (John  lil.  19).  Given  a  man  who  cannot
see  his  sin  if  he  would,  and  who  would  not  if  he  could,  and  you  have  a  case  in  which
confession  need  not  be  named.  Even  grant  a  measure  of  conviction,  and  confession
does  not  necessarily  follow.  When  sin  is  realized  in  a  certain  degree,  the  sinner'g
tongue  is  unloosed,  and  he  tells  it  out  with  shame  to  God.  But  it  does  not  follow  that
he  will  do  it  before  his  fellow-men.  That  means  a  great  deal  more,  is  harder  to
do,  and  more  reluctantly  done.  It  is  greater  humiliation.  It  involves  stronger
reprobation.  It  implies  deeper  self-abasement.  When  it  is  honestly  done  conviction
may  be  held  to  be  at  its  intensest ;  in  fact,  to  be  true  and  adequate.  Jonah's  repent-
ance had  now  come  to  this  advanced  stage  (vers.  10, 12).  "  When  the  whip  of  Qod
and  the  rod  of  his  justice  had  overtaken  Jonah,  so  that  he  now  sees  heaven  and  earth
to  be  against  him,  down  comes  his  proud  heart :  the  sleeper  now  awaketh ;  the
runaway  crieth,  Peocavj ;  contrition  and  confession  come  now  tumbling  upon  him"
(Abbot).  Oonfession  of  our  faults  is  an  essential  part  of  true  repentance.  To  deny
them  is  to  lie,  to  conceal  is  to  bolster  up.  When  a  transgressor  is  either  sullenly
silent  or  volubly  apologetic,  he  has  not  broken  with  his  sin.  He  could  bear  to  speak
the  truth  about  it  if  he  had  definitely  cast  it  off.  Hence  God  makes  confession  a
criterion  of  sincerity  and  a  condition  of  pardon  (Lev.  xxvi.  40 — 42 ;  Jer.  iii.  12, 13).


oa.1.1— 17.J  THE  BOOK  OF  JOJ^AH.  17

Hence,  on  occasion  of  sin,  Aaron  (Numb.  xii.  11),  anil  Saul  (1  Sam.  xv.  24),  and  David
(2  Sam.  xii.  13),  and  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxii.  11,  13,  19),  and  Behoboam  (2  Ohron.  xii.  6,
7, 12),  and  Manasseh  (2  Cbron.  xxxiii.  12,  13),  and  Hezekiah  (2  Ghron.  xxxii.  26),  and
Peter  (Mark  xiv.  72),  and  others  whose  sincerity  Scripture  certifies,  whilst  it  record*
the  fact  of  their  pardon,  made  free  and  heart-stricken  oonfi'ssion  of  their  fault  before
God  and  men.  Sin  confessed  means  sin  discovered  and  reprobated  and  disowned.
The  man  flings  it  off  in  the  very  act,  declares  himself  at  once  its  victim  and  foe.
There  is  philosophy,  therefore,  and  the  fitness  of  things  in  the  Divine  deliverance,
prescription  and  promise  hand  in  hand,  that  "  whoso  confesseth  and  forsaketh  his  sins
■hall  have  mercy."

IV.  His  new  attitude  toward'  sin  inoludbs  willinoness  to  buffbb  for  it.
The  world  is  sometimes  surprised  and  puzzled  by  a  voluntary  confession  of  murder.
The  self-accused  criminal  has  been  hitherto  undetected  and  secure.  People  may  have
had  their  suspicions,  and  drawn  their  inferences,  but  it  was  impossible  to  trace  the
crime  home.  Yet  at  last,  when  investigation  had  been  given  up,  and  the  very  memory
of  the  crime  died  out,  the  murderer  comes  of  his  own  accord,  confesses  his  crime,  and
delivers  himself  up  to  justice.  And,  the  wonder  and  puzzlement  of  shallow  people  not-
withstanding, the  act  is  perfectly  logical.  The  anomaly  is  not  that  he  has  delivered
himself  up  at  last,  but  that  he  did  not  do  It  at  the  first.  There  is  an  instinctive  sense
of  justice  in  a  man,  that  recognizes  the  unfitness  of  a  sinner  going  scot-free.  He  feels
that  sin  produces  a  moral  derangement  which  cannot  continue,  and  which  it  takes
punishment  to  readjust.  He  feels  at  war  with  the  nature  of  things  until  this  has  been
done.  He  thinks  if  he  had  once  endured  the  penalty  the  balance  of  things  would  be
restored,  and  a  foundation  for  future  peace  be  laid.  And  he  actually  finds  it  so.  The
very  fact  of  telling  out  his  guilt  has  already  lightened  the  load,  and  there  is  a  new
restfulness  in  the  thought  that  now  he  is  going  to  make  some  amends.  It  is  to  thii
principle  that  the  doctrine  of  the  cross  appeals.  In  Christ  crucified  the  demand  of  our
nature  for  punishment  proportioned  to  our  sin  is  met.  We  see  our  transgressions
avenged  on  him,  in  him  our  penal  responsibilities  met,  and  our  fuU  amends  made.
Our  faith  in  Christ  is,  in  one  aspect,  our  instinctive  clutching  at  the  peace  of  the
punished  minus  the  preliminary  pain.  The  same  principle  disarms  and  softens  chastise-
ment. Humility  feels  it  is  deserved.  Intelligence  sees  it  is  necessary.  And  godly
sorrow  for  sin  welcomes  it  as  a  key  to  the  dwelling  of  peace  from  which  transgression
had  strayed.  A  willingness  like  Jonah's  to  accept  the  meed  of  sin  is  no  mean  criterion
of  our  attitude  towards  it,  and  of  our  whole  moral  bent..

V.  He  thouoht  that  the  evil  consequences  of  his  sin  oould  only  be  removed
BT  HIS  ENDURiNO  ITS  FUNI8HUENT.  There  was  a  feeling  among  the  sailors  that  some
actioii  must  be  taken  in  reference  to  Jonah  (ver.  11).  Their  present  relation  to  him
had  involved  them  in  a  storm ;  what  but  a  new  relation  to  him  could  bring  the  calm  ?
And  the  prophet  himself  is  of  the  same  opinion.  He  considers  himself  the  mountain
which  attracts  the  storm,  and  that,  if  he  were  cast  into  the  sea,  its  great  occasion  would
be  gone.  What  is  this  but  the  practical  application  of  a  revealed  principle,  "  He  that
doeth  wrong  shall  receive  for  the  wrong  which  he  hath  done"?  The  axiom  applies  to
the  righteous  and  the  wicked  alike,  if  in  a  different  sense.  The  sin  of  wicked  Saul  is
visited  with  punishment  as  final  rejection  and  ruin.  The  sin  of  righteous  David  is
visited  with  punishment  as  fiery  trial  eventuating  in  a  contrite  heart.  Heathen
Philistia  and  chosen  Israel  sin  in  almost  equal  degree,  yet  "  the  remnant  of  the  Philis-
tines" perishes  (Amos  i.  8),  whilst  "the  remnant  of  Israel"  is  by  suffering  saved
(Isa.  i.  8  ;  Bom.  ix.  27 ;  xL  5).  And  among  natural  and  spiritual  men  alike  the  prin-
ciple holds,  cutting  this  way  and  that,  with  double  edge :  for  believing  sin,  "  the  rod ; "
for  unbelieving  sin,  "  the  sword ; "  for  aU  sin,  wrath  in  God  and  anguish  in  man
(Bom.  i.  18 ;  ii.  9).  A  recognition  of  this  fact  would  solve  some  mysteries  of  suffering,
and  put  an  end  to  many  "  offences  "  and  complaints.  A  man  sins  in  his  youth  against
God,  and  others,  and  his  own  body.  By  the  grace  of  the  Spirit  he  is  brought  in  a  little
to  repentance  and  the  higher  life.  Is,  therefore,  his  wrong-doing  undone  ?  By  no
means.  In  some  physical  ailment,  in  some  raked-up  imputation,  in  some  injured
fellow-creature,  it  rises  before  him  when  his  hair  is  white.  And  he  is  surprised  at  this.
He  tljought  that,  after  repentance  and  pardon,  his  sin  was  done  with  for  ever.  But  it
is  not  so.     Sin  once  done  cannot  be  undone.    It  leaves  its  mark  oa  the  sinner — ^in


M  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.i.1— 11

— — ^ rrm  ■  TTWM-       i    i  i  -         "  '    "*

mind,  or  body,  or  estate,  or  Bocial  relations,  bnt  leaves  it  inevitably  somewhere.
The  wood  from  which  a  nail  has  been  drawn  oan  never  be  aa  if  the  nail  had  not  been
driven.  The  nail-hole  is  there,  and  there  remains,  do  what  we  will.  When,  as  with
Jonah,  the  sin  is  against  God  directly,  it  has  no  physical  concomitant,  and  the  punish-
ment in  its  physical  aspect  can  show  no  connection  with  it.  But  it  is  neither  more
nor  less  the  doing  of  God  and  the  result  of  sin  on  that  account.  And,  although  in
regions  out  of  sight,  a  radical  and  natural  connection  still  exists  between  penalty  and
crime.  Its  moral  necessity  and  significance  and  tendency  remain  the  same.  Hence
the  certainty  of  its  coming  and  the  folly  of  striving  to  evade  its  stroke.  Not  till  law
natural  and  moral  has  had  its  amends,  and  all  ii^ured  interests  been  recouped,  ean
escape  for  the  law-breaker  come.  Come  then  it  fitly  and  fairly  may,  and  come  then,
and  only  then,  it  will  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  30 — 83).  1.  It  ia  not  enough  to  confest  sin  in  general,
we  must  confess  it  in  particular.  There  is  a  kind  of  impersonal  guilt  which  many  will
freely  acknowledge,  by ,  whom  personal  guilt  is  altogether  ignored.  If  we  say  generally,
"  Your  nature  is  corrupt,"  they  will  own  it  without  hesitation  and  without  emotion.
If  we  say,  "  Your  conduct  is  bad,"  they  will  deny  the  impeachment  and  resent  it.
That  waB  not  Jonah's  way.  He  unaffectedly  confessed  guilt  as  to  the  matter  in  hand.
And  it  is  not  the  way  of  true  conviction.  You  confess  and  deny  in  one  breath  j  deny
in  the  particular  what  you  confess  in  the  general ;  which  amounts  to  saying  that  a
certain  number  of  whites  will  make  a  black.  But  the  fact  is  your  acknowledgment  is
mechanical  and  formal,  and  therefore  worthless.  The  denial,  on  the  other  band,  is
intelligent  and  in  earnest,  and  the  deliberate  expression  of  your  miud  and  feeling.
Accordingly,  your  confession  as  a  whole  means  just  what  it  says,  and  that  is — nothing,
2.  Mercy  should  move  us  to  confession  of  sin  as  strongly  as  Judgment.  Who  will  say
that  it  was  altogether  the  severity  of  God  in  punishing  at  last,  and  in  no  degree  his
goodness  in  refraining  till  now,  that  led  the  prophet  to  repentance  ?  Not  so  speaks  the
Scripture  (Bom.  ii.  4).  Mercy  touches  a  bad  heart  and  breaks  it,  a  cold  heart  and  warms
it,  a  closed  mouth  and  opens  it.  That  is  its  normal,  and  ought  to  be  its  actual,  effect  on
you.  Your  mercies  have  been  neither  few  nor  small.  They  supply  a  basis  for  the
inspired  appeal,  "  We  beseech  yon,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,"  etc.  They  supply
an  impulse  more  than  adequate  to  bring  you  to  the  kingdom.  If  you  have  resisted
them,  what  will  persuade  you?  The  resources  of  grace  have  been  well-nigh  expended.
God's  time  of  striving  has  almost  run  out.  Strive  to  enter  while  you  see  the  gate  ajar,
or  the  clang  of  its  closing  bolts  may  be  the  knell  of  your  immortal  soul.— J.  E,  H,

Vers,  13 — IB.-^Storm-stiUing  extraordinary.  We  see  in  this  passage,  under  favour-
able circumstances,  the  workings  of  the  heathen  mind  in  its  first  glimpses  of  God.
And  the  study  is  one  of  lively  interest,  and  important  withal.  The  sailors  have,
innocently  and  involuntarily,  been  made  actors  in  a  drama  that  is  not  unlike  to  turn
out  a  tragedy.  A  stranger,  pursued  by  the  vengeance  of  his  (to  them)  unknown  God,
has  got  on  board  their  ship,  and  mixed  them  up  in  his  troubles  to  the  extent  of
bringing  them  to  the  very  brink  of  death.  From  their  standpoint  it  was  rather  a  hard
case.  They  might  well  have  felt  resentment  and  given  the  cold  shoulder  to  the  not
guiltless  occasion  of  their  evil  plight.  Their  prudence,  their  considerateness,  their
conscientiousness,  and  their  ultimate  devoutness  are  qualities  that  come  on  us  as  an
agreeable  but  complete  surprise.  There  is  a  philosophy  of  these  qualities,  however,
which  it  will  be  worth  our  while  to  endeavour  to  trace  out.

I.  Thbt  showed  ah  KNLiaHTEiiBD  BEQABD  FOB  BnuAN  LiFB,  They  might  well
have  been  excused  if,  in  imminent  danger  of  death  through  the  guilty  Jonah's  presence
in  their  ship,  they  had  jumped  at  his  proposal  to  throw  him  overboard.  They  knew,
for  he — an  mspired  prophet — had  told  them,  that  he  had  deserved  it  by  his  crime,  and
that  to  do  so  would  calm  the  sea  forthwith.  Yet  they  make  no  movement  in  that
direction,  but  redouble  their  efforts  at  the  oar  in  their  last  desperate  attempt  to  reach
the  land.  This  course  was  unlike  a  heathen  crew.  Heathenism  has  always  been
reckless  about  shedding  blood.  It  is  the  Bible  that  teaches,  and  believers  in  it  who
recognize,  the  sacredness  of  human  life.  Its  command,  "Thou  shalt  not  kill,"  is
Illustrated  and  enforced  by  its  history  and  entire  legislation.  The  murderer  was  to
suffer  death,  though  he  should  be  dragged  to  it  from  the  very  horuM  ol  ihe  altar  (Numb.
Cxxr.  31 ;  1  Kings  ii.  29).     The  very  ox  that  took  a  human  life  must  die,  and  might


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  19


not  be  eaten  (Bxod.  xxi.  28).  Even  the  man  who  slew  another  by  misadventure  made
his  life  forfeit  to  the  avenger  of  blood  If  he  were  caught  outside  the  city  of  refuge-
(Deut.  xix.  5).  Blood,  in  fact,  according  to  Scripture,  must  have  blood  (Gen.  ii.  5,  6).
There  is  no  other  patisfaction  for  it.  The  value  of  it  cannot  be  expressed  in  any
earthly  currency.  Even  the  whole  world  is  no  compensation  for  a  lost  life  (Mark  viii.
36).  Those  principles  find  little  place  in  the  consciousuess  of  heathendom.  It  is  filled
with  "the  habitations  of  cruelty."  You  will  get  no  heathen  nation  in  any  age
exhibiting  either  in  private  life  or  public  an  adequate  sense  of  the  inviolability  of
human  life.  It  is  evident  that  in  the  case  before  us  the  sailors  have  been  Impressed
by  the  Divine  portents  on  the  occasion,  and  under  their  impulse  act  for  a  time  on
a  higher  than  the  heathen  plane.  Not  in  their  heathenism,  but  in  the  theism  it  is  for
the  time  in  contact  with,  must  we  look  for  the  explanation  of  their  humane  and
generous  conduct.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  early  and  inevitably  practical.  By  it
"  grace  is  multiplied,"  and  the  "  pollutions  of  the  world  "  escaped  (2  Pet.  i.  2 ;  ii.  20).

II.  They  beooqnizbd  the  believing  life  as  specially  sacked.  It  will  be  conceded
that,  other  things  being  equal,  the  life  of  a  believer  is  more  important  than  that  of  an
unbeliever.  Not  only  has  it  elements  and  functions  which  are  all  its  own,  but  these
are  intrinsically  more  excellent  than  any  others.  God  treats  it  as  precious  in  a  peculiar
sense  (Ps.  Ixxii.  14 ;  cxvi.  15),  keeping  count  of  the  very  hairs  of  his  people's  heads
(Matt.  X.  30),  and  using  (1  Cor.  iii.  21,  22 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  15),  and  even  sacrificing,  the
lives  of  the  wicked  for  their  preservation  (Isa.  xliii.  4).  He  also  safeguards  it  by  •
double  rampart  of  threat  and  promise.  The  death  or  the  hurt  of  the  saints  he  will
avenge  with  punishment  worse  than  death  (Luke  xviii.  8;  Matt,  xviii.  7);  whilst  even
a  cup  of  water  to  the  least  of  them  shall  meet  with  eternal  recognition  and  reward
(Matt.  X.  42 ;  XXV.  40).  Of  the  inviolable  sacredness  of  the  saint's  life  the  sailors  had
evidently  an  intuitive  idea.  "Although  himself  accuse  himself,  and  lay  his  fault
plain  before  them,  although  winds  and  waves  did  confirm  it,  although  the  lot  thrown
did  assure  it,  although  in  words  he  did  desire  to  be  cast  into  the  water,  yet  those  who
should  have  done  it  do  so  ill  like  of  the  matter,  that  if  sails  or  oars  can  serve  they  will
back  again  to  the  land — rather  leave  their  intended  journey  than  use  any  violence
towards  him  "  (Abbot).  It  was  not  on  the  score  of  his  humanity  merely  that  Jonah
was  so  tenderly  dealt  with.  The  hurricane,  the  power  and  wrath  of  God  speaking  in
it,  Jonah's  revealed  connection  with  both,  his  acknowledgment  and  denunciation  of
his  fault,  and  the  meek  manhood  of  his  offer  to  die  that  they  might  live,  were  all
circumstances  to  awe  and  soften  them.  "  Disobedient  though  he  may  be,  Jonah  they
perceive  is  God's  prophet,  and  his  servant  still.  Revering  his  God,  they  respect  him.
They  feel  that  it  is  a  solemn  thing  to  have  to  do  with  anything  that  this  God  marks
as  his  own — marks  as  his  own  even  by  his  displeasure.  Hence  they  pause  "  (Martin).
This  is  godliness  in  its  normal  operation,  and  realizing  its  "  promise  of  the  life  that
now  is ''  by  surrounding  it  with  an  invisible  yet  inviolable  guard.

III.  Thby  shaped  their  conduct  in  the  embboency  as  tab  as  possible  by  God'b.
"  Thou,  0  Lord,  hast  done  as  it  pleased  thee  "  (ver.  14).  They  would  have  spared  the
prophet's  life  had  the  thing  been  possible.  It  is  only  when  Providence  fights  against
them,  and  logically  shuts  them  up  to  it,  that  they  accept  the  inevitable,  and  throw
him  overboard.  As  their  words  imply,  they  "  assume  that  to  be  righteous  which  God
will  have  to  be  done ;  and  because  they  see  him  will  it,  and  that  he  will  take  no  nay,
therefore  they  know  it  is  just,  and  accordingly  yield  unto  it "  (Abbot).  The  rule  of
right  is  God's  wilL  The  expression  of  this  in  a  particular  case  supersedes  the  general
law.  "  Thou  shalt  not  kill "  and  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal "  are  canons  in  the  universal
moral  code.  Yet  Abraham  would  have  killed  Isaac,  and  Samuel  killed  Agag,  whilst
Israel  spoiled  the  Egyptians  at  the  command  of  God.  Then,  from  the  general  law
forbidding  homicide,  was  excepted  the  whole  class  of  cases  in  which  it  was  necessary
for  self-defence ;  and  to  take  spoil  in  war,  or  as  much  food  from  a  neighbour's  field  as
would  save  the  life,  was  excepted  from  the  general  law  forbidding  theft.  On  the  same
principle  the  execution  of  Jonah  was  legalized  by  the  expressed  will  of  God  to  that
effect,  and  became  to  the  sailors  an  act  of  simple  duty.  And  their  course  was
exemplary.  Obedience  to  God  is  the  highest  morality.  Whatever  is  done  so  is  done
well.  It  may  seem  anomalous  and  unfit.  But  that  is  only  on  the  surface.  Some  of
the  finest  passages  in  literature  are  least  obviously  conformable  to  grammatical  rule.


20  THE  BOOK  01'  JONAH.  [en.  1. 1—17.

The  coQrormity  ia  there,  and  in  the  highest  sense;  it  is  only  the  tyro  who  cannot  see
it.  So  with  actions  done  in  the  highest  moral  plane.  The  actor  is  too  intent  on  doing
what  God  says  to  look  after  the  minor  congruities.  But  the  thing  he  does  has  aa
essential  and  fundamental  rightness  which  lifts  details  into  a  new  connection  where
they  also  become  appropriate.  "  Whatsoever  the  Lord  saith,  that  will  we  do."  The
men  who  accentuate  the  "  whatsoever,"  and  do  it  honestly,  are  seldom  favourites  with
the  crowd,  but  they  have  scaled  the  loftiest  moral  heights,  where  the  voice  of  human
opinion  is  neither  listened  for  nor  heard.

IV.  They  tound  dblivbkancb  in  followinq  God's  lead.  (Ver.  15.)  Attempts
at  escape  in  every  other  direction  were  made  persistently,  but  all  in  vain.  The  ship-
lightening,  the  prayers  to  idols,  the  strenuous  rowing,  were  so  many  exercises  in  the
bootless  task  of  fighting  against  God.  Against  the  wind  anil  tide  of  his  purpose  no
human  power  can  sail.  "  God  was  pursuing  this  matter  to  his  own  appointed  issue,
and  would  allow  no  effort,  however  well  meant,  to  baffle  his  purpose"  (Martin).  This
obvious  fact  the  sailors  are  compelled  at  length  to  recognize.  Beluctantly  tliey  give
up  their  unavailing  struggle,  and  take  the  course  to  which  all  along  events  had  been
conspiring  to  shut  them  up.  And  on  the  instant  the  face  of  affairs  is  changed.  The
elemental  war  is  hushed  in  peace.  The  hurricane  in  which  earth  and  heaven  reeled
becomes  the  calm  as  of  a  tropical  night.  The  waters  which  had  "gaped  at  their
widest  to  glut  him"  swallow  their  prey,  and  forthwith  cease  thoir  raging.  How  easy
the  end  if  we  only  take  God's  way  I  How  swift  the  transition  from  impossibility  to
attainment!  Yet  it  is  just  the  transition  from  man's  way  to  God's,  Have  we  not  all
experiences  on  which  by  anal  gy  the  event  may  throw  light?  Aiming  at  a  legitimate
object,  we  adopt  what  seems  to  us  a  fitting  course.  But  we  never  get  on  in  it.
Disapj  ointment  awaits  us  at  every  step.  Disaster  springs  on  us  from  every  covert.
It  seems  as  if  men  and  things  were  joined  together  in  a  universal  conspiracy  to  baulk
us.  Discouraged  at  last,  and  bitter  at  heart,  we  take  without:  definite  intention  or
expectation  a  step  in  a  new  direction,  and  which  circumstances  seem  to  thiust  upon
us;  and  lo,  before  we  are  aware,  and  almost  without  an  effort,  our  object  is  attained.
God  works,  not  ajiainst  means  but  with  them,  not  apart  from  means,  but  by  them ;
yet  eveiywhere  and  always  he  works  his  own  will  in  his  own  way.  As  we  recognize
that  way  and  take  it,  are  we  on  the  moral  rectilineal — the  shortest  line  between  our
present  and  God's  future.

V.  They  are  finally  won  to  God's  service  bt  the  exhibition  of  his  chabaoteb.
In  the  incidents  of  the  day  the  sailors  read  a  reveLition  of  God.  "The  storm  they
clearly  saw  was  in  his  band ;  a  reason  for  it,  they  saw,  was  in  his  heart.  And  that
reason  they  saw  as  clearly  as  they  saw  the  storm.  His  hand  they  saw  was  almighty.
His  heart;  they  saw  was  righteous.  Th6y  even  became  executioners  of  his  wrath.  It
was  a  solemn  initiation  into  the  knowledge  of  his  name"  (Martin).  And  what  but  the
revelation  of  God's  character  wins  men  to  his  service  everywhere  (Ps.  xxxvi,  7 ;  Eev.
XV.  4 ;  2  Cor.  V.  14, 15)  ?  Conversion  has  many  elements  leading  up  to  and  meeting  in
it.  There  is  the  truth,  the  instrument  in  all  .saving  change.  There  is  the  Holy  Spirit
interpreting  the  truth  and  bringing  it  home.  But  there  is  sunetbing  else  to  which
both  refer.  The  power  of  the  truth,  even  as  applied  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  must  lie  in
the  subject-matter  of  it,  and  that  subject-matter  is  God  (John  v.  39 ;  Bom.  i.  16).
God  is  the  Infinite  Beauty.  God  made  manifest  means  men  attracted,  all  minds
dazzled,  and  all  heart.s  won  (Ps.  ix.  10).  His  character  commands  confidence  and
challenges  fealty.  He  is  one  whom  to  know  is  to  trust,  whom  to  see  is  to  love  and
choose.  It  is  on  this  fact  that  inspiration  founds  in  a  familiar  maxim  of  the  kingdom
(John  xvii.  3).  Knowledge  of  God  is  .-alvation,  for  every  saving  grace  inheres  in  it  of
goes  with  it.

VI.  Theib  beliqious  life  gave  evidence  of  its  genuineness  by  following
BCBIPTDBAL  LINES.  (Vers.  14 — 16.)  Prayer,  fear,  sacrifice,  and  vows ; — what  essential
element  in  religious  life  or  worship  do  not  these  exercises  cover  (Acts  ii.  21 ;  Heb.
ix.  22 ;  Ps.  iii.  10;  Isa.  iliv.  5)?  In  prayer  is  the  coming  to  God  for  the  things  that
are  his  gift  if  they  come  at  all.  In  sacrifice  is  the  coming  symbolically  by  atonement,,
the  only  coming  to  which  blessing  is  promised.  Fear  epitomizes  the  attitude  and  line
of  action  in  which  practical  religion  may  be  summed  up.  A  vow  is  a  testimony  that
the  ideal  life  is  consecration — a  pledge  that  they  will  freely  give  who  have  received  so


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  31

freely.  We  womler  at  the  propriety  and  fitness  of  the  sailors'  entire  action.  They  had
no  Bible.  They  learned  nothing  from  the  prophet.  Yet  they  took  a  distiootly
scriptural  course.  They  rendered  God  service  in  God's  appointed  way.  Dues  it  not
seem  as  if  they  were  somehow  taught  by  his  Holy  Spirit ;  their  minds  enlightened,
their  hearts  renewed,  their  activity  shaped  by  almighty  grace?  As  to  salvation
without  the  Bible,  we  must  say,  with  a  leading  Refornjation  Symbol,  that  "  there  is  no
ordinary  possibility  "  of  it ;  but  might  it  not  bs  going  too  far  to  say  that  it  is  absolutely
and  in  tiie  nature  of  the  case  impossible?  The  rule  is  "salvation  by  faith,  and  faith
by  hearing;"  but  if  thejule  does  not  cover  the  case  of  infants,  why  must  it  be  taki-n
to  cover  that  of  all  other  human  beings?  The  mere  light  of  nature  is  doubtless
insufficient  to  give  saving  knowledge  of  God ;  but  saving  enlightenment  can  hardly  be
held  impossible  in  a  mind  to  which  God  has  access  direct.  Humility  and  charity  will
alike  refuse  to  mark  out  a  path  for  him  whose  "  footsteps  are  not  known."  It  is  ill
trying  to  malce  the  voyage  of  the  religious  life  with  a  spiritual  Jonah  on  hoard.  Yet
the  Church  is  full  of  such  would-be  navigators.  There  is  the  Jonah  of  a  demoralizing
occupation— occupation  having  to  do,  e.g.,  with  gambling,  or  betting,  or  drunkenness,  or
fraudulent  manufacture,  and  it  must  be  thrown  overboard  or  the  ship  of  personal
religion  will  go  down.  There  is  the  Jonah  of  some  pet  sin,  which,  like  Herod  to
Herodias,  we  cling  to  and  prefer  to  Christ;  and  if  we  would  escape  the  lake  of  fire  we
must  "  pluck  it  out  and  cast  it  from  us."  There  is  above  all  the  Jonah  of  an  unbe-
lieving heart.  Men  will  have  a  religion  without  self-surrender;  will  do  anything  and
everything  but  yield  themselves  to  God.  Yet  they  must  do  this,  or  all  else  is  vain.
Unbelief  is  in  its  nature  fatal,  cuts  off  the  dead  soul  from  its  life  in  Christ.  We  ask
you  one  question — Will  you  give  yourself  now  and  here  to  Christ  ?  If  you  answer,
"  Yes,"  you  are  a  saved  man.  If  you  answer,  "  No,"  we  need  pursue  the  inquiry  no
further,  for  heaven  is  as  inaccessible  to  you  as  if  Christ  the  Way  to  it  had  never
come. — J.  E.  H.

Ver.  17. — "  The  sign  of  the  Prophet  Jonas."  God  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning.
He  means  it  from  the  beginning.  He  is  moving  towards  it  from  the  beginning.  There  are
no  isolated  events.  Each  is  connected  with  a  series  leading  up  to  it.  The  series  is  so
long  that  we  cannot  see  its  earlier  steps,  much  less  observe  their  direction.  But  nothing
is  surer  than  that  from  the  first  they  have  a  trend  toward  that  one  which  is  their
ultimate  effect.  In  proof  of  this  we  have  only  to  select  a  series  on  which  we  have  the
light  of  Scripture,  such  as  that  leading  up  to  the  work  of  Christ.  There  are  many  such
series.  One  leads  up  to  his  birth,  another  to  his  education,  another  to  his  sufferings,
another  to  his  death;  and  so  on.  And  these  series  lead  up  to  it  in  various  ways.
There  is  a  prophetic  series,  and  a  typical  series,  and  a  contributory  series,  and  a  causal
series.  And  there  are  events  which  lead  up  to  it  in  two  or  three  of  these  capacities  at
once.  Such  an  event  is  the  one  recorded  here,  as  the  New  Testament  Scriptures
repeatedly  affirm.    Consider  this  event —

I.  As  A  MiBAOLB.  It  was  clearly  outside  the  natural  order.  The  shark  or  other
sea-monster  was  "prepared"  by  God.  It  swallowed  Jonah,  contrary  to  its  habit,
without  crushing  him  between  its  teeth.  He  remained  alive  in  its  stomach  for  days,
contrary  to  all  known  physical  laws.  He  was  cast  out  safely  on  land,  contrary  to  all
natural  probabilities.  Seeing,  as  he  could  not  but  see,  God's  hand  in  the  whole  thing,
Jonah  would  learn  from  it :  1.  The  Divine  resistless  purpose.  Throwing  off  allegiance,
he  fled  from  duty  like  a  man  resolved  on  any  terms  to  get  away.  But  God  went  after
him  in. a  way  that  showed  he  meant  to  have  his  work  done.  The  fugitive  was  stopped
by  wind  and  wave  and  conspiring  circumstances  as  by  an  adamantine  wall,  impossible
to  break  through.  He  knew  now  that  God  was  a  God  who  cannot  be  baulked,  and
who  will  have  his  way.  The  same  lesson  we  all  need  to  learn.  Much  rebellion  arises
out  of  a  half-conscious  expectation  that  God  at  last  will  give  way,  and  our  disobedience
be  all  condoned.  And  half  the  afflictions  we  suffer  are  to  cure  us  of  our  wilfulness  and
conceit  of  irresponsibility.  They  teach  us  that  God's  arm,  not  ours,  is  strongest — that
his  will,  not  ours,  must  rule.  When  we  have  appropriated  and  endorsed  the  sentiment,
"  Not  as  I  wiU,  but  as  thou  wilt,"  our  life-sky  will  clear,  and  the  thunder-clouds  that
threatened  a  deluge  wUl  discharge  themselves  in  fertilizing  showers.  2.  Tht  Divine  tori'
tistent  character.    Severity  was  conspicuous  up  to  the  point  of  the  prophet's  immersion.


22  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  l  1—17

After  that  everything  spoke  of  goodness.  There  are  qualities  in  God  fitted  each  in  its
own  way  to  move  men  to  his  service  (2  Cor.  v.  11 ;  Bom.  xii.  1).  They  moved  Jonah.
His  humhle,  believing,  thankful  prayer  in  the  monster's  maw  is  a  revelation  of  their
effect  on  his  moral  nature.  And  godly  lives  the  world  over  and  all  history  through
are  effects  due  to  the  same  cause  (Ps.  vii.  17 ;  Rom.  ii.  4).  Severity  and  goodness  are
just  Divine  moral  excellence  facing  two  different  ways  (Bom.  li.  22).  Both  have  the
eamo  inflnitely  glorious  perfection  behind  them,  and  are  forceful  with  its  inherent
essential  energy.  3.  The  Divine  effective  way.  God  had  not  interfered  in  the  matter
of  Jonah's  disobedient  flight  until  things  had  gone  a  certain  length.  He  allowed  him
to  reach  Joppa,  and  get  on  board  a  ship,  and  start  for  Tarshish.  The  sinful-  act  was
completed  before  the  punishment  began.  But  the  moment  it  was  morally  complete
the  stern  "Thus  far  and  no  further"  was  spoken.  And  how  masterly  the  strategy,  and
resourceful  the  strength  of  God  appeared !  The  elements,  the  lower  animals,  and  man
alike  become  his  ministers,  and  stop  the  runaway  before  and  on  either  side.  And  then
the  measures  as  a  whole  are  so  exactly  yet  variously  apposite  to  the  purpose  of  checking
insubordination,  and  compelling  execution  of  the  original  command!  Jonah  would
know  more  about  the  God  with  whom  be  had  to  do,  and  the  considerations  moving  to
implicit  obedience,  than  he  ever  knew  before.  It  is  not  in  the  Divine  dealings  aa  an
exhibition  of  mere  force,  but  of  force  directed  unalterably  to  ends  of  justice  and  mercy,
that  their  chief  disciplinary  value  lies  (Rom.  ii.  2 ;  iii.  3 — 6 ;  xi.  22).  Men  are  moved
by  them  in  proportion  as  God's  perfections  come  out  in  them  and  shine.

II.  As  A  TYPE.  On  this  point  we  have  for  an  interpreter  Christ  himself  (Matt.  xii.
40).  "  Jonah  was  in  the  fish's  belly,  so  was  Christ  in  the  grave ;  Jonah  came  forth
from  thence,  so  did  Christ  rise  again ;  his  (Christ's)  rising  doth  bring  our  rising,  his
resurrection  ours,  because  he  was  the  firstfruits  of  all  those  that  do  sleep  (1  Cor.  zv.
20) "  (Abbot).  The  analogy  between  Jonah's  sojourn  in  the  deffp  and  Christ's  in  the
grave  is  such  as  to  fit  one  to  be  a  type  of  the  other.  The  analogy  holds :  1.  In  the  timt
of  the  sojourn.  It  was  three  days  in  each  case.  In  the  case  of  Christ  we  know  that
two  of  these  days  were  incomplete.  He  was  buried  in  the  evening  of  the  first  day,  and
rose  on  the  morning  of  the  third  day.  Rhetorical  speech  is  necessarily  in  round
numbers,  and  our  Lord  states  the  truth  broadly  without  attempting  to  elaborate  details.
Why  three  days  was  the  period  fixed  on  either  in  type  or  antitype  we  cannot  tell.  It
is  pertinent  to  notice,  however,  that  three  and  four  are  mystic  numbers,  and  together
make  up  seven,  the  number  of  perfection.  Then  three  days  were  sufficient,  and  no
more,  to  establish  the  fact  of  death  in  the  case  of  Christ,  and  the  reality  of  the  miracle
of  preservation  in  the  case  of  Jonah.  Details  of  Scripture  are  important  because  they
record  details  of  aDivine  procedure  which  are  purposeful  through  and  through.  2.  In
the  capacity  in  which  each  sojourned.  Jonah  was  in  the  fish's  belly  as  Christ  was  in
the  grave,  in  payment  of  the  penalty  of  sin.  Moreover,  each  by  accomplishing  this
saved  men  from  death.  "  Each  of  the  processes  is  an  atonement,  an  expiation,  n
sacrifice,  pacifying  the  Divine  Judge,  satisfying  Divine  justice,  abolishing  guilt,  restoring
peace,  effecting  reconciliation"  (Martin).  But  here  the  analogy  ends.  The  type
suffered  for  sins  oi  his  own,  the  blessed  Antitype  for  sins  of  others.  The  type  saved
men  Irom  death  of  the  body,  the  Antitype  saved  them  from  death  eternal.  Well  might
he  say,  on  a  memorable  occasion,  "  a  greater  than  Jonah  is  here" t  3.  In  the  analogous
experience  of  the  two.  The  experiences  were  not  identical.  Christ  literally  "  died  and
rose  again  according  to  the  Scriptures."  Jonah  did  not  actually  die  and  rise.  But  he
did  virtually.  His  natural  life  was  forfeit,  and  was  only  saved  by  a  miracle  equal  to
that  of  resurrection.  His  life  in  the  deep  was  a  supernatural  life,  and,  therefore,
practically  a  new  one.  Indeed,  he  applies  the  words  "  hell "  {Sheol)  and  "  corruption"
(shachath)  to  his  condition,  the  same  words  which  Scripture  applies  to  Christ's
sojourn  in  a  state  of  death  (ch.  ii.  2 — 6 ;  Ps.  xvi.  10 ;  Acts  ii.  31).  He  uses  them
doubtless  in  a  figurative  sense,  but  by  using  them  at  all  he  treats  himself  as  virtually
a  dead  man.  Like  those  of  Hezekiah  and  Lazarus  and  the  widow's  son  (Isa.  xxxviii.
6 ;  John  xi.  44 ;  Luke  vii.  15),  the  life  of  Jonah  from  that  hour  was  God-given  and
new.  So  may  bo  your  life  or  mine.  If  God  has  saved  you  alive  when  men  despaired
of  your  recovery,  or  when  but  for  some  interposition  which  we  call  an  accident  it  was
forfeit  by  natural  laws,  then  yon  are  even  as  Jonah,  and  your  remaining  life,  like  his,
is  in  a  special  sense  and  measure  consecrate  (Bom.  xii.  1).    4.  That  with  each  it  toot


OH.  1.1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  23

the  gate  to  a  new  life.  The  life  of  Jonah  after  his  virtual  resurrection  was  a  new  one,
«nd  greatly  higher  than  the  old.  He  emerges  from  the  sea  a  new  man,  in  a  new
relation  to  God,  with  a  new  purpose  of  heart,  and  a  new  life-career  opening  out.  "  His
old  life  is  cancelled ;  all  its  guilt  obliterated ;  all  its  evils  interruptive  of  Divine  fellow-
ship and  blessing  abolished — left  behind  in  the  depths  of  the  sea.  He  is  dead  to  the
past ;  and  it  has  no  more  hold  on  him,  no  more  evidence  against  him,  no  more  wrath
in  store  for  him  "  (Martin).  A  prominent  element  in  this  new  life  was  the  preaching
to  Gentile  Nineveh.  But  for  it  that  heathen  city  would  have  perished  for  lack  of
knowledge.  So  also  the  resuirection-life  of  Christ  is  new  (IJom.  vi.  10).  Living  always
to  God,  he  lives  to  him  now  in  a  new  sense.  "  He  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the
glory  of  the  Father."  And  as  he  rose  no  bond  of  law  kept  hold  on  him  any  more ;
no  condemnation  laid  its  taint  upon  him  any  more ;  the  glory  of  his  Father's  unmingled
and  eternal  favour  shone  upon  him  now  for  evermore ;  and  in  his  Father's  favour  he  had
life,  his  risen  and  eternal  life  "  (Martin).  In  short,  the  risen  Saviour's  life  is  life  in  a  new
sphere,  and  a  new  relation  and  to  new  purpose.  By  that  life,  moreover,  he  enters  the
door  which  by  his  death  he  opened  (Eph.  ii.  11 — 17) — the  door  of  access  to  the  Gentile
world  (Matt,  xxviii.  16 — 20 ;  Acts  i.  5 — 8).  The  risen  Saviour  gives  the  Scriptures
to  be  preached  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  and  the  apostles  and  teachers  to  preach  them,
and  the  Spirit  to  apply  them,  and  the  Church  to  embody  them  in  her  Christ-like  life.
And  thus  is  negotiated  a  vsdder  repentance  than  of  Nineveh,  and  with  greater  results.
"  God  hath  also  to  the  Gentiles  granted  i  epentance  unto  life."

III.  As  A  SIGN.  A  sign  is  a  miracle  viewed  from  the  evidential  standpoint,  a
Divine  work  regarded  as  authenticating  a  Divine  truth.  Jonah's  entombment  served
this  purpose  (Matt.  xii.  39).  1.  It  was  a  sign  to  the  Ninevites.  (Luke  xi.  30.)  Jonah
in  Nine  \  eh  vvould  be  full  of  his  unparalleled  adventure.  He  would  tell  the  people  of
his  virtual  death  and  "rising  again  by  the  hand  of  God.  And  would  not  the  amazing
story  credential  the  prophet  as  beyond  dispute  the  messenger  of  God?  He  would  declare
to  them  how  the  miracle  of  judgment  which  had  consigned  him  to  the  deep  had  been,
If  possible,  outdone  by  the  miracle  of  mercy  which  had  saved  him  "  from  the  belly  of
hell."  And  would  he  not  be  thus  a  sign  at  once  of  God's  resistless  vengeance  on
sin,  and  his  unspeakable  mercy  to  the  penitent?  From  such  a  God  the  Ninevites
would  know  what  they  had  to  expect  in  the  one  character  and  in  the  other.  2,  It  was
'he  archetype  of  the  sign  of  the  resurrection.  (Matt.  xii.  40.)  The  miracles  of  Christ
were  all  signs.  The  effect  of  them  whs  to  certify  his  Divine  mission,  and  bring  men  to
faith  in  his  Name  (Matt,  xxvii.  54;  John  xi.  45).  On  many,  however,  they  were
practically  thrown  away.  The  Jews  clamoured  for  a  sign,  while  signs  were  being
wrought  before  their  very  eyes.  To  this  blind  demand  of  insuperable  unbelief  there
would  be  one  further  concession.  The  sign  of  the  Prophet  Jonah  would  be  repeated  in
the  Person  of  Christ  by  the  resurrection  on  the  third  day.  This  was  an  unchallengable,
sign  of  the  Divine  mission  of  our  Lord  (Bom.  i.  4).  If  the  dead  One  rose,  then
undoubtedly  that  dead  One  must  have  been  the  Son  of  God  (1  Cor.  xv.  14).  The
resurrection  of  Christ  was  the  Father's  sign-manual  to  the  Son's  claim  to  a  Divine
sharacter  and  an  accepted  work.  It  was  a  sign,  too,  of  the  Divine  attitude  toward  sin.
Taken  in  connection,  as  it  must  be,  with  the  death  and  burial,  the  whole  was,  like
Jonah's  miraculous  experience,  a  graphic  attestation  of  wrath  against  sin,  removed  as
soon  as  satisfied,  but  inappeaaablo  till  then.  If  God  "  spared  not  his  own  Son,"  whom
will  he  spare?  If  the  sin  laid  on  Christ  is  punished  to  the  full,  how  much  more
the  Bin  that  remains  on  the  sinner  I  And  then,  if  Christ  rises  into  a  new  life  the
moment  his  assumed  connection  with  sin  ends  by  death,  shall  not  we,  dead  to  our  sin
by  the  body  of  Christ,  be  raised  together  with  him  to  "walk  in  newness  of  life"?  The
sign  of  the  Prophet  Jonah  is  everything  to  us.  It  means  Christ  credentialled,  salvation
finished  and  attested,  and  a  sure  hope  springing  of  the  resurrection  unto  life.

1.  See  Iww  far  OocPs  Judgments  may  follow  deserters.  Generally  they  include  nuB-
fortune,  often  sickness,  and  sometimes  death.  The  principle  is  that  they  must  be
efBcacious,  and  bo  they  go  on  till  they  reach  their  object.  The  distance  you  have  gone
away  from  God  is  the  measure  of  the  length  to  which  his  judgments  will  follow  you
(Cof.  iii.  25).  2.  See  how  easily  Qod  can  turn  the  destroyer  into  a  preserver.  Instead
of  kUling  Jonah,  the  fish  saves  his  life.  The  Divine  afflictive  agencies  operate  in  like
manner.    They  wound  only  to  heal ;  destroy  the  flesh  "  that  the  spirit  may  be  Baved


24  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  1.1—17.

in  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  Your  judgments  are  your  mercies.  Let  the  Divine  mercy
they  reveal  be  your  call  to  the  duty  you  owe,  your  recall  to  the  service  you  forsake
(Ps.  Ixxxix.  30 — 33 ;  Eev.  iii.  19).  i.  Realize  tJie  high  things  to  which  this  sign  of
the  Prophet  Jonas  calls  you.  The  death  of  Christ  was  for  the  death  of  your  sin,  his  life
from  the  dead  for  the  life  of  your  soul  (Bom.  vi.  4 ;  Eph.  v.  14).— J.  B.  H.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Jonah's  call  and  flight.  "  Now  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Jonah
the  son  of  Amittai,  saying,"  etc.

I.  The  man.  Jonah  is  introduced  without  a  word  of  explanation,  except  (implicitly)
that  he. was  a  prophet  of  the  Lord.  So  also  Elijah  (1  Kings  xvii.  1).  Their  previous
history  is  assumed,  (jod's  servants  are  treated  as  all  waiting  on  him  to  receive  his
orders,  so  that  "he  says  to  this  one,  Go,  and  he  goeth,  and  to  another.  Come,  and  he
Cometh."  This  is  the  true  idea  of  servants ;  they  "look  uoto  his  hand"  (Ps.  cxxiii.
2);  "stand  in  his  house"  (Ps.  cxxxiv.  1);  "  staud  before  him  "  (Jer.  xv.  1).  We
have  a  little  more  information  about  Jonah  (see  2  Kings  xiy.  25).  In  the  New
Testament  we  have  a  twofold  view  of  Jonah — a  siga  to  the  Ninevites  (Luke  xi.
30,  32),  and  a  type  of  Christ  (Matt.  zii.  40).  This  book  is  short,  but  of  remarkable
interest.  "  It  is  long  and  it  is  short ;  short  if  we  respect  the  smallness  of  the  voltmie,
but  lone;  if  we  respect  the  copious  variety  of  excellent  observations  that  are  therein  to
be  found :  as  the  horribleness  of  sin,  which  was  able  within  forty  days  to  pluck  down
an  utter  desolation  on  so  famous  a  city  as  Nineveh  was ;  God's  love  in  forewarning
them  that  dwelt  in  that  place  that  they  might  be  spared ;  the  prophet's  foul  fall,  and
his  strange  punishment  for  it ;  his  offwardness  from  God,  and  God's  favourable  incli-
nation  evermore  to  him ;  the  regard  which  the  King  of  Nineveh  and  his  people  did
bear  to  God's  judgments  when  they  were  denounced ;  the  free  pardon  of  the  Lord  and
his  remitting  of  their  sin  upon  their  repentance  "  (Archbishop  Abbot).

IL  The  call.  1.  Its  source.  Directly  and  clearly  from  God — the  only  source  of
spiritual  authority — an  authority  not  to  be  gainsaid  or  trifled  with.  Unlike  any  other
authority,  to  it  implicit  obedience  is  due.

"  Theirs  not  to  make  reply ;
Theirs  not  to  reason  why."

2.  Its  rousing  note.  Arise!  Implies  summons  to  unusual  exertion — the  commission
that  follows  needs  great  energy — it  is  not  to  be  executed  in  a  listless  frame — "  where-
fore gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind."  Some  duties  are  of  such  a  kind  that  unusual  self-
excitation  is  needed  for  them  (see  Heb.  xii.  1).  "  The  very  first  word  he  hears  is '  Arise.'
It  is  a  word  used  before  another  verb  as  a  term  of  excitement.  Arise  I  I  know  you
have  difficulties,  in  yourself,  in  your  people,  in  the  mission  to  Nineveh ;  arise,  there-
fore, gird  up  your  loins,  stir  up  thy  strength  and  go  1 "  (Eev.  A.  Raleigh,  D.D.).  How
differently  has  the  command  to  arise  been  dealt  with  by  different  men!  Moses
hesitates,  pleads  off,  at  last  agrees  (Exod.  iv.).  Jeremiah  urges  his  youth  (i.  6).
Paul  confers  not  with  flesh  and  blood  (Gal.  i.  16).  Our  Lord  sets  his  face  steadfastly
to  go  up  to  Jerusalem  (Luke  ix.  51).  3.  Its  sphere.  "Go  to  Nineveh,  that  great
city."  The  prophet  is  sent  outside  the  boundaries  of  Israel ;  he  is  a  foreign  missionary
—the  first  foreign  missionary  after  Elijah,  who  was  sent  among  the  Phoenicians.  The
field  is  Nineveh,  probably  the  greatest  and  richest  city  pf  the  world  at  that  time.  As
missionary  to  Nineveh,  Jonah  occupies  a  remarkable  position — through  him  God  is  to
assert  his  claim  as  the  God,  not  only  of  the  Jews,  but  of  the  whole  earth.  He  is  to
declare  himself  Lord  of  Nineveh  and  of  all  countries,  and  summon  its  inhabitants  to  their
allegiance  to  him.  "Suddenly,  without  note  or  warning,  without  preface,  without
explanation,  assuming  sovereign  state  as  God  Most  High  over  all  the  earth;- Jehovah,
remanifesting,  if  not  reassuming  his  universal  supremacy,  conducts,  on  the  scale  of  most
amazing  miracle,  a  movement  of  his  ceaseless  government,  as  it  extends  over  all  nations ;
and  that  it  may  not  fail  to  compel  the  attention  of  all  succeeding  ages,  he  adorns  that
movement  with  the  most  marvellous  and  romantic  incident,  with  one  of  the  most
striking  if  not  perplexing  developments  of  human  character,  especially  as  occurring  in
a  man  of  God,  and  with  the  symbolic  death  and  resurrection  of  the  agent  under  whose
hand  that  movement  is  conducted — a  death  and  resurrection  on  the  very  type  of
Messiah's;  for  Jonah  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  whale's  belly,  even  as  tha


CH.I.1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  28

Son  of  man  was  three  days  and  three  nights  in  the  heart  of  the  earth  "  (H.  Martin,
D.D.).  4.  Its  pitrport.  "  Ory  against  it ;  for  its  wickedness  is  come  before  me."  "  He
must  cry  against  Nineveh,  not  whisper  in  the  ear  as  if  it  were  to  one,  not  speak  softly
as  to  a  few,  but  cry  as  unto  all:  this  is  a  general  proclnmation.  This  word  'cry'  is
used  in  Scripture  when  men  are  fast  asleep  and  lulled  in  their  sins,  and  awake  not  with
a  little ;  so  that  as  Elijah  said  to  the  Baalites,  they  were  to  '  Cry  aloud,  because  Baal
might  be  sleeping,  and  must  be  awaked ; '  so  the  minister  must  cry  aloud,  that  men  may
be  raised  from  their  drowsiness  in  sin"  (Abbot).  " The  wickedness  of^ Nineveh  "  con-
sisted in  pride,  ambition,  oppression,  cruelty,  sensuality.  The  Ninevites  were  very
merciless,  and  practised  most  horrible  cruelties  on  captives,  even  of  the  highest  rank.
This  wickedness  had  come  before  God,  denoting  that  it  had  become  full  (G-en.  xv.  16),
therefore  intolerable.  Yet  to  this  merciless  people  Divine  mercy  was  to  be  shown.
Great  cities  apt  to  become  great  in  sin — the  power  of  sin  becomes  concentrated — one
sinner  encourages  another — sin  can  be  more  easily  hid — or,  it  may  become  very  shame-
less— it  is  the  duty  of  God's  servants  to  cry  against  the  wickedness  of  such  cities,  their
drunkenness,  licentiousness,  greed,  sabbath-breaking,  etc.,  and  proclaim  God's  wrath
against  their  sins.

III.  Tee  call  befused.  Jonah  fulfilled  the  command  to  arise — but  not  to  go
against  Nineveh.  He  shrinks  from  duty — "  He  should  have  risen  to  cry,  but  he  rose
to  fly  "  (Abbot).  His  reasons  were  probably  various — one  is  afterwards  referred  to  by
him  (ch.  iv.  2).  Shirking  duty  because  it  is  irksome  and  disagreeable,  is  too  common.
In  ordinary  life,  irksome  employments,  when  not  patiently  accepted,  breed  negligence,
idleness,  drunkenness,  love  of  illicit  pleasure,  etc.  Here  is  a  lesson  for  tlie  young — at
school,  or  when  beginning  business  or  trade.  In  religious  life,  disagreeableness  of  duty
is  often  a  stumbling-block — often  makes  us  unfaithful ;  we  neglect  to  warn  others
because  the  task  is  disagreeable.  As  the  remedy  for  this,  learn  to  regard  duty  ever
as  the  command  of  God,  who  will  strengthen  and  carry  through  all  who  trust  him.
"  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  unto  Tarshish  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  He  could  hardly
have  believed  that  Tarshish  was  out  of  God's  presence,  but  he  acted  as  if  he  thought
BO.  It  was  away  from  his  immediate  and  manifested  presence.  There  is  a  tendency  in
many  to  act  as  if  God  were  in  some  places,  not  in  others — as  if  God  were  in  the  church
or  religious  meeting,  but  not  in  the  market-place,  and  as  if  they  might  act  there  as  his
enemies  act.  Edmund  Burke  said  the  humanity  of  England  was  "  a  thing  of  points
and  parallels."  Some  break  the  sabbath  abroad  as  they  would  not  do  at  home.  Many
fly  from  the  company  of  godly  people,  because  not  willing  to  think  of  God.  Lurking
unbelief  in  this.  Omnipresence  of  God  a  lesson  for  both  old  and  young.  God  is  some-
times represented  by  conscience.  Fatal  is  the  wish  to  escape  from  God — it  would  be
to  leave  all  that  is  bright,  holy,  gladdening,  for  ways  of  darkness,  filth,  misery.  If  we
say  to  God,  "Depart  from  us"  (Job  xxl.  14),  he  will  say  to  us,  "Depart  from  me"
(Matt.  XXV.  41).  Jonah's  effort  to  escape  from  God's  presence  seemed  successful —
"he  found  a  ship  going  to  Tarshish."  Providence  seemed  to  favour  him  j  but  this  was
a  narrow  view — providence  must  be  interpreted  widely.  "  We  cannot  expect  smiles  of
approbation  from  Heaven  any  longer  than  we  can  say  with  Abraham's  servant,  'I
being  in  the  way ' "  (Jones  of  Creaton).  "  So  he  paid  the  fare  thereof."  He  had  the
money  leady — another  apparently  lavourable  providence,  and  he  paid  it  at  once,  for
men  do  not  grudge  expense  to  carry  out  their  own  will,  however  reluctant  often  to
spend  it  to  carry  out  God's.  See  the  costliness  of  sin — yet  the  devil's  taxes  are  usually
paid  cheerfully.  Picture  Jonah  afloat  in  the  Mediterranean — his  conflicting  feelings
—relief,  yet  no  relief — ^like  a  modern  criminal  escaping  to  America,  with  an  evil  con-
science and  dread  of  the  telegraph — ^his  expedition  insane.  "  Whither  can  I  go  from
thy  presence  ?"(Ps.  cxxxix.).  No  hiding /rom  God  (Jer.  xxiii.  24;  Rev.  vi.  16).  Only
hiding-place  in  God  (Ps.  zxxii.  7).  The  great  lesson  is  this — ^indefeasible  obligation  of
God's  will,  and  man's  alienation  from  it  and  disposition  to  resist  it  (Bom.  vii.).  Hence
the  need  of  watching  and  prayer :  "  Teach  me  to  do  thy  will  I " — W.  G.  B.

Vers.  4 — 6. — The  fugitive  arrested.  "  But  the  Lord  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  th«
lea,  and  there  was  a  mighty  tempest  in  the  sea,  so  that  the  ship  was  like  to  be  broken,"
etc.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker  1 "  God  is  never  at  a  loss  for  means
of  conquering  opposition  and  bringing  erring  men  to  their  senses — he  arrests  Balaam


26  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  1. 1—17

by  means  of  a  sword,  David  through  a  parable,  Peter  by  a  look,  the  Philippian  jailor
by  an  earthquake,  Jonah  by  a  storm.  AH  natuie  is  at  his  command.  "  The  whola
world  lull  of  invisible  couriers,  robed  and  ready  for  their  service."

I.  The  storm  sent  out  by  God.  Connection  between  the  physical  and  moral  world
is  so  adjusted  that  the  former  accomplishes  purposes  of  moral  government.  Storms  in
a  sense  are  results  of  fixed  law,  yet  instruments  of  Divine  will — "stormy  wind  fulfilling
his  word"  (Ps,  cxlviii.  8) — fitted  to  show  men  thtir  helplessness  and  dependence — to
reprove  them  for  rebelling  against  him  whose  their  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all  their
ways.  Many  things  else  have  same  purpose — illness,  frustration  of  plans,  etc.  "  In  the
day  of  adversity,  consider."  Sin  often  causes  storms — "in  one's  heart,  in  families,  in
Churches,  in  towns,  and  in  nations  (Jas.  iv.  1)  "  (Jones).  The  storm  was  adjusted  so
as  to  answer  precisely  the  purpose  of  God.  The  ship  was  not  actually  broken,  but  like
to  be  broken — literally,  "  thought  to  be  broken" — vivid  image,  as  if  creaks  and  groans
were  those  of  a  living  thing,  as  if  the  ship  itself  dreaded  destruction.

II.  Conduct  op  the  mariners.  "Then  the  mariners  were  afraid."  Mariners
usually  an  intrepid  race — "  a  stiifer  kind  Of  men  than  most  are  " — are  now  afraid.  Pear
drives  to  prayer.  In  a  storm  the  forces  against  man  are  overwhelming ;  in  such  a  case
fear  becomes  inevitable,  and  prayer  an  instinct.  "  No  man,"  it  has  been  said,  "  was
ever  an  atheist  in  a  shipwreck."  Herein  is  testimony  to  the  existence  of  God — man  in
conscious  helplessness  invokes  a  higher  Power.  The  mariners  took  a  double  course —
they  buth  prayed  and  used  the  means  available  for  the  safety  of  the  ship.  1.  They
cried  every  man  to  his  god.  Ignorance  and  superstition  may  mingle  with  more  genuine
feelings.  "I  think  we  have  no  ground  for  uttering  one  word  of  reproach  or  blame
against  these  men.  They  would  contrast  but  too  favourably  with  many  a  ship's  crew
that  sails  out  of  London  or  Liverpool.  These  poor  heathen  men  prayed  to  their  gods.
Many  a  British  sailor  only  swears  and  curses  by  his.  They  oid  what  they  could.  They
were  true  to  the  best  instincts  of  the  human  mind  "  (Raleigh).  The  prayer  of  fear  is
not  necessarily  the  prayer  of  faith ;  fear  may  be  the  beginning  of  a  godly  life,  but  is  not
its  essence ;  love  is  the  essence  of  true  religion  and  of  true  communion  with  God ;  "  per-
fect love  casteth  out  fear."  If  fear  sets  us  at  first  to  pray  for  ourselves,  our  families,  our
Church,  our  country,  it  must  advance  to  something  higher.  2.  "  They  cast  forth  the
wares  that  were  in  the  ship  into  the  sea,  to  lighten  it  of  them."  How  worthless  are  all
earthly  possessions  in  comparison  of  life  1  "  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath,  he
will  give  for  his  life;"  "What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and
lose  his  own  life?"  There  are  moments  when  utter  worthlessness  of  all  earthly  things
irresistibly  flasiies  even  on  the  worldly  mind.  Would  that  men  thought  ofteuer  of  this!
Contrast  the  security  of  the  Christian  treasure — immovability  of  the  Christian  hope.

III.  Conduct  of  Jonah.  "  But  Jonah  was  gone  down  into  the  sides  ut  the  ship  ;
and  he  lay,  and  was  fast  asleep."  Apparently  he  avoided  prayer  when  the  mariners  took
to  it — he  could  not  pray.  "If  I  regard  iniiuity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not  hear
me ;  "  "  Your  sins  have  separated  between  you  and  your  God."  A  guilty  conscience
makes  prayer  impossible,  till  a  break-down  takes  place,  and  contrition  bursts  out.  Note
the  misery  of  Jonah — he  cannot  bear  to  see  the  men  praying  while  he  himself  cannot
pray — he  goes  down  to  the  sides  of  the  ship.  "  The  most  wretched  man  in  the  world  is
the  man  who  is  afflicted,  and  cannot  pray."  He  was  fast  asleep.  This  was  not  unnatural
— he  had  been  under  a  great  strain;  now  comes  a  recoil.  Sisera  slept  in  the  tent  of
Jael — the  disciples  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane.  Jonah's  sleep  was  not  a  sign  of
insensibility,  but  a  jiroof  of  the  terrible  constraint  under  which  he  had  been  acting.
He  had  utterly  exhausted  himself  in  his  struggle  with  God,  and  the  very  storm  cannot
keep  him  awake.  Yet  surely  this  was  a  strange  sight — the  heathen  mariners  praying,
and  the  servant  of  God  sleeping.  This,  indeed,  was  typical  of  the  purpose  for  which
God  had  sent  him  to  Nineveh,  viz.  that  the  repentance  of  Nineveh  might  be  a  reproof
to  Israel;  so  the  prayers  of  these  heathen  were  a  reproof  to  Jonah — he  was  provoked
to  jealousy  by  them  that  were  not  God's  people.  Sometimes  the  Church  is  rebuked
by  the  world;  at  least  a  contrast  to  the  crooked  ways,  cross  temper,  and  ungracious
talk  of  professing  Christians  is  sometimes  fouml  in  the  integrity,  gentleness,  and  charity
of  some  who  make  no  profession.  Earnestness  of  heathen  in  their  religious  observances
is  often  a  reproof  to  Christians.  "  Why  should  the  Church  allow  the  world  to  bear
away  the  palm  in  reference  to  any  one  element  of  excellence  whatsoever — candour.


iH.i.1-17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  27

courtesy,  charity,  kindliness,  large-mindedness,  liberality,  self-denial,  any  virtue  what-
Boevel  ?  Wliy  should  there  be  one  single  departmeot  of  what  is  good — good  in  any
sphere,  moral,  physical,  social,  scientific,  conceruing  which  the  world  can  with  any  show
of  fairness  profess  to  school  the  Church,  or  say.  Stand  aside,  for  we  are  mure  at  home
here  than  you  ?  "  (Martin).

IV.  CoNDDCT  OP  THE  SHIPMASTER.  The  abseucc  of  Jonah  in  time  of  prayer  had
arrested  attention,  and  was  felt  to  be  strange  and  unseemly.  Even  the  world  expect*
Chrisiians  to  do  their  duty.  Shipmaster  reproves  him  sharply,  cries  aloud  against  him,
"  What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper  ?  "  for  his  sleep  was  not  the  sleep  that  God  gi  vea  to  his
beloved.  A  rebuke  often  applicable  still  to  many  other  classes — to  all  at  ease  in  Zion,
to  neglecters  of  the  great  salvation,  to  open  transgressors,  to  worldlings,  to  forgetters  of
God,  to  those  who  think  not  of  righteousness,  temperance,  and  judgment  to  come  I
"  Arise,  call  upon  thy  God,  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us,  that  we  perish  not."
Jonah  is  called  to  prayer— earnest  prayer;  he  must  "arise" — a  recumbent  attitude  not
suitable  for  such  prayer — rather  the  attitude  of  Jacob  wrestling  at  Peniel.  A  reason
is  given  why  Jonah  should  pray,  but  a  hesitating  reason,  "  if  so  be  " — if  there  bo  even
a  chance  of  prayer  prevailing;  this  is  very  different  from  the  full  assurance  of  faith.
Faith  knows  that  God  will  hear,  and  that  he  ever  thinks  upon  his  own,  and  that  they
rannot  perish,  in  the  deepest  sense  of  the  word.  "My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know
them,  and  they  follow  me,  and  they  shall  never  perish."  The  name  and  work  of  Christ,
unknown  to  this  mariner,  give  confidence  in  prayer.  The  heathen  mariner  is  here  the
preacher  to  the  prophet,  not  the  prophet  to  the  mariner.  "  Let  us  listen  to  his  awaken-
ing call.  These  words  of  his  have  aroused  many  a  sleeper  besides  Jonah. . . .  Hear  them,
sleeping  soul,  to-day.  What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper? — sleeping  here  in  this  great
battle-field,  where  souls  are  lost  and  won?  In  this  vineyard  of  noblest  work,  where
God-given  talents  are  doubled  or  forfeited  for  ever  ?  In  this  treacherous  sea  of  life,  girt
rotmd  with  storms  which  might  so  easily  break  the  strongest  ships  that  float?  What
meanest  thou? — sleeping  now,  with  noonday  lights  above  thee,  and  about  thee  men  who
strive  and  men  who  pray?  .  .  .  While  the  gates  of  heaven  and  hell  stand  open,  tho
murky  shadows  of  the  one  gathering  in  deeper  folds,  the  joy-bells  of  the  other  waiting
to  peal?"  (Ealeigh).  Oh  the  unreasonableness  of  spiritual  sleep — sleep  of  unbelief-
sleep  of  backsliding  1  "Now  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of  sleep"  (Rom.  liii.  11). —
W.  G.  B.

Vers.  7 — 10. — The  fugitive  convicted.  "And  they  said  every  one  to  his  fellow.
Come,  and  let  us  cast  lots,  that  we  may  know  for  whose  cause  this  evil  is  upon  ns.
So  they  cast  lots,  and  the  lot  fell  upon  Jonah,"  etc.  The  prayers  of  the  mariners,  and
Jonah's  prayer,  if  indeed  he  tried  to  pray  (although  that  is  hardly  likely ;  see  ch.  iv.  2,
"  Then  Jonah  prayed  "),  led  to  no  abatement  of  the  storm.  God's  purpose  was  not  to
be  accomplished  in  that  way — Jonah  was  not  to  be  restored  in  so  easy  a  manner.  But
prayer  may  seem  to  be  unanswered  while  it  is  answered — it  is  a  link  in  a  chain.  A
much  more  profound  discipline  had  yet  to  be  passed  through  in  order  that  Jonah  might
be  restored  and  the  great  purpose  of  his  mission  to  Nineveh  attained.  Let  us  trace  the
next  steps  in  the  development  of  the  providential  plan.

I.  The  mabiners  eesolvb  to  oast  lots.  (Ver.  7.)  This  is  a  striking  step.  They
might  have  given  themselves  up  for  lost,  perhaps  drowning  their  feelings,  as  sailors
have  often  done,  in  intoxication  (if  that  be  not  an  exclusively  modern  practice) ;  but
they  resolved  to  make  another  effort  to  save  their  lives  and  their  ship.  This  proceeded
on  the  belief  that  this  storm  was  caused  by  some  man's  sin;  and  to  find  out  who  was
the  offender  they  determined  to  cast  lots.  A  dangerous  generalization,  to  ascribe  a
calamity  to  one  man's  sin,  though  in  this  case  correct.  Perhaps  there  were  unusual
circumstances  in  the  storm  that  led  them  to  reason  thus.  "  If  anything  should  happen
etrangely,  as  while  we  are  in  this  mortality  we  may  very  well  expect,  we  can  take  no
better  course  than  these  shipmen  presently  to  fear  lest  iniquity  be  the  author  of  it"
(Abbot).  Casting  lots  was  a  pecuHar  device  to  ascertain  a  secret ;  rdigiout  use  of  loti^
however,  is  very  different  from  the  careless  appeal  to  the  lot  often  made  (see  Josh.  vii.
16 ;  1  Sam.  x.  21 ;  Acts  i.  26).  The  lot  becomes  legitimate  only  when  all  the  ordinary
methods  of  settling  a  difficulty  have  failed,  and  nothing  remains  but  to  make  a  solemn
appeal  to  God.


28  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  [oh.  r.  1—17,

n.  The  lot  falls  upon  Jonah.  Picture  his  anxiety  while  the  lot  was  being  cast —
hl«  dei^r  when  it  fell  on  him.  This  seems  to  have  brought  him  to  a  sense  of  his  sin ;
It  was  God's  voice,  "  Thou  art  the  man ! "  Jonah  now  broke  down,  prostrated  by  the
little  arrow  from  God's  quiver.  In  walking  through  a  hospital  after  a  battle,  two
remarks  are  sometimes  made — How  easy  to  kill!  and — How  diffloult  to  kill!  Some
hodies  almost  entire,  yet  killed ;  some  fearfully  shattered,  yet  alive.  So  we  say — How
iflBoult  it  is  to  humble!  and — How  easy  it  is  to  iiumble!  difficult  for  man,  easy  for
.  iod;  man  may  reason,  expostulate,  apply  truth,  yet  the  offender  may  not  in  any  degree
le  touched  by  it.  A  word,  a  look,  a  lot  from  God,  makes  one  quite  prostrate  and  help-
less.   What  a  power  of  rebuking  and  prostrating  God  may  use  at  the  last  day  I

III.  Jonah  questioned.  All  eyes  are  fixed  on  Jonah  with  eager  curiosity  to  ascer-
tain what  he  had  done.  The  running  fire  of  questions  indicates  desire  for  light  on
the  strange  transaction.  They  were  chiefly  anxious  to  know  his  crime,  his  occupation,
and  his  country ;  either  his  personal  guilt,  or  the  guilt  connected  with  his  occupation,
if  it  wag  an  unlawful  one,  or  with  his  country,  or  with  his  people ;  for  there  might  be
Bome  horrible  sin,  perhaps  committed  of  old  by  the  people  of  his  country,  exposing
them  and  him  through  them  to  the  wrath  of  the  gods.  Why  did  they  not  act  at  once
on  the  decision  of  the  lot,  and  throw  Jonah  overboard?'  Probably  they  desired  con-
firmation of  it;  it  must  be  a  painful"  transaction,  and  they  would  like  more  authority
for  the  step  they  were  to  take.  It  would  be  satisfactory  to  get  Jonah  to  confess.  It
might  throw  light  on  the  origin  of  storms,  and  be  a  useful  hint  for  the  future.

IV.  Jonah's  answbe.  The  nobler  aspect  of  Jonah's  character  now  comes  out —
perfect  ingenuousness  and  honesty ;  he  knows  his  fate — death  stares  him  in  the  face —
yet  there  is  no  shrinking  or  fencing  of  any  kind.  He  tells  them :  1.  He  is  a  Hebrew,  a
member  of  the  race  that  had  so  much  to  do  with  the  powers  above.  2.  The  God
whom  he  worships  is  the  God  that  made  the  sea  and  the  dry  land,  and  has  absolute
power  over  both.  3.  He  has  fled  from  his  presence,  has  offended  him,  and  now  God  is
showing  his  displeasure.  Humiliating  position,  yet  not  without  a  certain  grandeur — ■
Jonah  under  the  rebuke  of  God,  his  own  conscience,  and  the  heathen  mariners.  In
reference  to  the  mariners,  he  who  might  have  been  expected  to  bring  them  blessing  has
brought  them  trouble.  His  mouth  is  shut;  he  can  say  nothing  for  himself.  There  is
something  very'striking  in  his  undergoing  the  condemnation  of  the  mariners.  He  had
been  a&aid,  apparently,  of  the  bad  opinion  of  the  Ninevites,  and  had  shunned  his  com-
miision ;  but  now  he  encounters  the  bad  opinion  of  the  mariners — with  nothing  to  fall
back  on — his  conscience  and  his  God  both  against  him.  Yet  there  is  a  grandeur  in  his
honest  confession,  in  his  attitude  of  thorough  humility ;  there  is  a  noble  truthfulness
now  about  him ;  he  conceals  nothing,  though  he  must  be  the  victim.

V.  Effect  on  the  mariners.  They  were  exceedingly  afraid.  They  felt  a  sense  of
the  reality  and  nearness  of  a  supernatural  power — the  power  of  the  God  who  made  the
sea  and  now  raises  it  in  storm.  The  supernatural  must  be  always  very  impressive —
must  have  subduing  effect  whenever  God  is  felt  to  be  near,  as  in  time  of  pestilence.
The  men  now  felt  God  near,  in  character  of  the  righteous,  holy  Judge,  punishing  an
offender — not  like  heathen  gods,  jesting  at  sin,  but  in  terrible  earnest  against  it.  They
seemed  to  have  been  impressed,  and  converted  to  God,  for  the  soul  may  move  very
rapidly ;  deep  impressions  may  be  made  very  suddenly  in  time  of  great  excitement.
A  great  lesson  to  Jonah  ;  if  these  rough  heathen  sailors  were  so  deeply  impressed  by
the  fear  of  God,  might  not  the  Ninevites  have  been  so  too?  They  said  to  Jonah,
"Why  hast  thou  done  this?"  Strange  aspect  of  sins  of  God's  servants  in  eyes  of
world!  God's  servants  have  no  cloak  for  their  sins.  The  question  must  have  cut
Jonah  to  the  quick.  He  could  only  echo  it  in  blank  amazement — Why  have  I  done
this?  Observe  the  hoUowness  of  all  apologies  for  sin  in  tlie  hour  of  judgment;  sin,
however  sweet  in  the  mouth,  is  bitter  in  the  belly;  "lust,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth
forth  death."  The  horror  and  misery  of  th?  ship's  company  are  a  type  of  the
effects  of  sin,  of  one  sin,  by  a  servant  of  God.  "  Who  can  understand  his  errors  ?
Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults.  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous
sins."  0  sin,  what  a  monster  art  thou  1  what  tragedies  come  out  of  thee  I  how  dost
thou  involve  others  in  ruin,  as  the  drunkard's  family  1  God  give  us  a  true  sense  of  it,
and  teach  us  to  hate  it  in  every  form,  and  guard  against  its  minutest  seeds,  lest,  like
the  dragon's  teeth,  they  breed  against  us  hosts  of  armed  men  1    Let  each  one  often  put


0H.1. 1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  29

the  question,  in  reference  to  his  sins,  "  Why  hast  thou  done  this  ?  "  Sinned  against
God  and  man,  and  against  thine  own  soul,  and  against  thine  own  children  ?  Better  we
should  put  the  question  and  answer  it  in  time,  than  wait  till  God  puts  it  in  the  day  of
judgment. — W.  G.  B.

Vers.  11 — 17. — The  offender  sacrificed.  "Then  said  they  unto  bim,  What  shall
we  do  unto  thee,  that  the  sea  may  be  calm  unto  us  ?  for  the  sea  wrought,  and  was
tempestuous,"  etc.  A  new  stage  of  spiritual  progress  has  been  reached — yet  the  sea
not  calm.  There  had  been  prayer — but  no  calm  followed ;  now  there  is  frank  con-
fession of  sin,  and  doubtless  repentance,  and  acknowledgment  of  God  even  by  the  men,
but  the  sea  still  wrought,  and  was  tempestuous.  Was  it "  no  use  "  to  pray  and  repent?
No ;  but  God's  plan  was  a  large  one,  not  yet  completed.  See  the  danger  of  impatience
and  despair  when  a  blessing  is  delayed :  "  Though  the  vision  tarry,  wait  for  it."

I.  Jonah  is  made  his  own  judge.  "  Then  said  they  unto  him.  What  shall  we  do
unto  thee,  that  the  sea  may  be  calm  unto  us  ?"  They  seem  to  have  felt,  "There  is
one  God,  and  Jonah  is  his  prophet."  Fearing  God,  they  recognized  the  claims  of  his
servant,  and  appealed  to  him  to  pass  judgment  on  himself — "What  shall  we  do  unto
thee  f  "  Doubtless  they  had  their  own  ideas,  but  they  respected  him  as  a  prophet,  and
were  slow  to  lay  hands  on  him,  and  thought  that,  as  a  servant  of  God,  he  would  know
best  what  would  appease  his  wrath.  "  I  see  chiefly  in  this  language  an  appeal  to  the
true  God  and  the  true  rnan.  Wherever  the  knowledge  of  God  is  clearly  and  truly
communicated,  heathenism  and  idols  have  no  chance.  .  .  .  Let  God  be  clearly  known
as  he  is  revealed,  and,  with  very  few  exceptions,  men  cannot  but  believe  on  him,  .  .  .
So,  too,  when  the  true  man  appears  among  men,  although  it  may  be,  as  in  this  case,
coming  out  of  untrueness  and  unfairness,  staggering  back  through  the  storm  and
penalty  that  he  may  at  least  die  in  the  right  way,  men  must  yield  that  man  rever-
ence. The  image  of  God  is  shining  in  him  once  more.  He  is  a  living  and  true  man —
eon  of  the  living  and  true  God — '  What  shall  we  do  unto  thee  ? ' "  (Raleigh).

II.  'i'HB  sblp-iMposed  sentence.  "  Take  me  up,  and  cast  me  into  the  sea."  The
coward  now  become  a  hero  shows  a  noble  and  self-sacrificing  spirit — contrast  to  former
spirit.  And  now  comes  to  the  front  the  instinct  of  retribution.  Jonah  does  not  pro-
pose that  he  should  be  granted  an  opportunity  to  go  to  Nineveh  and  execute  his  com-
mission ;  he  felt  that  he  was  causing  death.to  others — it  was  just  that  he  should  die  to
prevent  them  from  dying :  "I  know  that  for  my  sake  this  great  tempest  is  upon  you."
But  he  will  not  be  his  own  executioner:  "Take  me  up,  and  cast  me  into  the  sea."  No
man  is  entitled  to  take  away  his  own  life ;  no  countenance  either  in  nature  or  in  Bible
to  suicide.  Jonah's  death  must  be  a  juciicial  act,  executed  by  others.  "Cast  me  forth
into  the  sea,  for  that  is  the  will  of  God ;  it  is  my  will  also,  for  I  cannot  endure  to  see
you  in  such  danger  and  distress  any  longer  on  my  account.  You  have  already  lost
your  goods  because  of  me,  and  you  have  been  for  some  time  in  peril  of  your  lives ;  that
you  may  suffer  no  more,  take  me  up,  and  cast  me  into  the  sea  "  (Jones).

III.  Another  pull  for  life.  "Nevertheless  the  men  rowed  hard  to  bring  it  to
the  land,"  These  men  gain  upon  us — rough  seamen  by  profession,  tinged  by  Oriental
barbarity  in  all  likelihood,  they  become  generous,  and  eager  to  save  Jonah.  Jonah's
humility,  candour,  and  ready  self-saoiifice  had  impressed  them:  "They  rowed  hard  to
bring  the  ship  to  land."  A  self-sacrificing  spirit  draws  men's  hearts — turns  the  heathen
— Livingstone's  inflnence  with  natives  of  Africa  due  in  no  small  measure  to  this  feature
— remember  the  self-sacrifice  of  our  Lord :  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  from  the  earth,  will  draw
all  men  unto  me."  "  Every  good  thing  in  our  spirit  and  action  has  a  tendency  to  repro-
duce itself  in  others  who  are  in  any  way  related  to  it,  especially,  of  course,  if  it  is  called
forth  for  their  advantage.  Jonah  is  true  and  noble  at  length.  The  sailors,  having
responsive  qualities  in  themselves,  are  nobler  for  his  nobleness,  are  more  sell-forgetful
because,  when  the  moment  of  stress  came,  he  did  the  noblest  thing  a  man  could  do  for
fellow-meni — offered  his  life  for  theirs  "  (Raleigh).  Another  step  is  thus  gained  in  moral
progress — "  the  men  "  have  become  full  of  reverence  toward  God,  and  full  of  regard  for
his  prophet — but  to  no  purpose  apparently;  "  for  the  sea  wrought,  and  was  tempestuous
•gainst  them."  A  sacrifice  is  indispensable.  (In  the  men  "pulling  hard"  some  have
found  an  emblem  of  sinners  tiying  to  save  themselves  before  they  resort  to  God's  way
of  lacrifice;  but  thii  lesson  seems  far-fetched.)


30  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  1. 1—17,

IV.  The  mariners  prat  to  God.  "  Wherefore  they  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  said.
We  beseech  thee,  0  Lord,  we  besetch  thee,"  etc.  The  tender  conscience  and  devout
feeling  of  the  mariners  are  very  remarkable.  Observe:  1.  Vehemence  t)f  their  prayer:
"  They  cried  " — they  beseech  God  once  and  again.  2.  They  appeal  to  God's  justice ;
"  Let  us  not  perish  for  this  man's  life."  3.  Their  concern  for  life  :  "  Lay  not  upon  ua
innocent  blood."  Shedding  of  blood  was  little  thought  of  in  those  times — massacre  of
innocent  and  guilty  alike  were  common  enough.  4.  Their  submissiveness  to  God :  "  For
thou,  0  Lord,  hast  done  as  it  pleased  thee."  Thou  hast  shown  thy  sovereign  will  in
the  past ;  let  it  rule  us  now.  Most  profitable  lesson  for  us  all :  "  In  all  thy  ways  acknow-
ledge him,  and  he  shall  direct  thy  paths" (Prov.  Hi.  6).  Especially  in  reference  to  any
step  that,  once  taken,  cannot  be  recalled.  For  if  they  threw  Jonah  overboard,  it  was  an
irrevocable  act.

V.  Jonah  is  oast  forth.  "  So  they  took  up  Jonah,  and  cast  him  forth  into  the
sea :  and  the  sea  ceased  from  her  raging."  They  took  him  up,  tenderly  and  respectfully,
not  pitching  him  overboard  in  a  tumultuous  manner.  The  prophet  offers  no  resistance ;
one  great  heave,  and  he  is  engulfed ;  in  a  little  moment  the  sea  closes  on  him — the  men
gazing  after  him  with  sorrowful,  anxious  faces,  thinking,  perhaps, "  Poor  man  I  where  is
he  now?  "  It  is  an  awful  testimony  to  the  righteousness  of  God ;  one  offence  has  for-
feited Jonah's  life.  No  wonder  ttiey  are  anxious.  But  their  anxiety  does  not  last  long :
God  reveals  himself  at  once,  and  veiy  wonderfully:  "  The  storm  ceased  from  her  raging.
The  men  are  relieved  from  a  double  anxiety — anxiety  about  the  storm,  and  anxiety
whether  or  not  they  have  done  right.  "  Thus  died  Jonah,  to  them,  at  least,  the  death
of  a  criminal  pursued  by  justice ;  yet  the  death  of  a  repentant  and  righteous  man ;  in
death  triumphing  over  death ;  committing  himself  to  God  in  singular  meekness  and
faith  ;  acknowledging  the  justice  of  his  doom,  and  relying  on  Divine  pardon  and  pro-
tection ;  committing  his  body  to  the  sea  and  his  soul  to  the  God  whom  he  feared,  the
God  of  heaven,  and  of  the  sea,  and  of  the  dry  land  "  (Martin).

VI.  The  effect  upon  the  men.  At  last  the  storm  ceases.  What  neither  prayers,
nor  repentance,  nor  the  change  ia  the  mind  of  the  men  had  accelerated  by  one  iota
comes  at  once  and  ci  impletely  after  the  sacrifice  of  one  man.  Fresh  token  of  nearness
of  God ;  but  not  this  time  vindicating  his  justice  or  executing  his  wrath ;  showing  his
mercy  and  his  love.  Great  power  of  mercy  and  love  to  move  the  heart :  "  The  men
feared  the  Lord  exceedingly."  Awed  by  his  presence,  reassured  by  his  mercy,  they
"  offered  a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,  and  made  vows ; "  showed  their  deep  sense  of
obligation,  and  took  steps  to  keep  it  up.  The  vow  was  probably  to  be  performed  at
some  future  time.  Thus  they  took  precautions  against  evanescence  of  grateful  feeling
— a  useful  lesson.  Men  "soon  forget  his  mercies;"  vows- tend  to  keep  sense  of  them
alive  in  after-times.

VII.  Jonah  not  lost.  "  The  Lord  had  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow  up  Jonah."
"  Praise  the  Lord  from  the  earth,  ye  dragons,  and  all  deeps."  God  had  shown  himself  the
Lord  of  inanimate  nature ;  now  he  shows  himself  Lord  of  animate  nature.  The  storm
bad  been  his  messenger ;  now  his  messenger  is  the  fish.  This  is  duly  in  accordan  ce
with  the  idea  of  God  which  the  whole  transaction  and  the  whole  book  present.  Jehovah
claims  to  be  not  only  the  God  of  the  Hebrew,  but  the  God  of  Nineveh,  and  of  the  whole
earth.  He  is  the  God  of  heaven,  "  which  hath  made  the  sea  and  the  dry  land."  "  The
earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof ; "  "  So  is  this  wide  and  great  sea,  wherein
go  things  creeping  innumerable,  both  large  and  small  beasts."  He  shows  his  sovereignty
over  the  laud  by  "preparing  a  great  fish."  He  bends  it  to  his  own  purposes — makes
the  devouring  monster  a  means  of  protection  and  preservation.  The  whole  story  has
a  supernatural  air.  If  the  presence  of  the  supernatural  be  once  admitted,  the  form  of
miracle  is  a  mere  matter  of  detail.  Objections  arising  from  the  apparently  grotesque
character  of  this  miracle  are  obviated  if  it  be  considered  that  God  wished  to  convince
Jonah  of  his  power  to  protect  and  preserve  him  even  in  Nineveh,  amid  hordes  of  furious
enemies,  roused  perhaps  to  fury  by  his  message.  He  that  had  protected  him  in  the
body  of  the  fish,  surging  up  and  dowit  through  the  depths  of  the  stormy  sea,  was  able
to  protect  him  at  Nineveh.  The  unusual  character  of  Jonah's  mission  justifies  aa
unusual  miracle.  God's  manifold  resources  of  preservation — Noah  in  the  ark — Moses
in  the  cradle  of  bulrushes — Elijah  by  the  ravens — Jesus  by  flight  into  Egypt — Paul
through  his  nephew  finding  out  conspiracy.     Many  more  are  found   in  Christian


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  tl

biography.  All  the  powers  of  nature,  all  creatures  rational  and  irrational,  men,  devils,
and  angels,  are  subject  to  him ;  and  now  subject  to  Cluist :  Ood  "  hath  put  all  thiags
under  his  feet,  and  given  hira  to  be  Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,  which  is  hif
body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  fiUeth  all  in  all."— W.  O.  B.

Ter.  1— ch.  iv.  11. — Characttrittict  of  Jonah.  The  weaknesses,  the  secrets  of  cha-
racter, as  well  as  the  possibilities  of  a  man  are  discovered  in  life's  crises.  Jonah's  great
mission  to  Nineveh  has  revealed  him  to  us;  and  who  can  tell  how  much  it  revealed  him
to  himself  ?

L  Hk  was  a  HAN  or  btebn  TBnTHFDLKEsa.  This  book  was  virtually  written  by
him.  This  is  the  testimony  of  antiquity ;  is  attested  by  some  linguistic  peculiarities
In  the  original,  and  by  the  striking  details  in  the  narrativej  that  only  could  have  been
known  to  Jonah  himself.  Sad  and  monitory  is  that  narrative ;  but  be  it  remembered
that  Ae  writes  it.  And  mark  Aow.  He  conceals  nothing,  extenuates  nothing;  says  the
bitter  worst  about  himself.  There  is  no  effort  at  explanation,  no  colour  of  apology,  no
relieving  light.  If  his  conduct  should  be  a  warning,  let  it  be  a  warning.  It  is  not
difficult  to  "  speak  truth  "  to  and  about  others.  It  is  agreeable  even  to  some.  But
to  "  speak  truth  "  about  one's  self — there  is  the  difficulty.  Truth  about  one's  wrong-
doing, one's  wrung  spirit.  The  black  truth,  without  any  attempt  at  apology  or  expla*
nation.  Few  can  do  it.  Jonah  did  it.  How  men  hide  themselves  from  themselves  I
How  they  tone  down  their  evil  deeds  I  Their  sin  is  not  as  other  men's.  Not  so  with
Jonah,  He  seeks  not,  even  covertly,  mercy  from  the  reader.  Enough  for  him  to
"  find  mercy  of  the  Lord."

II.  He  was  a  HAN  or  imaqination.  He  is  ever  in  triumphant  exaltation  or  despair-
ing depression ;  ever  in  extremes.  And  a  very  little  matter  could  remove  him  from  one
to  the  other.  To  the  imaginative  life  has  brighter  lights  and  deeper  shadows  than  to
other  men ;  quicker  transitions,  darker  sorrows.  Sorrows,  too,  are  imagined  that  never
come.  Something  is  missed;  it  is  deemed  lost;  hence  vexation  and  annoyance.  All
needless;  the  thing  is  soon  found.  A  friend  is  expected,  is  delayed;  all  kinds  of  dis-
asters are  fancied  to  have  befallen  him.  Oppressive,  foolish  fancies  I  A  temperament
this  that  often  hinders  from  action.  Molehills  swell  into  mouutains,  and  little  bushes
into  burly  lions.  That  seems  in  some  cases  even  to  exonerate  from  action ;  men  so
enamoured  of  deeds  imagined,  that  the  deeds  in  reality  are  never  done.  Men  sunken
into  mere  day-dreamers.  Every  temperament  brings  its  own  special  temptation.  And
tlie  imaginative,  so  easily  gladdened  or  saddened,  need  much  to  pray  for  "  the  peace  of
God."  We  can  rest  from  the  undue  excitements  and  wearing  vexations  of  imagination
as  we  "  rest  in  the  Lord."

III.  Jonah  was  a  man  of  harbow  BELiaions  sympathies.  His  selfish  care  for  his
prophetic  reputation,  fearing  lest  the  preservation  of  the  Ninevites  should  stigmatize
him  as  a  false  prophet,  made  him  cruel.  His  intense  uncharitable  patriotism  made  him
long  for  the  destruction  of  Nineveh,  his  country's  enemy.  Patriotism  that  hinds  us  to
our  birthland,  the  scenes  of  memory,  and  of  our  nation's  history,  is  well.  But  it  is
sadly,-  teriibly  HI  when  a  man  thinks  that  he  can  only  truly  love  his  own  country  by
longing  for  the  humiliation  and  harm  of  all  others.  God  is  the  God  of  all  the  nations ;
the  gospel  is  for  "  every  creature  " — is  to  be  passed  on  by  us  to  those  as  yet  unblessed
by  us.  The  story  of  Jonah  warns  us  against  the  narrowing  influence  of  professional
and  national  feeling.  How  noble,  in  the  comparison,  is  Paul,  willing  for  Israel's  sake
to  be  "  accursed,"  and  yet  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  1

IV.  Jonah  was  a  man  of  an  ibasoible  tbmpeb.  Uncorrected,  it  may  be,  in  early
life.  Correction  always  comes  sooner  or  later ;  better  sooner  than  later.  He  was  one
soon  angry,  and  who  could  be  very  angry.  Not  a  pleasant  man  to  live  with.  A  com-
plaiuing  man,  and  fond  of  something  to  complain  of.  Fietful,  dark,  moody.  Quick  iu
a  quarrel,  and  one  who  dared  to  quarrel  with  God's  goodness.  A  man  with  a  spirit  of
contradiction,  who  stood  by  what  he  said.  "  Did  I  not  say  so  ?  I  said  it  in  my  own
country."  Unlovable  Jonah  I  A  man's  temperament  is  with  him  from  the  beginning,
and  abides  with  him,  through  all  changes,  to  the  end.  But  temper  can  be  corrected,
and  become  better ;  be  uncorrected,  and  become  worse.  It  is  to  be  watched ;  resisted
with  "  all  prayer,"  if  evil.  Let  tenriper,  as  well  as  cares,  be  carried  to  God.  St  caa
tubdue  it,  curb  its  anger  to  peace,  charm  its  darkness  to  cheerfulness.


82  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  1. 1—17.

V.  With  ah  hib  bin,  Jonah  was  a  seevant  op  the  Lord.  The  "  root  of  the
matter"  was  in  hifn.  We  have  gleams  in  this  dark  narrative  of  the  better  nature
within  him.  Pleasant  to  believe  that  his  later  life  (of  which  we  have  no  record)  was
calm  with  a  patience  and  beautiful  with  a  charity  unknown  before ;  that "  at  the  even-  .
time  there  was  light."  Here,  through  all  time,  he  is  seen  as  the  great  missionary-pro-
phet, and  as,  of  all  the  prophets,  the  great  Christ-type.  On  earth  he  had  much  to  learn —
much  concerning  his  own  folly,  impatience,  sin ;  much  of  God's  wisdom,  forbearance,
perfection.  And  now,  clear  from  sin,  is  he  not  learning  the  lesson  still  ?  For  to  know
God  is  the  blessed  lesson  of  eternity.  And  its  song  (as  was  Jonah's  here)  is, "  Salva-
tion is  of  the  Lord."  In  that  song  may  we  join  at  length  and  for  ever,  with  him  and
all  "  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets  "  I— G.  T.  C.

Vers.  1,  2. — Jonah  God's  messenger.  In  these  words  we  have  important  instruction
se  to  God's  messengers.

I.  Theie  continuity.  The  first  word  of  this  book  is  the  Hebrew  conjunction  "and :"
"  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Jonah."  Thus  begin  other  books  of  the  Old
Testament.  How  significant!  The  Divine  messages  stand  not  alone;  they  are  con-
nected with  those  sent  before.  So  with  the  Divine  messengers.  Did  the  word  of  the
Lord  come  to  Abraham,  Moses,  Elijah?  And  also  to  Jonah!  He  shows  poorly  in
comparison  with  them,  yet  he  too  was  in  "the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets."  We
may  have  slight  gifts  and  narrow  opportunities,  still  we  may  be  God's  messengers  and
in  the  line  of  the  greatest  of  the  past.  Each  humblest  Christian  worker  can  say,  "To
me  also  is  tliis  nraoe  given."

II.  The  difficulties  of  God's  mbssengebs.  Jonah  had  many.  This  was  a  novel
work  to  which  he  was  bidden.  A  great  work — one  man  to  warn  the  millions  of  Nineveh.
A  work  he  could  devolve  on  no  other,  and  in  which  he  was  to  have  no  human  helper.
He  had  to  say  a  "bard  saying."  Not  a  sermon  concerning  Nineveh — that  he  could
have  preached  at  home ;  nor  to  Nineveh ;  but  with  fearless  cry  against  it — the  city  of
violence,  of  manifold  vengeance-clamouring  wickedness.  But  his  great  difficulty  was
within  him,  in  an  unwilliDg  mind  that  soon  revealed  itself  in  rebellious  life.  We  too
have  difficulties  as  God's  messengers.  In  the  way  we  have  to  go,  the  people  we  have
to  address,  their  callous  unconcern  in  the  message  we  have  to  bear — "  warning  every
man."  But  our  greatest  difficulty  is  within.  To  be  promptly  obedient.  Not  to
hesitate,  delay,  argue  a-ainst.  Oh,  to  watch  against  the  reluctant  will !  There  is  the
fontal  evil.  No  audible  voice,  such  as  may  have  come  to  the  prophets,  do  we  need
to-day.  The  Spirit  of  Christ  is  with  us,  speaking  in  Scripture-illumined  conscience,
and  in  the  fresh  strong  convictions  of  the  soul.  Let  us  hear  and  promptly  heed  them,
willing  to  bear  or  do  all  to  which  he  calls.

III.  The  privilege  of  God's  messengers.  With  all  his  faults  Jonah  is  clothed
with  honour.  He  carried  God's  messnges  to  men;  he  was  "Jonah  the  prophet."  We
too  may  bear  his  messages,  and  by  every  right  word  and  true  deed  are  doing  it.  How
privileged  thus  are  we!  Then  let  us  "arise,  go."  Let  nothing  hinder,  remembering
whose  servants  we  are.  "  Arise,  go  "  to  cottage,  school-class,  bed  of  the  afflicted,  to
warn,  entreat — in  all  bearing  God's  messa<ies;  to  business,  to  do  it  as  in  Christ's  very
presence ;  to  scenes  of  rest,  by  purity  and  cheerfulness  to  witness  for  God  the  All-holy,
the  All  happy  Oue;  to  trials,  temptations,  to  be  in  Christ's  strength  stronger  than  all
of  them.  "Arise,  go  to"  all  the  work  given  you  to  do,  and  go  to  finish  it:  to  sorrows,
that  through  them  you  may  reach  the  realms  of  rest;  to  death,  through  it  to  arrive
at  the  land  of  life ;  through  all  to  him,  our  Master  and  Lord.  "  Where  he  is  there  we
shall  he  also."— G.  T.  C.

Ver.  3. — Jonah  the  fugitive.  I.  The  motives  that  impelled  him  to  flioht.  We
cannot  know  all  that  prevailed  with  him.  If  we  knew  just  vihere  the  call  found  him,
and  "the  spirit  of  his  mind,"  then  we  might  be  less  surprised  at  his  flight.  Had  he
been  "restraining  prayer"?  yielding  to  self-indulgence?  or  falling  to  the  idolatry  of
bis  own  judgment — confident  that  he  knew  his  own  powers,  what  he  could  best  do,
where  best  labour?  not  in  all  things  seeking  that  higher  wisdom  which  is  our  only
safe  and  unerring  guidance?  Anyway,  such  a  man  as  Jonah  falls  only  by  little  and
little.    There  are  many  steps  to  reach  a  spiritual  catastrophe.    Let  us  be  warned,  then.


om.1.1— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  SS

against  the  first  steps,  bowever  secret,  that  lead  from  God.  Among  the  things  that
wrongly  influenced  him  to  flight  we  may  suppose :  1.  The  novelty  of  the  work.  To  be
a  prophet  to  a  heathen  people,  to  go  to  them  as  God's  messenger,  was  striking  into  a
new  line  of  duty.  How  different  from  work  in  Israel  amid  familiar  surioundings  I  2.
It  was  work  afar  off,  involving  a  long  journey  of  several  hundred  miles.  Those,  too,
were  days  of  slow  travelling,  and  Jonah  too,  perhaps,  a  poor  traveller.  3.  The  difficulties
of  the  work  would  only  be  beginning  when  Nineveh  was  reached.  That  he,  a  solitary
man,  a  foreigner,  should,  in  that  city  of  insolent  pride  and  pitiless  violence,  denounce
judgment  upon  it,  was  indeed  a  stupendous  work — something  to  do  and  to  shrink  from.

4.  His  little  success  at  home  was  not  encouraging.  Jeroboam  may  have  been  quickened
by  his  prophecies  to  military  effort  and  victories,  but  Jeroboam  was  still  an  idolater.
And  idolaters,  as  a  whole,  were  his  people.    What  can  Jonah  expect,  then,  in  Nineveh  ?

5.  But  if  the  Ninevites  repented,  then  (for  they  would  surely  be  saved)  Jonah  would  be
discredited.  "  He  had  foretold  doom,  and,  lo !  deliverance."  6.  Why  should  Nineveh,
Israel's  enemy,  be  spared  ?  All  the  small  blind  patriot  in  Jonah  kindled  into  revolt
against  the  work  to  which  he  was  bidden.  Let  Nineveh  perish  1  And  have  we  no
excuses  for  flight  from  duty?  Such  a  novel  work,  or  so  new  t.o  us  I  So  far  away  from
all  our  experiences!  Beset  with  countless  difficulties  I  Anaid  dangers,  too,  perhaps  1
And  little  likelihood  of  success  in  itl  Must  the  work  be  done?  Then  others  must  do
itl  Excuses  may  be  many,  valid  reaaoni  there  can  be  none,  for  neglecting  the  duty
which  God  bids  us  to  do.

II.  The   rAVOUBABLE-SEBMINO  OHABACTER   OF  CIEOUMSTANOEa   IN   JoNAH'S  VLIOHT.

He  left  Gath-hepher;  went  down  to  the  coast.     No  accident  stopped  him.     In  Joppa
no  illness  delayed  him.    The  sea  was  peaceful.    He  found  just  the  ship  he  wished,  and
bound  whither  he  desired.     There  was  room  for  him  on  board.     He  had  money  enough  '
for  the  passage;  "so  he  paid  the  fare,"    He  went  aboard.     What  could  be  better?'
Not  into  the  book  of  providence  must  we  look  to  know  the  right  way  from  the  wrong. '
In  themselves,  prosperity  is  no  proof  of  the  Divine  favour,  nor  adversity  of  the  Divine  ^
displeasure.     We  have  a  "  sure  word  "  to  guide  us.    And  had  Jonah  tested  his  conduct
by  God's  word,  he  would  Ljve  known,  in  spite  of  all  that  seemed  favourable,  that  ha
was  going  "  the  way  of  transgressors."     Have  you  success  in  wrong  ?     It  is  none  the
less  wrong.    Things  are  not  really,  permanently  favourable  if  Ood  is  unfavourable.   Are
we  right  with  him  ?     Then  all  things,  storm  as  well  as  shine,  shall  be  right  with  us.
"  Even  the  nifjht  shall  be  light  about  us."

III.  Jonah's  spiritual  degradation  in  flight  from  duty.  "  He  went  down
to  Joppa."  Literally,  down  from  the  mountains  of  Zebulun,  down  to  Joppa,  and,
having  secured  his  berth,  "  doum  into  it."  Spiritually,  how  he  had  been  going  down  I
Down  from  his  moral  elevation  as  a  prophet.  Doum  from  the  heights  of  fellowship.
Down  from  the  highlands  of  peace.  Down  from  Divine  service  in  which  he  had  been
as  "  upon  the  top  of  the  mountains."  Down,  ever  less  noble,  beautiful.  Divine  I  Men
may  "go  up"  in  society,  wealth,  local  influence,  and  yet  morally  be  going  down.  By
every  act  of  duty  dune  we  ascend ;  by  each  neglected  we  morally  descend.  Having  the
Word  of  the  Lord,  may  we  have  his  Spirit  too,  that  daily  we  may  cheerfully  respond
to  the  heavenly  voice  that  says,  "  Come  up  higher  "  I — G.  T.  0.

Vers.  W-6. — Jonah  reproved.  I.  A  tempestitous  pbovidbnob  reproved  him.
Jonah,  aroused,  creeps  on  deck.  What  a  scene  met  him  1  The  sea  in  horrible  tumult.
The  fury  of  the  wind.    The  ship

**, . .  up  and  down
From  the  base  of  the  wave  to  the  billow's  crown  I "

The  bronzed  sailors  wondering  what  would  be  the  end  1  The  storm  is  reproving  him.
No  miraculous  wind,  perhaps.  Still,  God's  servant  with,  strong  reproof:  "  Guilty  Jonah,
awake  1  arise  1  return  1  To  thy  God ;  to  thy  work  1  Duty  may  be  left ;  it  can  never
be  escaped  till  donel"  Sleep  had  been  a  pg,rt  of  his  flight.  Now  he  was  awake.  Was
conscience  awake?  <7omM  he  think ?  PF/ia*  did  he  think?  Or  was  he  «<iB  escaping
from  himself  in  the  very  tumult  of  the  tempest  that  came  to  awake  him  ?  To  not  a
few  life  is  like  a  long  slumber.  Thought,  imagination,  love,  are  asleep;  their  noble
possibilities  awake  only  to  the  gains  and  joys  of  this  little  spot  of  earth  and  fleeting

JONAH.  B


84  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  1. 1—17

day  of  time.  But  not  without  reproving  storms,  of  loss,  trouble,  affliction,  bereavement.
It  is  well  that  the  man  suffer  loss  that  he  be  not  lost.  The  voice  of  circumstances  is
the  voice  of  God.

II.  The  example  or  the  bailors  eepeoved  Jonah.  They,  each  man  of  them,
praj'ed.  Each  to  his  favourite  god.  Earnestly,  with  faith  in  the  eflScacy  of  prayer,
they  "cried  every  man  unto  his  god."  Prayerless  Jonah  (how  can  the  backslider
pray?)  is  reproved  by  those  praying  sailors.  Their  prayer  is  one  of  ignorance,  ignorant
eainestness.  He  has  no  prayer  at  all;  and  he,  too,  a  prophet  of  the  Lord!  And  how
the  heathen's  passionate  cries  to  his  god  rebuke  our  restraint  of  and  coldness  in  prayerl
How  the  full-hearted  earnestness  of  (it  may  be)  the  illiterate  Christian  reproves  our
heartless  accuracies  and  formal  worship  1  How  the  backslider  is  shamed  by  the  cry  of
the  penitent  I     "  Arise,  call  upon  thy  God  I "

III.  The  appeal  op  the  captain  beprovbd  Jonah,  ffe,  respectful  in  all  his
surprise  and  suppressed  indignation,  goes  down  and  himself  awakes  Jonah.  A  heathen,
he  is  faithful  in  all  his  ship.  Not  man  or  boy  aboard  but  he  calls  to  prayer.  And
even  the  strange  passenger  must  be  called  as  well.  A  pattern  master  this.  He  had
a  religious  as  well  as  secular  care  for  those  under  him ;  was  not  ashamed  to  show  his
earnest  spiritual  interest  in  this  strange  Hebrew.  A  pattern  for  all  masters  and
mistresses  on  sea  and  land.  Jonah  should  have  been  reprover,  and  he  is  reproved ;  a
teacher,  and  is  being  taught ;  prayerless,  when  he  should  have  been  leading  others  in
prayer.  "What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper?"  Thou,  backslider  to-day,  why  sleep?
Awake  to  thy  peril  I  Call  upon  the  great  Deliverer  I  He  will  think  upon  you.  His
thought  shall  be  salvation.     You  shall  not  perish. — G.  T,  C.

Vers.  7 — 10. — Jonah  detected.  I.  Jonah  detected  by  the  lot.  Eeathetu  cast
that  lot ;  still  the  disposal  of  it  was  of  the  Lord.  Ee  guided  the  fateful  token,  and
bo  it  fell  to  Jonah.  Now  that  the  Divine  Spirit  is  given  to  those  that  seek  him,  we
are  released  from  dependence  upon  the  indications  of  the  lot.  But  still  by  things  as
little-seeming  as  lot-casting,  backsliders  are  discovered  to  themselves  if  not  to  others.
A  cock-crow  detected  the  recreant  Peter.  And  now  by  some  memorial  of  better  days,
an  old  letter  perhaps,  a  book  inscribed  vrith  a  once-cherished  Christian  name,  or  a
time-yellowed  ticket  of  Church-membership,  the  backslider  is  self-detected.  Oh  the
upbraiding  days  that  are  no  morel  Oh,  reproaching  light  of  the  irrevocable  years  1
Now  he  has  sinned  away  the  light,  has  grieved  out  of  his  heart  the  joy  of  the  Lord,
"  The  lot  fell  upon  Jonah,"  and  he  was  detected.

II.  Jonah  detected  bt  the  sailors'  many  questions.  "Thine  occupation?"
A  prophet  1  But  so  faithless  to  the  prophetic  call,  so  unworthy  of  the  prophetic  name  1
"  Whence  comest  thou?"  From  Gath-hepher;  from  high,  if  perilous,  mission  to  Nineveh,
seeking,  as  he  tells  them,  to  flee  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  to  escape  (how  gviilty  I
how  futile  1)  from  the  great  universal  presence.  "  What  thy  country  ?  "  The  land
of  privilege,  the  Holy  Land !  "  Of  what  people  art  thou  ?  "  Of  the  people  of  God,  the
people  chosen  to  be  the  depository  of  the  Divine  truth,  and  the  witnesses  to  the  Divine
character.  Questions  these  to  go  home.  Backslider,  "  what  thine  occupation  "  ?  You
have  been,  it  may  be,  a  Christian  worker,  a  teacher  of  the  young,  a  speaker  of  the
truth.  And  not  now.  Why  not?  "Whence  comest  thou?"  From  a  ^ious  early
home?  From  scenes  of  Christian  activity  and  service  that  miss  you,  thai  know  you
no  more?  "What  thy  country,  thy  people?"  A  citizen  of  this  Christian  country,
with  such  opportunities  to  he  a  Christian  man  and  to  do  Christ's  work  among  men,
and  yet  you  act  as  if  gospel  light  had  never  shone  to  you,  as  if  the  news  of  salvation
had  never  sounded  in  your  ears.

III.  Jonah  detected  by  the  bailors'  unanswerable  question.  "Why  hast
thou  done  this?"  was  the  question  that  pierced  deepest  of  all.  It  was  unanswered.
Jonah  could  not  attempt  excuses,  and  reason  for  bis  flight  there  was  none.  Backshder,
tmce  you  could  find  time  for  Christian  service;  you  had  joy  in  it;  you  were  a  blessing;
you  were  blest.  Not  so  now.  You  have  withdrawn  from  Christian  work.  "  Why
hast  thou  done  this  ?  "  What  valid  reason  can  you  give  ?  Once  you  were  in  fellow-
■hip  with  God's  people.  Not  so  now.  The  world's  spell  is  on  you.  You  are  intent
on  making  a  position,  pushing  the  fortune  of  your  family ;  pleasure  is  your  pursuit,
ambition  youi  aim.    But  were  you  not  happier  in  the  former  days  tlum  in  these  T


OK.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  85

"Why  hast  thou  done  this?  "  Once  you  tasted  that  the  Lord  was  gracious ;  now  you
are  far  out  on  the  godless,  reckless  deep,  where  there  is  no  peace.  Why  is  thit?
"  Speechless  "  you  must  be.    For  such  guilty  flight  reason  there  can  be  none. — Q.  T.  0.

Vers.  11 — ^16. — Tht  sailort'  conduct.  Look  at  those  swarthy  saUors.  They  were
among  Jonah's  teachers ;  they,  too,  may  be  among  onrs.  From  age  to  age  in  this
chapter  they  sail  the  sea — Jonah's  friends ;  ours  also  if  we  will  let  them  be,  having
much  to  say  to  us  if  we  have  but  ears  to  hear.    Mark —

I.  Thbib  revekbncb.  There  is  nothing  rough  and  rude  about  them.  The  storm
has  subdued  them.  What  they  hear  from  Jonah  affects  them.  Is  it  not  the  hour  of
their  conversion?  They  cease  from  idolatry  and  worship  Jehovah.  Hearing  of  Jehovah
as  God  of  heaven,  earth,  and  sea,  they  were  "  exceedingly  afraid."  He  must  indeed  be
the  Lord !  And  that  Jonah  should  have  sought  to  flee  from  him  I  "  What  shall  we
do  unto  thee  ?  "  they  ask ;  for  through  Jonah  they  would  learn  the  will  of  Ood  con-
cerning him.  They  have  no  grudge  against  him,  no -scorn  for  him,  no  words  of  insult,
no  deed  of  violence.  They  reverence  his  God,  and  so  show  kindness  to  him.  A  pattern
in  this  to  us.  Have  we  an  offending  brother — one  who  has  offended  us?  Let  us  wrong
not  ourselves,  nor  wrong  him,  the  better  man  in  him,  by  bitterness.  The  wrong-doer
will  have  self-reproach  enough,  bitter  memories  enough.

II.  Theib  self-dbnyino  OBNER08ITT.  Those  sailors  did  what  they  could  to  save
the  prophet.  When  Jonah  was  at  his  best  they  were  at  their  best.  His  unselfishness
called  out  theirs;  their  nobility  answered  to  his.  Thus  is  it  ever.  Be  kind,  pure,
generous,  and  you  will  help  others  to  show  kindness,  and  to  be  pure  and  generous.
What  inspiration  is  there  in  goodness  1  Supremely  is  this  seen  in  otir  blessed  Lord.
What  an  encouragement  to  copy  him  that  we  may  quicken  others  I

"Honour  to  those  whose  words  or  deed«
Thus  help  UB  in  our  daily  needs.
And  by  their  overflow
Baise  us  from  what  is  low.''

ni.  Thbib  peatehfulness.  As  heathens  they  had  "  given  themselves  to  prayw.""
Hearing  of  Jehovah,  they  pray  to  him.  They  cannot  save  Jonah ;  but  before  they  do
the  deprecated  deed  "  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  " — all  of  them,  earnest,  importunate.
They  recognized  God  in  this  series  of  events;  they  would  be  submissive  to  him ;  they
would  be  clear  of  this  man's  blood ;  they  would  take  no  step  without  prayer.  Npr  let
us.  Let  it  be  the  "  key  of  the  morning  and  the  bolt  of  the  night."  When  have  we
not  requests  to  offer?  needs  to  be  supplied?    When  do  we  not  need  Godf

IV.  Theib  oodlt  feab  attested.  At  the  sight  of  the  sudden  great  calm  "  the
men  feared  the  Lord  exceedingly."  Their  fear,  their  faith,  evidenced  itself.  By  "  a
sacrifice  unto  the  Lord"  they  expressed  in  act  thankfulness  for  the  past  and  present;
by  their  "  vows,"  their  resolution  of  service  in  the  time  to  come.  As  from  themselves
must  have  come  the  knowledge  of  the  sacrifice  offered  and  vows  made,  we  may  believe
that  that  sacrifice  to  Jehovah  was  the  first  of  many,  and  that  the_  vows  made  were
paid ;  otherwise  they  had  not  cared  to  have  remembered  or  spoken  of  them.  In  these
days  of  Christian  light  may  we  offer  a  daily  sacrifice  of  our  time,  means,  faculty,
influence,  to  him  who  for  us  "even  dared  to  die,"  and  in  his  strength  perform  the  many
vows  that  we  have  made. — Q.  T.  0.

Ver.  17— ch.  ii.  10. — Jonah's  "  De  profundis.''  Here  the  prophet  is,  as  he  is  called  in
the  Koran,  "  the  man  of  the  fish."  God  had  pity  on  him,  and  sent  him  into  an  awful
school-house  that  he  might  "  come  to  himself."  A  strange  character  was  his,  and  a
•trange  chastisement  came  upon  him.  God's  power  was  his  keeper — his  power  "  who
hath  a  bridle  for  the  lips  of  every  disease,  and  a  hook  for  the  nostrils  of  death,"  The
external  history  of  the' man  through  that  imprisonment  is  unwritten.  Not  so  the
history  of  his  heart.

I.  See  Jonah  at  pbateb.  He  had  slept  in  the  ship ;  he  is  awake  in  the  fish.  He
prays ;  he  feels  his  misery ;  ho  sees  his  sin.  The  man  is  awake.  In  the  terrible  dark-
ness of  adversity  he  longs  for  the  light  of  the  Lord.  In  what  solitude  was  he  1  Far
from  light  of  day,  human  voices,  human  sympathy.    Yet  there  he  could  pray.    We  can


86  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh,  L 1—17

pray  anywhere.  Jeremiah  could  pray  in  the  miry  pit,  Daniel  in  the  lions'  den,  and
Jonah  in  the  fish  amid  the  paths  of  the  sea£<.  lie  was  in  sad  and  extreme  case.  He
was  as  a  dead  man  out  of  mind ;  yet  he  can  pray.  What  distress  is  ours?  Our  hopes
may  he  "  ready  to  perish."  But  think  of  Jonah !  Ee  could  have  recourse  to  prayer.
So  can  we.  The  greatest  of  all  was  Jonah's  Friend.  In  losing  his  liberty  he  has  found
his  God.  He  prays  "unto  the  Lord  his  God."  "0  Lord  my  God"  (ver.  6),  he  cries.
We,  too,  have  the  greatest  of  all  as  our  Friend.  None  need  despair  with  such  a  Helper.
IL  Jonah's  prater  was  a  cry.  Whether  a  vocal  cry  or  not,  it  was  the  cry  of  his
soul.  In  this  second  chapter  we  have  a  well-arranged  prayer.  If  not  the  exact  order,
we  have  heie  the  substance  of  the  requests  he  cried  unto  the  Lord.  What  agony  and
horror  may  he  in  a  human  cry  I  In  cries  from  the  sta  when  perishing  men  call  for  a
lifehoat  1  Jonah  cried  to  Ood.  What  tears  in  his  words  I  what  distress  in  his  tones  I
What  hope  for  him,  as  "out  of  the  belly  of  hell"  (the  unseen  world,  the  place  of  the
dead)  he  cried?  Already  he  seemed  numbered  with  the  dead.  The  sense  of  God's  dis-
pleasure was  the  soul  of  his  afBictidn.  "  All  thy  billows  and  waves  passed  over  me."  Was
GoAfaDOurahlytheie?  "  I  said,  1  am  cast  out  of  thy  sight."  That  was  the  pang.  He  had
sought  to  escape  God's  presence ;  now  he  mourned  the  Divine  absence.  He  had  no  enjoy-
ment in  his  prayer,  yet  it  was  accepted.   The  prayer  of  agony  ends  in  the  voice  of  singing.

III.  Jonah's  prater  was  one  op  faith.  "I  will  look  again,"  he  said — mentally
look  again — "  toward  thy  holy  temple."  How  much  the  "  temple"  included — the  Law,
worship,  sacrifices  I  towards  these  he  looked,  and  thus  overcame  his  fears.  Down  there,
in  those  depths,  in  that  living  tomb,  by  that  "look"  this  man  becomes  one  of  the
heroes  of  faith.  He,  too,  like  a  prince  prevailed.  That  look  was  seen.  God  was
pleased  with  it,  and  accepted  it.  Still  God  sees  a  look  when  the  soul  is  in  it.  Though
no  word  be  spoken,  we  can  look  unto  him  and  be  saved.

IV.  Jonah's  prayer  was  one  of  thankfulness.  In  this  prayer  he  recalls  and
makes  his  own  words  from  the  Book  of  Psalms.  Some  of  the  old  cries  of  David  became
the  new  cries  of  Jonah.  And,  marvellously  preserved,  his  prayer  was  praise ;  and,  in
view  of  his  deliverance,  he  vowed  unto  the  Lord.  And  his  vow  was  kept.  The  very
subsequent  writing  of  this  chapter  warrants  our  belief  of  that.  And  what  of  the  vows
toe  have  made  in  times  of  peril ?  "  Vow  and  pay."  Say,  "I  have  opened  my  mouth
unto  the  Loid,  and  I  cannot  go  back."

V.  Jonah's  prayer  was  one  of  utter  dependence  on  God.  Such  was  his  spirit,
such  his  prayer.  With  "  salvation  is  of  the  Lord  "  it  ended.  -And  by  that  he  seems
to  have  meant  that  he  left  all  with  God.  He  was  in  the  best  hands.  In  his  own  time
and  way  God  would  save  him.  If  he  will,  creatures  will  act  contrary  to  their  natures,
as  did  this  fish  in  not  hurting  Jonah.  It  God  had  "prepared"  or  appointed ;  and  now
its  work  was  done,  the  prophet  penitent,  saved  not  only  from  death,  but  also  from  trusting
in  "  lying  vanity,"  "  the  deceitful  promise  of  his  own  will  and  his  own  way,"  no  lonfrer
"  forsaking  his  own  mercy,"  even  God,  but  cleaving  to  him.  Now  "  the  Loid  spake
unto  the  fish,  and  it  vomited  Jonah  upon  the  dry  land."  And  the  prophet  is  a  saved  man
— saved  body  and  soul,  the  word,  his  creed  and  Te  Deum,  upon  his  lips,  "  Salvation  is
of  the  Lord."  Still,  "  he  must  save,  and  he  alone."  Jesus,  and  no  other,  "  shall  save
his  people  from  their  sins." — G.  T.  0.

Ver,  17  with  cb.  ii.  10;  iii.  3  (cf.  Matt.  xii.  39 — 41). — Jonah  a  prophetic  lign  of
Christ.  I.  In  both  we  see  a  marked  judgment  of  God.  The  storm,  the  detec-
tion, the  punishment,  were  all  from  God.  Jonah  was  the  sinner  on  hoard.  Christ,
"  without  sin,"  "  became  sin  for  us."  He  suffered  at  the  hands  of  wicked  men  ;  yet
"  the  Lord  laid  on  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  "  He  was  wounded  for  our  transgres-
sion." 'I'he  vast  world-vessel  went  plunging  on  to  destruction,  the  storm  unappeased
while  the  sin  was  unpunished.    On  I —    ■

**  When  lo  I  npon  the  reeling  deck  a  weary  stranger  stands.
And  to  the  dark  devoted  orew  stretohes  his  suppliant  hands:
From  the  face.of  God,  from  the  face  of  God,  from  the  face  of  God  ye  flee ;
'Tis  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  that  shakes  this  stormy  sea.
But  take  ye  me  and  cast  me  into  the  troubled  deep.
And  the  wrath  that  is  roused  against  you  will  be  pacified,  and  sleep."

Fes,  ht  is  our  Peace!     "  For  the  transgression  of  my  people  was  he  stricken."


OH.  1.1-17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  37

II.  Jonah,  ik  his  burial,  was  a  sion  of  Christ.  Very  unlike  was  the  «ea-mon8ter
bearing  away  the  prophet  to  the  rook-tomb  that  received  the  body  of  our  Lord ;  yet  in
this  they  were  alike,  that  they  had  been  wnused  as  tombs  before.  Prepared  were  both
for  the  event  that  has  made  both  eternally  memorable.  "  The  Lord  had  prepared  "  the
fish.  Joseph,  unwittingly  acting  out  the  Divine  purpose,  had  prepared  the  rook-hewn
tomb.  He  may  have  meant  it  for  himself.  God  meant  it  for  his  Son.  This  Isaiah  had
foretold :  "  He  made  his  grave  with  the  rich."  The  time  of  Jonah's  and  our  Lord's
burial  agreed.  So  our  Lord's  resurrection  on  the  third  day  was  "according  to  the
Scriptures" — to  his  own  word,  and  his  predictive  type.  Jonah,  cast  into  the  deep,
seemed  done  with.  An  end  of  him !  So,  to  many,  with  Christ,  when  the  loving  Marys
and  "  those  lords  of  high  degree  "  bore  him  to  the  tomb.  In  his  living  tomb  Jonah
miraculously  lived.  And  though  Christ's  body  was  dead,  where  was  he  1  Still  living ;
"  doing  good ;  "  preaching  the  glad  tidings  in  the  unseen  world  (1  Pet.  iii.  19).

III.  Jonah's  bbsuereotion  was  a  sign  of  Christ's..  God  "  spake  unto  the  fish,"
and  it  cast  the  living  prophet  to  the  shore.  So  "  God  raised  from  the  dead  "  the  Lord
Jesus.  Thus  he  reversed  the  marked  judgment  that,  in  suffering  and  death,  had  come
upon  his  Son.  He  was  now  "  highly  exalted  "  as  Prince  and  Saviour.  Moral  resurrec-
tions attest  Christ's.  "  Witnesses  to  Christ's  resurrection  "  are  all  saved  men  and  women.
They  are  "  risen  with  Christ ; "  and  by  his  Spirit  rise.

lY.  Jonah's  mission  to  thb  Gentiles  was  a  type  of  Christ's.  Jonah  was  sent  to
the  Ninevites.  Christ  arose  to  be  a  Saviour  "  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth."  To
all  nations.  For  every  creature.  His  mission— by  many  voices  and  ministers — is  going
on.  Its  continuance  declares  his.  Its  moral  victories — over  iguoranbe,  superstition,
sin — attest  his  royal  and  almighty  power.  "  All  power  hath  been  given  unto  me."
JotMh  himself,  raised  from  such  a  grave,  was  the  sign  to  the  Ninevites.  Christ  is  the
Sign  of  Christianity.  Often,  alas  I  spoken  against  and  rejected.  Happy  those — only
those — who  accept  and  glory  in  him  1— G.  T.  0.

Vers.  1, 2. — 77ie  call  of  Jonah.  We  may  fairly  identify  Jonah,  the  son  of  Amittai,  with
the  prophet  who  preached  in  Israel  during  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II.  (see  2  Kings  xiv.
23 — 27).  His  name  signifies  "  a  Dove,"  and  it  well  expressed  his  mournful  and  brooding
temperament.  Amittai  means  "  the  Truth  of  God,"  and  it  has  been  wisely  said  by  a
great  Puritan  divine,  "  I  would  that  truth  were  every  preacher's  father."  The  narra-
tive is  exceedingly  simple,  and  the  Hebrew  remarkably  pure ;  while  the  lessons  taught
by  the  book  are  of  profound  significance,  and  far  in  advance  of  those  we  might  have
expected  in  that  age  of  the  world's  history.  The  revelation  of  God's  infinite  goodness
shines  radiantly  throughout.  1.  He  was  merciful  to  the  Ninevites,  who  were  regarded
as  being  outside  the  covenant ;  but  were  warned,  converted,  and  saved.  2.  He  was
merciful  to  Jonah,  not  cursing  him  for  his  wilful  disobedience,  but  preserving  him
from  peril  into  which  his  own  foolish  precipitancy  had  plunged  him ;  graciously  giving
him  a  new  commission  in  spite  of  his  failure;  teaching  him  gently,  after  a  sinful  out-
burst of  temper ;  and  closing  the  narrative  of  his  life  by  a  question  of  infinite  tenderness.
3.  He  was  merciful  to  the  sailors,  who  had  been  heathen  all  their  lives,  but  who,  on
taming  towards  him,  fonnd  his  deliverance  near  and  complete.

L  The  pbophbt's  call.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Jonah."  1.  It  was  a
Divine  caU.  Without  it  no  service  should  ever  be  attempted ;  with  it  no  service  should
be  avoided.  To  go  and  preach  to  Nineveh  would  never  have  arisen  as  a  conception  of
duty  in  the  heart  of  a  patriotic  Israelite  in  those  days.  The  generosity  of  the  thought
was  Divine,  not  human.  We,  too,  should  listen  for  the  words  of  our  God,  and  wait  for
his  commission.  If  we  are  true  Israelites,  we  shall  not  precede  the  cloud,  but  follow  it.
The  attitude  of  those  who  would  be  true  prophets  should  be  that  of  Samuel,  when  he
said,  "  Speak,  Lord;  for  thy  servant  heareth."  2.  It  was  a  secret  call.  Jonah  was  not
commissioned  by  courtiers,  or  by  ecclesiastics,  or  by  a  popular  assembly.  Probably  his
proposed  expedition  was  unknown  to  all  of  these.  It  is  a  frequent  experience  with  a
Christian  to  get  instruction  as  to  what  he  should  do,  when  he  enters  into  the  closet,
shuts  to  the  door,  and  prays  to  the  Father  who  seeth  in  secret.

II.  The  prophet's  sphere.  Nineveh  was  at  this  time  in  the  zenith  of  its  glory.
Rich,  corrupt,  and  godless,  it  was  the  centre  and  focus  of  eviL  1.  The  sphere  was
dangerous.    Even  in  these  gentler  times,  and  amidst  more  phlegmatic  people,  moral


38  THE  DOOK  OF  JONAIL  [oh.  l  1—17.

courage  is  required  by  those  who  rebuke  popular  sins.  But  an  Bagtern  mob  would
be  likely  to  handle  very  roughly  any  foreigner  who  dared  to  threaten  their  city  for  its
sins.  Jonah  had  no  fear  of  this,  however,  and  so  far  sets  a  noble  example  of  heroism.
2.  Th»  iph&rt  wai  uncongenial.  These  Ninevites  were  dreaded  and  hated  by  the
people  of  Israel.  Even  under  the  Christian  dispensation  we  see  frequent  evidences  of
national  jealousy  and  antipathy,  which  prevent  willingness  to  benefit  other  nations ;
and  many  a  man  would  be  rebuked  as  unpatriotic  who  earnestly  sought  the  well-being
of  foreigners.  How  much  more  intense  was  such  a  feeling  under  the  former  dispensa-
tiunl  But  God  had  room  in  his  Fatherly  heart  for  other  peoples  besides  the  race  he
had  chosen  for  a  peculiar  purpose.  Whenever  the  elect  nation  came  into  contact  with
others,  God  gave  to  those  others  some  revelatbm  of  himself.  He  revealed  himself  to
the  Egyptians  through  Joseph  and  Moses ;  to  the  Philistines,  through  the  sacred  ark ;
to  the  Assyrians,  through  Elisha;  and  to  Nebuchadnezzar  and  Belshazzar,  through
Daniel.  Those  who  are  inspired  by  God's  Spirit  overlook  the  barriers  of  race.  The
apostles  did  so,  and  were  glad  that  God  had  given  even  to  the  Gentiles  repentance  unto
life.  Personal  prejudices  and  dislikes  may  also  sometimes  hinder  us  in  carrying  on
our  divinely  appointed  work.  Let  us  pray  for  willing  minds  and  obedient  hearts,  that
uncongenial  sphere*  may  be  bravely  filled.

III.  The  prophxt's  dutt.  1.  lie  was  to  denounce  the  wickednesi  of  the  people.
Both  Nahum  and  Zephaniah  refer  to  the  sins  of  Nineveh.  Its  inhabitants  were  luxurious,
riotous,  addicted  to  witchcraft,  cruel,  and  idolatrous.  Sins  vary  in  form,  but  not  in
nature.  The  vices  of  our  own  time  we  should  specially  denounce  with  unsparing
courage.  2.  Ee  was  to  proclaim  the  nearness  of  Ood.  They  knew  not  the  truth  revealed
to  Jonah :  "  Their  wickedness  is  come  up  before  me."  Similar  was  the  statement  made
about  the  murder  of  Cain  and  the  sin  of  Sodom.  God  sets  all  our  sins  in  the  light  of
his  countenance.  3.  He  was  to  announce  a  coming  judgment.  "  Yet  forty  days,  and
Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown"  (ch.  iii.  4).  4.  He  was  to  be  ready  to  receive  and  convey
every  message  God  gave  him.  "  Preach  unto  it  the  preaching  that  I  bid  thee."  This
should  be  the  constant  attitude  of  all  religious  teachers. — A.  B.

Ver.  3. — The  prophets  disobedience.  Scripture  never  seeks  to  palliate  the  sins  of  the
saints,  but  reveals  them  in  all  their  wickedness.  Jonah's  disobedience  is  exhibited  in
the  strongest  light,  as  being  resolute  and  prompt,  following  immediately  on  the  Divine
command.  He  had  been  told  to  make  his  way  to  Nineveh,  which  lay  north-east  of  his
hume,  and  he  instantly  started  in  the  opposite  direction,  being  determined  to  go  as  far
west  as  he  could.  He  "  went  down  "  from  the  mountain  district  of  Zebulun,  where  he
lived, "  to  Joppa  " — now  known  as  Jaffa,  a  port  on  the  Mediterranean.  There  he  found
a  vessel  on  the  point  of  sailing  for  Spain,  which  was  much  larger  and  safer  than  the
ordinary  coasters,  as  we  may  judge,  not  only  from  the  length  of  the  voyage  undei  taken,
but  from  such  a  verse  as  this :  "  Thou  breakest  the  ships  of  Tarshish  with  an  east
wind  ; "  the  destruction  of  these  great  vessels  by  storm  being  evidently  considered  a
special  proof  of  Divine  power.  Tarshish  was  an  ancient  city  of  Spain,  proverbial  for
its  wealth,  and  was  the  exporter  to  Tyre,  to  Jud»a,  and  other  lands,  of  silver,  iron,  tin,
and  lead.  It  was  known  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans  as  Tartessus.  In  that  distant
place,  mingling  with  the  crowds  which  thronged  its  streets,  occupied  by  the  fresh
strange  scenes  which  would  surround  him,  Jonah  hoped  to  escape  from  his  duty  and  to
drown  the  voice  of  conscience.  His  folly  and  sin  are  suggestive  of  warning  to  all  who
are  tempted  to  disobey  their  God.

I.  Many,  lieb  Jonah,  flee  fbom  the  way  in  which  God  would  hats  them
GO.  The  expression,  "  to  flee  .  .  .  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,"  should  be  rendered
"  to  flee  .  .  .  from  being  before  the  Lord,"  i.e.  from  standing  in  his  presence  as  hii
servant.  Jonah  knew  perfectly  well  that  he  would  never  be  beyond  the  reach  of  God's
sight  and  power.  The  truths  celebrated  in  Ps.  cxxxix.  he  sincerely  believed.  But  he
resolved  no  longer  to  act  as  God's  messenger  and  prophet.  He  felt  sure  that  his  message
of  warning  was  meant  to  bring  Nineveh  to  repentance,  and  that  then  the  merciful  God
would  spare  the  city,  which,  with  far-seeing  prescience,  the  prophet  perceived  would  be
the  destroyer  of  his  country.  If  the  sins  of  its  inhabitants  were  so  great,  they  deserved
to  die;  and  if  their  growing  power  was  shattered,  he  cared  not  how,  a  threatening
danger  would  be  averted  from  his  ualive  land.     Just  as  some  Englishmen,  jealous  of


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAa  89

the  rising  power  of  the  United  States,  would  not  have  lifted  a  finger  to  avert  its  destruc-
tion in  the  late  ciril  war,  so  Jonah  felt  about  Nineveh.  He  determined  that  he  at  least
would  not  be  the  messenger  to  avert  its  destruction ;  so  he  fled  as  far  as  he  could  from
the  appointed  sphere.  Examples  of  similar  conduct  are  to  be  seen  amongst  us.  1.  God
calls  men  to  private  prayer.  They  hear  of  its  benefits;  they  are  conscious  that  it  is  a
duty  and  a  privilege.  Yet  they  avoid  solitude,  or  they  plunge  into  an  interesting  book,
or  they  yield  themselves  to  sleep,  just  when  the  opportunity  comes  for  praying  to  the
Father  who  seeth  in  secret.  2.  Ood  calls  men  to  his  service.  The  work  requires  to  be
done,  but  they  shut  their  eyes  to  it,  or  they  leave  it  to  others,  or  so  absorb  their  time  in
business  that  God's  service  is  neglected.  3.  Ood  calls  m,en  to  give  themselves  to  him.
At  times  they  are  almost  persuaded  to  be  Christians.  But  they  leave  the  sphere  in
which  good  influences  surround  them,  and  wander  away  into  the  far  country  as  the
prodigal  did.

11.  It  IB  NOT  ALWAYS  BAST  TO  AVOID  THE  GoD-APPOiNTBD  WAT.  Jonah  felt  that  he
could  not  remain  where  he  was.  He  wished  to  divert  his  mind  by  travel,  and  to  make
it  so  difficult  to  journey  to  Nineveh  that  he  could  quiet  his  conscience  in  Tarshish  by
saying,  "  The  distance  is  too  great."  Money,  time,  and  trouble  were  necessary  to  his
disobedience.  Every  wrong-doer  has  had  some  such  experience.  Around  most  of  us
God  mercifully  puts  a  protecting  hedge  of  holy  influences,  which  it  is  difficult  and
painful  to  break  through.  Those  who  are  brought  up  in  Christian  homes  do  not  flnd
it  easy  to  snap  the  bonds  of  love  which  have  held  them,  and  to  get  rid  of  the  sacred
memories  of  a  hopeful  childhood.  They  feel  shocked  and  ashamed  when  they  first
witness  scenes  of  vice  and  hear  words  of  evil.  Doubts  and  fears  trouble  them,  especially
at  the  beginning  of  a  downward  course,  though  all  too  soon  they  learn  even  to  rejoice
in  iniquity.  All  such  feelings  and  associations  are  among  the  Ood-appointed  means  for
saving  us  from  sin.

III.  God  does  hot  eesistlesslt  stop  thosk  who  abb  dbtbemined  to  go  wbono.
Jonah  had  no  accident  on  his  journey  down  to  Joppa.  He  found  the  very  ship  he
wanted  at  anchor  in  the  harbour.  He  paid  the  fare  and  embarked  for  his  destination,
and  when  the  anchors  were  raised  and  the  vessel  sailed  out  to  sea,  he  felt  that  he  had
nothing  more  to  do  but  wait,  while  the  breeze  that  filled  the  sails  would  soon  carry  him
to  a  distant  land.  Those  who  mean  to  leave  the  ways  of  unrighteousness  do  not  meet
with  insuperable  difficulties.  They  may  be  sometimes  troubled  with  self-reproach,  but
meantime  outward  circumstances  may  appear  even  to  favour  their  downward  progress.
If  only  they  can  stifle  convictions  and  oast  scruples  to  the  winds  while  they  resolutely
make  their  way  to  scenes  of  gaiety  and  sin,  God  will  work  no  miracle  to  prevent  them.
And  the  time  may  come  when  even  the  inward  monitor  is  silent ;  for  God's  voice  has
been  heard  saying,  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  his  idols :  let  him  alone." — A.  B.

Vers.  4 — 6. — The  Divine  interposition.  When  man  forsakes  God,  he  who  is  infinite
in  mercy  does  not  forsake  man.  No  sooner  had  Adam  fallen  than  Divine  love  planned
a  scheme  of  redemption.  Through  all  the  ages  the  voice  of  God  has  been  summoning
men  to  repentance ;  and  in  the  fulness  of  time  his  only  begotten  Son  came  to  seek  and
to  save  that  which  was  lost.  He  deals  as  lovingly  with  individuals  as  with  the  race.
Jonah  was  an  example  of  this.  Had  a  favourable  voyage  taken  him  to  his  destination,
or  had  a  sudden  tempest  drowned  him  in  the  depths  of  the  sea,  we  should  only  have
known  of  him  as  a  disobedient  prophet.  But  God  dealt  mercifully  with  him.  He  sent
a  tempest  which  aroused  him  from  lethargy,  brought  his  sin  before  him  through  the
remonstrances  of  heathen,  provided  for  him  a  means  of  escape,  and  gave  him  •  new
commission  as  his  servant.     These  are  the  facts  we  should  now  consider.

L  God  sometimes  sends  a  btobm  to  abottsb  a  wbono-dobr.  On  entering  the
ship,  Jonah  went  below  deck ;  partly,  no  doubt,  to  avoid  curious  inquiries,  and  partly
to  rest  after  the  long  and  hurried  journey  he  had  taken.  Soon  he  sank  into  a  heavy
sleep-^fit  emblem  of  the  lethargy  of  sin.  The  tempest,  or  rather  its  effect  on  the
sailors,  aroused  him.  Many  have  experienced  tempests  within  or  in  their  outward  life
which  have  led  them  afterwards  to  say,  "  He  restoreth  my  soul."  Anxieties  have  been
BO  terrible,  that  in  an  agony  the  convicted  have  cried,  "  Lord,  save,  or  I  perish."  111-
nesi  has  come  so  suddenly,  and  death  has  seemed  so  near,  that  the  awakened  soul  has
asked,  "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "    The  forsaking  of  friends,  the  death  of  rela .


40  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  1. 1—17

tiveg,  the  failure  of  businesB,  hare  been  employed  by  God  again  and  again  to  arouse
moral  thoughtfnlness,  and  save  the  soul  from  destruction.  Let  us  learn  the  lesson*
which  such  tempests  can  teach  us.  "What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper?  Arise,  and  call
upon  thy  God,  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us,  that  we  perish  not."

II.  God  employs  unlikely  agbnts  to  bbinq  a  wbonq-doee  to  bepektaitck.  The
manwho  uttered  the  words  just  quoted  was  a  heathen  shipmaster,  whom  a  Jew  would
despise  as  a  Geutile  dog  or  as  an  ignorant  idolater.  Yet  but  for  him  Jonah  might
have  slept  on  till  the  vessel  foundered .  It  has  often  been  so.  Naaman,  the  distinguished
Syrian  general,  was  taught  by  a  slave-girl.  David  was  instructed  by  Abigail.  The
Pharisees  and  scribes  were  rebuked  by  the  hosannas  of  little  children  in  the  temple.
God  chooses  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise,  and  weak  things  to
destroy  things  which  are  mighty.  If  we  see  no  reason  for  fear  or  for  seriousness  in  the
tempest  of  life,  he  may  arouse  us  by  means  we  despise.  A  single  phrase  in  a  sermon
which  is  far  from  eloquent,  a  leaflet  or  tract  without  any  pretension  to  literary  charm,
an  earnest  word  from  an  inferior  in  rank  or  education,  the  trustfiil  prayer  of  a  lisping
child, — may  be  used  of  God,  as  was  the  summons  which  came  to  Jonah  from  a  super-
stitious heathen.

III.  A   MAN    MAY  BE  IN   GBEAT  DANGEB  WITHOUT  BEING  CONSCIOUS  OT  IT.      Jonah

slept.  Perhaps  he  dreamed  of  happier  days  and  of  distant  scenes.  These  teemed  re*l
to  him,  but  the  realities  actually  around  him — the  storm,  the  ship,  the  sailors — were  as
if  they  did  not  exist.  He  did  not  know  his  danger,  and  had  forgotten  in  sleep  his  sad
disobedience.  Even  to  the  sailors  his  sleep  seemed  the  result  of  infatuation  or  of  sense-
lessness, and  they  asked  (not, "  What  meanest  thou  ?  "), "  What  aileth  thee,  0  sleeper  ?  "
—as  if  there  was  something  abnormally  wrong  with  him,  as  indeed  there  was.  But
more  strange,  more  fatal,  is  the  sleep  in  which  so  many  lie  who  believe  themselves  to
be  awake.  Shrewd  in  business,  eager  in  pleasure-seeking,  successful  in  study,  all  that
they  see  appears  for  the  time  to  be  the  only  reality.  But,  like  Jonah,  they  are  in  dream-
land. Heaven  and  hell,  death  and  judgment,  an  enemy  of  souls,  and  a  Saviour  from
sin,  are  recognized  by  others,  not  by  them.  Urge  all  such  to  awake,  and  arise  from  the
dead,  that  Christ  may  give  them  light.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time ;  now  is  the  day
of  salvation,"

IV.  God's  way  of  salvation  is  the  only  one.  It  was  useless  for  the  sailors  to
row  bard  in  the  hope  of  bringing  the  ship  to  land,  and  equally  useless  for  them  to  cast
the  cargo  overboard.  There  was  no  safety  for  them  or  for  Jonah  except  by  the  way
ordained  by  God.  Strange  as  it  seemed  to  them  and  to  us,  Jonah,  in  all  his  sinfulness
and  helplessness,  was  to  be  cast  into  the  sea,  where  none  but  God  could  save  him.  If
the  story  has  no  other  lesson,  it  at  least  teaches  us  the  impotency  of  human  effort  to
battle  successfully  with  the  storms  of  life.  The  struggles  some  make  in  their  unaided
strength  to  win  salvation  are  vain  as  the  efforts  of  these  who  "  rowed  hard  to  bring  the
ship  to  land,"  The  endeavour  to  get  rid  of  besetting  sins  without  prayer  for  grace  is
as  ineffectual  as  the  casting  overboard  of  the  burden  in  the  ship.  A  simpler,  stranger,
means  of  salvation  is  provided  for  us.  As  Jonah  was  cast  helpless  and  alone  into  the
sea,  for  God  to  save  in  his  own  way,  so  we  are  called  to  such  implicit  trust  as  wit]
prompt  us  to  cast  ourselves  wholly  upon  Christ,  in  whom  we  shall  find  eternal  rest.
— A.  R.

Vers.  1 — 8. — God  speaking  to  man  in  mercy,  and  man  fleeing  from  God  in  disobedience,
"  Now  the  word  cf  the  Lord  came  unto  Jonah  the  son  of  Amittai,  saying.  Arise,  go  to
Nineveli,  that  great  city,  and  cry  against  it ;  for  their  wickedness  is  come  up  before
me."  This  is  a  strange  book.  It  is  not  the  record  of  a  dre^im,  nor  the  sketch  of  an
allegory,  but  the  history  of  a  man  written  by  himself.  True,  he  speaks  in  the  third
person ;  but  so  did  many  of  the  old  prophets,  so  did  the  Apostle  Paul,  and  so  have
many  great  men.  Intellectual  children  are  prone  to  use  the  personal  pronoun  I;  great
intellectual  men  prefer  writing  of  themselves  in  the  third  person.  Speeches  and  books
bristling  with  /are  generally  the  effusions  of  little  souls.  We  have  here  his  name  and
that  of  his  father,  the  one  signifying  "  Dove,"  and  the  other  "  the  Truth  of  God."
Names  of  old  were  sometimes  .commemorative,  sometimes  predictive.  Names  now
signify  little.  Men  by  great  and  noble  deeds  can,  and  often  do,  throw  into  the  com-
monest names  a  meaning  that  will  radiate  through  centuries.     In  these  words  we  hari


OH.  1. 1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  41

two  things  ~v7orthy  of  mttention — Gh)d  speaking  to  man  in  mercy,  and  man  fleeing  from
OkA  in  disobedience.

I.  QoD  SPEAKINS  TO  UAV  Ts  HiBOT.  1.  Here  he  ipeakt.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord.*
Hii  word  to  Jonah,  like  his  word  to  all  men,  was  dear,  Irie/,  wtiglity,  practical.
2.  Here  he  speaks  to  an  individual.  He  speaks  to  all  men  in  natvire,  conscience,
history ;  bat  in  sovereignty  he  singles  some  men  ont  for  special  communications.  In
times  past  he  spake  "  imto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets."  3.  Here  he  speaks  to  an
individual  for  the  sake  of  a  community.  "  Arise,  go  to  Nineveh,  that  great  city."
Why  does  God  call  it  a  "great"  city?  To  men  it  was  considered  "great" — great  in
numbers,  pomp,  pretensions,  masonry.  But  to  God  it  could  only  be  great  in  sin,  for
sin  ii  a  great  thing  to  God;  it  is  a  black  cloud  in  his  universe ;  it  is  the  "  abominable
thing  "  which  he  hates.  For  the  sake  of  this  city,  in  order  to  effect  its  moral  refor-
mation, and  therefore  to  save  it,  Jonah  receives  a  commission.  "  Arise,"  shake  off  thy
languor,  quit  thyself  for  action,  go  down  to  this  city,  and  "cry  against  it."  Be  earnest.
The  danger  is  great,  i^ear  at  hand,  and  appoaching  every  minute.  Observe  here  two
things^.  (1)  Man's  distinguishing  faculty.  What  is  that?  The  power  to  receive,  \o
appreciate,  and  to  loork  out  the  ideas  uf  the  In6nite.  No  other  creature  on  earth  has
this  power.  (2)  God's  method  of  helping  humanity.  God  enlightens,  purifies,  and
ennobles  man  by  man.     We  have  this  "  treasure  in  earthen  vessels."

n.  Man  fleeing  fbou  God  in  disobedibnob.  "  But  Jonah  rose  up  to  flee  unto  Tar-
shisb,  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord."  Here  is  a  threefold  revelation  of  man.  1.  His
moral  freedom.  God  did  not  coerce  Jonah,  did  not  drive  him  to  Nineveh.  He  merely
commanded  him  to  go,  and  Jonah  resisted  the  Divine  command.  Man  has  the  power  to
resist  God — a  greater  power  tbis  than  can  be  found  in  all  the  heavenly  orbs  or  in  the
whole  history  of  material  organisms.  This  power  invests  man  with  all  but  infinite
importance,  links  him  to  moral  government.  "  Te  do  always  resist  the  Spirit  of  God."
2.  His  daring  depravity.  He  dares  to  attempt  extricating  himself,  not  only  from  his
obligations  to  God,  but  from  his  very  "presence."  Alas!  men  have  not  merely  the
power  but  the  disposition  to  oppose  Gk>d.  This  is  their  guilt  and  their  ruin ;  it  is  what
men  are  doing  everywhere,  trying  to  break  the  shackles  of  moral  responsibility,  trying
ts  elude  the  Infinite.  3.  His  egregUms  folly.  See  the  folly.  His  endeavouring  to
escape  from  God  was:  (1)  Not  merely  an  impulse,  but  a  resolution.  Had  it  been' a
sudden  wish,  it  would  have  been  bad.  But  here  is  a  resolution.  He  "  rose  up."  He
rallied  and  marshalled  his  energies.  (2)  Not  merely  a  resolution,  but  an  effort.  He
"  went  down  to  Joppa."  The  probability  is  that  he  went  with  the  greatest  speed  to
Joppa — the  Jaffa  of  our  day.  Though  a  descent,  it  was  rather  a  long  journey,  and
woiJd  take  him  two  or  three  days.  When  he  reached  the  spot,  how  long  he  was  about
the  quays  in  search  of  a  suitable  vessel  I  (3)  Not  merely  an  effort,  but  a  persevering
effort.  It  was  not  one,  or  two,  or  three  spasmodic  efforts,  and  then  over.  He  continued
his  journey  frx)m  his  home  to  Joppa,  then  he  searched  on  the  quays  for  a  vessel ;  and
when  he  found,  as  he  thought,  a  suitable  vessel,  he  "  paid  the  fare  thereof."  Ahl  what
fares  men  pay  in  the  career  of  sin  1  And  when  he  had  paid  the  fare  thereof,  he  "  went
down  into  it,"  and  there  he  thought  himself  safe.  How  inexpressibly  foolish  was  all
this,  not  only  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  but  according  to  results  I  All  the  efforts,  as  the
sequence  shows,  not  only  proved  futile,  but  brought  him  to  the  utmost  distress.

CoNCLirsiON.  The  two  things  that  you  have  in  these  verses  are  always  going  on —
God  in  mercy  speaking  to  man,  and  man  in  terror  fleeing  from  God.  Oh,  how  wrong,
how  foolish,  the  attempt  to  flee  from  the  Infinite  I  "  Whither  shall  I  flee  from  thy
presence?"— D.  T.

Ver.  6. — A  rousing  voice  to  moral  sleepers.  "What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper?  arise,
«all  upon  thy  God,  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us,  that  we  perish  not."  The
incident  referred  to  in  the  text  is  this — Jonah  was  sent  to  Nineveh  on  a  mission  of
mercy,  sent  to  warn  the  corrupt  population  of  their  impending  doom,  and  to  call  them
to  immediate  repentance.  The  Divine  message  was  not  to  the  prophet's  mind ;  he  was
^pleasei^,  and  instead  of  going  direct  to  Nineveh,  he  went  down  to  Joppa,  and  found
a  ship  going  to  Tarshish.  He  paid  the  fare,  embarked,  and  hasted  away.  While  on
the  deep  a  terrible  tempest  arose.  "  The  Lord  sent  out  a  great  wind  into  the  sea,  and
there  was  a  mighty  tempest  in  the  sea,  so  that  the  ship  was  like  to  be  broken."     As


42  THE  BOOK   OF  JONAH.  [oh,  1. 1—17.

the  tempest  raged  Jonah  was  asleep,  "  fast  asleep."  So  the  shipmaster  came  to  him
and  Kud  unto  him,  "  What  meanest  thou,  0  sleeper  ?  "  etc.  Mural  indifferentUm  ii  the
curse  of  the  world.    Three  practical  appeals  to  the  morally  indifferent  are  suggested.

I.  Jonah  was  m  imminent  peril.  So  are  you.  It  is  said  that  the  ship  was
"  like  to  be  broken."  The  perils  of  shipwreck  have  often  been  graphically  depicted  ;
but  they  surpass  the  conceptions  of  all  but  those  who  have  struggled  in  their  ghastly
horrors.  But  what  are  the  perils  of  material  shipwreck  to  the  perils  of  a  corrupt  and
disobedient  soul  ?  To  have  the  body  buried  in  the  depths  of  the  ocean  is  a  trifle  com-
pared with  the  burial  of  the  soul  under  the  black,  booming  billows  of  moral  depravity
and  guilt.  The  buried  body  becomes  unconscious  of  its  position,  and  sleeps  itself  into
the  calm  bosom  of  its  niother  nature ;  but  the  soul  becomes  bumingly  conscious  of  its
terrible  situation,  and  struggles  in  vain  to  ri^e  from  the  abyss.  What  is  hell  ?  I  know
not.  I  want  no  rolling  thunders  of  Divine  vengeance,  no  material  fires  burning  on  for
ever,  to  impress  me  with  its  awfulness.  A  soul  buried  in  the  black  ocean  of  its  own
depravity,  with  a  conscience  intensely  alive  to  its  hopeless  condition,  stn^gling  in  vain
to  release  itself,  is  the  hell  of  all  hells.  Careless  sinner,  you  are  in  danger  of  this  hellt
Tour  moral  circumstances  will  soon  be  changed,  a  tempest  is  brooding,  it  increases
with  every  sin.  Every  star  in  your  heavens  will  soon  be  extinguished,  and  the  sea
on  which  you  are  now  gliding  along  will  be  lashed  into  fury  and  will  engulf  you  in
ruin.

II.  Jonah  was  xmcoNscions  or  his  peril.  So  are  you.  Whilst  the  tempest  was
raging  and  the  vessel  ready  to  sink,  he  was  "fast  asleep."  Carless  sinner,  you  are
unconscious  of  your  danger!  You  say  to  yourself,  "Peace,  peace,"  when  there  is  no
peace.  If  you  were  aware  of  your  position,  you  would  give  no  sleep  to  your  eyes,  no
slumber  to  your  eyelids.  1.  Jonah's  unconsciousness  was  foolish.  So  is  yours.  How
unwise  was  the  prophet  to  sleep  under  such  circumstances  I  He  should  have  been  on
deck,  alert,  all  ear  and  eye,  and  with  hands  ready  to  giapple  with  the  emergencies  of
the  terrible  hour.   But  your  folly  is  greater,  inasmuch  as  your  peril  is  more  tremendous.

2.  Jonah's  unconsciousness  was  wicked.  So  is  yours.  For  the  sake  of  his  companions
on  board,  he  ought  not  to  have  been  "  fast  asleep ; "  it  indicated  a  shameful  lack  of
interest  in  his  fellow-men.  Your  indifferentism  is  wicked.  You  ought  to  be  spiritually
alive  and  awake,  not  only  for  your  own  sake,  but  also  for  the  sake  of  those  around  you
who  are  in  similar  peril.

in.  Jonah  had  a  messenger  to  warn  him  or  his  peril.  So  have  you.  "  The
shipmaster  came  to  him,  and  safd  unto  him,  What  meanest  thoa,  0  sleeper?  arise,
call  upon  thy  God,  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us,  that  we  perish  not."  There
are  certain  points  of  analogy  between  this  "  shipmaster  "  and  the  godly  ministers  that
are  warning  you.  1.  He  believed  in  the  existence  and  power  of  Ood.  So  do  they.  "  Call
upon  thy  God,  if  so  be  that  God  will  think  upon  us."  Great  dangers  seldom  fail  to
strike  the  idea  of  God  into  the  hearts  of  men,  whatever  their  creed  or  character.  This
man  believed,  not  only  that  a  God  existed,  but  that  that  God  had  raised  a  tempest,  and
had  the  power  to  subdue  it.  The  Ohristly  men  that  warn  you  every  Sunday  from  the
pulpits  also  believe  in  this  God.  2.  'H.e  helieveiiu  the  efficacy  (f  human  prayer.  So  do
they.  The  shipmaster  said  to  Jonah,  "Call  upon  thy  God."  Whatsoever  speculative
scientists  may  say  about  prayer,  one  thing  is  clear — that  it  is  an  instinct  of  the  sou),  not  a
mere  doctrine  of  the  Bible ;  it  is  a  law  of  nature,  not  a  mere  ceremony  of  religion.  What
soul  does  not  pray  when  in  conscious  contact  with  overwhelming  dangers?  Your
ministers  believe  in  prayer ;  they  pray  for  you,  and  urge  you  to  pray  for  yourselves.

3.  He  believed  it  to6e  his  duty  to  sou/nd  the  warning.  So  do  they.  What  right  had  he
to  interfere  with  the  sleeping  prophet,  to  break  his  slumber,  and  to  summon  him  to
prayer  ?  The  instincts  of  nature  authorized  him,  nay,  bound  him  to  do  so.  Your  ministers
have  a  right  to  warn  you ;  they  are  bound  to  warn  you.  They  are  commanded  to  "  cry
aloud,  to  lift  up  their  voice  like  a  trumpet."  Do  you  say,  when  godly  men  speak  to
you  about  your  moral  condition,  "  What  business  have  they  to  interfere  ?  My  soul  is
my  own;  if  I  choose  to  throw  it  away,  what  matters  it  to  them?"  It  does  matter  to
them.  You  are  not  your  own,  you  are  not  an  isolated  unit,  you  are  a  member  of  the
spiiitual  universe;  you  have,  therefore,  no  right  to  be  dishonest,  corrupt,  ungodly,  and
throw  your  soul  away.  You  were  made  to  serve  the  universe,  not  to  curse  it ;  you
cannot  sin  without  injuring  others.    Every  true  man  is  bound  to  protest  against  your


OM.  n.  1—10.]


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


4»


conduct,  and  to  demand  from  you,  in  the  name  of  Qoi  and  this  nniverse,  an  tmmtdiat*
reformation.

CoHCLUBioN.  The  following  fact,  recorded  in  the  '  Biblical  Treasury/  ii  worthy  of
note  as  an  illustration  :  "  A  traveller  who  was  pursuing  his  journey  on  the  Scotch
coast,  was  thoughtlessly  induced  to  take  the  road  by  the  sands  as  the  most  agreeable.
This  road,  which  was  safe  only  at  low  tides,  lay  on  the  beach,  between  the  sea  and  the
lofty  cliffs  which  bound  the  coast.  Pleased  with  the  view  of  the  inroUing  waves  on  the-
one  hand  and  the  abrupt  and  precipitcut  rocks  on  the  other,  he  loitered  on  the  way,
unmindful  of  the  sea  which  was  gradually  encroaching  upon  the  intervening  sands.  A
man,  observing  from  the  lofty  cliffs  the  danger  he  wag  incurring,  benevolently  descended^
•nd  arresting  his  attention  by  a  loud  halloa,  warned  him  not  to  proceed.  '  If  you  pas»
this  spot,  you  will  lose  your  last  chance  of  escape.  The  tides  are  rising.  They  nav»
already  covered  the  road  you  have  passed,  and  they. are  near  the  foot  of  the  cliffs  before
you ;  and  by  this  ascent  alone  you  can  escape.'  The  traveller  disregarded  the  warning.
He  felt  sure  he  could  make  the  turn  in  the  coast  in  good  time ;  and,  leaving  his  volunteer
guide,  he  went  more  rapidly  on  his  way.  Soon,  however,  he  discovered  the  real  danger
of  his  position.  His  onward  journey  was  arrested  by  the  sea ;  he  turned  in  haste,  but
to  his  amazement  he  foimd  that  the  rising  waters  had  cut  off  his  retreat.  He  looked
up  to  the  cliffs ;  but  they  were  inaccessible.  The  waters  were  already  at  hii  feet.  He
sought  higher  ground,  but  was  soon  driven  off.  His  last  refuge  was  a  projecting  rock ;
but  the  relentless  waters  rose  higher  and  higher ;  they  reached  him ;  they  rose  to  hi*
neck ;  he  uttered  a  despairing  shriek  for  help,  but  no  help  was  near,  as  he  had  neglected
hit  last  opportunity  for  escape.  The  sea  closed  over.  It  was  the  closing  in  upon  him
of  the  night  of  death."— D.  T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XL


Vera.  1—10.— Part  II.  Jonah's  Pbatib

AND  DeLTVEBANOB.

Vers.  I — 9. — §  1.  Jonah,  in  the  beUj/  of
(he  fish,  offen  a  prayer  of  thanktgiving  for
hit  rescue  from  death  by  chrovming,  in  tehioh
he  teee  a  pledge  of  further  deliverance.

"Vex.  1. — Then  Jonah  prayed.  These  were
his  feelings  when  he  sank  in  the  waters  and
while  he  lay  in  his  mysterious  prison ;  he
may  have  put  them  into  their  metrical  form
after  his  deliverance.  The  grammatical
arrangement,  and  especially  the  language
of  ver.  7,  seem  to  speak  of  a  deliverance
already  experienced  rather  than  of  one
expected.  As  this  "  prayer  "  does  not  suit
an  allegory,  and  as  no  one  but  Jonah  could
have  known  its  substance,  we  have  here
an  argument  for  his  authorship.  It  is
rather  a  thanksgiving  than  a  prayer —
like  that  of  Hannah  (1  Sam.  ii.  1).  When
he  realizes  that  he  was  saved  from  drown-
ing, he  uttered  his  gratitude,  and  saw  that
he  might  hope  for  /urther  rescue.  How  he
passed  the  three  days  we  cannot  tell ;  some
have  thought  he  was  uaconseaous ;  but  this
is,  perhaps,  hardly  consistent  with  the  notice
of  his  "  praying,"  and  with  the  action  of  his
great  Antitype,  who,  during  his  sojourn  in
the  unseen  world,  "  preached  to  the  spirits
in  prison  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  19).    His  God.    He


acknowledges  Jehovah  as  his  God.  He  had
proved  himself  his  by  inspiration,  by  chas-
tisement, and  now  by  mercy  (Pusey).  The
following  prayer  contains  ample  remini-
scences of  the  Psalms,  which  would  be
familiar  to  a  devout  Israelite.  Those
quoted  are  mostly  what  have  been  con-
sidered to  belong  to  David's  time,  if  their
date  is  really  ascertained.  But  it  is  •
matter  of  controversy,  incapable  of  settle-
ment, whether  Jonah  or  the  psalmist  is  the
original.

Ver.  2. — He  introduces  the  prayer  with
the  fact  that  he  cried  to  God  in  distress  and
was  heard.  By  reason  of  mine  affliction;
better,  out  of  my  affliction.  This  may  be  •
reminiscence  of  Fs.  oxz.  1  or  Ps.  xviii.  6;
but  from  such  coincidences  nothing  can  be
established  concerning  the  date  of  the  book
Like  circumstances  call  forth  like  expres-
sions ;  and  the  writers  may  have  composed
them  quite  independently  of  one  another.
Hell  {BheoV).  The  unseen  world  (Ezek.  xxrii.
21).  He  was  as  though  dead  when  thus
engulfed  (oomp.  Ps.  xviii.  6).  Cried  I  (¥».
xxviii.  1,  2).  Thou  heardest  my  voice  (Ps,
cxxx.  1,  2).

Ver.  3. — He  describes  his  danger  and  dis-
tress. Thou  hadst  oast;  rather,  tAou  diilit
east,  the  sailors  being  the  agents  of  the
Divine  will.  Septuagint,  airi^^iifias.  The
deep  i  piOri,  "  depths  "  (Septuagint) ;  Eiod.
XV.  8.  In  the  midst;  literally,  in  the  heart;
Septuagint,  xapSlas  SaKiaaris :   Vulgate,  <


44


THE  BOOK   OF   JONAH.


[oh.  n.  1—10,


eorde  marii.  This  deflnea  more  closely  the
preTions  expresBion.  The  floods;  literally,
the  river.  This  may  mean  the  current  (as
in  Pb.  xxIt.  2),  which  in  the  Mediterranean
Sea  sets  from  west  to  east,  and,  impinging
on  the  Syrian  coast,  turns  north ;  or  it  may
have  reference  to  the  notion,  familiar  to  ub
in  Homer,  which  regarded  the  ocean  as  a
river.  All  thy  billows  and  thy  waves ;
TdPTfS  ot  ftfTeapuT/ioi  aou  nal  to  Kv/iaTa  <rov,
"all  thy  iwellings  and  waves"  (Septua-
gint);  ontTie*  gurgitet  tui,  et  fluctua  tui
(Vulgate).  The  former  are  "breakers,"
the  latter  "  rolling  billows."  The  clause  is
from  Pb.  ilii.  7,  Jonah  transferring  what  is
there  said  metaphorically  to  his  own  literal
experience,  at  the  same  time  acknowledging
God's  hand  in  the  punishment  by  speaking
of  "  thy  billows  "  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxxviii.  6,  7).
Ver.  4. — Jonah  confesses  that  he  at  first
folly  expected  death;  but  faith  and  hope
aoon  triumphed  over  despondency.  I  am
oast  out  of  thy  sight  This  was  his  thought
when  what  is  mentioned  in  ver.  3  happened
unto  him.  The  words  are  a  reminiscence
of  Ps.  xxxi.  22,  altered  somewhat  to  suit
Jonah'8  circnmstances.  The  psalmist  says,
"  I  said  in  my  haste."  Jonah  says  simply,
"I  said,"  without  any  limitation;  and  fo*
"  I  am  out  off,"  Jonah  uses, "  1  am  cast  out."
Septuagint,  iaraanai — a  strong  term,  imply-
ing hanishment  with  violence.  Out  of  thy
light;  literally, /rojn  6e/ore  thine  eyet;  i.e.
from  thy  protecting  care  (comp.  1  Sam,
xxvi.  24 ;  1  Kings  viii.  29).  He  who  had
fled  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  in  Canaan
fears  that  he  has  forfeited  the  favour  of  God.
Yet  I  wUl  look  again  toward  thy  holy
temple.    I  will  turn  in  prayer  to  that  holy

?lace  where  thou  dost  manifest  thy  presence.
'he  Jews  were  wont  to  turn  towards  Jeru-
■alem  when  they  prayed  (comp.  1  Kings
viii.  30,  etc.;  Dan.  vi.  10;  Ps.  xviii.  6;
zxviiii  2).  Some  think  that  Jonah  ex-
presses a  hope  of  worsliipping  again  in  the
temple;  but  the  turn  of  expression  in  the
text  hardly  warrants  this.  Others  refer
the  term  to  the  heavenly  temple,  as  they  do
in  ver.  7;  Pb.  xi.  4 ;  xviii.  6.

Vers.  5,  6. — In  parallel  clauses,  Jonah
describes  still  more  rividly  the  horrors  that
surrounded  him.

Ver.  5. — Compassed  me  about.  Not  the
same  word  as  in  ver.  3.  Septuagint,  irepie-
xiiri  liot,  "  was  poured  around  me."  Even
to  the  soul ;  so  as  to  reach  his  life  (comp.  Pa.
xviii.  5 ;  Ixix.  1, 2 ;  Lam.  iii.  54).  The  depth
closed  me  round  about.  The  verb  is  the
tame  as  in  ver.  3,  translated  there,  "  coin-
passed  me  about"  Vulgate,  ahystua  vallavit
DM.  The  weeds  (euph);  sea-weed,  Jonali
sank  to  the  bottom  before  hu  was  swallowed
by  the  flih.     The  LXX.  omits  the  word.


The  Vulgate  gives  pelagut,  which  ii  pro-
bably derived  from  the  fact  :f  the  Red  Sett
being  called  "  the  Sea  of  Snph,"  the  term
being  thence  applied  to  any  sea.

Ver.  6. — The  bottoms  of  the  mountainB;
literally,  the  euttingt  off,  where  the  moun-
taina  seem  to  be  cut  off  by  the  ocean  floor ;
the  roots  of  the  mountains.  £15  <rYi<r/(i]
hpeav,  "  the  clefts  of  the  mountains  (Sep-
tuagint); Ps.  xviii.  15.  The  earth  with
her  bars ;  as  for  the  earth,  her  bars  were
about  me ;  return  to  it  was  shut  out  for  me ;
the  gate  by  which  I  might  return  was  locked
behind  me.  He  adds,  for  ever,  as  it  was
to  all  appearance,  because  he  had  no  power
in  himself  of  returning  to  earth  and  life.
Yet ;  in  spite  of  all,  I  am  preserved.  From
corruption  (shachath);  as  Job  xvii.  14;  de
eorruptione  (Vulgate) ;  so  the  Ghaldee  and
Syriao;  Septuagint,  'hvafi^ra  in  <p6opas  v
C<cii  fiov  (Alex.),  *A.va,^T\Tw  tpBopa  ^rts  fwv
(Vatican),  "  Let  my  life  arise  from  destruc-
tion ; "  or,  "  Let  the  destruction  of  my  life
[i.e.  my  destroyed  life]  arise."  Jerome  refers
the  word  to  the  digestive  process  iu  the  fish's
stomach  ;  it  is  probably  merely  a  synonym
for  "  death."  The  marginal  rendering,  "  the
pit,"  i.e.  Sheol,  is  also  etymologically  correct
(comp.  Ps.  XXX.  3).  My  God.  He  thank-
fully acknowledges  that  Jehovah  has  proved
himself  a  beneficent  God  to  him.

Ver.  7. — His  prayer  was  heard.  When
my  soul  fainted  within  me;  literally,  wot
covered — referring,  says  Pusey,  to  that  physi-
cal exhaustion  when  a  film  comes  over  the
eyes,  and  the  brain  is  mantled  over.  The
clause  is  from  Ps.  cxlii.  3  or  cxliii.  4.  I
remembered  the  Lord.  That  was  his  salva-
tion (Ps.  cxix.  55).  He  turned  in  thought
to  thine  holy  temple  (ver.  4),  the  sanctuary
where  God's  presence  was  most  assured,
like  the  psalmist  in  the  wihlerness  (Ps.
Ixiii.  2),  or  like  the  exiles  by  the  waters  of
Babylon  when  they  remembered  Zion  (Ps.
cxxxvii.).

Ver.  8. — Jonah  contrasts  the  joy  and
comfort  arising  from  the  thought  of  God
with  the  miserable  fate  of  idolaters.  They
that  observe  (Ps.  xxxi.  6) ;  court,  pay  defer-
ence to,  reverence.  Lying  vanities ;  Septua-
gint, /iiraia  Kai  ^evSri,  "vain  things  and
false."  Idols  (comp.  Jer.  xviii.  15;  Hos.
xii.  11 ;  1  Oor.  viii.  4).  Their  own  meroy ;
«,«.  their  state  of  favour  with  God — the
meroy  shown  to  them,  as  "the  mercies  of
[shown  to]  David"  (Isa.  Iv.  3);  or  God
himself,  the  Fountain  of  meroy  and  good-
ness (Ps.  cxliv.  2).  Henderson  translates,
"  forsake  their  Benefactor."

Ver.  9. — But  I — who  know  better  than
idolaters,  and  who  have  learned  a  new
lesson  of  trust  in  God — I  will  sacrifice,
Pusey  notes  that  the  Hebrew  denotes
rather,  "I  fain  would  sacrifice,"  as  it  de-


OH.  U.  1 — lO.J


THE   BOOK  OF  JONAH.


46


pended,  not  on  him,  but  on  God,  whether
he  was  able  to  worship  again  in  the  Holy
Land.  His  sficriflce  of  thanksgiving  (Lev.
vii.  12,  etc.)  should  be  offered  witli  prayer
and  praise  (Ps.  zlii.  5).  That  which  I  have
vowed  (Ps.  1.  U ;  Ixvi.  13).  Salvation  is  of
the  Lord.  This  ia  the  conclusion  to  which
bis  trial  has  brought  him,  the  moral  of  the
whole  canticle  (Ps.  lii.  8 ;  cxviii.  14,  21 ;
Eev.  vii.  10).  The  LXX.  and  the  Vulgate
join  thif  clause  to  the  preceding,  thus:
•'That  which  I  have  vowed  I  will  pay  to
the  Lord  for  my  salvation."  This  is  tame,
and  not  in  strict  accordance  with  the
Hebrew.

Ver.  10.— §  2.  The  Jbh  taOi  tip  Jonah
•Um  on  ih*  ihon.


Ver.  10. — Spake  unto  the  flsh.  The
punishment  having  done  its  work,  the  fish
is  impelled  by  some  secret  influence  to
eject  Jonah  on  the  dry  land,  on  the  third
day  after  he  was  swallowed  (oh.  i.  17).
Bome,  who  regard  the  Book  of  Jonah  as  an
historical  allegory,  see  in  these  three  days
an  adumbration  of  the  period  of  the  Baby-
lonish captivity,  during  which  Israel  was
buried  iu  darkness,  »ud  from  which  she
rose  to  a  new  and  happier  life.  They  com-
pare, as  referring  to  the  same  transaction,
Jer.  li.  34,  44  and  Hob.  vi.  1,  2  (see  Dr.
0.  H.  H.  Wright,  '  Exegetioal  Studies,'  pp.
53,  etc.).  Upon  the  dry  land.  Probably
on  the  ooait  of  Palestine,  whence  he  had
started.


HOMILBTICS.

Ver.  1. — "  Out  of  <J«  depths.^  Never  surely  was  prayer  offered  in  so  strange  a  place
•s  this  I  Men  have  often  prayed  upon  the  sea,  but  Jonah  is  represented  as  praying  from
the  ocean  depths.

JL  No  PLACE  IS  UNSUITABLE  FOB  FBATEB.  It  is  Well  to  pray  in  stately  cathedrals
ard  in  couseciated  chapels,  in  the  humble  meeting-house  and  at  the  "domestic  altar."
But  the  persecuted  have  prayed  upon  the  remote  hillside,  and  ia  "  dens  and  caves  of
the  earth."  And  let  it  be  remembered,  that  God's  will  is  that  "men  should  pray
everywhere,  lifting  holy  hands"  to  heaven.  In  the  thronged  street,  the  bxisy  market,
the  legislative  hall,  the  court  of  justice,  in  the  field  of  battle,  and  upon  the  island
where  the  shipwrecked  mariner  finds  a  refuge, — in  every  place  God  may  be  sought  and
found.  If  Jonah  cried  "  out  of  the  fish's  body,"  and  was  heard,  is  there  reason  for
silence,  for  refraining  from  prayer,  in  any  spot  where  we  may  find  ourselves  ?

II.  Acceptable  pbateb  fboceeds  fbou  necessity.  There  are  those  who  have
never  prayed  before,  who  have  been  driven  to  supplication  by  their  needs.  And  many,
whose  prayers  have  often  been  formal,  have  learned  to  pray  in  earnest  when  they  have
been  plunged  into  the  overwhelming  ocean  of  affliction.  None  ask  so  urgently  as  those
who  are  in  want ;  and  one  purpo^se  of  Providence  in  permitting  men  to  suffer  need  may
well  be  this — to  call  forth  entreaties  and  supplications  which  shall  be  sincere,  profound,
and  urgent.

III.  Acoeftabls  FBATEB  IS  THE  OFFSPBiNa  OF  A.  SUBMISSIVE  HIND.  Bchellion,  and
even  murmuring,  are  incompatible  with  a  prayerful  spirit.  It  proves  that  Jonah  was
not  wholly  bad  that,  in  his  affliction,  he  did  not  resent  the  Lord's  treatment,  he  did
not  "  kick  against  the  goad."  He  rather  behaved  and  quieted  himself  as  "  the  weaned
child."  It  is  well  to  acknowledge  that  justice  and  mercy  are  in  all  the  Lord's  dealings
with  his  people.  Many  have  been  taught  by  experience  to  say  with  the  psalmist,
"Before  I  was  afflicted,  I  went  astray;"  "It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted."
Trouble  is  not  designed  to  lead  God's  people  to  cry  against  the  Lord,  but  unto  the
Lord.     To  complain  is  both  foolish  and  sinful ;  but  they  are  happy  who  endure.

IV.  Acceptable  fbayer  is  the  utteeancb  of  faith  and  hope.  Even  in  the
depths  of  the  sea  Jonah  did  not  lose  his  faith  in  the  oversight,  the  care,  the  goodness
of  the  Lord.  He  believed  that  the  Lord  had  overwhelmed,  and  that  the  Lord  could
rescue  him.  He  who  brought  him  into  the  depths  could  bring  him  out  of  the  depths.
The  believing  prayer  which  the  prophet  is  recorded  to  have  offered  in  his  extremity  is
a  model  to  all  those  who  because  of  their  iniquities  and  transgressions  have  been
afflicted.  Have  faith  in  God,  and  hope  in  his  mercy — such  is  the  lesson  which  this
verse  teaches.

V.  FsATEB  fbou  tee  depths  IB  eeabd  in  the  heights  and  answxbed.  Jonah's
subterraneous,  subaqueous  dungeon  became  a  temple,  God  was  present  when  his
servant  prayed.    When  submission  and  faith   took  the  place  of  disobedience  and


46  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [cH.  n.  1— 10

rebellion,  the  Most  High  was  willing  to  delirer  the  captive,  to  pardon  the  ainner,  t«
employ  again  the  unfaithful  fugitive.

Vers.  2,  3. — Affliction  and  prayer.  Doubtless  the  language  of  this  psalm  of  thanks-
giving was  the  result  of  subsequent  meditation,  for  it  is  eyidently  a  studied  composi-
tion, resembling  in  passages  several  of  the  sacred  Hebrew  odes.  But  the  sentiments
were  those  actually  experienced  by  the  prophet  when  in  the  most  humiliating  position.
In  his  experience  was  much  which  may  prove  very  instructive  and  helpful  to  ourselves.

I.  Deep  affliotiok.  The  language  of  ver.  3,  literally  descriptive  of  Jonah's  state
and  sufierings,  is  tinged  with  poetical  feeling,  and,  like  similar  passages  in  the  Psalms,
is  emblematic  of  the  afSictions  which,  at  some  periods  of  human  life,  are  the
appointed  experience  of  Qod's  people.  The  deep  waters  of  trouble  must  be  passed
through ;  the  mighty  billows  must  roll  over  the  spirit.  Sorrow  submerges  and  appa-
rently overwhelms  even  the  child  of  God;  how  much  more  the  impenitent  and
disobedient !

II.  Eabnebt  prater.  How,  indeed,  can  prayer  be  other  than  earnest,  if  it  be
offered  from  "the  belly  of  hell"?  Those  afflictions  are,  indeed,  a  blessing  which
prompt  such  supplications  as  those  which  came  from  Jonah's  lips.  Far  from  human
succonr,  and  perhaps  from  human  pity,  the  afflicted  lift  their  voice,  and  cry,  by  reason
of  their  afflictions,  unto  the  Lord.  There  is  something  very  instructive  in  the  language
used  by  Jonah,  attributing  his  affliction  to  the  Being  upon  whom  he  was  calling,
"  Thou  hadst  cast  me  into  the  deep,  .  .  .  thy  billows  and  thy  waves  passed  over  me."
In  this  way  the  distressed  may  learn  the  lesson  which  the  wisdom  and  the  love  of  God
would  teach.

HI.  GsAcioni  SELIYERANOE.  When  in  Scripture  it  is  said  that  God  hears,  we  may
usually  understand  more  than  is  expressed.  He  hears  to  answer,  to  rescue,  to  save.
The  Omnipresent  did  not  lose  sight  of  his  servant  even  when  he  was  beneath  the
waves  of  the  ocean;  and  the  AU-gracious  was  not  inattentive  to  his  supplicaiion,
though  offered  from  the  depths  where  weeds  were  about  the  suppliant's  head.  If  there
are  those  who  fear  lest  their  situation  or  their  circumstances  should  shut  tkem  out
from  the  regard  and  interest  of  the  Supreme,  they  may  well  take  courage  when  they
think  of  the  experience  of  the  prophet,  who  called  upon  the  Lord  from  the  depths,  and
was  heard  and  was  delivered.

Ter.  i. — Looking  toward  the  temple.  It  is  remarkable  thit  in  two  passages  of  this
prayer  the  prophet  should  allude  to  the  temple.  Although  he  was  from  Northern
Palestine,  and  lived  whilst  Judah  and  Israel  were  distinct  kingdoms,  it  does  not  seem
open  to  question  that  his  allusion  is  to  the  sacred  edifice  at  Jerusalem,  where  Jehovah
manifested  his  presence  and  favour,  and  received  the  worship  of  his  people.  Yet  the
temple  must  have  been  referred  to,  not  so  much  as  a  material  edifice,  as  in  the  light  of
the  symbol  of  the  manifestation  of  the  presence  and  the  favour  of  the  Most  High.

I.  To  LOOK   TOWARD  THE   TEMPLE   IS   TO  BE   REMDTDBD   OF  THE   BXISTEHOE   OF    GOD.

As  the  sight  of  a  bouse  may  remind  us  of  the  friend  who  dwells  there,  as  the  sight  of  a
palace  may  lead  us  to  think  of  the  king, — so  to  look  toward  the  t«mple  is  to  look  to
God.  Jonah  may  have  been  tempted  to  say,  "There  is  no  God ;"  or, "  If  there  be  a  God,
he  regards  not  me."  When  he  turned  in  heart  to  the  temple,  such  thoughts  vanished,
and  God's  existence  became  a  reality  to  him.

II.  To   LOOK   TOWARD  THE    TEMPLE   IS  TO   SEEK   THE   FAVOUR   OF   GOD.      Tke  temple

was  the  place  where  sacrifices  were  offered  and  accepted;  where  God  showed  him-
self to  be  gracious  to  his  covenant  people,  where  sin  was  pardoned,  and  the  penitent
sinner  was  received  into  acceptance.  And  Jonah  knew,  even  from  the  very  commission
he  was  unwilling  to  fulfil,  that  God  delighted  in  mercy,  and  was  long-suffering  and
compassionate.  He  had  incurred  Divine  displeasure,  but  he  began  to  feel  that  he  was
not  beyond  the  reach  of  Divine  commiseration  and  help.

III.  To  LOOK  TOWARD   THE  TEMPLE  IS  TO  EXPECT  THE  DiVINB  INTERPOSITION   AND

DIRECTION.  The  pious  Jews  sought  Jehovah  in  his  house,  consulted  the  oracle,
invoked  guidance,  implored  blessing.  And  when  Jonah  directed  the  gaze  of  his  heart
tiiwards  the  dwelling-place  of  his  God,  it  was  with  the  well-formed  expectation  that,
however  impossible  it  was  for  him  to  make  a  way  of  escape  for  himself,  God  would


OH.  II.  1— lO.J  THE  BOOK   OF  JONAH.  «


surely  do  this  upon  Ma  tehalf.  Thtre  Is  no  depth  from  which  he  canuot  lift  us;  no
recess  from  which  he  cannot  draw  us  forth ;  no  sorrow  of  which  he  canuot  relieve
us  J  no  sin  which  he  cannot  pinion.  Of  how  many  of  God's  people  may  it  he  said,
"  They  looked  unto  him,  and  were  lightened,  and  their  faces  were  not  ashamed  " !

Ver.  7. — Eememhering  <Ae  Lord.  The  circumstances  in  which  Jonah  was  placed
were  such  as  give  very  peculiar  value  and  interest  to  this  declaration.  And  it  appears
that  this  act  of  recollection  was  the  turning-point  in  his  experience;  for  hitherto  his
troubles  had  increased,  whilst  henceforth  his  prospects  began  to  brighten.

I.  The  occasion  op  this  bemembranoe.  1.  External  ailversity  may  have  prompted
him  to  a  kind  of  remembrance  which  in  his  prosperity  he  had  not  cultivated.  2.
Mental  exhaustion  and  distress  caused  him  to  realize  his  helplessness,  and  the  vanity
of  expecting  human  aid.  When  his  "  soul  fainted  within  "  him,  then  he  called  to  mind
the  God  whom  he  had  disobeyed.

II.  The  ohabagter  of  this  rememb  range.  1.  Jonah,  no  doubt,  remembered  God's
commands  and  his  own  rebellion.  2.  He  must  also  have  remembered  the  revelation
of  Divine  mercy  which  had  been  vouchsafed  him.  And  whilst  the  former  recollection
must  have  awakened  penitence,  this  may  well  have  shed  into  his  soul  a  ray  of  hope.

III.  The  fruit  op  this  remembrance.  1.  It  prompted  to  prayer.  They  who
forget  God  will  not  call  upon  God ;  but  they  who  remember  his  promises  may  well
lift  up  their  hearts  to  him.  2.  It  was  thus  the  means  of  securing  the  Divine  regard
and  the  Divine  deliverance.  God  heard  the  prophet's  cry,  though  uttered  from  the
ocean's  depths,  and  when  he  heard,  he  came  to  the  rescue  of  his  servant.  "  The  Lord  is
mindfal  of  his  own."  We  may  for  a  time  forget  his  faithfulness,  but  when  we  call  to
mind  his  nearness  and  his  grace,  he  remembers  us  even  in  our  low  estate.

Ver.  8. — The  vanity  of  idolatry.  Jonah  had  been  brought  into  association  with
idolaters  in  the  person  of  the  mariners  of  the  ship  out  of  which  he  had  been  cast.  It
may  be  that  this  fact  accounts  for  the  reference  in  this  passage  to  those  who  worship
other  gods  than  the  Lord.  The  more  he  experienced  the  faithfulness  and  goodness  of
Jehovah,  the  more  was  he  convinced  that  there  was  none  other  entitled  to  reverence,
confidence,  and  prayers.

I.  The  description  here  given  of  idolaters.  They  are  such  as  "  observe  lying
vanities."  The  Hebrews,  whether  pious  or  not,  were  monotheists,  and  regarded  with
contempt  the  idolatrous  superstitions  of  their  neighbours.  The  language  of  irony
occurs  in  several  places  of  Old  Testament  Scripture  when  allusion  is  made  to  the
itapotence  of  the  gods  of  the  nations.  Yet  it  may  be  profitably  remembered  by
ourselves,  who  may  have  no  immediate  connection  with  professed  idolaters,  that
whatever  men  substitute  for  God  as  the  law  of  life  and  the  object  of  devotion  and
trust,  will  surely  deceive  all  those  who  put  their  faith  therein.

II.  The  pate  here  foretold  op  idolaters.  Their  "  mercy,"  their  "  goodness,"
is  the  God  whom  they  forget,  and  to  whom  they  are  so  infatuated  as  to  prefer  the
"lying  vanities"  here  censured.  They  who  quit  the  Lord  prepare  for  themselves  a
tprrible  fate.  In  God  is  salvation ;  out  of  him  is  destruction.  There  is  somethmg
appalling  in  the  doom  which  is  here  described  as  overtaking  those  who,  when  the
Saviour  may  be  found,  turn  their  back  upon  him,  in  order  to  seek  and  to  serve  other
gods.  Such  are  said  to  "  forsake  their  own  mercy."  They  act  against  their  highest
interests ;  they  refuse  the  richest  blessing ;  they  abjure  their  truest  Friend.

Ver.  9. — Piety  triumphant.  The  remarkable  fact  connected  with  this  sublime
hymn  of  confidence  and  adoration  is  this — it  was  uttered  while  deliverance  was  yet  In
the  future.  The  prophet  sings  of  God's  goodness  while  he  is  still  experiencing  Gk)d's
chastisement,  and  promises  offerings  whilst  the  favour  which  they  are  to  acknowledge
is  as  yet  in  the  future.  In  these  closing  words  of  the  hymn  there  is  a  tone  of  exulta-
tion and  of  triumph,  which  evinces  singular  confidence  and  singular  hope.

I,  Thanksoivino.  There  are  some  circumstances  which  render  gratitude  natural
and  easy.  But  it  is  a  triumph  of  faith  when  the  afflicted  can  acknowledge  the  good
hand  of  God,  when  they  can  discern  mercy  in  chastening,  when  they  can  see  the  hand
of  a  Father  in  the  hand  that  smites.    One  thing  is  certain — whatever  be  our  positioi',


48  THE  BOOK  Olf  JONAH.  [ch.  n.  i— 10.

our  experience,  we  owe  gratitude  as  a  debt  due  to  him  who  is  ever  forbearing  and
gracious.

II.  Saobifioe.  According  to  the  religious  customs  of  his  country  and  his  age,  the
prophet  vowed  to  offer  an  outward  expression  of  his  loyalty  and  gratitude  to  God,  by
presenting  a  sacrifice  in  the  temple  or  at  some  consecrated  altar.  His  life  had  been
spared;  his  deliverance  was  near;  he  looked  forward  to  an  opportunity  of '♦offering
burnt  offerings "  upon  the  altar  of  Jehovah.  The  spiritual  reality  of  which  such  an
act  is  the  symbol  is  the  consecration  of  heart  and  life  unto  the  God  of  all  grace  and
salvation,

III.  Pbaise.  Thanksgiving  looks  mainly  to  the  benefits  received;  praise,  to  the
Bestower.  "  Salvation  unto  the  Lord  I "  such  is  the  joyful  and  adoring  cry  with  which
this  hymn  is  brought  to  a  close.  It  is  well,  when  we  have  acknowledged  favour  and
long-suffering  enjoyed,  to  turn  away  from  ourselves,  and  to  fix  our  thoughts,  our
sentiments  of  affectionate  and  adoring  devotion,  upon  him  whoge  attribute  is  mercy,
and  whose  work  is  salvation.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBa

Vers.  1—4.—^  uniqtie  oratory.  "Then  Jonah  prayed  unto  the  Lord  Ms  God,"
etc.  The  key-note  of  this  passage  is  struck  in  the  first  verse.  It  is  the  fish,  by
God's  hand  made  Jonah's  preserver  instead  of  his  destroyer,  that  inspires  the  praise^
prayer  of  the  whole  chapter.  God  did  not  come  to  help  till  the  prophet  had,  in
imagination,  faced  the  worst;  but  still  he  came  in  time.  In  the  very  moment  of
imminent  death  he  stepped  in  a  Deliverer.  And  he  delivered  in  his  own  inimitable
way.  Natural  laws  cannot  serve  his  purpose,  and  he  accomplishes  it  against  them.
"  The  ravens  furnish  Elijah's  table ;  the  lions  are  tame  and  quiet  while  Daniel  is  in
the  den ;  the  violence  of  fire  is  gone  when  believers  are  in  the  furnace ;  the  sea,  which
acts  according  to  its  nature  towards  Pharaoh  and  his  host,  is  a  wall  on  the  right  hand
and  on  the  left  to  Moses  and  to  Israel;  and  the  devouring  shark  preserves  Jonah's
life  "  (Rev.  Thomas  Jones,  in  loc).  And  now  the  prophet  realizes  that  God,  after  all,
is  his  Friend.  He  is  bringing  life  out  of  the  jaws  of  death,  converting  the  voracious
sea-monster  into  a  kind  protector.  And  thus,  by  judgment  and  mercy  in  turn,  the
obdurate  heart  is  broken,  and  the  sturdy  apostate  brought  to  his  knees  and  the  praise-
song  of  the  restored.    We  see  here  —

I.  How  ArFLicTioN  OPENS  THE  MOUTH  wHiOH  BIN  HAD  SHUT.  Jouah's  defection  was
deliberate  and  persistent.  Not  for  a  trifle  would  be  cry,  Peccavi!  Not  by  an  ordinary
obstacle  would  he  be  arrested  in  his  course.  He  seceded  most  determinedly.  He  kept
his  purpose  in  unabated  strength,  through  a  forty-mile  tramp  on  foot.  He  overcame
difficulty  with  resourceful  energy.  He  slept  calmly,  going  on  his  way,  amidst  the
crash  of  an  appalling  hurricane.  He  sat  sullen  and  made  no  sign  when  even  heathen
sailors  called  upon  their  gods,  and  wondered  at  his  self-composure.  But  flesh  is  flesh,
and  at  length  the  word  came  true,  "  In  their  affliction  will  they  seek  mo  early."  God
has  weapons  that  pierce  even  armour  of  proof.  The  invasion  of  fiery  serpents  did  it
for  incorrigible  Israel  (Numb.  xxi.  7).  The  cut  of  the  Assyrian  slave-lash  did  it  for
graceless*  Manasseb  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  12, 13).  The  death  of  Bathsheba's  child  did  it
for  David,  after  a  great  crime  and  a  whole  year  of  impenitent  hardness  (2  Sam.  xii.
13, 16).  The  Babylonish  exile  did  it  for  Israel,  as  Isaiah  expresses,  "  Lord,  in  trouble
they  have  visited  thee;  they  poured  out  a  prayer  when  thy  chastening  was  upon
them."  And  the  experiences  of  a  shark's  interior  did  it  for  Jonah.  He  would  not
surrender  sooner,  but  resistance  is  out  of  the  question  now.  The  victory  rests  with
God.  The  fires  of  his  judgment  have  softened  the  apostate's  iron  will.  Yet  not  the
Divine  severity  only,  but  severity  and  goodness  together  have  operated  here  as  "  the
iriedicine  of  the  mind."  It  was  not  imminent  death  alone  but  this  with  miraculous
life  out  of  death  that  broke  the  hideous  spell,  and  opened  the  lips  so  stubbornly  sealed.
It  is  a  wrong  way  of  looking  at  things  to  contrast,  where  both  have  operated,  the  value
of  severity  and  goodness  as  motive  powers  in  the  religious  sphere.  Neither  probably
would  be  effective  by  itself.     The  severity  before  the  goodness  did  not  conquer,  and


«H.n.l— 10,J  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAa  4»

neither,  probably,  would  the  gocidneM,  had  not  the  severity  gone  before.  The
effect  does  not  flow  from  the  last  of  the  series  of  its  causes,  but  from  the  series  as  •
whole.

II.  How  A  BEViviKO  FAITH  OAK  TBiuMFH  ovEB  SENSE.  To  sense  the  prophet's  case
was  desperate.  On  the  platform  of  natural  laws  the  circumstances  forbid  hope,  and
would  logically  shut  the  mouth  of  prayer.  Yet  their  efiect  is  directly  the  reverse.
The  prophet  only  begins  to  pray  at  the  moment  when  all  seems  past  praying  for.
And  this  is  the  paradoxical  but  characteristic  way  of  faith.  It  triumphs  over  sense,
reverses  its  verdict,  overbears  its  testimony,  realizes  in  actual  possession  its  theoretio
impossibility.  "Take  the  case  of  Abraham  and  the  character  and  commendation
of  his  faith.  'Against  hope  he  believed  in  hope.'  Appearances  were  all  against
him.  Sensible  realities  all  contradicted,  and  in  themselves  alone  destroyed,  his  expecta-
tion. Had  his  hope  rested  on  sense,  on  reason,  on  nature,  on  time,  it  must  have  failed
and  sunk  for  ever.  But  he  did  not  rest  on  nature.  He  did  not  argue.  He  believed ;
and  his  faith  destroyed  the  hope-destroying  power  of  sense  "  (Rev.  Hugh  Martin,  D.D.,
in  loe.').  It  is  the  business  of  your  faith  and  mine  to  do  likewise.  We  are  surrounded
by  influences  and  circumstances  altogether  adverse  to  the  attainment  of  our  soul's
salvation.  Lusts  are  strong.  Tempers  are  violent.  Habits  are  tenacious.  Example
is  corrupting.  Toil  is  engrossing.  Pleasure  is  ensnaring.  The  world,  alike  when  it
■miles  and  frowns,  is  our  soul's  foe.  But  faith  is  there — keen-eyed  conquering  faith.
It  sees  through  opacity  and  discovers  the  invisible.  And  it  knows  things  very  different
from  what  they  seem.  Beneath  the  currents  of  sense,  whose  trend  is  away  out  to  sea,
it  discerns  the  tidal  wave  of  unseen  influence  moving  in  steady  flow  toward  the  celestial
■hores  (2  Oor.  L  9 ;  iv.  8 — 11).  God,  in  his  wise  and  stimulative  dealing, "  may  clothe
all  circumstances  and  all  his  dispensations  towards  us  with  appearances  of  opposi-
tion and  hostility,  in  order  that  we  may  flee  to  the  anchor  of  his  pure  and  simple
Word,  and  lean  on  it  without  any  other  help,  or  rather  against  all  adverse  power "
(Martin).

III.  How    KATUBALLT    FBATBB    OLOTHEB    ITSELF     IN    THE    W0BD8    OF     SoBIFTUBa.

Jonah's  prayer  was  original  in  the  sense  that  the  thoughts  called  forth  the  words.
But  the  words  themselves  are  largely  borrowed  from  the  Psalms.  Most  of  these  had
then  been  written,  and,  as  the  Church's  Psalter,  would  be  familiar  to  a  prophet  of  0od.
And  naturally  his  devotional  feelings  appropriate  their  inspired  and  so  fitting  words.
His  prayer  "  it  the  simple  and  natural  utterance  of  a  man  versed  in  Holy  Scripture,
and  living  in  the  Word  of  God  "  (Keil).  What  Scripture  says  is  best  said.  It  contains
at  once  the  warrant  and  the  definition  of  prayer,  and  the  actual  words  in  which  it  was
offered  by  holy  men  of  old.  What  more  natural  or  fitting  than  that  a  man  should  use
these  for  himself  as  at  once  unerring  and  appropriate  I  "  Let  the  Word  of  God  dwell
in  you  richly."  There  is  nothing  else  can  support  faith,  or  so  well  formulate  its
prayer.  And  then  as  to  the  Psalms,  where  in  Scripture  is  there  to  be  found  such  a
concentrated  wealth  of  devotional  matter  as  there?  "  They  appear  to  me  a  mirror  of
the  soul  of  every  one  who  sings  them  "  (Athanasius).  "  The  Psalter  deserves  to  be
ealled  the  praise  of  Ood,  the  glory  of  man,  the  voice  of  the  Church,  and  the  most
beneficial  confession  of  faith  "  (Ambrose).  "  Not  without  good  grounds  am  I  wont  to
call  this  hook  an  anatomy  of  all  parts  of  the  soul,  since  no  one  can  experience  emotions
whose  portrait  he  could  not  behold  reflected  in  its  mirror  "  (Calvin).  The  artist  goes
to  the  Louvre,  and  the  scholar  or  antiquarian  to  the  British  Museum,  because  he  finds
there  the  objects  he  studies  in  greatest  variety  and  profusion.  And  so  the  pious,  in
search  of  devotional  materials  of  the  most  precious  kind,  resorts  inevitably  to  the  Book
of  Psalms.  There  are  found  portrayed,  as  from  the  life,  the  hopes  and  fears,  the
moods  and  framea,  the  faith  and  ardour,  of  their  own  soul.  There  they  find  words  that
interpret  their  case  and  express  the  very  spirit  of  their  aspiration.  And  so  in  all  time,
and  over  all  the  world,  the  saintly  praise  and  pray  and  vow  "  with  the  words  of  David
and  Asaph  the  seer."

IV.  How   POINTEDLY    QoD    PUNISHES    DEFECTION   BY    BNDOBSINO   IT.      Jonah    WS*   k

spiritual  deserter.  He  struck  work,  abandoned  his  post,  and  so  practically  vacated
his  office  and  abjured  God's  service.  He  seemed  resolved  to  have  done  with  the  whole
thing.  And  he  succeeded  but  too  well,  as  now  to  his  cost  he  feels.  God  has  taken
him  at  his  word.  Figuratively  speaking,  he  has  got  the  "  Chiltem  Hundreds."  He  is
rowiiB.  ■


60  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  n.  1— Itt

no  longer  prophet  of  Go(i,  or  servant,  or  companion.  His  punishment  rises  on  him  in
the  likeness  of  his  sin.  He  has  fled  from  God,  and  now  he  complains  of  the  separation.
"  I  am  cast  out  of  thy  sight,"  i.e.  banished  from  covenant  territory,  the  sphere  of  God's
protection  and  care.  So  with  Peter.  He  says,  "I  know  not  the  Man,"  and  he  is
virtually  and  formally  a  stranger  from  that  moment.  Only  after  three  times  confess-
ing the  Lord  whom  he  had  three  times  denied  is  he  spiritually  reinstated,  restored  to
forfeited  office,  and  authorized  to  feed  the  sheep.  This  is  a  terrible  aspect  of  spiritual
renegadism.  God  accepts  it  as  an  accomplished  fact.  You  break  away,  and  are  let
go.  You  forsake  God,  and  he  casts  you  off.  It  is  a  fearfiil  power  this  you  have
of  putting  a  whole  infinity  betvveen  yourself  and  God,  between  your  sin  and  his
righteousness,  between  your  want  and  his  gifts,  between  your  desolate  heart  and  his
everlasting  consolations.  Yet  it  is  a  power  proper  to  a  moral  being,  a  power  it  is  of
the  insignia  of  your  manhood  to  have,  and  yet  an  utter  renunciation  of  it  to  use.

V.  How  THE    EEMINISOENCB    OP    A   FOEMEK    FELLOWSHIP    HELPS    TO  DEAW   BACK  TO

God.  Jonah  could  look  back  to  a  gracious  state  and  consciousness.  He  had  walked
in  the  light  of  God's  countenance.  He  knew  the  joy  of  his  presence  and  the  life  in
his  favour.  As  part  of  the  thought,  "  I  am  cast  out  from  before  thine  eyes,"  these
things  would  come  up  to  mind.  He  must  remember  their  quality  in  bewailing  their
loss.  And  they  were  a  fragrant  memory,  the  very  cream  and  flower  of  the  goodness
he  had  tasted.  Would  they  not  bulk  large  among  the  influences  drawing  the  wanderer
back  ?  "  As  new-born  babes  desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  Word, ...  if  so  be  ye  have
tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  Yes  I  there  is  the  secret.  If  a  man  has  come  and
tasted,  he  will  be  moved  to  come  back  and  feast.  The  final  apostasy  from  God  of  a
true  believer  would  be  against  the  nature  of  things.  "  His  seed  remaineth  in  him."
The  life  that  has  had  God  in  it  once  can  never  be  without  him  again.  The  void  would
be  intolerable.  And  so,  like  the  child  that  for  a  time  has  left  its  mother's  knee,  the
backslider  has  survivals  of  precious  memories  that  bring  him  back  to  God.

VI.  How   THE   TEMPLE   IS    THE    CENTBE    OP    THE   BETUBNING    PBNITBNt'S    EEGAEDS.

(Ver.  4.)  The  temple  was  the  national  meeting-place  with  God,  the  spot  which  "  he
bad  chosen  to  place  his  Name  there."  "  There  was  the  mercy-seat,  the  ark  of  the
covenant,  and  the  Divine  presence ;  there  the  tribes  of  Israel  met  to  worship  the  Lord,
and  there  the  God  of  Israel  came  to  meet  and  bless  his  people.  No  wonder  Jonah's
eyes  should  be  fixed  on  this  house,  which  was  the  glory  of  all  lands,  the  sun  in  the
world  of  mercy,  and  the  centre  of  true  worship"  (Jones,  in  loc.).  In  the  spiritual
sphere  worship  underlies  work.  When  Jonah  ceased  to  labour,  he  had  already  ceased
to  pray.  As  in  every  case  of  suspended  animation,  it  was  failure  of  the  heart's  action
that  had  paralyzed  his  hand.  And  now  the  converse  process  begins,  and  first  of  all
pulsation  is  re-established.  The  heart  resumes  its  normal  action  and  beats  for  God.
To  approach  him  in  worship,  and  resume  fellowship  with  him  in  his  holy  ordinances,
is  the  first  sacred  exercise  to  which  his  hope  springs.  It  is  so  always.  The  stay-at-
home  Christian  is  never  a  worker  for  God.  No  heart  for  the  sanctuary,  no  hand  for  the
plough.  The  very  breath  of  the  religious  life  is  to  say,  "  My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,
for  the  living  God;  when  shall  I  come  and  appear  bdbre  God?"  1.  Wherever  you
are,  Ood  has  placed  you.  Jonah  says,  "  Thou  hast  cast  me  into  the  deep  .  .  .  thy
billows  and  thy  waves  passed  over  me,"  Privilege  and  calamity  are  both  God's.  He
sends  them,  and  bounds  them,  and  is  revealed  in  them.  Judgments  viewed  as  acci-
dents have  no  disciplinary  value  and  no  moral  aspect.  The  rod  is  reforming  only
when  we  see  it  in  our  Father's  hand.  2.  You  tannot  he  in  anyplace  where  it  is  not  fitting
you  should  seek  Ood.  Jonah  cried  out  of  "  the  belly  of  hell."  What  pit,  then,  is  so
deep,  what  fall  so  low,  what  evil  case  so  desperate,  that  in  it  and  from  it  we  may  not
call  on  God?  "  Is  any  afllicted,  let  him  pray;"  "Whosoever  shall  call  on  the  Name
of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  3.  Ood  is  again  "  my  Ood"  in  the  thought  of  the  return-
ing penitent.  (Ver.  1.)  With  the  child's  reawakened  love  comes  back  the  revived  filial
instinct.  God  is  "  my  Father  "  to  the  prodigal  from  the  moment  he  comes  to  himself.
Blessed  be  his  gracious  Name,  that  such  things  can  be  1  If  you  have  renounced  the
life  for  self,  you  may  call  God  your  own  this  hour.  The  thought  is  a  new  backbone
to  faith.  God  "  waits  to  be  gracious."  He  is  with  you  the  moment  you  wish  it,  and
for  you  the  moment  you  submit,  and  yours  in  present  pussession  the  moment  the
■oul'g  appropriating  hand  is  stretched  forth.


OH.  n.  1—10.]  THK  BOOK   OF  JONAH.  51

*  O  Sariour,  precious  Saviour,
Whom  yet  unseen  we  love ;
O  Name  of  might  and  favour,

All  other  names  above :
We  worship  tbee,  we  bless  thee^

To  thee  alone  we  sing;
We  praise  thee  and  confess  tbM,
Our  holy  Lord  and  King."

J.  B.  H.

VerB.  &— 10.— Deliverance  waiting  on  the  astmred  hope  of  it.  It  is  an  obTious  remark
that  all  men  are  ingenuous  with  God.  There  is  no  thought  of  trying  to  mislead  his
judgment  or  escape  his  lidless  eye.  They  know  that  he  knows  them,  knows  them  truly,
knows  them  thoroughly.  Accordingly,  when  religious  profession  is  false  and  religious
converse  is  suppressive,  and  other  religious  acts  are  hollow  and  formal,  secret  prayer,  if
it  be  offered  at  all,  is  both  honest  and  open.  Only  tell  us  what  a  man  says  into  the  secret
ear  of  God,  and  you  have  told  us  all  that  is  in  his  heart — ^have  revealed  what  micro-
scope could  not  detect,  nor  scalpel  lay  bare.  It  is  in  this  way  that  our  text  is  apoca-
lyptic. It  unveils  for  us  the  inner  life  of  Jonah  as  this  is  done  by  no  other  portion  of
his  book.  And  the  revelation  raises  him  not  a  little  in.our  estimation.  It  shows  him
at  bottom  a  regenerate  and  saintly  man.  It  reveals  a  beaten  path  between  his  soul
and  God's  throne,  a  path  unused  during  a  wayward  hour,  but  resorted  to  instinctively
when  disaster  has  come  and  has  sobered  him  into  thought.     Learn  here-^

I.  The  essential  solitudk  of  bcffbring.  (Vers.  5,  6.)  We  find  matter  around
us  of  different  degrees  of  density,  from  the  light  volcanic  ash  to  the  heavy  metallic  ore.
But  men  of  science  tell  us  that  no  material  substance  is  absolutely  solid.  In  the
closest-grained  rock,  in  the  diamond  itself,  the  ultimate  particles  are  not  in  actual
contact.  They  approach  each  other  inconceivably  close,  but  when  attraction  has
brought  them  thus  far,  a  mysterious  repulsion  intervenes  and  forbids  that  they  should
altogether  touch.  This  fact  of  the  material  world  has,  no  doubt,  its  counterpart  in  the
world  of  spirit.  There  is  an  individuality  about  the  soul  that  cannot  be  destroyed.
We  may  be  united  to  others  by  the  closest  ties.  We  may  be  of  one  mind,  and  one
heart,  and  one  taste,  and  one  aim.  We  may  thus  approach  men  and  be  approached
by  them  on  many  sides,  and  feel  in  union,  and,  to  many  effects  and  purposes,  be  in
union  with  each  other.  But  it  is  plain  that  we  never  coalesce,  never  actually  touch.
The  shock  of*  personal  disaster  proves  this.  Then  all  ties  seem  loosened  and  fall
away.  Friends  drift  apart.  We  are  thrown  in  upon  ourselves.  Others  cannot  follow
us  into  the  depths.  We  are  in  a  relation  to  the  event  into  which  no  one  else  can  come.
In  the  last  appeal  we  have  to  meet  it  alone.  It  was  so  with  Christ  (John  xvi.  31, 32).
Disciples,  friends,  kinsmen, — with  none  of  them  could  the  Redeemer  share  the  pangs  of
death.  He  had  to  die  alone.  Even  the  earlier  thought,  "  I  am  not  alone,  the  Father
is  with,  me,"  gave  way  in  the  hour  of  mortal  agony  to  the  question  of  sore  amaze,
"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  It  was  so  with  Jonah.  He  was
pressed  by  a  feeling  of  utter  isolation.  The  depths  closed  over  him.  The  earth  with
her  bars  was  about  him.  This  he  felt,  and  in  proportion  as  he  felt  it  did  he  realize
that  he  was  cut  off  from  his  kind,  engulfed  in  the  horrors  of  a  living  grave,  and  left  to
face  them  all  alone.  "I  shall  die  alone."  "Yes;  »ni  alone  you  live.  No  soul
touches  another  soul  except  at  one  or  two  points,  and  those  chiefly  external — a  fearful
and  lonely  thought,  but  one  of  the  truest  life.  Death  only  realizes  that  which  has
been  the  fact  all  along.  In  the  central  deeps  of  our  being  we  are  alone"  (F.  W.
Bobertson).

II.  Thebe  is  an  antioipativb  power  in  all  tbub  faith.  (Vers.  7,  9.)  Jonah's
prayer  has  really  no  petition  in  it.  It  becomes  in  the  offering  a  song  of  praise.  Still
in  the  shark's  maw,  with  the  sea  grass  around  his  head,  and  going  down  through  the
deep  sea  caves  to  the  foundations  of  the  mountains,  he  speaks  as  a  man  delivered,  and
knowing  only  occasion  of  thanks.  This  is  the  grand  attitude  and  achievement  of  faith.
It  sees  the  end  from  the  beginning.  It  expects  the  end  because  there  has  been  a
beginning.  It  anticipates  the  end  at  the  beginning,  and  deals  with  it  as  an  accom-
plished fact.  "  Thou  hast  brought  up  my  life  from  corruption,  0  Lord  my  QkA."
"I  know  nothing  more  sublime  in  all  the  range  of  recorded  human  utterances.     What


62  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oH.n.1— IG

could  dictate  assured  and  triumphant  language  like  this,  but  marvellous,  miraculous
faith  ?  His  deliverance  is  not  yet  come ;  yet  faith  speaks  of  it  as  If  it  were.  0  noble
faith  1  it  is  in  thy  power  to  bring  in  the  deliverance  that  is  still  future,  with  the
sweetness  of  that  which  is  already  present,  and  the  sureness  of  that  which  is  already
past "  (Rev.  Hugh  Martin,  D.D.).  This  quality  of  Jonah's  faith  appeared  also  in  that  of
Paul,  Crying  for  deliVerance  from  indwelling  sin,  he  forestalls  the  event,  and  prepays
the  thanks  (Rom.  viL  24,  25).  So  surely  is  prayer  answered,  so  infallibly  does  needed
help  accrue,  that  from  an  adequate  faith  the  gratitude  may  go  up  when  as  yet  the
blessing  has  not  come  down.  And  there  is  this  prophetic  realizing  power  in  all  faith.
It  "is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  the  evidence  of  things  not  seen."  It  carries
in  its  head  the  jewel  of  hope;  and  where  the  one  reaches  the  other  shines.  Faith
trusts  God  that  he  can  do  all  things,  and  hope  looks  for  the  doing  of  them.  The
potential  deliverance  seen  by  faith  becomes  actual  deliverance  in  the  eye  of  hope.
And  so  to  the  believing  soul  "  the  things  that  shall  be  "  already  are,  and  the  present
is  bright  with  the  borrowed  light  of  not  yet  risen  suns.

III.   It  IB  JUST  IN  THE   MOMENT  OF  BBALIZBD  HBLPLES8KES8   THAT  THE   THOnOHT  OF

God  comes  to  a  soul.  (Ver.  7.)  Jonah,  as  is  evident,  had  up  till  now  forgotten  God.
Not  only  so,  but  he  had  deliberately  driven  and  persistently  kept  him  out  of  his
thoughts.  The  bursting  of  a  fearful  storm  impressed  him  sn  little  that,  if  left  alone,  he
would  have  slept  it  through.  The  rude  piety  of  the  sailors,  calling  every  man  upon
hii  god,  sent  no  responsive  thrill  through  him.  The  captain's  reproachful  summons  to
arise  and  pray  was  disregarded  or  ignored.  Even  the  ominous  lot-casting,  on  the  issue
of  which  his  life  hung,  was  watched  with  apparent  calm.  His  self-possessed  and  iron
obstinacy  died  hard.  But  it  died.  Angry  Omnipotence  will  not  be  denied ;  and  God
took  measures  that  not  even  Jonah's  hardihood  could  survive.  The  prophet '  broke
down.  Flesh  and  heart  failed  together.  And  then  he  came  back  to  first  principles,
and  remembered  God.  God,  if  they  knew  it,  is  the  one  need  of  human  hearts.  "  Every
finite  spirit  is  inherently  related  to  the  Infinite,  in  him  to  live,  and  move,  and  have  its
being.  It  wants  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  society  of  God,  the  approbation  of  Grid,
the  internal  manifestation  of  God,  a  consciousness  lighted  up  by  his  presence,  to  receive
of  his  fulness,  to  be  strung  in  his  might,  to  rest  in  his  love,  and  be  centred  everlastinglj'
in  his  glory  "  (Horace  BushneU,  D.D.).  But  the  natural  man  has  no  idea  of  this.  Con-
scious of  incompleteness,  he  knows  not  in  what  it  consists.  And  he  prescribes  at  randoni
for  his  own  case.  He  absorbs  himself  in  business,  he  struggles  up  the  path  of  ambition,
he  plunges  into  mad  indulgence,  he  runs  breathless  from  sensation  to  sensation,  seeking
rest  and  satisfaction,  and  finding  none.  Everything  gets  stale  and  tiresome,  and  the
soul  finds  itself  unprovided  for  and  orphan  still.  Not  seldom  the  man  spends  his  days
thus  iu  feverish  search  of  good,  and  dies  unsatisfied  and  unfed  at  last.  But  sometimes,
in  the  providence  of  God,  disaster  comes  at  this  stage.  He  is  losing  his  idol.  He  is
being  robbed  of  all  ho  loved,  or  abandoned  of  all  he  trusted  in.  He  is  being  brought  to
the  grave's  mouth  by  a  resistless  Providence.  It  becomes  with  him  a  question  of  God's
help  or  none.  And  shut  up  to  it  thus,  he  chooses  it,  albeit  only  as  a  last  resource.  "  I
cried  unto  the  Lord  with  my  voice.  In  the  day  of  my  trouble  I  sought  the  Lord  "
(Ps.  cxvi.  3,  4).  This  is  the  natural  history  of  the  soul's  resort  to  God.  It  is  the  last
resort.  All  other  help  has  been  tried  and  found  wanting  before  the  sinner  turns  to
him.  What  grace,  that  he  waits  till  thenl  that  while  every  conceivable  earthly
nostrum  is  being  tried,  the  Balm  of  Gilead  is  kept  in  store,  and  is  available  in  the
extremest  hour !  Truly  a  God  "  long-suffering  and  slow  to  wrath,  and  plenteous  in
mercy,"  is  our  God,  who  wearies  not  at  our  long  wandering,  and  welcomes  even  the
latest  return.

IV.  The  sight  of  God  and  the  sight  of  sin  involve  each  other.  (Ver,  8.)
Jonah  had  lost  sight  of  God  and  of  his  own  guiltiness  together.  In  his  conduct  up  to
this  point  we  see  the  most  astounding  oblivion  of  both.  And  now  the  two  matters
come  to  mind  together,  suggesting  a  logical  connection  between  them.  And  so  there
is.  Sin  is  a  conscious  offence  against  God,  Its  antagonism  to  him  is  its  essential
element.  Accordingly,  the  sense  of  it  will  come  and  go  with  the  thought  of  God,  and
will  be  adequate  as  this  is  adequate.  You  cannot  remember  the  offence  and  yet  forget
the  offended  Being.  Neither  can  you  realize  God  as  near  and  cognizant  without  a  con-
sciousness of  your  moral  attitude  toward  him     The  thought  of  sin  and  the  thought  of


OT.  XL  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  U

God,  in  fact,  brinp;  up  each  other.  And  not  only  is  the  fact  of  sin,  but  the  extent  and
evil  of  it  are  revealed  in  the  revelation  of  God.  Contact  with  the  plumb-line  l)etrays
the  curve  in  the  bowing  wall.  So,  side  by  side  with  God's  ideal  holiness,  sin  looks
itself  and  looks  its  worst  (Job  xlii.  5).  When  a  man  sees  his  sinfulness,  he  has  also^
as  the  condition  of  it,  got  a  glimpse  of  God.  To  Jonah  his  late  conduct  seems  nothing
now  but  the  pursuit  of  lying  vanities.  He  had  no  fruit  in  it.  Every  promise  of  good
it  held  out  had  been  falsified.  He  had  not  escaped.  He  had  not  improved  matters  ia
any  way.  He  had  only  intensified  existing  evils  and  involved  himself  and  others  ia
new  troubles.  And  that  is  a  true  picture  of  sin  the  world  over  and  all  history  through.
It  is  a  following  of  delusive  phantasies,  and  a  running  away  from  our  own  mercies.
Its  prospective  blessings  burst  like  bubbles  in  our  hands — the  hands  that,  but  for  it,
would  have  been  full  of  theVshoicest  gifts  of  God.

v.   ThK  RECErVINO  OF   SPIBITDAL   QOOD  IS   FOLLOWED   BT  A   DESIRE  TO   UAEK  BOMB

BETCBN.  (Ver.  9.)  Gratitude  is  a  universal  duty,  and  ought  to  be  a  universal  gracei
All  men  receive  blessing  from  God,  and  as  a  consequence  owe  him  thanks.  Of  the
gratitude  due,  however,  they  fall  tar  short.  Some  good  things  come  incognito,  and  are
thus  received  unthankfully.  Other  good  things,  God's  free  gifts,  are  traced  to  «ome
earthly  source,  and  so  produce  no  thankful  feeling.  And  then  the  multitude  of  life's
mercies,  so  obviously  Divine,  are  yet  so  common  that  their  origin  is  forgotten,  and  they
•re  received  as  a  matter  of  course.  But  spiritual  gifts  can  never  be  ungratefully  received.
They  are  too  conspicuously  gracious  to  be  taken  as  a  matter  of  right.  They  are  too
immeasurably  great  to  be  lightly  deemed  of.  They  involve  the  gift  of  a  new  heart
itself,  in  which  gratitude  is  a  native  growth,  because  grace  has  made  it  God-like.  There
are  no  thankless  Christians.  Ingratitude  possibly  means  the  spiritual  nature  absent
or  in  abeyance,  and  points,  where  we  find  it,  to  previous  spiritual  deforcement.  Such
deforcement  Jonah  had  suffered  during  the  continuance  of  his  rebellious  freak.  Kow
that  religions  principle  had  resumed  the  sway  in  his  soul,  the  gratitude  is  restored  that
had  been  exiled  during  the  spiritual  interregnum.  And  everywhere  and  always  the  heart
that  has  been  blessed  to  saving  effect  is  one  in  which  infallibly  is  mooted  the  question
of  making  grateful  return.

VL    DrVINK   DELIVERANCE  18  ALWAYS  TIMED  TO  ABRIVB   WHEN   THERE   IS   RIPENESS

FOB  IT.  (Ver.  10.)  Deliverance  any  sooner  would  have  been  too  soon.  It  would  hav«
anticipated  repentance,  and  so  have  left  the  erring  prophet  unreclaimed.  It  would,  in
fact,  have  defeated  the  object  for  which  the  entire  disciplinary  course  had  been  adopted.
It  could  not  therefore  occur  in  a  divinely  ordered  life-history.  God's  providence  never
counterworks  his  scheme  of  grace.  The  one  is  adjusted  to  the  other.  His  backsliding
Jonahs  are  converted  before  his  disciplinary  whales  vomit  them  forth.  See  you  to  the
repentance,  and  God  will  see  to  your  relief.  Refining  silver,  at  a  certain  stage  the
molten  metal  becomes  for  an  instant  so  still  and  bright  that  the  refiner  can  see  his  image
in  it  as  in  a  glass.  And  this,  it  is  said,  is  the  moment  to  pour  it  out,  to  anticipate
which  or  delay  beyond  it  is  to  spoil  the  whole  experiment.  In  the  visitations  of  his
hand,  God  sits,  we  read,  "as  a  refiner  and  purifier  of  silver,"  to  "purify  the  sons  of
Levi,  and  purge  them  as  gold  and  silver"  (Mai.  iii.  3).  No  fear  that  he  will  spoil  the
process  by  taking  you  out  of  the  fire  a  single  moment  out  of  date.  He  will  keep  yott
under  discipline  till  he  sees  his  image  in  your  purified  soul,  and  in  that  moment  precisely
will  reiaove  his  hand.

•  He  that  from  dross  would  win  the  preoions  ore.
Bends  o'er  the  crucible  an  earnest  eye,
The  subtle  searching  process  to  explore,

Lest  the  one  brilliant  moment  should  pass  by
When,  in  the  molten  silver's  virgin  mass.
He  meets  his  pictured  face  as  in  a  glass.
**  Thus  in  QoA'b  furnace  are  his  people  tried ;
Thrice  happy  they  who  to  the  end  endure.
But  who  the  fiery  trial  may  abide  ?

"Who  from  the  crucible  come  forth  so  pure
That  he  whose  eyes  of  flame  look  through  the  whole
Hay  see  liis  image  perfoi.-t  in  the  soul  ? "

(J.  Montgomery.)

J.E.B.


M  TUE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  n,  1— la

Vers.  1 — 7. — "  De  profundis : "  distress  and  prayer.  "  Then  Jonah  prayed  unto  the
Lord  his  God  out  of  the  fish's  belly,"  etc.  Unexampled  position  of  Jonah — no  details
given,  and  hints  lomewhat' obscure;  evidently  he  retained  measure  of  consciousness,
but  for  how  long  we  know  not — seems  to  have  been  conscious  of  moving  through  the
water  before  being  swallowed  by  the  fish — miracle  of  his  preservation  corresponds  to
that  of  the  three  Hebrews  in  the  furnace  (Dan.  iii.  27),  or  of  the  burning  bush  (Exod.
iii.  2,  3) — element  of  apparent  destruction  becomes  supernaturally  element  of  preserva-
tion— this  record  of  his  feelings  composed  after  his  deliverance — a  record  of  the  conflict
of  sight  and  faith — to  sight,  the  situation  desperate — faith  pierces  to  the  unseen,  finds
support,  and  finally  triumphs.  The  prayer  is  a  singular  combination  of  midnight  dark-
ness and  noonday,  light.

I.  The  situation.  Described  in  many  expressions,  some  of  awful  intensity :  "  By
reason  of  mine  affliction ;  "  "  out  of  the  belly  of  hell ; "  "  in  the  deep.  In  the  midst  of
the  seas ; "  "  The  floods  compassed  me  about,  all  thy  billows  and  thy  waves  passed  over
me ; "  "  out  of  thy  sight ; "  "  The  depths  closed  me  round  about,  the  weeds  were  wrapt
about  my  head ; "  "  I  went  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  mountains,  the  earth  with  her
bars  were  about  me  for  ever."  Situation  Boemed  absolutely  hopeless — physical  sur-
roundings the  most  frightful  ever  known— each,  too,  appeared  a  token  of  Divine
displeasure — apparently  as  little  hope  for  the  soul  as  for  the  body.

II.  Its  boubce — from  God.  For  it  was  not  a  chance  that  had  befallen  Jonah ;  it
was  all  God's  doing :  "  2%oa  hadst  cast  me  into  the  deep ;  all  thy  billows  and  thy  waves
passed  over  me."  God  had  pursued  him  ever  since  he  turned  his  back  on  him ;  raised
the  storm  against  him ;  caused  the  lot  to  fall  on  him ;  cast  him  into  the  deep ;  entombed
him  in  the  fish ;  shut  him  up,  as  it  were,  in  despair.  Yet  he  utters  no  word  of  reproach ;
God  is  justified  when  he  speaks,  and  clear  when  he  judges  (Fs.  li.  4).

III.  OoNSTEENATioN  OF  HIS  soui.  The  first  effect  was  to  paralyze  him.  "  I  said,
I  am  cast  out  of  thy  sight;  "  "My  soul  fainted  within  me."  Horrors  of  his  situation
unexampled,  escape  impossible;  shut  up  a  helpless  prey  to  the  most  appalling  forms
of  destruction — Omnipotence  itself  crushing  him :  "  It  is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into
the  hands  of  the  living  God."

IV.  The  dawn.  "  When  my  soul  fainted  within  me  I  remembered  the  Lord."  The
darkest  hour  of  night  is  that  which  precedes  the  dawn— out  of  the  very  depths  of  help-
lessness and  desolation  faith  begins  to  rise.  Far  more  beautiful  than  the  fabled  sight
when  the  goddess  of  beauty  rose  from  the  ocean  foam  is  the  sight  of  Jonah's  faith
rising  from  the  depths,  both  literal  and  spiritual.  The  moment  of  utter  hdplessneu
is  often  the  turning-point  in  spiritual  experience — at  first,  in  justification  (Rom.  iii.  19,
21),  afterwards  in  recovery  from  backsliding  (Hob.  ii.  14),  and  in  sanctification  (Bom.
T.  20).

"  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  bring;
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  ollns;;
Naktd,  come  to  tliee  for  dress ;
Helpless,  look  to  thee  for  grace  •
Foul,  I  to  the  fountain  fly ;
Wash  me,  Saviour,  or  I  die  I "

1,  In  "remembering  God,"  Jonah  recognized  him  as  "the  Lord  his  God;"  his  by
national  covenant,  by  personal  choice  (the  fruit  of  Divine  grace),  and  by  his  prophetic
call  and  consecration;  his,  though  he  had  attempted  to  See  from  his  presence,  for  does  he
not  say, "  Turn,  0  backsliding  Israel,  and  I  will  heal  your  backsliding  "  (Jer.  iii,  12, 22)  ?
The  God  who  first  chose  him  in  all  his  unworthiness  must  have  an  interest  in  him
Btill.  So  the  psalmist  cried  ;  so  Jesus  afterwards  in  the  like  spirit,  "  My  God,  my
God,  why  hast  thou  firsaken  me  ?  "  2.  He  looked  towards  God's  temple.  Why  ?
Because  of  the  promise  virtually  given  to  Solomon  (1  Kings  viii.  38).  He  builds  on
God's  word,  "  Kemember  the  word  unto  thy  servant,  upon  which  thou  hast  caused  ma
to  hope  "  (Ps.  cxix.  49).  He  thinks  of  the  temple,  the  sacred  ark,  the  mercy-seat,  the
overshadowing  cherubims,  the  promise  to  Moses,  "  There  I  will  meet  with  you,  and  I
will  commune  with  you  from  above  the  mercy-seat"  (Exod.  xxv.  22).  He  takes  hold
of  this — steadies  his  soul  upon  it — shaking  off  the  impression  of  his  horrible  surround-
ings,  and  enters  into  peace.  What  a  change  I — the  belly  of  hell  turned  into  the  gate
of  heaven,  the  howl  of  despair  changed  into  the  hallelujah  of  delight.


OH.  Ill— 10.]  THE  BOOK  OF   JONAH.  61

See  here  an  encouragement  to  spirit  of  faith — in  Jonah  all  lights  extinguished  except
faith — in  lowest  depths,  "  let  Israel  hope  in  the  Lord>  for  with  the  Lord  there  is  mercy,
and  with  him  is  plenteous  redemption."  Even  when  we  are  the  authors  of  our  own
trouhles,  when  we  are  in  the  depths  by  reason  of  sin,  n0  desperandum  f  "0  Israel,
thou  hast  destroyed  thyself,  but  in  m«  is  thy  help." — ^W.  G.  B.

Vers.  2 — 10. — Triumph,  thanksgiving,  "  And  said,  I  cried  by  reason  of  mine  afflic-
tion unto  the  Lord,  and  he  heard  me ;  out  of  the  belly  of  hell  cried  I,  and  thou  heardest
my  voice,"  etc.  This  is  one  of  the  most  striking  instances  in  all  Scripture  of  the  benefit
of  believing  prayer.

"  Lord,  what  a  change  within  us  one  short  hour

Spent  in  thy  presence  will  prevail  to  make  I

What  heavy  burdens  from  our  bosom  take  t
What  parched  lands  refresh  as  with  a  shower  I
We  kneel,  and  all  around  us  seems  to  lower;

We  rise,  and  all,  the  distant  and  the  neM,

Stands  forth  in  sunny  outline,  brave  and  clear.
We  kneel,  liow  weak ;  we  rise,  how  fnll  of  power  I
Wliy  therefore  should  we  do  ourselves  this  wrong,

That  we  are  ever  overborne  with  care?
That  we  should  ever  weak  or  heartless  be.

Anxious  or  troubled,  when  with  us  in  prayer.
And  joy,  and  strength,  and  courage,  are  with  thee  ?  "

(Trench.)

In  the  brighter  part  of  Jonah's  prayer  we  notice  his —

I.  Grateful  becoonition  of  pbaveb  A8  answered.  (Vers.  2,  7.)  Happy  effect
of  certainty  as  to  this.  There  are  grounds  for  such  certainty:  1.  When  prayer  is  offered
trustfully,  poured  as  into  the  ear  of  a  Father,  who  has  promised  to  hear  such  prayer.
Answer  to  be  expected,  since  God  is  true  and  never  can  deceive  us.  2.  When  the  evil
dreaded  is  actually  averted,  or  the  benefit  asked  is  sent.  Unbelief  says  it  would  have
been  so  at  any  rate ;  faith  says, "  My  prayer  came  in  unto  thee,  into  thine  holy  temple."
8.  When  the  heart  is  filled  with  a  sense  of  the  goodness  and  love  of  God  and  his  trust-
worthiness even  before  the  answer  comes,  it  may  be  felt  that  the  prayer  is  heard.  Con-
fidence in  God  as  Hearer  of  prayer  is  a  most  valuable  Christian  grace — ever  associated
■with  deep  humility — infinitely  removed  from  presumption  and  boasting.

II.  Humble  aoknowlbdoment  of  past  guilt  and  folly.  (Ver.  8.)  "They
that  observe  lying  vanities  forsake  their  own  mercy."  This  is  what  he  had  done.  Human
devices  contrary  to  will  of  God  are  "  lying  vanities ;  "  empty,  they  bring  no  satisfac-
tion ;  lying,  they  promise  peace  and  safety,  but  bring  misery  and  horrible  troubles.
So  Eve  found,  so  Pharaoh,  so  Israel  when  they  went  after  ways  of  heathen.  So  Jonah
himself.  So  all  who  forsake  Fountain  of  living  waters  and  hew  out  to  themselves  broken
cisterns  that  can  hold  no  water.  Worldly  devices  to  get  happiness  apart  from  God
are  indeed  "vanity  of  vanities."  Soul  of  man  cannot  be  satisfied  with  husks.  For
God's  servants  to  follow  them  is  to  forsake  their  own  mercy.  It  is  for  prodigal  son  to
change  father's  house  for  society  of  riotere  and  harlots ;  "  Many  sorrows  shall  be  to  the
wicked :  but  he  that  trusteth  in  the  Lord,  mercy  shall  compass  him  about "  (Ps.  xxxii.
10).  The  way  of  duty  is  ever  the  way  of  safety,  peace,  and  comfort ;  neglected  duty
is  a  sure  forerunner  of  trouble  j  an  evU  conscience  can  never  be  the  harbinger  of  sweet
content.

ni.  PuBLK)  EXPRESSION  OF  THANKSGiviNo  AND  coNBEOBATiON.  (Ver.  9.)  Sacrifice
— thanksgiving — ^vows.  This  is  to  be  done  openly  and  publicly  at  the  proper  place.
No  concealment  by  Jonah  of  what  had  taken  place.  He  would  at  once  proclaim  his
own  guilt,  and  declare  himself  a  monument  of  God's  grace.  Genuine  repentance  carries
spirit  of  self-abasement,  conscious  indebtedness  to  God^-eagerness  to  be  more  conse-
crated to  him.  The  spring  of  this  feeling — "  salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  God's  saving
mercy  keeps  alive  in  redeemed  hearts  the  sense  of  infinite  obligation,  and  prompts  to
every  suitable  recognition.  No  other  spiritual  dynamic  like  this — ali  active  obedi-
ence, sU  the  labour  of  lore,  all  patient  endurance  spring  from  this;  whatever  our
mercies,  we  have  the  duty  of  grateful  remembrance  of  them,  and  actire  consecration  to


66  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  n.  1— la

God  in  connection  with  them,  Jonah  is  disenton.hed  (ver.  10).  "And  the  Lord
spake  unto  the  fish,  and  it  vomited  out  Jonah  upon  the  dry  land."  At  length  the
purpose  of  the  chastisement  is  served,  therefore  it  is  removed.  The  great  fish  continues
under  God's  control,  and  having  carried  Jonah  safely  through  the  deep,  deposits  him
on  the  dry  land.  "  As  you  see  the  foamy  track  the  creature  leaves  behind  gradually
melting  into  the  quiet  green  of  the  sea ;  as  you  turn  and  look  at  the  prophet,  washing
himself  from  the  filth  of  his  living  grave,  and  then  standing  upon  the  shore,  inhaling
the  fresh  breeze,,  rejoicing  in  heaven's  blessed  light,  and — to  prove  and  feel  himself
alive,  to  make  sure  that  all  was  not  a  dream — shouting,  perhaps,  in  a  loud  voice,
'Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,'  say,  'God  helping  me,  I  shall  never  despair.  Never.  For
I  see  that  the  heaviest  judgment  may  ripen  into  mercy.  The  darkest  night  may  havu
a  morning.  The  deepest  grave  has  a  resurrection-portal.  A  voyage  wrapped  in
whirling  storm,  and  horrible  with  engulfing  dangers,  may  yet  end  in  safety  on  a  sunny
shore '"  (Ealeigh).  Jonah  a  sign :  1.  To  the  Ninevites.  His  history  a  twofold  picture-
lesson  to  them.  (1)  Of  the  consequence  of  spurning  the  authority  of  the  God  of  the
Hebrews ;  for  he  is  no  local  deity,  but  Lord  of  earth  and  sea,  of  all  creatures  and  all
their  actions,  and  has  showed  he  could  signally  punish  and  humhle  Jonah  on  the  very
element  to  which  he  had  betaken  himself  fur  safety  from  this  God.  It  was  before  this
God  the  iniquities  of  Nineveh  had  come.  How  must  he  view  these?  (2)  Of  the
pardoning,  restoi  ing,  and  preserving  mercy  of  God  to  the  penitent — God  not  inexorable
— if  Nineveh  should  repent,  it,  like  Jonah,  would  experience  God's  mercy.  2.  To  the
men  of  Christ's  generation.  (1)  In  his  humiliation.  The  Jews  asked  of  Christ  a  sign
(Malt.  xii.  40) — some  great  display  of  power  in  the  heavens.  He  refused ;  the  only  sign
to  be  given  would  be  precisely  opposite,  viz.  that  of  Jonah — a  sign  not  in  heaven,  but
beneath  the  surface  of  the  earth.  As  Jonah  suffered  humiliation  for  his  own  sin,  so
Jesus  would  suffer  humiliation  for  the  sin  which  he  bore.  Reality  of  his  Messiahship  was
to  be  shown  in  bis  death  and  burial,  and  continuii^g  for  the  same  period  as  Jonah  under
the  power  of  death.  Divine,  saving  power  of  Jesus  is  connected  with  his  humiliation  aa
Sin-bearer.  "  As  if  Jesus  had  said, '  'I'he  signs  which  are  to  discover  themselves  in  ma
are  to  grow  darker,  and  not  brighter :  they  are  to  be  derived,  not  from  the  heavens  above,
but  from  the  depths  beneath — from  the  very  chamber  of  the  dead ;  yet  am  I  not  less  on
that  account  the  Ambassador  of  Heaven ;  yea,  surpassing  Jonah  in  the  depth  of  ray
humilia^on,  I  still  more  surpass  him  in  the  dignity  of  my  character;  and  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  healhen  city,  which  repented  at  his  preaching,  will  assuredly  rise  up  in
judgment  to  condemn  the  impeniient  of  this  generation'"  (Fairbaim).  (2)  In  his
exaltation.  This  view  is  rather  implied  than  expressed  by  our  Lord,  Jonah  escaping
from  the  fish  is  a  type  of  Christ  rising  from  the  dead.  'JThe  Ninevites  were  moved  to
repentance  by  means  of  the  type ;  they  must  have  heard  Jonah's  history  and  been  greatly
impressed  by  it.  The  Jews  had  the  antitype — the  literal  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the
dead,  but  were  not  moved  by  it.  Herein  is  a  great  lesson  for  all — listen  to  the  Divine
Messengei',  who  liveth  and  was  dead,  and  is  alive  for  ever,  and  hath  the  keys  of  hell  and
of  death  I  "  1  hough  our  Lord's  pointing  to  the  sign  of  Jonah,  with  the  assurance  that
no  other  would  be  given  them,  might  at  first  seem  to  betoken  only  trouble  and  disaster
to  his  mission,  yet  the  more  thoughtful  and  discerning  minds  would  not  fail  to  discover,
on  further  reflection,  that  there  was  also  couched  under  it  a  promise  of  encouragement
and  success  far  beyond  anything  that  had  hitherto  appeared.  He  was  to  become  to  the
world  the  sign  that  Jonah  was  to  Nineveh  only  when  he  entered  on  the  resurrection-
life,  and  in  his  Name  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  were  preached  to  the  people.
And  hence  the  great  stress  laid  upon  the  fact  of  the  resurrection  by  the  first  heralds  of
the  gospel,  and  the  wonderful  effect  produced  by  it  upon  those  who  heard  them,  nut
simply  on  account  of  the  proof  it  afforded  of  the  truth  of  Christ's  pretensions  to  be  the
Son  of  God,  but  also,  and  still  more,  for  the  impressive  attestation,  the  living  witness  it
gave  of  the  placability  of  God,  and  of  the  holy  earnestness  of  his  desire  that  sinners
would  repent  and  live.  Precisely  as  in  the  case  of  Jonah,  though  in  a  manner  unspeakably
more  solemn  and  affecting,  the  things  that  had  befallen  Jesus  and  the  condition  in  which
he  now  presented  himself  through  his  ambassadors  to  the  people,  were  seen  to  be  a
singular  and  most  magnificent  provision  of  love  on  the  part  of  God  to  reach  their  oon-
sciences,  and  to  avert,  ere  it  might  be  too  late,  the  doom  of  condemnation  which  Divine
justice  had  suspended  over  their  heads  "  (Fairbaim). — W.  G.  B.


OT.n.1— 10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH,  57

Ver.  2. — The  value  of  affliction  (as  seen  in  Jonah's  prayer).  It:  1.  Brings  the  man
to  himself.  To  «o«Z-consciousness,  to  Ood-consciousness.  When  "  in  the  shadow  of  a
great  affliction,  the  soul  sits  dumb."  Chastened,  he  feels  his  need  of  chastisement,  and
knows  from  whom  it  comes.  "  Thy  waves  j  "  "  thy  billows."  2.  Brings  the  consola-
tion of  Scripture  to  the  man.  From  various  psalms  of  sorrow  (now  remembered)  Jonah
quotes.  By  sorrow  he  enters  into  the  sorrows  of  others.  Affliction  "  opens  up  tibe
mine  of  Scripture,  before  seen  only  on  the  surface."  3,  Brings  the  man  to  God.  ■  He
"cries"  to  him.  He  comes  to  him.  He  feels  that  "sorrow's  crown  of  sorrow"  is
in  being  "  cast  out  of  God's  sight."  4.  Brings  the  assurance  of  salvation  to  the  man.
Thus,  divinely  blest,  affliction  is  good.  The  eoul,  then,  triumphant  over  trouble,  can
exclaim,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord ; "  «  0  Lord  my  God."— G.  T,  C.

Ver.  8. — "Lying  vanities,"  1.  Vanities,  Vanities  are  vain  things — things  that  deceive.
Such  are  idols.  All  things  are  idols  that  men  trust  out  of  God.  Jonah  had  his  idol-
it  was  his  false  love  for  his  country.  How  many  idols  1 — ambition,  pride,  strength,
wealth,  influence,  self,  self-will.  And  men  observe  them  as  gods.  But  they  are  all
"  lying."  They  deceive.  Their  promises  fail.  One  only  is  "  faithful  who  has  promised  "
us  happiness.  2.  The  consequence  of  observing  these  lying  vanities.  Men  who  observe
them  "  forsake  their  own  mercy."  How  much  they  leave !  Mercy  I  It  is  to  all ;  but
not  to  all  alike,  "  Their  own,"  In  turning  to  any  idol,  men  forsake  Qod,  "  whose
property  is  always  to  have  mercy." — G.  T.  0.

Ver.  9. — Thankfulness,  "  Thankfulness  opens  the  door  of  mercy,  sets  God's  goodness
free  to  be  good  to  us,  prepares  us  to  receive  blessing."  It  should  be  cultivated,  It
should  be  expressed.  "  The  voice  of  thanksgiving."  Jonah  was  thankful.  He  had
strong  reason  indeed  to  be.  He  paid  the  vows  he  had  made.  "Be  ye  thankfuL"
Every  mercy  is  an  incentive  to  thankfulness.  And  God's  mercies,  "  new  every  morn-
ing and  repeated  every  evening,"  and  panseless  in  their  coming,  "  cannot  be  reckoned
up."  And  all  crowned  by  the  gift  of  Christ.  "  Thanks  be  imto  God  for  his  unspeakable
Gift."    "  Thanksgiving  is  thanksliving."

"  Let  never  day  nor  night  unhallow'd  pass,
But  still  remember  what  the  Lord  hath  done."

G.  T.  0.

Ver.  7. —  The  prophet's  prayer.  The  contrast  which  Jonah  depicts  between  his  own
conduct  and  that  of  the  heathen  with  whom  he  came  in  contact  is  very  unfavourable
to  himself.  He  appears  as  a  coward  fleeing  from  his  duty,  and  cruel  enough  to  prefer
that  the  Ninevites  should  be  destroyed  rather  tlian  that  his  accuracy  should  be
impugned.  But  the  idolatrous  sailors  prayed  in  the  storm  as  best  they  could,  and
they  were  humane  enough  to  try  to  save  him,  even  after  they  had  been  told  to  cast
him  overboard  (ch.  i.  13).  It  is  not  only  noteworthy  that  Jonah  wrote  thus,  but  also
that  a  book  which  compared  a  Jew  so  disadvantageously  with  the  heathen  should  have
been  preserved  by  the  Jewish  people,  who  were  notoriously  proud  and  bigoted.  Describe
the  event  narrated  in  the  preceding  chapter.  Point  out  the  use  our  Lord  made  of  it  to
typify  his  own  death  and  resurrection.  Pass  on  to  apply  the  prophet's  experience  to
what  is  represented  by  it  among  ourselves.

I.  The  neglect  of  appointed  service  is  a  sin.  The  command  given  to  Jonah
was  plain  enough,  but  he  wilfully  disobeyed  it.  Some  of  the  excuses  he  may  have  made
to  conscience  may  be  profitably  snggested.  1.  "  /  have  alrewly  done  my  share  of
service ;  let  another  undertake  this."  He  had  faithfully  conveyed  his  message  to  King
Amaziah,  and  had  doubtless  proved  bis  fldelity  on  other  occasions,  but  he  shrank  from
this  new  summons  from  God.  Past  service  does  not  relieve  us  of  present  responsibilities.
The  indolence  or  the  failure  of  others  will  not  justify  us  in  ignoring  duty.  2.  "It  is
useless  to  preach  to  the  Ninevites ;  they  would  laugh  me  to  scorn."  Ignorant  of  the  true
God  as  they  were,  it  certainly  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  they  would  humble
themselves  before  him  at  the  bidding  of  a  stianger  preaching  in  their  streets.  Yet
often  those  we  deem  to  be  the  most  hopeless  are  the  most  ready  to  listen.  Even  if
they  were  not,  it  is  at  our  peril  that  we  refuse  to  obey  a  God-given  impulse  to  sj  eak  to


68


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


[oh.  m.  1—10.


them.  3.  "  These  Ninevites  are  the  foes  of  my  country ;  let  one  of  their  own  citizens
he  raised  mp  to  warn  them."  National  hostility  and  personal  prejudice  have  done  much
to  hinder  God's  work  in  all  ages.

II.  Such  sin  in  God's  people  is  followed  bt  chastisement.  1.  Chastisement
does  not  always  follow  sin.  Sometimes  it  precedes  and  prevents  it.  Paul's  thorn  in
the  flesh  was  sent,  not  because  he  was  exalted  above  measure,  but  lest  he  should  be.
Bbt  often  an  affliction  is  intended  to  bring  a  sinner  to  a  right  state  of  mind  about  sin
already  committed.  2.  Chastisement  gives  us  time  to  thinh.  Jonah  acted  on  impulse,
and  hurriedly  fled  to  Joppa.  When  cast  into  the  sea  he  imagined  that  all  was  over
with  him ;  but  when  he  was  miraculously  preserved  he  had  opportunity  to  reflect  on
his  own  wrong-doing  and  on  God's  marvellous  mercy.  So  the  ill  health  which  prevents
work,  the  family  affliction  which  keeps  us  within  doors,  the  failure  which  sets  us  free
from  an  accustomed  sphere, — give  us  time  to  think  of  neglected  duties  and  to  recover
strength  by  prayer.  3.  In  chastisement  Ood  is  near.  Jonah  felt  that  he  was  not  beyond
Divine  help.  "My  prayer  came  in  unto  thee."  Compare  Peter  in  prison,  and  Paul  in
the  storm,  and  John  in  Patmos,  and  Bunyan  in  jail.  Listen  to  the  words  of  Bradford,
"  I  thank  God  more  of  this  prison  and  of  this  dark  dungeon  than  of  any  parlour,  yea,
tban  of  any  pleasure  ever  I  had ;  for  in  it  I  find  God,  my  sweet  God  always."  Jonah
was  cast  out  as  Adam  was  from  Paradise,  and  as  Job  was  from  bis  home,  that  he  might
learn,  through  prayer,  to  suffer  and  be  strong.

III.  Chastisement,  rightly  beceivbd,  brdtos  about  hepentanob.  1.  In  order
to  this  it  was  necessary  for  Jonah  to  recognize  God's  hand  in  this  event.  He  felt  it  was
not  the  result  of  chance  nor  of  human  action.  Hence  he  does  not  say,  "  The  sailors
cast  me  into  the  deep,"  but  "thou"  (ver.  3);  nor  does  he  speak  of  "the  waves  and
billows  of  the  sea,"  but  "  thy  billows  and  thy  waves  "  (ver.  3).  We  too  must  learn  to
look  beyond  second  causes,  such  as  an  unfortunate  step  or  a  man's  injustice,  and  see
God  as  the  Disposer  of  all  events.  2.  I^is  thought  led  Jonah  to  true  repentance.  He
did  not  despair,  although  there  seemed  no  hope  of  deliverance.  He  did  not  pray  to  be
delivered  from  danger,  but  earnestly  thanks  God  for  his  rescue  from  the  sea,  and  praised
him  in  the  belly  of  the  whale  that  he  had  been  so  good  and  merciful.  The  reality  nf
his  repentance  was  shown  in  this,  that  he  gratefully  and  bravely  did  the  work  he  had
formerly  refused.  His  vow  made  in  trouble  was  faithfully  kept.  Pliny  advised  one  whs
wished  to  please  the  gods  to  be  the  same  when  well  as  he  had  vowed  to  be  when  sick.
A  lesson  for  us.

IV.  Such  eepentanoe  itodee  chastisement  leads  to  acceptable  pbateb.  His
prayer  shows  that  he  had  not  given  up  hope,  that  he  still  believed  that  Jehovah  was
his  God,  and  would  do  what  was  best  with  him.  Strangely  and  soon  the  prayer  was
answered.

Conclusion.  We  may  obtain  mercy  as  Jonah  did.  We  may  find  that  the  very
instrument  of  death  becomes  the  preserver  of  life,  as  the  great  fish  proved  an  ark  of
safety  to  Jonah ;  and  as  he  was  cast  upon  the  shore,  so  a  trouble  may  cast  us  on  the
shore  of  duty,  and  death  will  cast  us  on  the  shore  uf  heaven. — A.  B.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEE  lU.

Vers.  1 — 10.— Part  HI.  Jonah's  Pkbaoh-
INO  IN  Nineveh  ;  the  Refentanoe  ov  tbb
Ninevites.

Vers.  1 — 3. — §  1.  Jonah  is  sent  a  second
time  to  Nineveh,  and  obeys  the  command.

Ver.  1. — The  seoond  time.  He  is  forgiven
and  restored  to  his  office,  and  the  commis-
sion formerly  given  is  renewed.  Commen-
tators have  supposed  that  he  weiit  up  to
Jerusalem  to  pay  his  vows,  and  that  the


word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him  there.
But  all  unnecessary  details  are  omitted
from  the  account,  and  we  know  nothing
about  this  matter.  The  beginning  of  the
next  verie,  "  arise,"  seems  to  imply  that  lie
was  then  in  some  settled  home,  perhaps  at
Gath-hepher.

Ver.  2.— That  great  city  (see  note  on  oh.
1.  2).  Preaching;  rendered  "cry"  in  ch.  i.
2;  Septuagint,  Kiipvyiia.  This  time  the
proclamation  is  unto  it,  as  interested  in  the
message,  not  "against  it,"  as  doomed  to
destruction  (Fusey).


OH.  m.  1-rlO.]


THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.


6S


Ver.  3. — Arose,  and  went  He  was  now
as  prompt  to  obey  as  formerly  to  flee.  Was;
i.e.  when  Jonah  visited  it.  Nothing  can  be
argued  from  the  past  tense  here  as  to  tlie
date  of  the  composition  of  the  book.  It  la
a  mere  historical  detail,  and  cannot  be
forced  into  a  proof  that  Jonah  wrote  after
the  destruction  of  Nineveh.  An  exceeding
great  city;  literally,  a  city  great  to  God;
ir({\ij  iifyd\ri  rif  ®ef  (Septuagint) ;  great
before  God — in  his  estimation,  as  though
even  God  must  acknowledge  it.  So  Nimrod
is  called  (Gen.  x.  9)  "a  mighty  hunter
before  the  Lord ; "  and  Moses,  in  Acts  vii.
20,  is  said  to  have  been  "  beautiful  to  God."
The  expression  may  also  mean  that  God
(MoMm,  God  as  Governor  of  the  world)
regarded  this  city  with  interest,  as  intended
in  the  Bivine  counsels  to  perform  an  im-
portant part.  For  he  is  not  the  God  of  the
Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  Gentiles  (Bom.
iii.  29).  Of  three  days'  journey;  i.e.  in  cir-
cumference— about  sixty  miles  (see  note  on
oh.  i.  2).  Or  the  writer  may  mean  that  it
took  Jonah  three  days  to  visit  the  various

Saarters  of  this  huge  place.  The  area  of
le  vast  quftdrangle  containing  the  remains
of  the  four  cities  comprised  under  the  name
Nineveh  is  estimated  by  Professor  Bawlinson
at  two  hundred  and  sixteen  square  miles.
We  ought,  however,  to  omit  Ehorsabad  from
this  computation,  as  it  was  not  founded  till
Bargon's  time,  B.o.  710.

Ver.  4. — §  2.  Jonah,  undeterred  by  the
danger  of  the  enterprise,  executes  hit  mis-
$ion  at  once,  and  announces  the  approaching
destruction  of  the  city.  Began  to  enter  into
the  city  a  day's  journey,  Jonah  commenced
his  day's  journey  in  the  city,  and,  as  he
found  a  suitable  place,  uttered  his  warn-
ing cry,  uot'  necebsarily  continuing  in  one
straight  course,  but  going  to  the  most  fre-
quented spots.  At  the  time  of  Jonah's
preaching  the  royal  residence  was  probably
at  Cbalah ;  i.e.  Nimrud,  the  most  southern
of  the  cities.  Coming  from  Palestine,  he
would  reach  this  part  first,  so  that  his
strange  mussage  would  soon  come  to  the
king's  ears  (ver.  6).  Yet  forty  days.
"Forty"  in  Scripture  is  the  number  of
probation  (see  Gen.  vii.  4,  12 ;  Exod.  xxiv.
18;  1  Kings  .xix.  8;  Matt.  iv.  2).  The
LXX.  has,  en  rpeis  ij/ifpat,  "yet  three
days,"  owing  probably  to  some  clerical
error,  as  writing  y'  instead  of  ft'.  St.  Augus-
tine ('  De  Civit.,'  xviii.  44)  endeavours  to
explain  the  discrepancy  mystically  as  refer-
ring to  Cliribt  under  difiEerent  circumstances,
as  being  the  same  who  remained  forty
days  on  earth  after  his  resurrection,  and
who  rose  again  on  the  third  day.  Shall
be  overthrown.  This  is  the  word  used  for
the  destruction  of  Sodom  (Gen.  xix.  25,
27;   Amos  ir.  11).      The  prophet  appears


to  have  gone  oa  through  the  oity,  lepeatine
this  one  awful  announcement,  as  we  read
of  fanatics  denouncing  woe  on  Jemsalem
before  its  final  destruction  (Josephus,  *  BelL
Jud.,'  vi.  5.  3).  The  threat  was  conditional
virtually,  though  expressed  in  uncompro-
mising terms.  In  the  Hebrew  the  participle
is  used,  "  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  over-
thrown," as  though  he  saw  at  the  end  of
the  specified  time  the  great  city  lying  in
riiins.  One  sees  from  Isa.  xxxvL  11,  13,
that  Jonah  could  readily  be  understood  by
the  Assyrians.

Vers.  .5— 9.— §  3.  The  Ninevitet  hearken
to  the  cry  of  Jonah,  believe  in  Qod,  and
repent.

Ver.  5. — BelieTed  God;  believed  in  God,
which  implies  trust  and  hope;  Vulgate^
crediderunt  in  Deum.  They  recognized
Jonah  as  God's  messenger ;  they  recognized
God's  power  as  able  to  execute  the  threat,
and  they  had  confidence  in  his  mercy  if
they  repented.  This  great  result  has  seemed
to  some  incredible,  and  has  occasioned  doubta
to  be  oast  upon  the  history.  But,  as  wa
have  seen  in  the  Introduction,  Jonali's  mis-
sion occurred  probably  at  a  time  of  national
depression,  when  men's  minds  were  disposed
to  expect  calamity,  and  anxious  to  avert  it
by  any  means.  Other  considerations  led  to
the  same  result.  They  had  heard  much  of
the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  much  of  the  doing!
of  his  great  prophets  Elijah  and  Elisha;
and  now  they  had  in  their  midst  one  of
these  holy  men,  who,  as  they  were  informed,
had  been  miraculously  preserved  from  death
in  order  to  carry  his  message  to  them ;  for
that  it  was  thus  that  Jonah  was  "a  sign
unto  the  Ninevites"  (Luke  xi.  30)  seems
most  certain.  They  saw  the  Divine  inspira-
tion beaming  in  his  look,  dictating  hit
utterance,  animating  his  bearing,  filling
him  with  (^ourage,  confidence,  and  faith.
The  credulity  with  which  they  received  the
announcements  of  their  own  seers,  their
national  predilection  for  presages  and  omens,
encouraged  them  to  open  their  ears  to  this
stranger,  and  to  regard  his  mission  with
grave  attention.  Their  own  conscience,  too,
was  on  the  prophet's  side,  and  assisted  hia
words  with  its  powerful  pleading.  So  they
believed  in  Qod,  and  proclaimed  a  fast
Spontaneously,  without  any  special  order
from  the  authorities.  Before  the  final  fall
of  Nineveh,  the  inscriptions  mention,  the
then  king  ordered  a  fast  of  one  hundred
days  and  nights  to  the  gods  in  order  to
avert  the  threatened  danger  (see  a  note  by
Professor  Sayoe,  in  G.  Smith's  'History  nf
Babylon,'  p.  156).  Fut  on  sackcloth  (comp.
Gen.  xxxvii.  34;  1  Kings  xxi.  27;  Joel  i.
13).    The  custom  of  changing  the  dress  la


60


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


[oh.  m.  1 — 10.


toten  of  mortrning  was  not  confined  to  the
Hebrews  (oomp.  Ezek.  xxvi  16).

Ver.  6. — For  word  came;  and  the  matter
eame;  liyyiatv  i  \6yos,  "the  word  came
near"  (Septuagint).  The  tokens  of  peni-
tence mentioned  in  ver.  5  were  not  ex-
hibited in  obedience  to  any  royal  command.
Katljer,  as  the  impression  made  by  the
propliet  spread  among  the  people,  and  as
they  adopted  these  modes  of  showing  their
sorrow,  the  news  of  the  movement  reached
the  king,  and  he  put  himself  at  the  head
of  it.  The  reigning  monarch  was  probably
either  Shalraaneser  III.  or  one  of  the  two
who  succeeded  him,  Assbur-danil  and
Asshur-niraii,  whose  three  reigns  extended
from  BO.  781  to  750.  His  robe  (addereth) ;
the  word  used  for  the  "Babylonish  gar-
ment" in  Josh.  vii.  21.  The  magnificence
of  the  Assyrian  kings'  attire  is  attested  by
the  monuments.  Sat  in  ashes  (comp.  Job
U.  8;  Esth.  iv.  8).

Ver.  7. — He  caused  it,  etc.;  literally,  he
eauted  proelamation  to  be  made,  and  said.
I.e.  by  the  heralds.  The  decree.  The  word
nsed  here  (taam)  is  an  Accadian  term,  which
had  become  naturalized  in  Assyria,  Persia,
and  Babylonia,  and  was  applied  to  a  mandate
issued  with  royal  authority.  It  is  found  in
Dan.  iii.  10,  29;  iv.  6;  Ezra  iv.  8,  etc.
Jonah  introduces  it  here  as  being  the  very
vord  employed  in  describing  the  proclama-
tion. And  his  nobles.  Tlie  monarchs  of
Assyria  were  absolute;  and  if  the  king  in
the  present  case  associated  the  magnates
with  himself,  he  did  it  in  an  humility  oc-
casioned by  alarm,  and  because  he  saw  that
they  were  of  the  same  mind  as  himself
(oomp.  Dan.  vi.  17).  Saying.  The  decree
extends  from  here  to  the  end  of  ver.  9.
Han  nor  beast ;  i.e.  domestic  animals,  horses,
mules,  distinct  from  herd  and  flook.  These
great  cities  contained  in  their  area  immense
open  spaces,  like  our  parks,  where  cattle
were  kept.  The  dumb  animals  were  made
to  share  in  their  masters'  fast  and  sorrow,
as  they  shared  their  joy  and  feasting ;  their
bleating  and  bellowing  were  so  many  appeals
to  Heaven  for  mercy ;  the  punishment  of
these  innocent  creatures  was  a  kind  of
atonement  for  the  guilt  of  their  lords  (oomp.
Hos.  iv.  3;  Joel  i.  20;  and  note  how  the
brute  creation  is  said  to  share  in  the  happi-
ness of  paradise  regained,  Isa.  xi).  The
commentators  quote  Virgil, '  Eel.,'  v.  24,  etc.,
where,  however,  the  point  is  that  the  grief
of  the  shepherds  binders  them  from  attend-
ing to  the  wants  of  their  flocks.  Herodotus
(ix.  21)  mentions  an  instance  of  the  Persians
cutting  the  manes  and  tails  of  their  horses
end  mules  in  a  case  of  general  mourning
(comp.  i'^urip.,  'Aloest.,'  428,  etc. ;  Pint.,
'Alex.,'  72).

Ver.  8. — ^Let  man  and  beast  be  covered


with  sackcloth.  As  we  put  trappings  on
horses  in  funerals.  The  LXX.  wrongly
makes  this  verse  give  an  account  of  the
execution  of  the  edict  instead  of  being  part
of  the  edict  itself;  thus:  "And  men  and
beasts  were  clothed  with  sackcloth,"  eto.
Cry  mightily;  i.e.  let  man  cry  miglitily,
Septuagint,  itcrevas,  "  with  intensity ;  "
Vulgate,  in  fortitudine.  Let  them  torn
BYsry  one  from  his  evil  way  (Jer.  xxv.  5 ;
xxxvi.  3,  7).  The  edict  recognizes  the
truth  that  outward  acts  of  penitence  are
worthless  without  moral  reformation — a
truth  which  the  Jews  themselves  had  been
very  Inth  to  admit  (see  Isa.  Iviii.).  And
from  the  violence  that  is  in  their  bands.
The  acts  of  violence  that  their  hands  have
committed  (Job  xvi.  17;  Ps.  vii.  3).  This
is  the  special  sin  of  the  Assyrians,  always
grasping  after  empire,  oppressing  other
nations,  and  guilty  of  rapine  and  avarice  at
home  (see  Isa,  x.  13,  14;  zzxvii.  24,  etc.;
Nah.  ii.  11, 12;  iii.  1).

Ver.  9.— Who  can  tellT  (2  Sam.  xil.  22).
An  expression  of  hope  that  the  Divine
wrath  may  be  averted  by  the  timely  repent-
ance. It  is  the  same  form  of  words  as  in
Joel  ii,  14,  "Perhaps  God  would  thereby
indicate  that  he  had  himself  put  it  into  their
mouths  "  (Pusey ;  comp.  Jer.  xviii.  11).  If
Ood ;  i.e.  the  one  God,  whom  the  king  and
his  people  now  acknowledge  as  supreme,
like  the  idol-worshippers  at  Carmel,  when
they  fell  on  their  faces,  crying,  "  Jehovah,
he  is  the  God"  (1  Kings  xviii.  39).

Ver.  10. — §  4.  God  accepts  this  repent-
ance, and  the  threatened  destruction  it
averted.  Ood  saw  their  works,  There  is  no
notice  in  the  inscriptions  of  this  "repent-
ance," or  of  any  change  in  the  polytheistio
worship  of  the  Ninevites.  But  the  existing
records  of  this  period  are  singularly  meagre,
and  show  a  state  of  calamity  and  depres-
sion, of  internal  commotions  and  famine.
Nor  is  it  usual  in  the  monumental  history  to
find  mention  of  any  events  but  wars  and  the
execution  of  material  works ;  moral  reforma-
tions are  not  recorded.  God  repented  of  the
evil  (Exod.  xxxii.  14).  This  is  an  authmpo-
pathical  mode  of  speaking;  God  acted  as  if,
taking  man's  view  of  the  transaction,  he
repented.  The  sentence  was  conditional,  as
Jonah  well  knew  (oh.  iv.  2),  in  accordance
with  the  great  principle  laid  down  in  Jer.
xviii.  7,  eto.,  viz.  that  if  a  nation  against
which  sentence  is  pronounced  turn  from  its
evil  way,  the  sentence  shall  not  be  executed.
God  does  not  change,  but  he  threatens  that
man  may  change  (see  note  on  Amos  vii.  3 ;
and  observe  the  same  principle  applied  to
individuals,  Ezek.  xxxiii.  8,  13 — 16).  H«
did  it  not.  The  evil  day  was  postponed.
This  partial  repintance,  though  it  was  not
permanent  and  macio  little  lasting  imprea-


OH.  m.  1—10.]


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


61


rion  on  the  national  life,  showed  that  there
was  some  element  of  good  in  these  Assyrians,
and  that  they  were  not  yet  lipe  for  destmo-
tion.  It  has  been  considered  to  be  a  proof
of  the  unhistorical  character  of  the  Book  of
Jonah  that  no  mention  of  any  of  the  inci-
dents is  made  in  the  Books  of  Kings  and
Chronicles ;  but  there  is  nothing  strange  in


tliis.  Those  records  never  tonch  external
politics  except  as  closely  connected  with
Israel's  fortunes ;  and,  deriyed  as  they  wer«
from  national  annals,  it  would  have  been
nnnatural  for  them  to  have  narrated  eventi
happening  so  far  away,  and  not  likely  to  be
introduced  in  the  documents  on  whioh  their
history  was  founded.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  2. — City  preaching.  In  Palestine  there  veere  no  great  cities.  The  population
was  scattered  throngh  pastoral  regions  or  gathered  in  small  and  unimportant  towns.
This  fact  gave  a  character  to  the  national  life  of  the  Hebrews  and  to  their  national
religiousness.  It  was  a  strange  experience  for  a  Jew  like  Jonah  to  be  brought  into
contact  with  city  life  upon  a  grand,  colossal  scale.  We  modem  Bngli-<hmen  are  more
familiar  witli  this  development  of  human  existence  and  activity.  We  need  to  study
the  relations  of  religion  to  city  life,  its  occupations,  temptations,  and  opportunities.

L  The  peeacheb  in  a  great  citt  needs  xo  have  his  imagination  and  his

HEABT   FILLED   WITH   AN  IMPEESSION    OF    ITS    MAGNITUDE    AND    IMPOKTANCE.      In   the

view  of  the  Almighty  all  things  earthly  may  well  seem  diminutive ;  yet  Jehovah  is
represented  as  commissioning  Jonah  to  preach  unto  Nineveh — "  that  great  city."  The
population,  the  wealth,  the  industry,  the  political  importance  of  a  metropolis  should  be
pondered  by  one  who  is  required  to  discharge  a  public  ministry  among  its  inhabitants.
Thus  he  will  be  more  likely  to  rise  to  the  due  height  of  seriousness,  of  sympathy.
He  who  labours  in  "  an  exceeding  great  city  "  needs  to  fill  his  soul  with  a  conviction
of  the  spiritual  necessities  and  the  spiritual  possibilities  of  such  a  population.

II.  ThK  PREACHEE  in   a   GREAT    CITY    NEEDS   TO    FULFIL   A    MINISTRY   OF   WITNESS.

"Cry  unto  it  the  cry."  Such  is  the  exact  language  in  which  Jehovah  commissioned
his  servant.  In  the  university,  the  private  chapel,  the  select  and  cultivated  congre-
gation, there  may  be  room  for  argumentative,  emotional,  poetical,  or  philosophical
preachii^.  What  a  great  city  needs  is  a  voice,  a  cry,  a  preaching,  in  the  proper  sense
of  that  word.  A  plain  and  powerful  vntness  to  man's  sin  and  need,  to  (rod's  grace  and
power  to  save,  a  summons  to  repentance  and  surrender, — such  is  what  the  population
of  a  great  city  for  the  most  part  needs.

ni.  The  peeacheb  in  a  great  city  needs  an  unmistakable  Divine  commission
AND  MESSAGE.  "The  preaching  that  Itid  thee" — such  was  to  be  the  burden  of  the
prophet's  utterances.  It  is  only  the  Word  of  the  Lord  which  should  be  proclaimed  by
the  minister  of  religion  in  any  position,  in  all  circumstances.  But  when  standing  in
the  midst  of  a  great  metropolis,  how  can  a  man,  justly  sensible  of  his  own  ignorance
and  powerlessness,  proceed  in  his  ministry,  unless  he  is  assured  that  the  Lord  has  sent
him,  uuless  he  can  commence  his  testimony  with  the  preface,  "Thus  saith  the  Lord"?

Ver.  5. — National  repentance.  No  doubt  repentance  is  an  individual  exercise  of
heart;  yet  when  the  bulk  uf  a  community  is  pervaded  by  similar  sentiments,  it  may
be  a  national  exercise  also.  Such  seems  to  have  been  the  case  with  the  population  of
Nineveh ;  Jonah's  witness  was  believed  by  one  and  by  another,  until  belief  became
general ;  and,  as  penitence,  fear,  and  supplication  spread  from  man  to  man,  the  city
seemed  moved  by  one  common  impluse,  leading  the  whole  population  to  the  feet  of  God.

L  Such  bepestance  begins  in  faith.  The  inhabitants  of  the  great  city  credited
the  message  of  the  Hebrew  prophet ;  that  is,  they  believed  that  the  Supreme  Buler
and  Judge  was  displeased  with  them  because  of  their  sinfulness ;  that  they  were  liable
to  the  punishment  which  the  godless,  the  vicious,  the  criminal  deserve  ;  and  perhaps
also  that,  notwithstanding  their  dangerous  condition,  there  was  some  hope  for  them  in
the  Divine  mercy,  if  they  would  but  turn  unto  God.  Certainly  the  gospel  of  Christ
dties  not  ask  the  sinner  to  yield  his  belief  merely  to  the  tidings  of  God's  justice  and
holiness ;  it  invites  him  also  to  give  credence  to  its  offers  of  salvation.

II.   SUOH   REPENTANCE   MANIFESTS  ITSELF   IN  CONTRITION    AND    IN    ALL    TH«    BIONI


*^  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  m,  1—10

OF  sracEBB  EEGRET  AlfD  DISTRESS  BECAUSE  OF  SIN.  There  is  Something  very
attecting  in  the  spectacle  of  a  nation  mourning  and  lamenting  because  of  a  great
bereavement,  when  an  honoured  sovereign,  a  trusted  minister,  a  mighty  warrior,
passes  away.  But  the  pathos  and  the  moral  significance  of  that  national  mourning
are  far  greater  which  is  prompted  by  a  general  consciousness  of  sin,  by  a  conviction  of
national  wrong-doing,  by  humiliation  before  an  omniscient  and  righteous  God,  The
tokens  of  such  contrition,  as  recorded  in  the  text  to  have  been  displayed  in  Nineveh,
were  appropriate  to  that  time  and  community,  and  accorded  with  the  customs  of  the
East.  But  whatever  be  the  manifestations  of  sorrow,  the  first  essential  is  that  it  be
real,  as  in  the  sight  of  the  heart-searching  God.

.     ^}\'   ^'^*'H    EEPBNTANCB    PBBVADBS    THE    WHOLE    COMMUNITY.        In    mOSt    citieS   are

individuals  who  sigh  and  cry  for  the  abominations  done  by  the  people.  Even  a  few
are  as  salt  to  preserve  the  mass  from  corruption.  For  the  sake  of  a  very  few  a  city
may  be  spared  the  doom  deserved.  But  a  nation  in  mourning  for  sin  is  a  sight  as
sublime  as  it  is  affecting.  Nineveh  is  in  this  respect  an  example  to  other  sinful  cities.
The  king  led  the  way,  and  his  subjects  followed.  Even  the  least,  the  lowest,  joined  in
the  solemn  act  of  penitence.  Such  repentance  is  indeed  repentance  imto  life;  it  cannot
be  unheeded  or  unrewarded  by  Heaven.

Ver.  6.— .4  king's  contrition.  It  is  an  illustration  of  the  power  of  truth,  of  the
commanding  majesty  of  the  faithful  and  fearless  preacher,  which  we  witness  in  this
narrative.  An  unknown  Hebrew,  with  nothing  to  recommend  him,  nothing  to  enforce
attention,  comes  to  a  foreign  city,  passes  through  the  public  places,  reproaches  th«
citizens  for  their  sins,  denounces  destruction  upon  the  inhabitants  as  the  punishment
due  to  them  because  of  their  wickedness.  And  what  is  the  result  ?  Is  it  neglect,  or
derision,  or  incredulity?  On  the  contrary,  the  people  feel  the  justice  of  the  rebukes,
acknowledge  their  ill  desert,  humble  themselves  before  God,  and  entreat  mercy,  for-
bearance, pardon.  What  a  testimony  to  the  reality  of  the  moral  law,  to  the  authority
of  conscience!  Jonah  preaches,  and  the  king  of  a  mighty  empire  divests  himself
of  the  insignia  of  power  and  rule,  abases  hiniself  before  God  in  sackcloth  and  ashes  I

L  Kings  abe  sometimes  the  leadebs  of  theib  people  in  sin.  Surrounded  by
everything  that  can  minister  to  selfish  gratification,  beset  by  flatterers,  possessed  in
some  instances  of  absolute  power,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  occupants  of
thrones  are  often  the  foremost  in  cruelty,  in  vice,  in  .self-indulgence.  They  may  be  to
blame,  but  in  a  just  estimate  their  perilous  circumstances  will  be  considered.  Their
temptations  are  many,  and  their  faithful  friends  are  few.

II.   KiNQS  ABE   AGCOBSINaLY   SOMETIMES  BESPONSIBLE   FOB   THE   MI8EBIES  OF   THEIB

SUBJECTS.  When  royal  ambition  has  led  to  culpable  warfare  and  slaughter;  when
headstrong  purposes  have  issued  in  national  disaster,  impoverishment,  and  disgrace;
when  luxury  in  palaces  has  entailed  hunger  upon  the  occup^mts  of  hovels ; — in  such
cases  sovereigns  have  a  terrible  account  to  render  to  him  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons,
who  is  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.

HI.  Kings  aee  suitably  employed  in  heading  evbby  elevatdto  and  pbofit-
ABLB  movement.  Happily  there  are  many  examples  of  such  conduct  on  the  part  of
those  occupying  the  very  highest  stations.  Institutions  and  agencies  for  imparting
knowledge,  for  refining  life,  for  relieving  suffering,  are  better  deserving  the  "patronage"
and  the  attention  of  royalty  than  schemes  of  pleasure  or  methods  of  destruction.

IV.  When  kings  as  well  as  subjects  have  sinned  it  becomes  all  to  units
IN  sAOEiFioES  OP  coNTEiTioN  AND  IN  VOWS  OF  RBFOKMATioN.  The  frank,  dignified,
right-minded  conduct  of  the  King  of  Nineveh  raises  him  in  our  esteem.  No  man  is
disgraced  by  admitting  his  faults.  And  every  man,  even  though  he  be  r  king,  is  in  his
right  place  when  low  on  his  knees  in  penitence  and  in  prayer.

Vers.  7  8. Ceremonial  and  moral  repentance.    It  must  have  been  a  striking  and

picturesque  spectacle  that  was  presented  by  Nineveh  when  the  decree  of  the  king  and
nobles  was  carried  out,  when  a  general  fast  was  observed,  when  sackcloth  and  ashei
were  worn  by  man  and  beast,  and  when  general  prayer  ascended  in  •  mighty  cry  to
Heaven.  But  to  the  reflective  mind  it  must  have  been  stiU  more  interesting  to  observe
the  population  turning  from  their  evil  ways  and  refraining  from  acts  of  violence.


CH.  m.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  63

I.  Thb  outward  signs  of  penitence  and  contrition  are  good  when,  and  onlt

WHEN,   THEY   ABB   THE   EXPRESSION   OF  GENUINE  FEELING  AND  PURPOSE.      We  feel  this

to  be  the  case  with  reference  to  ordinary  human  sorrow.  The  mere  garb  and  semblance
of  mourning,  being  but  conventional,  is  of  little  value.  It  is  felt  to  be  appropriate  when
the  mourner  can  say —

"  I  have  that  within  which  passes  show,
These  but  tbe  trappings  and  the  signs  of  woe."

How  much  more  do  the  religious  interest  and  value  of  "  sackcloth  and  ashes,"  "fasting
and  prayers,"  depend  upon  the  sincerity  of  the  emotions  thus  expressed  I

II.  BeSOLUTIONS  to  REFOBM  and  amend  are  the  BEST  EVIDENCE  OF  THE  GENUINE-
NESS AND  ACCEPTABLBNE8S  OF  BEPENTANCE.  It  is  very  muoh  to  the  Credit  alike  of
the  prophet  and  of  those  to  whom  he  preached,  that  the  Ninevites  should  have  felt  and
expressed  the  absolute  necessity  of  moral  amendment  in  order  to  the  enjoyment  of  for-
giveness, favour,  and  acceptance  with  God.  There  must  have  been  something  searching
in  Jonah's  preaching,  and  something  very  responsive  in  the  heart  and  conscience  of  the
Ninevites,  to  have  produced  such  a  state  of  mind  as  that  here  indicated.  It  is  especially
observable  that  the  citizens  turned  "every  one  from  his  evil  way."  The  ways  of  sin
are  devious,  numerous,  and  varied ;  sinners  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way ,
true  repentance  shows  itself  in  a  resolve  on  the  part  of  each  individual  offender  to
forsake  his  own  sins.  "  Violence,"  whether  proneness  to  national  schemes  for  attacking
other  peoples,  or  assaults  upon  peaceful  citizens,  seems  to  have  been  the  prevailing  sin;
for  of  this,  it  is  said,  the  people  chiefly  repented.

Application.  The  whole  nature,  body  and  soul,  is  implicated  in  sin ;  and  the  whols
nature  accordingly  should  concur  in  repentance.

Ver.  9. — Hoping  for  mercy.  Tbe  pathos  of  this  question  is  increased  as  we  call  to
mind  the  ignorance  of  the  Ninevites  regarding  the  true  God.  Their  own  religion  was
as  likely  to  conceal  as  to  make  known  the  real  character  of  the  Deity.  And  what
they  had  heard  from  Jonah  was  but  very  slender  ground  upon  which  to  proceed  in
their  approaches  to  Heaven.  Hence  the  uncertainty,  the  commingling  of  fear  with  hope
in  the  language  they  employed :  "  Who  can  tell,"  etc.  ?

I.  The  NEED  OF  MEROY.  This  appears  from  considering  (1)  human  sin ;  (2)  Divine
justice;  and  (3)  the  express  threatenings  of  the  Divine  Word.  All  this  was  very
apparent  in  the  case  of  the  Ninevjtes,  and  accounts  for  their  attitude  of  contrition  and
supplication.  But  the  same  holds  good  of  men  of  every  nation  and  in  every  state  of
society.

II.  The  ground  of  hope.  1.  With  the  Ninevites  this  could  have  been  nothing
but  some  instinct  in  their  own  heart.  A  Creator  who  has  implanted  pity  in  the
breasts  of  his  creatures  cannot  surely  be  destitute  of  that  quality  himselt.  2.  With
those  to  whom  the  gospel  is  preached  the  case  is  otherwise;  they  have  not  to  abk,
"  Who  can  tell?"  for  the  Lord  uf  all  has  made  himself  known  to  them  as  delighting  in
mercy,  and  has  given  his  own  Son  to  be  the  Mediator  and  the  Pledge  of  mercy.

III.  The  OBJECT  of  entbbaty.  1.  With  regard  to  God,  the  aversion  of  his  anger.
Applying  human  language  to  the  infinite  God,  the  suppliants  hoped  for  his  turning
and  repentance.  2.  With  regard  to  themselves,  the  suppliants  desired  that  they  might
not  perish,  that  the  doom  deserved  and  threatened  might  not  come  upon  them,  that,
in  a  word,  they  might  be  saved.  It  is  not  easy  to  form  any  judgment  as  to  the  measure
in  which  desire  for  spiritual  blessing  entered  into  the  prayers  of  the  men  of  Nineveh,
But  enlightened  Christians  are  constrained  to  feel  that  the  salvation  which  they  seek
is  not  merely  release  from  suffering  and  penalty,  but  restoration  to  the  favour  and  the
obedience  of  God.

Ver.  10. — Man'*  repentance  and  Oo(Pt.  The  simplicity  with  which  this  great  fact
is  recorded  is  quite  in  accordance  with  the  usual  style  in  which  the  Old  Testament  is
written.  Inspired  men  wrote  of  Gud  as  they  would  have  written  of  a  great  king.  Thus
only,  indeed,  can  we  receive  or  communicate  intelligible  ideas  regarding  the  Supreme.
It  is  easy  to  criticize  such  statements  as  that  of  this  text  by  calling  them  '*anthropo-
pathic  i     but  the  fact  is  that  it  is  not  degrading  but  exalting  the  conception  of  God,  to


6i  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [ch.  m.  1— Itt

attribute  to  him,  not  merely  reason  and  will,  but  the  capacity  of  the  highest,  purest,
and  tenderest  emotions.

I.  HuuAir  EEPENTANOB  THE  CONDITION  OF  THE  DiviNB.  1.  Bepentancs  involTes
the  turning  with  loathing  from  the  paths  of  sin.  Yet  tliis  is  very  difficult  to  account
for.  How,  why,  should  those  who  have  addicted  themselves  to  Bin,  because  of  its
pleasantness  or  its  profitableness,  regard  it  in  a  quite  different,  a  contrary  light?  2.
Kepentance  involves  an  apprehension  of  the  majesty  and  justice  of  the  moral  law.
AVhilst  men  look  earthward  they  will  never  repent,  i.e,  of  sin  itself;  but  when  they
direct  their  gaze  heavenward,  and  perceive  the  splendour  and  beauty  of  an  eternal,  an
inflexibla  law  of  right,  then,  by  comparison  with  that,  their  own  sin  seems  odious  and
degrading.

II.  Divine  ebpentanob  is  the  eesponsb  to  the  humas.  1.  The  repentance
attributed  to  God  dues  not  involve  any  real  change  in  the  character  or  the  purposes
of  God.  He  ever  hates  the  sin,  and  pities  and  loves  the  sinner;  this  is  so  both  before
and  after  the  sinner's  repentance.  2.  Divine  repentance  is  therefore  the  same  principle
acting  differently  in  altered  circumstances.  If  the  prospect  of  punishment  answers  the
same  purpose  as  that  intended  by  the  punishment  itself,  there  is  no  inconsistency  in  its
remission ;  for  punishment  is  not  an  end,  it  is  only  a  means  to  goodness,  to  the  reign  of
the  law  of  righteousness.  3.  Divine  repentance  is  apparent  in  the  forgiveness  and
acceptance  of  the  contrite  sinner.  4.  And  also  in  the  moral  influence  which  it  exercises
over  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  reconciled.  Gratitude  is  excited,  love  is  awakened,
consecration  is  elicited,  obedience  is  confirmed.

Application.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  these  great  principles  of  the  Divine  govern-
ment  are  exhibited  in  all  their  power  in  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In  the
cross  God  summons  mankind  to  repentance ;  in  the  cross  God  shows  how  he  himself
can  repent.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Peremptory  reiteration  and  prompt  obedience.  We  see  Jonah  entering
here  on  the  second  stage  of  his  strange  career.  And  it  is  adjusted  logically  to  the  firsk
His  recent  experiences  and  their  resulting  sentiments  form  an  obvious  preparation  for
the  duty  next  to  hand.  He  has  sinned  and  suffered  and  repented.  He  has  deserted,
and  been  captured  and  surrendei'ed  unconditionally.  He  has  prayed,  and  been  forgiven
and  set  free.  And  it  is  natural  that  duty  should  be  faced  from  a  different  standpoint
henceforward.  He  is  in  another  mind  now,  and  ready  for  a  new  departure  in  personal
effort  and  official  tactics.     And  the  opportunity  to  make  it  is  promptly  furnished.

I.  The  spiritual  debebtek's  betubn  is  tollowed  by  his  bb-enqagembnt.  Jonah
had  discarded  much  and  been  stripped  of  more.  He  had  refused  to  act,  and  had  ipso
facto  forfeited  his  commission.  Now  with  a  return  to  his  right  mind  there  is  rein-
statement in  his  lost  calling,  and  re-employment  in  his  forsaken  work.  We  account
for  this  on  the  principle  that:  1.  There  is  forgiveness  with  Ood,  that  he  may  he  feared.
There  is  a  forgiveness  that  only  encourages  transgression.  Such  is  weak  forgiveness,
implying  a  want  of  firmness  in  the  forgiver,  on  which  there  is  the  temptation  to  make
further  aggressions.  Such  is  careless  forgiveness,  that  takes  no  hostages  for  the  future,
nor  even  makes  terms.  Such  is  inequitable  forgiveness,  in  which  principle  is  io:nored,
and  the  (jffence  hushed  up  without  regard  to  the  claims  of  justice.  But  the  Divine
"  more  excellent  way  "  of  pardon  is  at  once  equitable  and  defined  and  strong.  Amends
for  the  past  and  amendment  for  the  future  are  both  exacted  sternly.  God  forgive*
when  he  has  punished,  and  on  the  unbending  condition  that  the  offence  cease.  Then
punishment  is  mingled  with  so  much  of  mercy,  and  requirement  is  sweetened  by  such
promise  of  grace,  that  gratitude  mates  with  reverence,  and  obedience  is  the  firstborn
issue  of  the  happy  tie.  The  insubordinate,  mutinous  Jonahs  having  been  ironed  and
snbdued,  are  at  length  released,  that  in  after-action  they  may  exemplify  obedience
unqnestioning  and  without  a  semblance  of  the  old  self-will.  2.  Spiritual  office  attaches
to  existing  spiritual  relation.  The  Divine  government  is  paternal.  God's  ufficers  are
first  of  all  his  children.  Their  fitness  for  the  discharge  of  spiritual  functions  is  dne  to
their  previous  endowment  with  spiritual  gifts.    If  unspiritual  men  and  whilst  unspiritual


eB.m.1— 10.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  «S

they  may  be  formally  in  office,  but  are  incapable  of  spiritual  work.  When  Jonah  fell
for  the  time  being  out  of  the  spiritual  connection,  he  ceased  to  be  a  prophet  of  God.
He  could  not  be  at  once  a  recruiter  and  a  deserter,  an  ambassador  and  a  rebel.  Kov7
he  has  come  back,  and  in  resumed  spiritual  relations  he  finds  the  condition  of  restored
religious  functions.  He  may  again  speak  for  God  now  that  again  he  is  on  God's  side.
No  man  goes  legitimately  on  God's  errand  who  cannot  do  it  con  amort.  Spiritual
officers  are  to  be  sought  exclusiTely  by  promotion  from  the  spiritual  ranks.  Every
true  shepherd  has  been  first  of  all  a  sheep  in  God's  fold,  and  to  each  relation  hag  come
in  by  Christ,  the  Door.

II.  God's  pboorammb  is  stereotyped,  whatever  else  mat  ohakse,  (Ver.  2.)
God  has  not  changed,  although  Jonah  has.  The  prophet's  mutinous  outbreak  has  not
moved  him  a  hairbreadth  from  hia  purpose.  What  he  meant  at  first  he  means  still,
and  will  liave.  So  the  prophet  is  brought  back  exactly  to  the  point  at  which  be  had
broken  away,  and  told  to  begin  where  he  had  left  off.  1.  Ood  is  moved  still  by  the
same  compassion /or  the  doomed.  "  That  great  city."  The  repetition  of  these  words
on  each  occasion  of  the  mention  of  Nineveh  is  significant.  It  shows  that  God  had
regard  to  the  fact  of  its  size ;  that  all  through  the  arrangement  of  measures  for  its
warning  he  was  moved  by  the  thought  of  its  teeming  population  given  over  to  death.
Hence  it  is  styled  in  ver.  3  "  a  great  city  to  God,"  i.e.  in  his  estimation,  and  in  ch,  iv.
11  the  Divine  compunction  is  directly  connected  with  the  existence  of  its  hundred
and  twenty  thousand  children,  not  yet  responsible,  but  bound  to  perish  with  it.  The
Divine  compassion  is  a  glorious  factor  in  human  life.  Its  attitude  is  catholic.  It
embraces  in  wide  paternal  arms  the  heathen  that  knows  noi  God,  the  infant  that  could
not  know  him  if  revealed.  Its  outflow  is  unstinted,  averting  myriad  evils  altogether,
suftuning  the  inevitable,  indemnifying  the  past  by  the  amends  of  rich  compensatory
good.  Believe  in  God's  pity.  It  is  a  splendid  fact.  It  is  hunger's  provision,  and
pain's  antesthetio,  and  misery's  comforter,  and  humanity's  good  Samaritan  in  the
darkest  reaches  of  its  Jericho-journey,  and  the  most  calamitous  experiences  by  the  way.
2.  Ood's  prescribed  step  remains  the  fitting  one  to  take.  What  other  methods  it  was
within  the  resources  of  Divine  omnipotence  to  use  for  the  conversion  of  the  Ninevites,
we  cannot  tell.  What  we  know  is  that  the  proclamation  of  the  truth  was  the  ordinary
method,  and  that  God  keeps  to  it.  "  The  sword  of  the  Spirit,"  with  which  he  pierces
the  soul  and  kills  its  sin,  is  the  "  Word  of  God."  "  The  foolishness  of  preaching  "  is
that  special  presentment  of  the  Word  by  which  in  all  ages  it  has  pleased  God  to  save
them  that  believe.  And  there  is,  if  we  could  see  it,  the  perfection  of  fitness  in  this
ordinance.  Truth  is  light  revealing  things  as  they  are  and  as  they  ought  to  be.
Truth  is  motive,  presenting  considerations  that  move  intelligence  to  seek  that  better
state.  Truth  is  force,  conveying  to  the  soul  and  constituting  in  it  the  Divine  omnipo-
tent energy  in  the  strength  of  which  the  new  man  arises,  and  the  new  life  is  lived.
Truth  is  comfort,  unfolding  the  soul-rest  and  joy  of  the  free  which  climb  the  throne  of
being  when  the  new  regirwS  of  righteousness  begins.  Then  truth  preached  with  the
living  voice  and  personal  element  is  all  this  and  more.  To  the  influence  proper  to  the
abstract  truth  is  added  its  influence  as  concreted  in  a  human  life.  As  light  it  is
intensified  by  the  added  ray  of  an  illustrative  experience.  As  power  it  is  reinforced  by
the  impulse  of  a  co-operant  human  will.  As  comfort  it  is  at  once  confirmed  and
sweetened  by  personal  testimony  and  fellow-feeling.  There  is  no  conceivable  substitute
in  the  enginery  of  grace  for  the  personal  preaching  to  sinners  of  the  word  of  life.  3.
Repentance  is  best  proved  by  obedience  in  the  matter  at  which  there  was  stumbling  before.
Jonah  had  passed  through  a  severe  discipline  for  the  conquest  of  his  self-will.  Whether
or  not  it  was  really  overcome,  this  reiteiated  commission  would  test.  And  there  was
a  needs-be  that  the  point  should  be  settled.  All  judgment  is  "  unto  righteousness ;  "
to  bring  us  to  it  if  afar  from  it,  to  restore  us  to  it  if  we  have  strayed.  And  it  is  this,
not  in  the  general,  but  in  the  particular.  It  is  to  check  particular  faults  and  produce
the  opposite  virtues.  In  this  object  God  will  see  that  it  succeeds.  He  cannot  fail  as
men  fail.  His  chains  must  bind.  He  gives  no  disputable  instructions,  nor  moves  to
their  observance  by  futile  action.  In  tow  of  his  disciplinary  privateers,  when  they
return  to  port,  will  be  found,  as  a  prize  of  war,  every  skulking  craft  that  had  been
trying  to  do  the  enemy's  work.  The  proof  that  his  measures  have  not  been  nugatory
is  the  circumstantial  realization  of  their  purpose.     The  iniquity  he  visits  with  the  rnd

JONAH.  1*


66  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAK  [oh.  ra.  1—10.

he  must  8«e  put  away.  The  forsworn  task  he  enforces  with  the  strong  arm  he  must
see  done.  '  Ood  looks  upon  men  when  he  has  afflicted  them  and  has  delivered  them
out  of  their  affliction,  to  see  whether  they  will  mend  of  that  fault  particularly  for
which  they  were  corrected ;  and  therefore  in  that  thing  we  are  concerned  to  see  to  it
that  we  receive  not  the  grace  of  God  in  vain  "  (Matthew  Henry).

III.   The   DIBOIPLINED   SERVANT  IS   AN  IMPROVED   SERVANT.        (Vof.    3.)      The   Stem

discipline  has  done  its  work  at  last.  The  rebellious  fit  is  over,  and  the  unruly  servant
is  pliant  to  his  Master's  will.  What  evils  of  terror  and  pain  and  agony  he  might  have
escaped  if  he  had  only  done  this  at  first  I  But  6o(}  bends  all  things  to  his  purpose,  and
Jonah's  rebellious  freak  among  the  rest.  His  message  to  Nineveh  is  not  only  done,
but  better  done  than  it  could  possibly  have  beea  at  first.  1.  Jonah  is  letter  prepared
for  it  than  he  was.  He  has  sinned  and  been  forgiven,  has  suffered  and  been  delivered,
has  prayed  and  received  an  answer.  And  each  experience  is  of  the  nature  of  a  qualifi-
cation for  the  better  doing  of  his  work.  "  Bejoicing  in  the  sweetness  of  a  fresh  and
full  reconciliation ;  lightened  in  spirit  by  tasting  in  God  a  mercy  larger  than  he  could
formerly  have  thought  of ;  cleansed  from  the  darkness  that  brooded  over  his  soul,  and
the  countless  images  of  terror  and  of  evil  which  rose  up  before  him  while  be  was  fleeing
from  his  Q-od  in  rebellion,  and  his  God  was  pursuing  him  in  wrath"  (Martin),  he
would  approach  his  Master's  work  as  never  before.  Beverence  for  a  God  so  great  and
good,  and  gratitude  to  a  God  so  merciful  and  kind,  would  spring  together  and  work
together  the  new  mind  and  way.  AfSiction,  moreover,  had  left  its  mark  on  him.  He
was  subdued  and  chastened.  He  knew  experimentally  his  impotence  and  God's
omnipotence.  He  could  speak  by  book  of  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  and  the  fatuity  of
hoping  to  defy  him  and  escape.  And  his  preaching  would  have  a  reality  and  vividness
about  it  attainable  only  by  way  of  his  late  experience.  Then  "  he  had  called  upon  the
Lord  in  circumstances  almost  fitted  to  shut  out  the  possibility  of  hope."  If  there  be
a  case  on  record  pre-eminently  fitted  to  confirm  the  declaration,  "  Men  ought  always
to  pray,  and  not  to  faint,"  it  is  his.  Would  he  not  resume  his  post  with  livelier  loyalty
and  implicit  sense  of  duty,  when  he  could  resume  it  with  the  blessed  protestation,
"  I  love  the  Lord,  because  he  hath  heard  the  voice  of  my  supplication :  because  he
hath  inclined  his  ear  unto  me,  I  will  call  upon  him  as  long  as  1  live"?  (Martin).  2.
He  does  it  implicitly,  (Ver.  3.)  "  So  Jonah  arose,  and  went  unto  Nineveh."  Submission
h  now  as  thorough  as  at  first  self-will  was  resolute.  The  change  is  excellent,  and  its
occurrence  a  vindication  of  the  treatment  that  has  brought  it  about.  An  infinitely
wise  and  holy  will  is  God's.  The  ideal  of  a  man's  life  is  to  believe  in  that  will,  and
will  it,  and  find  his  joy  in  doing  it.  From  irreconcilable  variance  to  absolute  harmony
with  that  ideal  is  Jonah's  change,  a  change  that  means  his  spiritual  reaiijustment.  It
will  mean  no  less  to  us  all.  "  The  felicity  of  heaven  greatly  consists  in  perfect  sub-
mission in  all  things  to  the  government  of  Jehovah  the  Saviour.  The  misery  of  this
world  is  the  want  of  that  temper  of  mind ;  the  very  end  and  design  of  grace  is  to
restore  us  to  it ;  and  so  far  as  we  are  under  the  influence  of  the  grace  of  life,  we  are
brought  back  to  it ;  the  more  grace  the  more  submission ;  and  grace  will  not  cease  its
operation  in  the  saints  till  every  thought  is  brought  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of
Christ"  (Jones).  A  man  following  absolutely  the  lines  of  the  infinitely  perfect  will;
a  man  moving  thereon  witti  fullest  faith  and  sympathy  and  zest ;  a  man  starting  therein
as  a  child  starts  for  the  haven  of  a  mother's  arms ;  a  man  incapable  of  other  thought
tlian  following  them  to  the  highest  good,  and  till  his  life's  end; — that  is  a  man  in  the
highest  sense,  and  to  the  highest  spiritual  effect.  3.  He  goes  closely  hy  his  instructions.
(Ver.  3.)  "  According  to  the  word  of  the  Lord."  This  terse  record  is  instinct  with
suggestiveness.  He  went  because  he  was  told,  and  where  he  ^as  told,  and  when  lie
was  told,  and  as  he  was  told,  and  to  do  the  thing  he  was  told,  and  in  the  way  he  was
told.  His  conduct  now  was  exemplary  as  before  it  was  intolerable.  And  his  case  is
typical.  His  instructions  were  the  preacher's  instructions  for  all  lands  and  times.
"  Preach  the  preaching  that  I  bid  thee."  It  was  this  Moses  preached  (Deut.  xviii.  18),
and  Jeremiah  (Jer.  i,  7),  and  Paul  (I  Cor.  xi.  23),  and  Christ  himself  (John  vii.  16 ;
xii.  50).  It  is  this  we  must  preach.  What  else  is  worth  preaching,  or  can  or  dare  be
preached?  As  to  the  substance  of  his  message,  the  preacher  has  no  discretionary
power.  He  is  not  to  preach  science,  nor  philosophy,  nor  sentiment,  nor  his  own
notioni,  nor  human  knowledge.    He  is  rightly  to  divide  the  Word  of  life.    That  is  all


OH.™.  1-10.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  67

"There  is  not  the  grestest  minister,  not  the  most  learned  or  acute,  but  must  observe
this  rule ;  not  James,  not  John,  not  Peter,  not  all  the  troop  of  the  apostles,  may  once
vary  from  this :  he  who  shall  bring  other  doctrine,  let  him  be  accursed  by  us ;  he  who
speaketh  of  himself,  let  him  be  refused  by  us ;  howsoever  godly  or  holy  he  do  pretend
himself,  yet  if  he  decline  that  word  which  should  be  his  direction,  let  him  be  declined
by  us"  (Abbot).  Here  is  an  admirable  maxim  for  universal'  use,  "according  to  the
Word  of  the  Lord."  It  is  good,  and  wise,  and  true,  and  pertinent  to  every  case,  and
the  key  to  every  puzzle  of  life.  Are  you  a  sinner  ?  there  is  salvation  for  you,  full,  and
free,  and  present,  and  "  according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord."  Are  you  a  seeker  ?  expect
to  find,  for  salvation  is  in  Christ,  and  of  those  that  come  to  him  there  are  none  cast
out, "  according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord."  Are  you  a  saint  ?  then  fight  and  persist  and
hope;,  for  that  you  are  "kept  by  the  power  of  God,"  and  will  yet  "reap  If  you  faint
not,"  IB  "  according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord."— J.  E.  H.

Vers.  4 — 10. — A  heathen  city  in  sackcloth.  Let  us  try  to  realize  the  scene.  An
Eastern  city  sleeps  in  the  rosy  morning  light.  Its  moated  ramparts  tower  a  hundred
feet  in  air,  and,  dotted  with  fifteen  hundred  lofty  towers,  sweep  around  it  a  length  of
over  sixty  miles.  Already  the  gates  are  open  for  the  early  traffic,  and  conspicuous
among  the  crowd  a  stranger  enters.  The  stains  of  travel  are  on  his  dress,  and  be  looks
with  curious  awe  st  the  figures  of  winged  colossal  bulls  that  keep  silent  symbolic  guard
over  the  gate  by  which  he  passes  in.  Within,  things  new  and  strange  appear  at  every
step.  The  houses,  sitting  each  in  its  own  grounds,  are  bowered  in  green.  The  streets
are  spanned  at  intervals  with  triumphal  arches,  whose  entablature  is  enriched  by  many
a  Bcmptured  story.  On  every  eminence  is  a  palace,  or  monument,  or  idol  temple,  guarded
by  symbolic  monsters  in  stone,  and  adorned  in  carving  of  bas-relief  with  sacred  symbols.
The  markets  fill,  the  bazaars  are  alive  with  multifarious  dealing,  soldiers  and  war-chariots
parade  the  streets,  and  the  evidences  of  despotic  power  and  barbaric  wealth  and  heathenish
worship,  with  their  inevitable  accompaniments  of  luxury,  corruption,  and  violence,
aboimd  on  every  side.  The  stranger  is  deeply  moved.  Surprise  gives  place  to  horror,
then  horror  warms  into  righteous  indignation ;  and  with  trumpet  voice  and  dilating
form  and  eye  of  fire  he  utters  the  words  of  doom,  "  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh
shall  be  destroyed."  Through  street,  and  park,  and  barrack,  and  bazaar  the  direful
message  rings.  There  is  momentary  incredulity,  then  swift  alarm,  then  utter  consterna-
tion. Like  wildfire  the  news,  and  with  it  the  panic  spreads.  It  reaches  the  nobles  in
their  palaces.  It  penetrates  to  the  king  upon  his  throne.  It  moves  society  to  its
depths.  And  the  result  is  the  scenes  of  mourning  and  self-abasement  our  text  records.
I.  Bepentakcs  combs  beadilt  to  untdtobbd  hinds.  Never  did  preacher  see
better  or  speedier  fruit  of  his  labours  than  Jonah  did  in  heathen  Nineveh.  By  a  single
sermon  but  a  few  sentences  long  he  sent  the  entire  city  into  penitence  and  sackcloth.
Granted  that  there  was  much  to  account  for  this  in  the  preaching  itself.  It  was  bold
and  oracular  and  explicit,  and  spoken  with  the  conviction  that  is  most  of  all  contagious.
It  was  enforced  by  such  a  narrative  of  his  own  recent  history  as  made  him  nothing
less  than  a  sign  to  the  men  of  Nineveh  (Luke  xi.  30),  Granted  too  "  the  great  sus-
ceptibility of  Oriental  races  to  emotion,  the  awe  of  one  Supreme  Being  which  is  peculiar
to  all  the  heathen  religions  of  Asia,  and  the  great  esteem  in  which  soothsaying  and
oracles  were  held  in  Assyria  from  the  very  earuest  times"  (Eeil).  Yet  still  the  repent-
ance, so  widespread,  so  real,  so  sudden,  has  in  it  something  phenomenal  in  the  religious
sphere.  Not  thus  did  the  prophets  and  their  utterances  move  the  Jews.  They  "  beat
one,  and  killed  another,  and  stoned  another,"  and  disregarded  all  as  a  general  rule
(Matt.  xxi.  35).  A  greater  than  Jonah,  the  Truth  himself,  spoke  to  them,  and  spoke
in  vain  (Matt.  xii.  41).  Unbelieving  and  lengthened  contact  with  truth  had  no  doubt
produced  the  exceptional  hardness  of  the  Jewish  nature.  The  works  done  in  vain  in
the  gospel-hardened  Ohorazin  or  Bethsaida  would,  as  we  know,  have  brought  Tyre  and
Bidon  to  repentance  in  dust  and  ashes.  Even  filthy  Sodom  would  have  cleansed  its
way,  and  been  spared  on  earth,  had  it  seen  the  mighty  works  by  which  Capernaum
WM  yet  utterly  unmoved  (Matt.  xi.  20 — 24).  So  when  the  soil  of  the  Jewish  nature,
pliod  with  the  truth-seed  till  trodden  hard  by  the  sowers'  feet,  refused  utterly  to
produce,  the  apostlei  found  a  fertile  seed-bed  in  the  virgin  soil  of  the  Gentile  mind
(Aeti  xiiL  44— 48)l    An  analogous  fact  is  the  success  of  Christ  among  the  common


68  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  [<«.  m.  1— la

people  (Mark  zii.  37),  when  the  scrilieB  and  Pharisees,  who  were  more  familiar  with
revelation,  remained  uninfluenced  almost  to  a  man  (John  vii.  48,  49).  It  would  seem
as  if  Divine  truth,  like  potent  drugs  with  the  body,  is  effectiye  most  of  all  in  its  first
contacts  with  the  soul.  Lengtiiened  and  frequent  contact  with  truth,  if  it  does  not
regenerate,  only  thickens  the  spiritual  skin,  and  much  hearing  means  little  heeding
as  a  general  rule.

IL  Repentance:  implies  a  belief  of  thb.  tbuth.  (Ver.  SJ  Belief  of  the  truth
is  a  logical  first  step  to  every  religious  attainment  (Heb.  xi.  6).  Truth  is  the  revelation
of  things  as  they  are — of  character,  of  destiny,  of  duty.  Until  that  has  been  received
there  can  be  no  spiritual  beginning.  While  not  only  danger  bat  the  disease  itself  is
disbelieved  in,  the  patient  will  take  no  step  toward  cure.  "  He  that  cometh  to  the  Lord
must  believe  that  he  is."  This  is  the  least  modicum  of  knowledge  conceivable  in  any
intelligent  comer.  So  he  that  comes  away  from  sin  must  believe  that  sin  is.  Unlesi
he  does,  and  until  he  does,  he  has  no  reason  for  moving.  He  that  comes  by  repentance
and  faith,  moreover,  must  believe  in  the  propriety  and  dutifulness  of  these  acts.  Fore-
casting the  possible  result  of  Timothy's  ministry  in  the  turning  of  the  wicked,  Paul
says,  "  If  God  peradventure  will  give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  of  the
truth."  This  aspiration  brings  out  the  point  exactly.  Repentance  and  the  acknow-
ledging of  the  truth  imply  and  involve  each  other.  Impenitence  is  largely  the  result
of  incredulity.  If  a  man  really  believed  what  God  says  about  sin — its  demerit,
deformity,  and  destroying  character — the  grief  and  hatred  and  turning  which  constitute
repentance  must  arise.  The  impenitent  man  either  does  not  believe  God  at  all,  or  he
gives  him  a  weak  and  heedless  credence  that  is  never  acted  on,  and  so  is  practical  dis-
belief. -  Let  God's  word  of  dogma,  God's  word  of  promise,  be  truly  and  adequately
believed,  and  God's  word  of  precept  will  be  infallibly  obeyed.  A  man  may  contemplate
his  sin  indifferently  and  commit  it  with  even  pulse,  but  the  power  to  do  so  means  that
the  Scripture  testimony  against  it  has  been  silenced,  or  the  witness  put  out  of  the  court
of  conscience  altogether.  "  It  is  to  be  observed  that  faith  operates  differently  according
to  the  matter  believed.  When  faith  looks  to  the  redeeming  love  of  Christ,  faith  worketh
by  love.  '  We  love  him  who  first  loved  us.'  When  faith  looks  to  the  infinite  wrath  of
God,  faith  worketh  fear,  and  we  '  flee  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  us.'  When  faith
looks  at  Christ,  bearing  in  his  love  the  wrath  from  which  he  calls  us  to  flee,  faith  worketh
by  grief;  and, '  looking  on  him  whom  we  have  pierced,  we  mourn.'  And  all  these
operations  of  faith — love,  fear,  grief— enter  into  that  repentance  unto  salvation  which
true  faith  produces"  (Martin).

III.  Repentance  is  at  once  deepened  by  feab  and  sweetened  bt  hope.  The
Ninevites  feared  to  "perish"  through  the  "fierce  anger"  of  God,  yet  hoped  he  might
"  turn  away  "  from  it  and  "  repent."  Pear  is  a  rather  ignoble  emotion,  but  it  is  not
without  its  place  and  jiower  in  the  religious  sphere.  A  man's  life,  in  the  widest  sense,
is  his  most  precious  trust.  To  gain  the  whole  world  would  not  compensate  for  the  loss
of  it.  Hence  the  universal  instinct  of  self-preservation.  "All  that  a  man  hath  will  he
give  for  his  life."  And  by  appealing  to  this  instinct,  as  it  so  often  does,  the  Scripture
assumes  its  lawfulness  (Luke  xiii.  3 ;  Matt.  x.  28).  The  loss  of  soul  and  body  in  hell
is  a  loss  unparalleled  and  irreparable,  and  which  it  would  be  madness  not  to  fear.  The
Ninevites  feared  it.  Their  dread  of  it  was  a  chief  cause  of  the  penitence  they  showed.
And  naturally  so.  To  a  man  as  yet  unspiritual,  the  bearing  of  his  sin  on  his  own  fate
Is  the  supreme  consideration.  When  he  becomes  better  he  will  be  amenable  to  higher
motives,  but  fear  as  opposed  to  carnal  security  is  always  a  prominent  factor  in  the  early
stages  of  the  religious  life.  But  the  Ninevites'  repentance  did  not  spring  from  fear  alone ;
it  based  on  hope  as  well.  "  Who  can  tell,"  etc.  V  (ver.  9).  The  hope  here  was  far  from
ass'ired.  It  was  a  mere  glimmer  in  the  soul.  Yet  still  it  was  hope.  Escape  was  deemed
not  impossible, — that  was  all.  And  there  was  a  shadow  of  ground  for  hope,  which  the
keen  eye  of  the  doomed  did  not  fail  to  detect.  They  had  an  intuitive  idea  that  God
would  make  some  diiference  between  a  penitent  city  and  an  impenitent  one.  Then  the
catastrophe  was  not  to  come  for  forty  days,  and,  in  the  granting  of  so  long  a  respite,
they  would  see  the  door  left  open  for  a  possible  change  before  its  close.  Besides,  Jonah'i
own  deliverance  in  a  more  dire  extremity  still,  and  of  which  he  evidently  told  them  in
his  preaching  (Luke  xi.  30),  would  suggest  the  possibility  of  a  like  escape  to  them  with
like  repentance.    If  the  preacher  had  been  saved  in  the  very  moment  of  immijMUt


OH.  UL  1— 10,J  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  61

death,  the  fact  was  ground  of  hope  to  the  people  who  had  forty  days'  reprieve.  Thus
the  faith  in  which  the  Ninevites'  repentance  originated  "  wrought  by  fear  and  hope
combined.  The  evil  dreaded  was  sufficient  to  break  and  humble  all  their  pride.  And
the  hope  they  entertained  was  sufQcient  to  prevent  their  fear  from  turning  into  mere
despair"  (Martin).  It  is  the  element  of  hope  in  it  that  marks  off  the  sorrow  which
worketh  only  death  from  the  sorrow  which  worketh  repeatance  to  salvation.  There  is
a  persuasion  of  men  which  bases  on  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  and  a  beseeching  of  them
also  by  the  mercies  he  has  shown.  And  what  is  this  but  to  make  fear  and  hope  the
limbs  of  a  stable  arch  to  carry  the  repentance  "that  needeth  not  to  be  repented  of"?

IV.  Ebpbntanoe  includes  gkiep  fob  the  past  and  rbfobmation  for  the  future.
The  Ninevites  "  put  on  sackcloth,"  etc.,  and  "  turned  them  every  one  from  his  evil
way."  There  was  compendious  logic  in  this.  Sackcloth  and  ashes  were  the  con-
ventional livery  of  abasement  and  grief  (2  Cor.  vii.  9, 10),  and  these  have  a  distinct
place  in  the  spiritual' connection  (Joel  ii.  13).  But  they  must  be  spiritual.  Not  the
result  of  wounded  pride,  or  baffled  purpose,  or  ruined  prospects.  These  things  are  utterly
carnal.  They  involve  no  sense  of  sin  s  demerit,  no  horror  of  its  impurity.  They  are
merely  aspects  and  expressions  of  selfishness.  Every  detected  rogue  can  see  that  he
has  blundered  in  his  sinuing,  and  from  that  standpoint  grieves.  Saul  does  it,  exclaim-
ing, in  the  bitterness  of  failure,  "  I  have  played  the  fool  exceedingly."  But  the  sorrow
"  after  a  godly  sort "  is  a  radically  different  thing,  and  done  in  a  different  spiritual
atmosphere  altogether.  And  David  crying  with.contrite  and  humbled  spirit, "  I  acknow-
ledge my  transgression,  and  my  sin  is  ever  before  me,"  is  a  perfect  moral  contrast.  His
is  a  sorrow  that  has  God  in  it.  Sin  is  viewed  in  its  relation  to  God,  from  God's  stand-
point, and  with  feelings  like  to  God's.  Job  sorrowed  thus  with  God  when  he  said,
"  Now  mine  eye  seeth  thee ;  wherefore  I  abhor  myself,"  etc.  Such  sorrow  has  hope  in
it,  and  so  "  the  promise  and  potency  "  of  a  reformed  life.  Under  its  impulse  the  Ninevites
"  turned  every  one  from  his  evil  way."  Reformation  is  the  work  meet  for  repentance
— the  crystalline  form  revealing  the  genuine  metal.  "  Numbers  will  do  everything  in
religion  but  turning  from  sin  to  the  Saviour;  and  where  this  is  not  done,  all  the  rest  is
lost  labour — their  religion  is  hypocrisy,  their  hope  is  mere  delusion,  and  their  latter  end
is  bitterness  and  woe ;  for  all  who  refuse  to  depart  from  sin  must  perish  in  sin.  In  vain
shall  we  fast  for  sin,  if  we  do  not  fast  from  sin ;  and  what  blessings  can  all  our  prayers
bring  down  while  we  refuse  to  turn  from  our  evil  ways?"  (Jones).

V.  Rbpbntanob  cbibs  to  God  in  prater.  The  words  of  Jonah  were  like  an  earth-
quake in  the  vast  city.  From  king  to  beggar  there  was  consternation  and'  dismay.
The  destroying  armies  of  heaven  were  at  hand.  Men  can  neither  disbelieve,  nor  doubt,
nor  resist,  nor  fly,  nor  survive.  What  remains  but  to  submit  and  beg  for  mercy — the
last  resort  of  the  sinner,  but  the  very  first  command  of  God  ?  And  so  the  king  descends
from  his  throne,  and  the  beggar  rises  from  his  straw,  and  a  stricken  universal  cry  for
help  goes  up  in  the  ear  of  Heaven.  In  such  an  exercise  true  repentance  is  at  home.
Prayer  is  the  spontaneous,  the  instinctive  expression  of  the  soul's  new-found  need.  A
true  sense  of  sin,  together  with  an  apprehension  of  God's  mercy  in  Christ  which  all
genuine  repentance  includes,  leads  logically  to  prayer.  Given  a  sick  man  thoroughly
alarmed,  and  a  willing  physician  accessible,  and  the  application  for  help  will  infallibly
follow.

"On  bended  knees,  replete  with  godly  grief,
Bee  where  the  mourner  kneels  to  seek  relief;
From  his  full  heart  pours  forth  the  gushing  plea,
'  God  of  the  lost,  be  merciful  to  me  I '
The  light  of  life  descends  in  heavenly  rays.
And  angels  shout  and  sing, '  Behold,  he  prays  I ' "

VL  Ebfentahob  is  to  bb  national  when  the  sin  is  national.  The  Ninevites'
was  a  "  public,  general,  royal  fast."  So  when  the  Divine  judgments  menaced  Jerusalem
in  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  all  the  people  proclaimed  a  fast  (Jer.  xxxvi.  9).  Then  it
was  observed  by  all  the  people  in  accordance  with  a  royal  edict.  So  Jehosnaphat  "  feared
and  proclaimed  a  fast  throughout  all  Judah  "  (2  Chron.  xx.  3)  when  Moab  and  Anunon
invaded  the  kingdom.  In  the  nature  of  the  case,  the  repentance  must  correspond  to  th«
transgression.  The  people  must  repent  who  have  sinned,  and  in  the  character  and  relation*
in  which  tb«  sin  has  been  committed.    That  their  action  in  the  matter  was  suggestad


TO  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  m.  1—10.

and  shaped  by  royal  edict  detracted  ia  nothing  from  the  value  of  the  Nlnevites'  repent-
ance. The  obligations  of  religion  rule  every  relation  of  life.  Each  community  ought
to  be  religious,  and  the  rulers  of  each  to  consider  their  office  sacred  to  the  accomplish-
ment of  this  result.  Monarchs  should  reign  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  they  do  so  when
they  "  take  order  "  for  the  observance  of  religious  worship  with  due  regard  to  the  pre-
rogatives of  the  Church,  and  to  the  right  of  private  judgment.  "  It  is  an  evil  and
dangerous  principle  that  would  exempt  the  rulers  of  a  kingdom  from  being  in  subjection
in  their  public  capacity  to  the  Word  of  Christ,  and  from  being  under  obligation  in  their
government  to  rule  for  the  promotion  of  his  kingdom.  It  strikes  at  the  root  of  all
family  as  well  as  national  religion ;  and  while  it  would  confine  Christ  to  the  separate
consciences  of  individual  men,  it  would  refuse  him  the  right  to  govern  the  households
and  communities  into  which  in  Providence  they  are  combined  "  (Martin).  The  practical
lesson  of  this  is  read  to  us  by  Jesus  Christ  (Luke  xi.  32).  The  existence  of  saints  in
the  world  is  a  virtual  condemnation  of  all  the  sinners.  With  similar  privileges  and
opportunities,  why  are  these  spiritually  changed,  and  those  not  ?  Unless  the  believers
have  done  more  than  their  duty,  the  unbelievers  have  fallen  woefuUy  short.  Every
saint  in  a  Christian  congregation  will  stand  up  in  the  judgment  a  silent  but  damning
witness  against  its  imconverted  members  who  remain  so  under  equal  inducements  to
repentance,  ^ni  the  case  is  worse  when  the  balance  of  privilege  was  on  the  unbelievers'
side.  It  was  so  as  between  Nineveh  and  Israel.  The  one  was  brought  to  repentance
by  means  incomparably  less  than  those  which  had  proved  entirely  inoperative  with  the
other.  It  will  be  so  as  between  each  of  them  and  us,  if  we  are  blind  to  our  greater  light,
and  insensible  to  our  more  potent  spiritual  agencies.  "  A  o;reater  than  Jonah  is  here  " —
greater  in  person,  greater  in  ofBce,  greater  in  power,  and  greater  in  influence.  Have  we
resisted  him  y  Have  we  withstood  his  mightier  striving  ?  Then  who  so  inexcusable,
who  so  hopeless,  as  we  ?  What  guilt  so  deep,  what  condemnation  so  great,  as  oura
(Heb.x.  28)?— J.  E.  H.

Vers.  1 — i. — Jonah's  second  call.  "  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Jonah  the
second  time,  saying,  Arise,  go  unto  Nineveh,  tliat  great  city,  and  preach  unto  it  the
preaching  that  I  bid  thee,"  etc.

I.  Reinstatement  op  the  prophet.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  Jonah
the  second  time."  Jonah's  rebellion  had  had  a  twofold  effect  on  his  relations  to  God —
broken  up  his  personal  fellowship  with  him,  and  suspended  his  official  function  as  a
prophet.  God's-  grace  restored  him  both  personally  and  ofBcially,  as  afterwards  in  the
case  of  Peter ;  but,  as  in  this  case,  the  restoration  of  the  first  did  not  necessarily  include
that  of  the  second.  Servants  of  God  who  have  fallen  need  a  second  call  to  public  ser-
vice ;  it  needs  to  be  shown  that  God  trusts  them  with  his  work  again.  It  is  natural
for  ministers  who  have  been  publicly  dealt  with  and  censured  to  desire  to  be  reponed ;
but  this  cannot  be  rightly  done  without  some  token  that  God  again  calls  them.

II.  The  new  commission.  "  Arise,  go  unto  Nineveh,  that  great  city,  and  preach
unto  it  the  preaching  that  I  bid  thee."  We  know  not  where  Jonah  was — where  he
had  been  landed — what  had  happened  in  the  interval.  Imagination  can  picture  the
prophet  on  the  shore  making  for  Gath-hepher,  and  probably  arriving  there.  Again  the
message  is  preceded  by  the  word  of  stimulation,  "Arise;  brace  thyself,  prepare  for
arduous  work;  and  this  time  it  would  bring  a  lesson  of  warning — remember  how  easily
you  were  turned  aside  before  1  The  work  was  not  to  be  made  easier  out  of  regard  to  the
prophet's  proved  weakness,  but  the  prophet  must  seek  a  higher  strength.  The  great-
ness of  Nineveh  is  again  dwelt  on — "Nineveh,  that  great  city" — "an  exceeding  great
city,  and  great  unto  God  "  (ver.  3).  "  Think  of  a  whole  vast  city,  full  of  this  humanity,
of  this  God-breathed  life ;  and  is  it  surprising  that  a  great  city  should  be  great  unto
GodV  What  flashings  of  intellectual  lights  in  one  day  1— as  many  almost  as  the
separate  rays  of  the  sun.  What  throbbings  of  moral  or  immoral  purpose,  the  moral
faculty  acting  in  each!  What  a  sighing  of  wandering  spirits,  unconsciously  or  blindly
seeking  the  lost  portion  I  What  a  swell  and  heave  of  the  great  tide  of  animated  life
composed  of  the  blended  individual  streams  I  London  is  like  a  great  and  wide  sea  of
life.  The  daily  agitations  which  stir  in  her  bosom  are  felt  in  feebler  pulsings  even  in
&r-off  shores ;  and  in  multitudes  which  no  man  can  number  her  thoughts  and  acts,  and
fn  these  her  checkared  moral  history,  are  going  up  to  God's  heaven.   Such  was  Nineveh


OH.  m.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  Tl

of  old,  and  for  Buch  TMSons  as  we  have  named,  it  waa  still,  as  at  first,  a  city  great  to
Ghxl "  (Baleigh).  The  message  is  somewhat  different  from  before :  "  Preach  the  preach-
ing rUterally, '  cry  the  cry  T  that  I  bid  thee."  This  may  either  mean,  "  the  cry  that
I  will  bid  thee  at  the  time,  or  "  the  cry  that  I  already  bade  thee."  Either  Jonah  was
to  go,  like  an  admiral,  with  sealed  orders  to  be  opened  at  a  certain  place ;  or  he  was  to
say  what  he  had  been  ordered  to  say  before,  but  had  shrunk  from  saying.  The  latter  view
is  probably  correct— a  further  trial  of  Jonah's  sincerity  and  submissiveness— in  the  very
matter  which  had  dissatisfied  him  before,  he  was  called  to  place  himself  in  God's  hands,
and  to  engage  to  do  precisely  as  God  would  direct.  In  all  cases,  true  preaching  is  "  the
preaching  that  I  bid  thee."  It  is  a  simple  message  from  God ;  it  becomes  effectual
when  it  is  given  as  such.  All  very  well  to  be  able  to  reconcile  it  with  reason  and  com-
mend it  to  the  conscience,  and  to  set  It  forth  with  the  enrichments  of  learning  and  the
embellishments  of  art;  but  there  is  danger  lest  its  true  simple  nature  be  thereby
disguised;  nothing  should  be  allowed  which  prevents  it  from  being  presented  as  a
simple  message  from  God :  "  the  preaching  that  I  bid  thee,"  "  How  often  did  our  Lord
disclaim  the  authorship  of  all  that  he  said,  and  assign  it  continually  to  the  Father  I
'  Jesus  answered  them,  and  said,  My  doctrine  is  not  mine,  but  his  that  sent  me ;  the
words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  I  speak  notof  myself  (John  vii.  16).  Himself  personally
cognizant  of  all  truth,  he  acts  as  the  Church's  Teacher  under  the  responsibility  and
within  the  exact  limits  of  his  office.  Officially  ordained  the  Father's  Ambassador,  he
confines  himself  to  a  declaration  of  the  Father's  words.  .  .  .  Exactly  ■■  the  Father
had  said  unto  him,  so  he  speaks  "  (Martin).

nL  Tmt  OBEDiENOK  OF  THE  PBOPHET.  "  So  Jonah  arose,  and  went  unto  Nineveh,
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord."  "  Hpw  different  every  way  from  what  he  was  when
he  fled  to  Tarshish  I  We  see  him  no  more  consulting  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  yield-
ing prompt  obedience  to  the  heavenly  call.  No  more  running  away,  but  asking, '  Lord,
what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  Here  am  I ;  send  me.'  The  Lord  saith, '  Go  to  Nineveh ; '
he  instantly  goes  without  gainsaying  or  resistance "  (Jones).  "  In  the  present  case,
Jonah  would  resume  his  commission  with  a  new  obedience ;  with  a  meekness,  a  faith,
a  courage,  to  all  of  which  his  punishment  and  pardon  had  been  the  signal  means  of
disciplining  him.  He  would  resume  his  work  and  mission  with  another  spirit — (1)  as
a  sinful  man,  whose  sin  had  been  eminently  forgiven ;  (2)  as  a  prayerful  man,  whose
prayer  had  been  eminently  answered;  (3)  as  an  afflicted  man,  whose  affliction  had
been  eminently  blessed  "  (Martin).  "  The  Word  says, '  Arise,'  and  Jonah  arose ;  the
Word  says, '  Go,'  and  Jonah  went.  It  is  beautiful.  It  is  grand.  We  must  not  indeed
exi^gerata.  For  we  know  that  there  is  something  dark  and  bitter  in  this  man  still,
which  will  break  out  again.  But  meantime,  and  in  this  act  of  obedience,  so  far  as  we
see  it,  there  is  a  grandeur  like  that  of  an  angel— a  simplicity  like  that  of  a  child  "

IV.  Thb  uessaoe  DBLrvERBD.  "  And  Jonah  began  to  enter  into  the  city,  a  day's
journey,  and  he  cried,  and  said,  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown."  Jonah
in  Nineveh — ^what  a  contrast  to  Gath-hepher,  Joppa,  or  even  Jerusalem !  What  temples  1
what  tombs  I  what  monuments  I — ^what  new  impressions  of  its  vastness  and  power  I
Perhaps  new  impressions  of  its  horrible  treatment  of  those  who  opposed  themselves  to
It.  It  was  no  uncommon  sight  to  witness  a  row  of  prisoners,  each  impaled  alive  on  an
iron  spike ;  or  men  of  mark  flayed  alive ;  or  captives,  with  hooks  in  nose,  dragged  by
halters,  carrying  the  bleeding  heads  of  their  kings  or  nobles.  Anyhow,  pictures  of
such  things  abounded.  They  made  no  undue  impression  on  Jonah.  "  Strong  in  faith,"
he  went  boldly  forward  and  delivered  the  message.  "  He  cried,  and  said  " — lifted  up
his  voice  like  a  trumpet — ^under  the  windows  of  the  rich,  in  the  resorts  of  the  poor —
before  the  proud  military  array — before  nobles  and  judges  and  alL  His  message  was
more  specific  and  startling  than  before.  Stem,  but  faithful  and  honest  preaching;
no  flattery ;  no  shrinking  from  exposure  of  the  true  mind  of  God.  They  might  do  with
him  as  they  pleased ;  he  had  not  a  single  friend  in  that  vast  multitude — ^no  protection
but  God's — ^nevertheless,  he  would  proclaim  the  message.  As  John  Enox  said  long
afterwards,  "  I  am  in  the  place  where  I  am  commanded  of  God  to  speak  the  truth ;
and  the  truth  I  will  speak,  impugn  it  whoso  list."  Contrast  the  feeling  of  Jonah  now
and  when  he  fied  to  go  to  Tarshish.  His  soul  tumultuous  and  agitated  then,  in
paac*  and  serenity  now.    "He  that  saveth  his  life  shall  lose  it,  and  he  that  loMth  hit


7J  THK  BOOK  OF   JONAH.  [oh.  m.  1— Ift


life  for  my  sake  shall  find  it.*  Acknowledge  the  reality  of  Diriae  protection  and
atreDgth — sense  of  peace  and  proof  of  it,  for,  after  all,  fidelity  to  God  is  the  true  policy.
"  Them  that  honour  me,  I  will  honour  "  (1  Sam.  u.  30).— W.  G.  B.

Vers.  6 — 9. — The  repentance  of  Nineveh.  "  So  the  people  of  Ninereh  believed  Qoi,
md  proclaimed  a  fast,  and  put  on  sackcloth,  from  the  greatest  of  them  even  to  the  least
of  them,"  etc.  Here  is  Jonah  in  Nineveh  alone  against  the  world.  Oh,  the  moral
grandeur  of  the  sight  I — ^resting  on  God  alone — "  according  to  his  faith  it  was  to  him  "
— marvellous  success  of  his  preaching,  through  Divine  power  working  in  him  and
through  him.  Observe  the  contrast  to  Koah  and  to  Lot.  He  is  like  John  the  Baptist
— a  torch,  setting  all  on  fire.  We  notice  the  effects  of  his  crying  the  cry  which  God
bade  him.

I.  The  peoplk  of  Nineveh  believed  God.  (Ver.  5.)  Apparently  "  the  people "
were  first  impressed — deep  religious  impressions  commonly  begin  with  them,  and  rise
from  them  to  the  upper  class — "  the  common  people  heard  Jesus  gladly."  There  are
many  hindrances  among  men  of  wealth  and  station  to  religious  impression,  but  Provi-
dence gives  compensations — "  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them."  They
believed  God.  They  saw  in  Jonah  only  a  messenger — the  messenger  of  God,  who
made  the  earth  and  the  sea.  Probably  they  had  heard  his  history,  for  "  Jonah  was  a
sign  to  the  Ninevites."  Before  one,  in  whose  person  there  had  been  given  such  tokens
of  the  Divine  power,  both  to  punish  and  to  save,  they  stood  in  awe.  "  The  busy  crowd
is  by-and-by  arrested ;  a  solemn  awe  steals  over  the  minds  of  the  people,  they  press
around  the  preacher  to  know  who  and  whence  he  is,  and  why  he  utters  such  an  ominous
cry  in  their  streets ;  and  hearing  as  they  now  do,  that,  so  far  from  lightly  denouncing
this  doom  against  them,  he  had  tdready,  at  the  hazard  of  his  life,  shrunk  from  executing
the  charge  committed  to  him,  that  he  had  been  cast  out  for  his  wilful  resistance  into  the
mighty  deep,  and  miraculously  restored  only  that  he  might  be  sent  forth  anew  to  utter
the  cry  they  now  heard  of  approaching  destruction — learning  all  this  concerning  Jonah
and  his  burden,  how  solemn  and  perilous  must  their  situation  have  appeared  in  their
eyes  1 "  (Kitto).  He  whom  they  now  heard  proclaiming  his  warning  was  the  messenger
of  that  God  who  had  roused  the  storm  and  cast  him  overboard ;  who  had  prepared
the  great  fish  to  swallow  him,  keep  him  alive  within  its  huge  body,  and  then  vomit
him  on  the  dry  land ;  and  who  had  sent  him  back  to  deliver  his  message,  "  Yet  forty
days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  destroyed."  The  whole  community  were  actuated  by  a
common  feeling.  "  Word  came  to  the  king."  All  ranks  and  classes  were  moved  by  the
message  of  the  strange  preacher;  all  realized  that  the  anger  of  God  and  the  coming
destruction  of  the  city  were  awful  calamities ;  as  of  the  Pharisees  at  John's  baptism,
the  question  might  have  been  asked,  "  Who  hath  warned  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath
to  come? "  When  God  makes  his  voice  heard,  he  bows  the  hearts  of  the  people  like
the  heart  of  one  man.

II.  Fboolamation  of  a  fast.  An  external  token  of  distress  is  deemed  fitting —
heathen  fasts  extended  to  animals  as  well  as  men.  "  It  was  a  custom  among  the  ancient
heathen  to  withhold  food  from  their  cattle  as  well  as  from  themselves  in  times  of  mourn-
ing and  humiliation ;  in  some  instances  they  cut  o£f  the  hair  of  their  beasts  as  well  as
their  own"  (Eitto).  Attitude  of  the  king,  great  and  noble  (ver.  6) — all  his  pride  and
vain-glory  laid  aside— he  humbles  himself  openly  before  God — contrast  this  with  spirit
of  Sennacherib  afterwards  (2  Kings  xviii.,  xix.) — ^kings  never  so  great  as  when  they  pay
honour  to  b^m  by  whom  kings  reign — the  King  of  Nineveh  rose  above  all  shame  and
vanity,  saw  only  the  dread  reaUty,  and  acted  accordingly.  Kings  are  in  their  noblest
attitude  when  leading  their  people  to  honour  God.

III.  Pbatbb  demanded.  "  Let  them  cry  mightily  unto  God."  All  their  own  gods
are  to  be  set  aside — this  God  only  is  to  be  recognized.  No  one  seems  to  have  said  a
word  for  the  Assyrian  gods — "  Our  God  is  in  the  heavens :  he  hath  done  whatsoever
he  hath  pleased  "  (Ps.  cxv.  3).  Prayer  is  often  derided  by  the  world — in  time  of  press-
ing danger  the  praying  people  are  the  wise,  the  patriotic,  the  true  people.  Beal  prayer
is  no  barren  form — "  let  them  cry  mightily  to  God  " — throw  their  whole  souls  into  the
exercise — pray  as  for  dear  life.  The  true  idea  of  prayer  is  beseeching  God's  mercy-
beseeching  it  as  the  one  only  resource — what  alone  can  save  &om  misery  and  ruin.

IV.  MoBAL  BKFOBMATION  DKICANDED.     "Let  them  tuTD  every  Qna  from  hia  evil


aH.ni.1— lO.J  TUK   tn.)VK  UF   JUAAii.  73


way,  and  from  the  violence  that  is  in  their  hands."  The  humiliation  of  the  people
more  than  external — "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  mau  his
thoughts"  (Isa.  It.  7) — instinctive  recognition  of  the  holiness  of  God — ^it  is  unholy
acts  and  an  unholy  spirit  that  excite  his  displeasure  (see  Isa.  Iviii.  5—7).  Violence
specified — the  rapacious  cruelty  which  characterized  the  people,  and  the  cry  of  which
had  come  up  hefore  God.  When  once  conscience  was  roused,  it  would  condemn  these
acts  of  violence  very  loudly.  Interesting  and  beautiful  sight — all  classes  haateniug  to
put  away  their  evil  ways,  and  reversing  them,  doing  the  very  opposite  to  what  they
had  been  wont  to  do.

"  Sinners  listened  to  Jonah,
And  each  one  confessed  his  sins.
The  polluted  city  heard  him,
And  quickly  put  off  its  abominations.
Masters  also  heard  him,

And  proclaimed  freedom  to  their  bondmen  i  .  >  •
At  the  voice  of  Jonah  honourable  women
Brought  down  theii'  pride  in  sackcloth :
Tho  repentance  was  indeed  sincere
When  haughty  women  put  on  humility  I  .  .  ,
The  gay  laid  restraint  upon  their  eyes,
That  they  might  not  gaze  on  women.
Women  laid  aside  their  ornaments,
That  those  who  looked  on  them  might  not  stumble."

(Ephraem  Syrus,  translated  by  Bnrgeis.)

Abiding  picture  of  what  ought  to  be  the  attitude  of  kings  and  people  in  times  of  national
calamity — sin  is  then  felt  to  be  a  curse  and  a  poison :  "  Search  us,  0  G-od,  and  know
our  hearts ;  try  us,  and  know  our  thoughts,  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  us,
and  lead  us  in  the  way  everlasting."

v.  Beason  fok  these  steps.  (Ver.  9.)  "Who  can  tell  if  God  will  turn  and
repent,  and  turn  away  from  iiis  fierce  wrath,  that  we  perish  not  ?  "  Only  a  possibility —
"Who  can  tell?"  But  in  time  of  extreme  peril  a  possibility  ought  to  be  acted  on.
**  We  cannot  plead  this  on  the  score  of  justice,  neither  can  we  ply  his  faithfulness  with
any  specific  assurance  of  mercy,  given  to  meet  the  necessities  of  our  case ;  we  have
nothing  to  encourage  us  but  the  general  character  of  God  himself,  as  manifested  in  his
dealings  with  men  on  earth.  But  still  we  have  that,  and  the  matter  is  not  altogether
hopeless.  For  why  should  God  have  seat  his  prophet  to  admonish  us  of  sin,  and  fore-
tell his  impending  judgment — a  prophet  too  who  has  himself  been  the  subject  of  singular
mercy  and  forbeturance  ?  If  destruction  alone  had  been  his  object,  would  he  not  rather
have  allowed  us  to  sleep  on  in  our  sinfulness?  And  why  in  particular  should  these
forty  days  have  been  made  to  run  between  our  doom  and  our  punishment?  Surely  this
bespeaks  some  thought  of  mercy  in  God ;  it  must  have  been  meant  to  leave  the  door
still  open  to  us  for  forgiveness  and  peace  "  (Fairbairn).  The  proclamation  and  the  reason
for  it  were  not  perfect— did  not  go  beyond  the  spirit  of  fear  and  trembling — ^but  the
Ninevites  acted  on  their  light.  "  If  there  be  first  a  ready  mind,  it  is  accepted  according
to  what  a  man  hath,  and  not  according  to  what  be  hath  not "  (2  Cor.  viii.  12).  Who-
ever faithfully  follows  the  light  he  has  may  look  for  more — "  to  him  that  hath  shall  be
given."  It  is  interesting  to  think  how  Jonah's  prophecy  would  affect  the  young,  and
it  is  the  property  of  childhood  to  receive  testimony  with  full  belief  in  it.  Possibly  the
emotion  of  the  children  may  have  helped  to  move  the  parents.  Prospect  of  speedy  death
is  naturally  more  terrible  to  young  than  old.  The  following  picture  of  the  scene  by
Ephraem  Synu  may  be  quoted : —

"The  children  inquired  while  weeping
Of  their  fathers,  in  the  midst  of  their  tean,
'Narrate  to  us,  O  parents,
How  many  days  yet  remain
From  the  time  which  that  Hebrew  preaohef
Hath  determined  for  as?
And  what  hour  he  hath  indicated
When  we  shall  go  down  below  to  She(d?


W  THK  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  L<«-m-l— KX

And  In  what  day  will  it  be

That  this  fair  oity  ehall  be  deitioyed  f

And  further,  when  will  the  last  day  be,

After  which  we  shall  not  exist  ?

When  will  the  season  arrive,

When  mortal  pangs  shall  seize  on  all  of  as  f

And  when,  throughout  the  world

Shall  fly  the  tidings  of  our  ruin  7

And  the  passing  spectators  shall  gaze  npoa

The  oity  overthrown  npon  its  masters  ? '

"When  the  parents  listened  to  these  tbingt
From  the  month  of  their  little  ones,
Their  tears  most  bitterly
OTerflowed,  and  sufTused  their  children.
And  dropped  at  the  same  time  on  the  persons
Of  the  speakers  and  the  hearen.
And  the  fathers  were  not  able
To  find  ntterance  through  sighing ;
For  their  grief  had  closed  up
The  straight  path  of  words  ;
And  their  speech  was  interrupted
By  the  weeping  of  their  beloved  ones.**

Bead  the  analogy  between  threatened  destruction  of  Nineveh  and  destruction  of  slnnen
•t  the  last  day.  Beasons  for  repentance  in  one  case  infinitely  stronger  in  other.  Katural
indifference  and  unbelief  of  men  in  reference  to  the  latter.  Accumulated  guilt  of
those  who  refuse  him  that  speaketh  from  heaven.  "  The  men  of  Nineveh  will  rise
up  in  the  judgment  with  the  men  of  this  generation,  and  condemn  it;  for  thej
repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah  :  and  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonah  is  here."  (1)
They  had  but  one  preacher,  and  that  a  stranger.  (2)  They  heard  hut  one  message,
and  it  was  wrath.    (3)  They  had  but  a  vague  hope  of  mercy. — W.  G.  B.

Ver.  10. — Ood  repenting.  "  And  God  saw  their  works,  that  they  turned  fixjm  their
evil  way;  and  God  repented  of  the  evil,  that  he  had  said  that  he  would  do  unto
them ;  and  he  did  it  not."  Merciful  character  of  God  vindicated.  "  He  retaineth  not
anger  for  ever,  because  he  delighteth  in  mercy ; "  "1  said,  I  will  confess  my  transgression
unto  the  Lord ;  and  thou  forgavest  the  iniquity  of  my  sin ;  "  "If  we  confess  our  sins,
he  is  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness."

L  The  oausb  of  the  change.  "  God  saw  their  works,  that  they  turned  from  their
evil  way."  He  not  only  heard  their  professions,  but  saw  from  their  acts  that  these
were  real ;  they  believed  God — believed  that  on  account  of  their  sins  his  "  fierce  anger  "
rested  on  them,  and  they  showed  their  faith  by  their  works;  and  the  particular  kind
of  works  was  their  turning  from  their  evil  way — not  resorting  to  matters  of  will-
worship,  such  as  self-mutilation  or  making  children  pass  through  the  fire,  not  stretch-
ing forth  hands  or  making  many  prayers,  but  abandoning  the  sin  that  had  offended
Qfld ;  not  giving  money  to  build  or  ornament  temples  or  buy  God's  favour,  but  tearing
the  idol  from  their  hearts — turning  from  their  evil  way.  ^e  real  test  of  repentance
is  giving  up  sin — favourite  sin,'  pleasant  sin — sins  of  sensuality  and  indulgence  and
display ;  giving  them  up  as  acts,  and  trying  to  give  them  up  as  objects  of  desire ;
seeking  to  have  the  heart  cleansed  as  well  as  the  hands ;  to  have  the  natural  love  of
them  subdued  by  the  thought  that  they  excite  against  us  the  fierce  wrath  of  God ;
and  in  our  case,  under  the  light  of  the  gospel,  by  all  the  'considerations  derived  from
the  cross  of  Christ,  and  God's  display  of  love  and  grace  in  him.  Was  the  repentance  of
Nineveh  complete,  inward,  spiritual  ?  This  is  not  said,  nor  is  it  necessary  to  believe  it
was.  Probably  it  did  not  last  long.  It  was  repentance,  however,  according  to  their  light
and  circumstances — the  expression  of  deep  national  concern  for  sins  that  had  come  up
before  God,  and  agedntt  which  God  had  sent  his  prophet  to  testify.  It  was  an
acknowledgment  of  the  Qoi  of  Jonah  as  the  God  of  the  whole  earth — a  submission  of
themselves  to  him — such  submission  as  would  have  saved  Egypt  and  Pharaoh,  had  it
been  made,  in  Moses'  time,  with  accompauyinp;  tokens  of  sorrow  and  sincerity.     Higher


OH.  m.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  7ft

quality  of  repentance  is  d<manded  firom  an  individual  than  from  a  nation  ;  fellowship
of  reconciled  Ood  with  the  individual  is  much  more  intimate  and  spiritual  than  with
the  nation ;  such  fellowship  is  impoasihle,  save  in  case  of  regenerate  hearts ;  in  "  repent-
ance unto  life "  there  must  be  genuine  hating  of  what  Qod  hates,  and  loving  what  he
loves.

n.  The  change  on  the  pabt  of  God.  "  God  repented  of  the  evil,  that  he  had  said
he  would  do  unto  them;  and  he  did  it  not."  It  is  frequently  objected  that  this
implies  ficJdeness  on  the  part  of  God,  as  if  he  were  mutable — ^as  if  he  were  a  son  of
man  that  he  should  repent.  But  fickleness  or  mutability  implies  change  of  action
while  dreumstances  remain  the  same;  immutability  demands  change  of  action  when
circumstances  change.  Immutability  is  tested  by  prindplei  on  which  one  acts  rather
than  on  the  outward  actions  one  performs ;  hence  there  is  no  fickleness  on  part  of  God
in  opposite  actions,  as  when  he  placed  man  in  Paradise  aod  afterwards  drove  him  forth.
When  God  said  by  Jonah, "  Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  destroyed,"  he  meant
that  Nineveh — ^Nineveh  if  it  continued  the  same,  black  with  guilt,  impenitent,  unre-
formed.  He  did  not  meau_that  ano<Aer  Nineveh  would  be  destroyed — Nineveh  fasting,
penitent,  transformed.  At  the  end  of  forty  days  old  Nineveh  did  not  exist ;  the  corrup-
tion that  would  have  drawn  down  the  Divine  judgment  was  removed — in  a  sense  that
old  Nineveh  was  destroyed — ^it  had  passed  away.  Consequently,  the  denunciation
ceased  to  be  applicable ;  the  doom  threatened  was  not  inflicted.  This  was  the  whole
amount  of  the  change  on  the  part  of  God.  The  phrase, "  God  repented,"  is  an  anthropo-
morphism ;  God  acted  as  man  would  have  done  if  he  had  repented — regarded  it  no
longer  as  a  case  for  infliction  of  judgment.  Qoi's  denunciations  of  judgment  are
directed  rather  against  states  of  mind  and  conduct  than  particular  places  or  com-
munities— implying,  usually,  a  chance  of  repentance.  In  some  cases  the  time  for
repentance  had  passed,  and  denunciation  of  doom  became  absolute — as  in  the  case  of
our  Lord  weeping  over  Jerusalem.  In  rejecting  him  they  had  filled  up  the  measure  of
their  Iniquities.  Their  house  was  left  desolate.  "  We  are  ever  to  guard  against  assign-
ing human  imperfection  to  God.  But  we  are  equally  to  guard  agamst  assigning  to  him
such  a  character  or  nature  as  would  render  living,  intelligible,  friendly  intercourse
between  him  and  his  people  impossible.  But  impossible  utterly  all  such  intercourse
may  be,  if  I  may  not  speak  to  God  in  the  same  forms  and  phrases  and  feelings  in  which
I  would  offer  a  request,  or  state  my  case  to  a  fellow-man,  though  of  course  retaining
unreserved  submission  and  unlimited  adoration  of  the  Mighty  One  of  Israel.  My
adoration  unbounded ;  my  surrender  of  myself  to  God  unreservedly ; — ^these  are  tributes
to  the  searchless  glory  of  his  Godhead  which  I  may  not  withhold,  and  yet  profess  to
worship  him.  Nevertheless,  with  these  I  must  be  allowed,  in  condescension  to  my
weakness,  to  ask  God  to  be  '  attentive  to  the  voice  of  my  supplications ; '  to  '  behold  and
visit  me; '  to  'stretch  out  his  hand'  for  my  help;  to  'shine  upon  me  with  the  light  of
his  countenance ; '  to  '  awake ; '  to  '  arise ; '  to  '  draw  near ; '  to  '  come  and  dwell  with
me.'  All  these  expressions  and  requests  are  after  the  manner  of  men.  I  must  be
allowed  to  spread  out  my  sorrow  and  my  trial  before  him,  precisely  as  if  my  design  and
expectation  were  to  work  on  his  feelings,  and  move  and  induce  him  in  his  pity  to
deliver  me  "  (Martin).

III.  Nineveh  is  spared.  Picture  the  city  as  the  fortieth  day  approached ;  when  it
dawned;  afterwards,  when  it  passed  away  and  Nineveh  remaioed.  Picture  universal
relief  and  joy — old  and  young — congratulations — life  appearing  before  them  with  a  new
brightness — the  day  breaks,  and  the  shadows  flee  away.  Symbol  of  what  may  be
realized  when  the  anger  of  God  due  to  sin  is  averted :  "  In  that  day  thou  shalt  say,  O
Lord,  I  will  praise  thee :  though  thou  wast  angry  with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned  away,
and  thou  comfortest  me "  (Isa.  xii.  1).  "  What,  then,  must  we  expect  will  be  the
■weet  surprise  and  transport  of  the  departed  sotU  on  his  first  entrance  into  glory ;  when
translated  of  a  sudden  from  this  material  world  to  the  world  of  spirits;  from  among
men  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God?  What  must  be  his  sensations,  delight,  and
astonishment,  when  first  conducted  into  the  presence  of  the  Saviour  reigning  on  the
throne  of  heaven?  What  will  be  his  feelings  when  he  sees  around  the  throne  a  com-
pany which  no  man  can  number,  all  arrayed  in  white  robes,  and  wearing  brilliant
crowns  that  never  fade;  all  in  transport  of  joy,  singing  of  redeeming  love,  and  cele-
brating the  praises  of  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  and  their  voices  like  the  sound  of  many


76  TEE  BOOK   OF  JONAH.  [ch.  m.  1— 10.

waters?  When  the  soul  first  joins  this  company,  and  reviews  the  dangers  it  has  escaped
in  the  world  below,  its  love  will  kindle  into  a  burning  flame,  and  its  song  will  be
eternaL"— W.  G.  B.

Vers,  1 — 4. — Jonah  in  Nineveh.  L  A  gbeat  eestoration.  After  his  recreancy  to
duty,  who  had  been  surprised  if  Jonah  had  been  thrust  out  of  the  prophet's  office  ?
The  guilt  of  his  flight,  the  moral  insensibility  into  which  he  had  sunken,  rendered  him,
many  would  think,  unfit  to  be  God's  spokesman  to  men.  But  God  had  mercy  on  him.
And  saved,  he  had  presently  the  assurance  of  it.  He  was  reinstated  in  the  prophet's
office,  and  solemnly  commissioned  anew  to  the  prophet's  work.  A  "  second  time "
bidden  go,  he  went.  It  was  a  great  restoration,  and  openly  marked  by  the  great
errand  on  which  he  was  sent.  The  work  showed  that  the  worker  was  restored.  For
that  still  the  backslider  is  recovered.  Not  for  mere  personal  enjoyment  in  religion.
Not  merely  to  have  the  assurance  of  individual  safety.  But  also  to  "show"  what
great  things  God  hath  done  for  him.  Was  Peter  restored  ?  Let  him  prove  it :  "  Feed
my  sheep, . .  .  my  lambs."  So  was  Jonah  comforted;  restored,  he  had  the  assurance  of
it  in  the  renewed  commission,  "  Go  to  Nineveh."

II.  A  GBEAT  SPHEBE  KOB  woBK.  God  himself,  in  giving  this  commission,  spoke  of
Nineveh  as  "  that  great  city."  Jonah  knew  from  human  testimony  that  the  city  was
great.  But  Ood  says  it  is.  Then  let  Jonah  be  ready  for  difficulties.  It  is  no  little
work  to  which  he  is  bidden.  And  is  the  greatness  of  Nineveh  mentioned  only  to
prepare  him  for  the  magnitude  of  the  task  before  him  ?  Is  there  not  implied  therein
a  reason,  should  the  people  repent,  for  the  Divine  compassion  ?  "  Should  not  I  spare
Nineveh,  that  great  city  ? "  (ch.  iv.  11).  In  a  town,  with  its  many  homes,  families,
cares,  virtues,  vices, — how  much  to  impress  a  human  imagination,  to  affect  a  human
heart  1  But  in  great  cities,  throbbing  with  restless  life,  each  man  of  the  millioned
multitude  with  his  own  history,  his  own  destiny,  how  the  solemn  interest  is  deepened !
Great  cities  are  great  to  Ood.  Beligion  is  the  only  protectioQ  of  city  or  state.  UTie
lepentance  of  the  Ninevites  averted  the  doom  of  Kineveh;  its  wealth,  valour,  fame,
availed  not  to  eflect  this.  This  punishment  of  nations  as  such  comes  in  this  world.  The
sins  of  nations  have  destroyed  them.  May  our  own  nation  know  the  time  of  its  visita-
tion, that  it  perish  not !

III.  A  GREAT  EXAMPLE.  Jouah  is  here  seen  at  his  best.  There  is  a  moral  sub-
limity in  his  promptitude.  "  Arise,  go."  He  went.  The  difficulty  of  obedience  always
grows  by  delay.  It  may  he  hard  at  the  beginning,  but  it  will  be  easier  then  than  ever
after.  "  God  loveth  a  cheerful  giver,"  whatever  be  the  gift.  Bold  was  Jonah.  Wisely
bold.  As  soon  as  Nineveh  was  reached  he  began  his  solemn  cry.  Bold,  though  alone.
He  had  no  human  companion  to  encourage  him,  to  help  him.  Bold,  to  utter  the  cry
of  woe.  Destruction  was  the  burden  of  his  oft-repeated  message.  Nothing  in  thai  to
gather  affection  to  him — loving,  joyful  attention.  .May  his  courage  be  oursl  W»
have  glad  tidings  to  tell ;  and  no  such  lonely  path  to  tread  as  he.  With  such  •
message,  and  with  the  Tiewless  presence  of  the  Messenger,  we  may  well  be  of  good
courage. — G.  T.  0.

Ver,  2, — I%e  preaching  tluit  Ood  hids.  1.  Not  the  message  of  onr  own  Imagination.
2,  Not  what  men  desire  and  what  will  be  palatable  to  them.  3.  But  what  Ood  bids.
To  the  messenger  he  gives  the  message — from  his  Word ;  by  his  Spirit.  His  gospel —
not  altered,  not  added  to,  not  diminished — ^is  to  be  preached  "  to  every  creature,"
With  faithfulness,  simplicity,  persistence — whether  men  hear  or  whether  men  forbear.
Like  Luther,  « I  can  do  no  other ;  God  help  me  1 "  — G.  T,  0.

Vers.  6 — ^9, — Jonah's  successful  ministry  in  Nineveh.  With  a  quick  and  marvellous
success  was  Jonah's  ministry  crowned.  Doubtless  the  Ninevites  knew  how  he  had
sought  to  escape  his  mission  to  them,  and  all  the  perilous  and  miraculous  consequences  of
his  flight.  This  seems  clearly  implied  in  our  Lord's  words,  who  says  that  Jonah  was
"  a  sign  unto  the  Ninevites."  And  he  only  could  be  this  in  so  far  as  they  were
acquunted  with  his  history.  He  was  "  a  sign  "  that  Jehovah  was  not  to  be  trifled  with.
If  he,  a/riind  of  Jehovah,  had  been  punished,  what  might  the  enemies  expect?  "A
■ign  "  also  of  Jehovah's  mercy  as  well  as  justice.    If  he  had  been  saved,  might  not  they  T


OH.  m.  1—10.]  THB  BOOK  QF  JONAH.  77

If  their  case  had  been  utterly  hopelesB,  why  had  he  come  at  all  ?  So,  though  they  had
■een  no  miracle,  they  "  believed  God."  That  doom  was  at  hand ;  doom  that  might —
who  could  tell? — be  averted,  if  they  " battered  the  gates  of  heaven  with  storms  of
prayer."  They  proclaimed  a  fast ;  "  the  people ;"  for  then,  as  always,  national  repent-
ance and  reformation  worked  its  way  tyaward.  Here,  from  the  people,  at  length  reaching
the  nobles  and  the  king.  Be,  too,  was  a  man  and  in  peril,  and,  like  his  subjects,
must  repent.  And,  by  royal  proclamation,  all  were  bidden  fast,  be  clad  in  sackclotli ;
the  creatures,  too,  dependent  on  them,  by  their  mute  misery  were  to  share  in  the
national  humiliation.  Above  all,  let  the  people  "  cease  to  do  evil,"  and  show  a  changed
heart  by  an  altered  life.    The  humiliation  of  the  Ninevites  was —

I.  Booted  in  faith.  "They  believed  God."  What  were  Asshur  and  their  many
gods  to  them  now  ?  Jehovah  was  the  living  God.  All  else  were  dead.  They  believed
in  his  power  to  punish ;  and  also  (though  doubt  may  have  mingled  with  their  faith)
that  if  they  turned  from  their  evil  way,  he  would  turn  from  the  fierceness  of  his  anger,
and  they  should  perish  not.  Not  "  idle  words  "  were  Jonah's.  Not  heard  with  critic
ear.  Not  questioned,  much  less  opposed.  Jonah — yrho  was  he  ?  God's  messenger.
They  believed  God.  Hence  their  repentance.  Had  they  not  believed,  they  had  been
unrepentant.  How  they  rebuke  many  among  us  to-day !  Those  who  have  heard
many  of  God's  messengers:  why  turn  they  not  from  their  evil  way?  Because  they
believe  not  God.  This  is  the  capital  count  in  the  Divine  indictment  against  man.  He
makes  God  a  liar.  He  believes  not  the  testimony  God  has  given  in  his  Son.  The
terrible  testimony  against  sin  as  the  dark,  dreadful  evil  it  is.  The  gracious  testimony
to  his  unutterable  love,  that  only  could  be  truly  vocal  as  it  spoke  in  the  sorrow,
Bufferings,  and  death-agonies  of  his  Sou.  Did  man  believe  with  the  heart  this,  it  would
be  to  repentance — to  righteousness.  "  Believe  God."  Booted  in  faith,  the  conduct  of
the  Ninevites  was —

IL  Fbuitfitii  IK  BEPENTANOB.  True  belief  and  true  repentance  are  ever  connected
as  root  and  fruit.

"  If  faith  produce  no  works,  I  see
That  faith  is  not  a  living  tree."

The  Ninevites  fasted,  put  on  sackcloth,  cried  mightily  to  God.  And  is  the  etprettUm
of  our  repentance  to  be  the  same  as  theirs  ?  Are  we  to  fast  ?  If  given  to  the  pleasures
of  the  table,  to  fulness  of  bread,  abstinence  will  be  well.  Whatever  hinders  the  soul
must  be  avoided.  If  gay  clothing  is  a  temptation  to  us,  we  must  watch  against  that
peril.  The  soul  must  be  supreme.  Let  it  "  cry  mightily."  Cry  that  it  may  he  truly
repentant.  For  "  godly  sorrow  "  is  the  gift  of  God.  The  doom  coming  on  the  Ninevites
was  averted.  By  what?  Not  the  fasting;  not  the  sackcloth;  not  even  the  mighty
crying,  though  a  whole  city  was  at  prayer.  God  saw  their  works,  that  they  turned
from  their  evil  way"  (ver.  10).  That  plucked  them  from  the  peril.  There  was  repent-
ance— a  change  of  mind ;  reformation — a  change  of  life.  All  is  nothing  without  that.
Turn  from  all  evil.  Have  you  wronged  another  ?  Confess  it ;  make  restitution.  Be
the  changed  mind  seen  in  the  changed  life.  The  way  of  sin  is  an  evU  way  and  ends  in
evil.  Turn  from  it.  "  Lord,  make  me  pure  and  holy,  but  not  now,"  prayed  the  uncon-
verted Augustine.  It  must  be  now.  Turn  from  sin,  and  "  who  can  tell  if  God  will
turn?"  "Tell?"  You  know — as  did  not  the  Ninevites — the  glorious  gospel,  that
God  waits  to  be  gracious ;  that  for  Christ's  sake  he  will  forgive  you.  Be  not  shamed
and  condemned  by  the  repentant  Ninevites.  "  They  repented  at  the  preaching  of
Jonah ;  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonah  is  here." — G.  T.  C.

Ver.  10. — Missions  to  the  heathen.  1.  The  heathen  are  capable  of  salvation.  2.  God
purposes  their  salvation.  3.  The  Jews  were  the  divinely  appointed  first  preachers  of
salvation  to  the  Gentile  heathens.  Jewish  Jonah,  the  first  of  the  prophets,  was  sent
to  heathen  JTineveh.  "  A  real  example  "  this  "  of  the  genius  of  the  gospel."  And  the
Jewish  apostles  were  sent  to  preach  Jesus  Christ  to  "every  creature.  Se  died  for
alll-a.T.O.

Ver.  10. — God  repenting.  It  is  another  people  in  Nineveh  that  God  now  Ior>kB  down
upon.     These  have  "  ceased  to  do  evil."    "  God  saw  their  works,  that  they  turned


78  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  [oh.  m.  1— Itt

from  their  evil  way."  Then  is  the  threatened  doom  to  come  t  No ;  "  God  repented  of
the  evil,  that  he  had  said  that  he  would  do  unto  them ;  and  he  did  it  not."  And  yet
in  other  Scriptures  God  is  said  not  to  repent.  Words  can  only  faintly  portray  a
human  friend.  How  feeble,  then,  are  all  words  to  declare  God  1  Words  that  seem  to  us
to  contradict  each  other  are  necessary  to  convey  to  us  a  fuller,  clearer  view  of  him.  If
in  one  Scripture  God  is  said  not  to  repent,  or  "  change  his  mind  "  (as  the  word  means),
that  is  true.  If  in  another  he  is  said  to  do  so,  that  is  also  true.  The  Scripture  fear-
lessly declares  both.  It  makes  no  attempt  to  harmonize  them.  We  may  be  imable  to
do  80.  And  yet  we  may  believe  both ;  confident  that  they  are  in  harmony  if  we  cannot
harmonize  them.  Men  repent,  or  chancre  their  mind,  in  reference  to  (m.  Ood  repents,
or  changes  bis  mind,  in  reference  to  the  sinner.

I.  In  his  own  nature  God  is  ohanoelebb.  What  changes  there  are  in  earth  and
sky,  the  seasons,  human  life  and  experience  I  "Man  continueth  not  in  one  stay."  With
God  "  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  of  turning."  He  never  ceases  to  be  almighty,
omniscient,  "  the  only  wise  God."  He  says,  "  I  am  the  Lord,  I  change  not "  QAal.  iii.  6).
This  was  the  Divine  message  by  Balaam  to  Balak :  "  God  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should
lie;  neither  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent;  hath  he  said,  and  shall  he  not  do
it  ?  "  etc.  (Numb,  xxiii.  19,  20).  In  other  words,  no  enchantment,  no  divination,  could
avail  against  Israel.  What  were  Balak's  bribes  to  God  ?  He  could  fulfil  his  promises
to  Israel — for  he  was  almighty ;  he  would,  for  he  was  faithful.  Further,  in  various
Scriptu'-es  (Gen.  vl.  3 ;  Jer.  xviii.  7  ;  as  well  as  here)  we  are  taught —

n.  That  God  repents,  ob  changes  his  mind.  Some  would  limit  this  to  God's
altered  dealings  with  men ;  to  his  acts,  never  to  his  feelings.  They  hold  that  in  his
feelings  he  is  ever  the  same  to  men ;  that  none  of  the  affections  found  in  ns  have  any
counterpart  in  him ;  that  he  looks  down  upon  all  human  changes — sorrows,  joys,  con-
flicts, defeats,  triumphs— cold,  calm,  unmoved,  immovable  I  What  I  a  God  only
thought,  only  will  ?  No  mercy,  no  pity,  no  sympathy,  no  love  ?  Unlovely  creed  1
"  QoA  is  love."  Then  he  has  the/eelings  of  love,  without,  indeed,  the  imperfections  that
may  mingle  with  ours.  He  is  "  the  Father  of  our  spirits."  Our  emotions  are  the  image
of  his ;  in  him  "  without  spot,"  or  defect, "  or  any  such  thing."  It  is  no  mere  figure  of
meaningless  speech  that  speaks  of  him  as  "  angry  with  the  wicked,"  as  "  pitying  them
that  fear  him,"  as  rejoicing  over  his  penitent  creatures ;  as  repenting  concerning  Nineveh.
With  no  idle  threatening  was  Jonah  sent  to  the  Ninevites.  God  then  meant  destruc-
tion. And  had  the  people  not  repented,  it  would  have  come.  But  the  very  threatening
was  blessed  to  them.  They  saw  the  greatness  of  their  sin  in  the  greatness  of  the
imminent  punishment.  And  when  their  state  of  rebellion  and  defiance  ceased,  their
city  came  into  a  new  relation  to  God,  "  and  room  was  made  for  the  word  to  take  effect ;
'  the  curse  causeless  shall  not  come.' "  God  knew  that  the  city  would  be  spared.  Yes.
But  he  also  knew  that,  when  spared,  it  would  be  another  city — a  city  not  of  violent
rebels  against  him,  but  of  penitent  subjects.  God  is  righteous  in  all  his  ways.  He
rewards  every  man  according  to  his  works.  It  was  in  accordance,  then,  with  his  nature,
that  when  the  Ninevites  turned  from  their  evil  courses  with  true  heart-sorrow,  he  should
turn  from  the  fierceness  of  his  anger.  There  is  warning  here.  God's  threatenings  are
not  to  be  trifled  with.  Remember  the  destroyed  sinners  "in  the  days  of  Noah;"
ultimately  these  very  Ninevites ;  and  the  Jew, "  tribe  of  the  wandering  foot  and  weary
breast,"  is  witness  to-day  through  all  lands  to  the  fact  that  when  a  warned  nation
repents  not,  God  is  faithful  to  his  warning.  And  so  with  the  individuaL  Let  the
warned  sinner  "flee  from  the  wrath  to  come."  What  consolation,  too,  in  this  narrative !
God  is  "  not  willing  that  any  should  perish ;  but  that  all  should  come  to  repentance."
How  willing — how  revealed  in  Christ,  who  came  to  "  call  sinners  to  repentance  "  1  Turn
from  sin.  God  will  turn  to  you.  Prom  afar  he  will  see  you.  He  will  run  to  meet
you.  He  will  kiss  into  forgetfulness  all  your  lini.  He  wait*  to  be  gracioui.  "  H«
delighteth  in  mercy."— G.  T.  a


,  IT.  1—11.]


THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.


79


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  IV.


Yen.  1 — 11. — Jonah's  Displbabubb,  aitd

ITS   CORBBOnON.

Vers.  1 — i. — §  1.  Jonah  it  grieved  at  the
sparing  of  Nineveh,  the  expectaiion  of  which
had  led  to  hie  former  flight,  and  complaint
of  OoCCt  demenoy.

Ver.  1. — It  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly ;
literally,  it  wat  evil  to  Jonah,  a  great  evil.
It  was  more  than  mere  displeasure  wbioh
he  felt ;  he  was  vexed  and  irritated.  The
reference  is  to  what  is  said  in  the  last
verse  of  the  preceding  chapter,  viz.  that  the
predicted  destruction  was  not  inflicted.
How  the  knowledge  of  this  reprieve  was
conveyed  to  the  prophet  we  are  not  in-
formed. It  probably  was  made  known  to
him  before  the  expiration  of  the  forty  days
by  Divine  communication,  in  accordance
with  the  saying  in  Amos  iii.  7,  "  Surely  the
Lord  will  do  nothing,  but  he  revealeth  his
secret  unto  his  servants  the  prophets "  (see
ver.  5).  Various  reasons  have  been  assigned
for  this  displeasure.  (1)  Personal  pique,
lest,  his  prediction  having  failed,  he  should
be  liable  to  the  charge  of  being  a  false
prophet.  (2)  Zeal  for  the  honour  of  God,
whose  knowledge  o{  the  future  might  be
discreditel  among  the  heathen,  when  they
saw  his  awn  servant's  words  unfulfilled.
(3)  Because  he  saw  in  this  conversion  of
Qentiles  a  token  of  the  ruin  of  his  own
people,  who  remained  always  hardened  and
impenitent.  (4)  A  mistaken  patriotism,
which  could  not  endure  to  find  mercy  ex-
tended to  u  heathen  nation  which  bad
already  proved  hostile  to  Israel  and  was
destined  to  oppress  it  still  further.  This
last  seems  to  have  been  the  real  ground  of
his  annoyance.  So  deep  was  this,  that  he
would-  gladly  have  seen  the  sentence
executed  even  after  the  city  had  repented'
(oomp.  ver.  H,  "  Should  not  I  spare  Nine-
veh," i.e.  which  thou  wouldst  have  me  even
now  destroy?)  He  was  Tery  angry ;  Septua-
gint,  (rvyex^^V,  '  was  confounded."  His
vexation  increased  unto  anger.

Ver.  2. — ^He  prayed.  He  carried  his  com-
plaint to  God,  and  was  prepared  to  submit
it  to  him,  even  while  he  questioned  the
wisdom  of  his  clemency.  I  pray  thee
(anna);  Vulgate,  dbseoro.  A  particle  of
entreaty,  "Ah I  I  pray  thee."  Was  not
this  my  saying  1  Was  not  this  what  I
said  to  myself,  vis.  that  God  would  spare
Nineveh  if  it  showed  signs  of  repentance?  .
Uy  oonntry.  Palestine,  where  the  original
message  reached  him.    I  fled  before;  lite-


rally, /  anticipated  to  fly;  Septnagint,  wpo-
4ipiaaa  roG  ipuyely,  "  I  made  haste  to  flee ; "
Vulgate,  prmoceupavi  ut  fugerem.  I  hast-
ened to  fly  before  I  should  be  reduced
to  seeing  my  mission  rendered  nugatory.
Poi  I  knew.  Joel  knew  the  character  of
God,  and  how  that  he  threatened  in  order
to  arouse  repentance,  and  that  he  might  be
able  to  spare  (see  Exod.  xxxii.  11 ;  xxxiv.
6,  7).  The  description  of  God's  mercy
agrees  with  that  in  Joel  ii.  13  and  Neh.
ix.  17.

Ver.  3. — Take  ...  my  life  from  me  (comp.
ver.  8).  Jonah  throughout  represents  him-
self as  petty,  hasty,  and  self-willed,  prone  to
exaggerate  matters,  and  easily  reduced  to
despair.  Here,  because  his  word  is  not  ful-
filled, he  wishes  to  die,  though  he  will  not
take  his  own  life.  In  a  different  spirit
Moses  (Exod.  xxxiL  S2)  is  ready  to  die  for
his  people's  sake,  and  Elijah  asked  for
death  because  his  zeal  for  God  had  appa-
rently wrought  no  effect  (1  Kings  xix.  4).

Ver.  4 — ^Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry?
Septuagint,  Ei  iTip6Spa  \eKiTn)<rai  <r<l ;  "Hast
thou  been  greatly  grieved?"  Vulgate,
Putasne  bene  irascerit  tu  ?  The  English
Version  is  doubtless  correct.  God  bids  him
consider  with  himself  whether  his  anger  is
reasonable.  The  version  of  the  LXX,,  how-
ever grammatically  permissible,  is  somewhat
pointless.

Ver.  5. — §  2.  Jonah,  not  yet  abandoning
hit  hope  of  seeing  the  city  punished,  makes
for  himself  a  hut  ovicide  the  walls,  and  waits
there  to  see  the  issue.  Went  out  of  the  oity.
It  is  best  so  rendered,  and  not  in  the  plu-
perfect. It  must  have  been  before  the  end
of  the  forty  days  that  Jonah  perceived  that
Nineveh  would  escape.  And  now,  from
God's  expostulation  with  him  in  ver.  4,  he
seems  to  have  conceived  the  expectation
that  some  catastrophe  would  still  happen;
as  though  God  had  told  him  that  he  was
too  hasty  in  his  judgment,  that  he  could
not  know  the  mind  of  God,  and  that  because
he  did  not  strike  immediately  he  was  not  to
conclude  that  he  would  not  strike  at  all.
On  the  east  side  of  the  city.  The  opposite
side  to  that  by  which  be  had  entered,  and
where  the  high  ground  enabled  him  to  over-
look the  town,  without  necessarily  sharing
in  its  destruction.  A  booth.  A  tent  con-
structed of  branches  interlaced,  which  did
not  exclude  tlie  sun  (Lev.  xxiii.  42 ;  Neb.
viii.  14,  etc.).  What  would  become  of  the  oity.
He  still  expected  that  some  calamity  would
befall  the  Ninevites,  perhaps  witli  the  idea
that  their  repentance  would  prove  so  im-
perfect and  temporary  that  Chid  would
punish  them  after  all.


80


THE  BOOK   OF  JONAH,


[cH.  n,  1—11


Vers.  6,  7. — S  3.  Ood  eautt  a  plant  to
epring  up  in  order  to  shade  Jonah  from  the
sun;  but  it  is  made  soon  to  wither  away  and
leave  him  exposed  to  the  soorohing  rays.

Ver.  6.— Prepared  (yerg.  7,  8) ;  appointed
(see  note  on  oh.  i.  17).  A  gourd;  Hebrew,
hikaion  (here  only  in  the  Old  Testament) ;
Septuagint,  KoKeieii/Sri, "  pumpkin ; "  Vulgate,
hedera;  Aquila  and  Theodotion,  KuKeiiy.
Jerome  describes  this  as  a  shrub  called  in
Syi'iao  elkeroa,  and  common  in  tlie  sandy
regions  of  Palestine.  It  has  large  leaves  and
grows  to  a  considerable  height  in  a  very  few
days,  so  that  a  mere  shrub  brcomes  quickly
a  small  tree.  The  scientific  name  of  this
plant  is  Bioinus  communis;  in  Egyptian,
HM;  in  Assyrian,  fcufcaraifu.  A  drawing  of
it  is  given  in  Dr.  Pusey's  'Commentary,'
p  260.  It  is  also  known  by  the  name  of
the  Palma  Christi,  and  from  iti  seeds  is
expressed  "c.istor  oil."  But  it  is  very
doubtful  whether  this  is  the  plant  intended.
Certainly  the  ricinus  is  never  used  in  the
East  as  a  protection  against  the  sun,  for
which  its  straggling,  open  growth  renders
it  unsuitable;  while  tlie  gourd,  as  Mr.
Tristnim  testifies  ('Land  of  Israel,'  p.  37),
is  used  universally  to  form  trellises  for  shad-
ing arbours  and  summer-houses,  and  affords
a  most  effectual  scriien.  "  Orientals,"  says
Dr.  Thomson  ('  The  Land  and  the  Book,'  p.
15),  "never  dream  of  traiuiug  a  castor-oil
plant  over  a  booth,  or  planting  it  for  a  shade,
and  they  would  have  but  small  respect  for
any  one  who  did.  It  is  in  no  way  adapted
for  that  purpose,  while  thousands  of  arbours
are  covered  with  various  creepers  of  the
general  gourd  family."  With  this  testimony
it  is  well  to  be  satisfied.  Whatever  the
plant  was,  its  growth  was  abnormal  in  the
present  case,  though  the  rapidity  with  which
it  developed  was  merely  a  quickening  of  its
ordinary  powers,  in  due  accordance  with  its
nature  and  character.  From  his  grief;
Septuagint,  imh  rdr  KaKiSv  airoO,  "  from  his
evils ; "  Vulgate,  u(  . . .  protegeret  earn.  The
Hebrew  word  is  the  game  as  in  ver.  1,  and
it  refers,  not  so  much  to  the  physical  dis-
comfort occasioned  by  the  heat,  but  rather
to  the  condition  of  his  mind,  the  vexation
and  disappointment  under  which  he  was
suifering.  Was  exceeding  glad;  literally,
rejoiced  a  great  joy;  ixifn  X'P^"  M'^yi^vy
(Septuagint).  The  candour  and  simplicity
of  tlie  writer  throughout  are  very  remark-
able. He  may  have  seen  in  this  providential
shelter  an  intimation  that  God  approved
of  his  intention  to  wait  and  see  the  issue.

Ver.  7. — Frepared  (see  note  on  ver.  6).  A
worm.  Either  a  single  worm  which  punc-
tured the  stem  and  caused  the  plant  to
wither,  or  the  word  is  used  collectively,  as
ii  Deut.  xxviii.  89,  for  "  worms."    A  single


warm  night,  with  a  moist  atmosphere,  will
suffice  to  produce  a  kost  of  caterpillars,
which  in  an  incredibly  short  time  strip  a
plant  of  all  its  leaves.  When  the  morning
rose.  At  the  very  earliest  dawn,  before  the
actual  rising  of  the  sun  (oomp.  Judg.  ix.
33).  Jonah  seems  to  have  enjoyed  the
shelter  of  the  gourd  one  whole  day.  The
withering  of  the  plant  came  about  in  a
natural  way,  but  was  ordered  by  God  at  a
certain  time  in  order  to  give  Jonah  the  in-
tended lesson.

Vers.  8— 11.— §  4.  Jonah  gHeves  bitterly
for  the  loss  of  the  gourd;  and  Ood  tahes
oocaiion  from  this  to  point  out  tlie  prophet's
inconsistency  attd  pitHessness  in  murmuring
against  the  mercy  shown  to  Nineveh  with  its
multitude  of  inhabitants.

Ver.  8. — A  vehement  east  wind ;  Septua-
gint, irj/erf/iaTt  KttuVuin  (Jag.  L  II)  (ri/yKal-
ocTi,  "  a  scorching,  burning  wind ; "  Vnlgato,
vento  calido  et  urenti  (Roa.  xiii.  X5).  The
word  translated  "vehement"  is  also  ren-
dered "silent,"  «.«.  sultry.  Pusey  and
Hitzig  rather  incline  to  think  it  may  mean
the  autumn  or  harvest  wind.  Either  in-
terpretation is  suitable,  as,  according  to  Dr.
Thomson,  there  are  two  kinds  of  sirocco,
equally  destructive  and  annoying  —  the
violent  wind,  which  fills  the  air  with  dust
and  sand ;  and  the  quiet  one,  when  scarcely
any  air  is  stirring,  but  the  heat  is  most
overpowering  ('The  Land  and  the  Book,'
p.  536,  etc).  Beat  upon  the  head.  The
same  word  for  the  effect  of  the  rays  of  the
sun  as  in  Ps.  cxxi.  6  and  elsewhere.  Tro-
chon  quotes  Ovid, '  Metam.,'  vii.  804 —

"  Sole  fere  radiis  feriente  oaoumina  primis."
"  The  sun  with  earliest  rays
Scarce  smiting  highest  peaks."

Eich,  ' Eoordistan,'  i.  125,  "Just  as  the
moon  rose,  about  ten,  an  intolerable  puff  of
wind  came  from  the  north-east.  All  wore
immediately  silent,  as  if  they  had  felt  an
earthquake,  and  then  exclaimed,  in  a  dismal
tone,  '  The  sherki  is  come.'  This  was  in-
deed the  so-much-dreaded  sherki,  and  it
has  continued  blowing  ever  since  with  great
violence  from  the  east  and  north-east,  the
wind  being  heated  like  our  Bagdad  saum,
but  I  think  softer  and  more  relaxing.  This
wind  is  the  terror  of  these  parts."  "Few
European  travellers,"  says  Layard  ('Nin.
and  Babyl.,'  p.  366),  "  can  brave  the  per-
pendicular rays  of  an  Assyrian  sun.  Even
the  well-seasoned  Arab  seeks  the  shad;
during  the  day,  and  journeys  by  night,
unless  driven  forth  by  necessity  or  the  love
of  war"(quotedby  Dr.  Pnsey,  <nloo.).  H«
fainted  (see  note  on  Amos  viii,  13,  where


«H.  IT.  1— H.J


TUE   BOOK  OF  JONAH.


8i


the  nme  word  it  used  of  the  effects  of
thirst;  oomp.  ch.  ii.  7).  His  position  on
the  east  of  the  city  (ver.  5)  exposed  him  to
the  full  force  of  the  scorching  sun  and
wind.  Wished  in  himself  to  die ;  literally,
asked  /or  his  sotd  to  die  ;  Septnagint,  &ri-
Ae7eTo  T^v  ^vx^v  ouToB, "  despaired  of  hia
life"  (1  Kings  xix.  4).  The  expression
implies  that  he  asked  God  to  grant  him
his  life  to  do  with  it  what  he  liked.  In
hia  self-will  and  impatience  he  still  shows
his  dependence  upon  God.  He  may  have
had  in  his  miud  the  precedent  of  his  great
master  Elijah,  though  his  spirit  is  very
different  (see  note  on  ver.  3  above).  Better
for  me  to  die.  His  wish  for  death  arose
from  his  now  assured  convictioo  that  God's
mercy  was  extended  to  the  heathen.  He
argued  from  the  sudden  withering  of  the
gourd  that  he  was  not  to  stay  there  and  see
the  accomplishment  of  his  wishes,  and,  in
hia  impatience  and  intolerance,  he  would
rather  die  than  behold  Nineveh  converted
and  saved.

Ver.  9. — God  said.  Keil  and  others  have
noted  the  variety  in  the  use  of  the  names  of
God  in  this  passage  (vers.  6 — 9).  The  pro-
duction of  the  gourd  ia  attributed  to  Je-
hovah-Elohim  (ver.  6),  a  composite  name,
which  serves  to  mark  the  transition  from
Jehovah  in  ver.  4  to  Elohim  in  vers.  7  and
8.  Jehovah,  who  replies  to  the  prophet's
complaint  (ver.  4),  prepares  the  plant  as
Elohim  the  Creator,  and  the  worm  as  ha-
Elohim  the  personal  God.  Elohim,  the
Ruler  of  nature,  sends  the  east  wind  to
correct  the  prophet's  impatience;  and  in
ver.  10  Jehovah  sums  up  the  history  and
teaches  the  lesson  to  be  learned  from  it.
Doest  then  well  to  be  angry  t  The  same
tender  expostulation  as  in  ver.  4.  I  do  well
to  be  angry,  even  nnto  death.  I  am  right
to  be  angry,  so  that  my  anger  almost  kills
me.  Deprived  of  the  shelter  of  the  gourd,
Jonah  is  immediately  depressed,  and  inhis
unreasoning  anger  defends  himself  against
the  reproaches  of  God's  voice  within  hiln.
Septuagiut,  S(l>6Spa  \e\iiniiiiii  iyi)  eas  Bavd-
Tou,  "I  am  greatly  grieved  even  nnto  death,"
which  reminds  one  of  our  Lord's  words  in
the  garden  (Mark  xiv.  34).

Ver.  10. — The  lord.  Jehovah,  closing  the
story,  and  driving  home  the  lesson  with  un-
answerable force,  the  prophet  himself  being
the  judge.  Thou  hast  had  pity ;  thou  on  thy
part  hast  spared;  Septuagiut,  ait  e<j>et(ra).
Tot  the  which  thon  hast  not  laboured;  Sep-
tuagiut, iwhp  ?is  ovK  iKaKOiriiSTi<ras  eit'  airiiv,
"  for  which  thou  sufferedst  no  evil."  The
more  trouble  a  thing  costs  us,  the  more  we
regard  it,  as  a  mother  lovea  her  aiokly  child


best.  Neither  madest  it  grow.  As  God  had
made  Nineveh  into  a  "  great  city."  Which
came  up  in  a  night,  and  perished  in  a  night ;
literally,  which  was  the  son  of  a  night,  and
perished  the  son  of  a  night.  The  allusion,
of  course,  is  to  the  extraordinaiy  rapidity  of
the  growth  and  destruction  of  the  gourd.

Ver.  11. — Should  not  I  spare  Nineveh?
The  contrast  between  the  feeling  and  con-
duct of  God  and  those  of  the  prophet  is
very  forcible.  Thou  hast  compassion  for  a
plant  of  little  worth,  in  whose  growth  thou
hast  had  no  concern,  to  which  thou  hast  no
right ;  should  I  not  pity  a  great  city  which
is  mine,  which  I  have  permitted  to  grow
into  power?  Thou  hast  compassion  on  a
flower  which  sprang  up  in  a  day  and
withered  in  a  day;  should  I  not  pity  this
town  with  its  teeming  population  and  its
multitude  of  cattle,  the  least  of  which  is
more  worth  than  any  senseless  plant,  and
which  I  uphold  daily  with  my  providence  ?
Six  score  thousand  persons  that  cannot  dis-
cern between  their  right  hand  and  their
left  hand ;  i.e.  children  of  tender  years,  who
did  not  know  which  hand  was  the  strongest
and  fittest  for  use ;  or,  metaphorically,  who
"  had  no  knowledge  between  good  and  evil "
(Dent.  i.  39),  at  present  incapable  of  moral
discernment.  This  limitation  would  include
children  of  three  or  four  years  old;  and,
taking  these  as  one-fifth  of  the  population,
we  should  set  the  inhabitants  at  six  hun-
dred thousand  in  number.  The  multitude
of  these  innocent  children,  who  must  needs
perish  if  the  city  were  destroyed,  is  an  addi-
tional reason  why  it  should  be  spared.  A
still  further  claim  for  compassion  is  ap-
pended. And  also  much  cattle.  God's
mercy  is  over  all  his  works ;  he  preserveth
man  and  beast  (Ps.  xxxvi.  6 ;  cxlv.  9),  and
as  man  is  superior  to  other  animals,  so  are
cattle  better  than  plants.  The  book  ends
abruptly,  but  its  object  ia  accomplished.
Jonah  is  silenced ;  he  can  make  no  reply ;
he  can  only  confess  that  he  is  entirely
wrong,  and  that  Grod  is  righteous.  He
learns  the  lesson  that  God  would  have  all
men  saved,  and  that  that  narrow-minded-
ness which  would  exclude  heathen  from  hi?
kingdom  is  displeasing  to  him  and  alien
from  his  design.  "For  thou  hast  mercy
upon  ail ;  for  thou  canst  do  all  things,  and
winkest  at  the  sins  of  men  in  order  that
they  should  repent.  For  thou  lovest  all
the  things  that  are,  and  abhorrest  nothing
that  thou  hast  made;  for  never  wouldst
thou  have  made  anything  if  thou  hadst
hated  it.  .  .  .  But  thou  sparest  all ;  for  they
are  thine,  O  Lord,  thou  Lover  of  souls
(Wisd.  xi.  23,  eto.>


JOTAK.


U\J\/.tA        \yM'        V  Vy-Ll  fMJ«


H0MILBTI08.


^vn«  «T«  «*-


Vers.  1 — 3. — Repining  at  Ood's  mercy.  A  more  mixed  character  than  Jonah's  it
would  not  be  easy  to  imagine.  God's  treatment  of  him,  God's  language  to  him,  prove
that  he  was  regarded  as  a  servant,  as  a  prophet,  of  the  Lord,  His  own  prayers  and
thanksgivings  indicated  a  nature  in  happy  fellowship  with  the  Eternal,  Yet  how
lacking  in  human  charity,  in  true  submissiveness,  in  unselfishness  1  True  to  nature,
the  portrait  is  one  very  suggestive  to  the  thoughtful  reader,  who  is  anxious  to  escape
self  and  to  serve  God.

L  The  oabbb  of  bbpinino.  1.  Jonah's  fear  was  realized.  2.  Jonah's  plans  were
defeated.  3.  Jonah's  self-importance  was  wounded.  His  sin  lay  here — he  thought
little  or  nothing  of  the  Ninevites,  much  or  altogether  of  himself.  So  devoted  was  he
to  his  own  dignity,  so  fiUed  with  a  sense  of  the  importance  of  men's  estimate  of  himself,
that  he  had  no  pity,  no  thought,  for  those  to  whom  he  was  commissioned.  The  real
explanation  is  here  hinted  of  much  of  the  repining,  murmuring,  discontent,  which
prevail  among  those  professedly  religious.  Men  would  complain  less  frequently  and
bitterly,  did  they  think  less  of  themselves  and  more  of  their  feUow-men,  were  they
more  ready  to  forget  themselves  in  desiring  and  seeking  the  welfare  of  others.

II.  The  fruit  of  repinino.  1.  Anger  and  displeasure.  2.  Vexation  and  dejection.
Moses  and  Elijah,  before  Jonah,  had  asked  that  life  might  be  taken  away.  Ardent  souls,
when  disappointed,  are  prone  to  despondency.  But  it  is  one  thing  to  despond  because
labour  is  unsuccessful;  another  thing  to  despond  because  men  are  saved.  Because
Nineveh  was  spared,  Jonah  fain  womd  die.  Had  Nineveh  perished,  he  would  have
been  willing  to  live.

III.  The  sin  op  bbpinino.  This  appears  from  the  fact,  so  plainly  stated  by  Jonah
himself,  that  the  Divine  forbearance  and  mercy  were  made  the  ground  of  dissatisfaction
and  complaint.  If  men  murmur  at  the  exercise  of  God's  most  gracious  attributes,  they
can  have  no  clearer  proof  of  their  want  of  sympathy  with  what  is  best,  and  no  plainer
indication  of  the  urgent  duty  of  repentance  and  humiliation.

Ver.  2. — The  long-suffering  of  Ood.  The  magnificent  description  of  the  Divine
character  is  given  in  language  familiar  to  the  pious  Hebrews,  as  is  apparent  from  its
almost  exact  coincidence  with  other  passages  of  Old  Testament  Scripture.  Nothing
could  more  conclusively  contradict  the  common  impression  that  the  old  covenant  was
one  of  justice  only  and  not  of  mercy.  The  language,  occurring  as  it  does  in  dose
connection  with  the  repining  of  the  prophet,  appears  strangely  oiit  of  place.  It  is
surprising  that  Jonah  could  have  spoken  thus  of  God  without  feeling  himself  reproved
and  silenced.  How  could  he  have  reflected  upon  the  mercy  and  kindness  of  Qrod,  and
have  continued  to  cherish  regret  because  his  threats  were  not  fulfilled,  because  a  great
city  was  spared?

I.  The  bbkbvolent  ATTRiBnTss  or  God.  By  a  redundancy  of  language,  testifying
to  the  depth  of  appreciation  felt,  the  Lord  is  declared  to  be :  1.  Gracious.  2.  Meroful.
8.  Of  great  kindness.

II.  The  actions  in  which  God  expbebseb  his  benevolent  attbibxttes.  1.  He
defers  the  execution  of  bis  just  indignation  against  sinners.  The  narrative  gives  an  im-
pressive instance  of  this ;  but  it  is  the  lesson  of  all  history.  2.  He  changes  his  purposes
of  wrath  into  piu^oses  of  mercy.  Such  was  the  case  with  Nineveh.  Such  is  the  case
with  humanity  at  large.

Ver.  i, — Anger  rebuked.  The  Prophet  Jonah  was  a  singularly  complex  being.  On
the  one  hand,  he  evidently  reverenced  and  trusted  the  Lord;  yet,  on  the  other  hand,
he  acted  disobediently,  and  he  cherished  feelings  which  were  in  the  highest  degree
discreditable  to  one  who  enjoyed  his  opportunities  of  knowing  the  Divine  character
and  purposes.  The  inquiry,  the  expostulation,  of  the  text  indicates  God's  displeasure
with  his  servant ;  yet  the  form  in  which  it  shapes  itself  shows  that  God  wished  rather
that  Jonah  should  rebuke  himself,  that  his  conscience  should  be  awakened  to  condemn
(he  attitude  which  he  had  assumed,

I.  Ahsib  is  nr  itself  an  emotion  which  mat  be  bithkb  oood  ob  xteu    God


OH.  IT.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  U


himself  ii  reprasented  in  his  Word  as  haying  been  angry  with  the  wicked;  and  a
righteous  anger  or  indignation  with  wrong-doers  is  now  and  again  in  the  Scripture
narrative  mentioned  with  approval.  Indeed,  a  nature  to  which  anger  is  foreign  cannot
but  be  lacking  in  moral  fibre.  On  the  other  hand,  into  how  many  sins  hare  men  been
led  by  giving  way  to  foolish  anger? — i.e.  to  anger  either  altogether  unwarranted  or
unjustifiable  in  the  degree  in  which  it  has  been  cherished.  An  angry  man  can  seldom
decide  with  justice  or  act  with  consideration.

II.  Angeb  is  nevbb  justifiable  when  occasioned  bt  the  action  of  a  BiOHTiorrs
AND  QEACious  GoD.  Now,  Jonah  saw  that  the  Divine  Buler  was  "slow  to  anger"
with  the  Ninevites ;  yet  he  himself  was  quick  to  indignation  and  wrath.  Anger  like
Jonah's  questions  the  justice  of  the  Divine  proceedings.  He  who  is  angry  with  the
plans  and  purposes  of  the  Eternal  sets  himself  up  as  a  judge  of  that  Being  who  is
Judge  of  all.  There  may  be  occasions  for  anger  with  fellow-men ;  but  anger  with  the
Creator  and  Buler  of  all  is  never  defensible  or  excusable.  It  evinces  a  sad  lack  of
modesty  and  of  true  submissiveness.

III.  ANGEB    is    always    BLAUABLE    when    IT    IS    OCCASIONED  BT   THE    BELIEF   AND

SALVATION  OF  MEN.  The  plain  truth  concerning  Jonah's  anger  is  this — it  arose  because
the  Ninevites  were  not  overwhelmed  with  destruction.  If  the  city  had  perished,  the
prophet  would  have  felt  satisfaction  in  contemplating  such  a  fate.  Because  the  city
was  spared,  and  (as  he  thought)  his  authority  was  discredited,  he  gave  way  to  wrath.
A  more  selfish  and  unamiable  temper  has  never  been  exhibited.

IV.  ThEBE  is  always  BBASON  TO  StrSPBCT  THE  JUSTICE  OF  ANQBB  WHEN  IT
ACCOMPANIES   SOME   HUMILIATION  OB  MOBTIFIOATION  OF  SELF.      Plainly  Jouah  thought

more  of  himself  than  of  those  to  whom  he  ministered,  or  he  would  not  have  ^ven  way
to  anger  because  his  word  of  -prophecy  was  not  literally  fulfilled.  Men  sometimes
endeavour  to  deceive  themselves,  to  persuade  themselves  that  their  wrath  is  stirred  by
some  infraction  of  right,  when,  all  the  time,  the  true  secret  of  their  anger  is  to  be  found
in  personal  mortification.  A  lesson  this  of  the  importance  of  being  upon  our  guard
against  the  insidious  temptation  to  vanity  and  self-importance.

Ver.  7. — TJie  withering  of  earthly  consolation.  If  Jonah's  vexation  and  anger  were
due  first  to  the  sparing  of  Nineveh,  and  the  mortification  of  his  self-importance,  similai
emotion  was  excited  within  him  by  the  deprivation  of  personal  comfort  which  was
appointed  by  Divine  providence.

I.  In  times  of  tbouble  God  appoints  Divinb  consolations  fob  his  people.
The  gourd,  or  palmcrist,  which  the  Author  of  nature  caused  to  grow  up  over  Jonah's
1}ooth,  was  "  for  a  shadow  over  his  head,  to  deliver  him  from  his  grief."  Such  a  refuge,
shelter,  shadow,  Providence  often  appoints  for  those  who  are  in  distress.  Some  unex-
pected provision  for  want,  some  gracious  alleviation  of  suffering,  some  marvellous  deliver-
ance from  impending  danger,  reveals  the  thoughtful  and  loving  care  of  the  Most  High.

n.  God  in  his  meect  thus  tuens  sobrow  into  gladness.  "  Jonah  was  exceeding
glad  of  the  gourd."  It  was  itself  beautiful  to  behold,  and  its  cool  shelter  was  refreshing,
and  it  was  a  pleasant  and  welcome  emblem  of  Divine  care  and  kindness.  Many  have
been  made  glad  according  to  the  days  in  which  they  have  been  afflicted,  to  the  years
in  which  they  have  seen  evil.  Of  many  once  storm-tossed  and  imperilled  it  may  be
said,  "  They  are  glad  because  they  be  quiet."  It  is  right  to  rejoice  when  Eternal  Mercy
rescues  and  delivers  those  who  are  in  trouble  and  distress.

III.  Consolations  abe  often  shobt-livbd  and  disappointing.  The  caterpillars
which  smote  the  palmcrist  in  a  few  hours  robbed  Jonah  of  bis  comfort,  so  that  his  new,
dawning  joy  was  overcast  with  clouds  of  gloom.  And  this  withering  was  an  emblem
of  the  transitory  nature  of  aH  earthly  happiness  and  prosperity.  The  comforts  which
God  sends  he  takes  away,  lest  we  should  set  our  hearts  upon  created  good.  Health
fails,  property  is  lost,  friends  die,  bright  prospects  are  clouded,  hopes  perish.  Nothing
continueth  in  one  stay.

"This  world  is  all  a  fleeting  show.
For  man's  illusion  given ;
The  smiles  of  joy,  the  tears  of  woe,
Deceitful  shine,  deceitful  flow :
There's  nothing  true  bnt  heaven."


84  TUB  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [ch,  iv.  1— 11.

IV.  The  privation  op  earthly  comforts  is  iktended  to  lead  men  to  seek
THEIR  HIGHEST  GOOD  IN  GoD.  Such  discipline  does  not,  indeed,  produce  this  effect
U[ion  all  men ;  many  are  hardened,  some  are  driven  to  despair,  by  adversity.  But  with
regard  to  the  truly  pious,  it  ibay  be  said  that,  when  the  gourd  withers,  the  Giver  is  as
firmly  trusted  and  as  warmly  loved  as  when  the  shelter  was  thick  and  green.

**  Though  vine  nor  fig  tree  neither

Tlieir  wonted  fruit  should  bear;
Though  all  the  field  shonld  wither.

Nor  flock  nor  herd  be  there ;
Tet  God  the  same  abiding,

His  praise  shall  tune  my  voice;
For  while  in  him  confiding,

I  cannot  but  rejoice."

Ver.  8. — Desire  to  die.  Deep  was  the  mortification,  the  disappointment,  the  dejection,
which,  more  than  once,  found  expression  in  this  wish.  It  is  not  an  uncommon  thing
for  those  whose  hearts  are  blighted,  whose  prospects  are  clouded,  for  whom  life  has  but
few  attractions  left,  to  wish  rather  to  die  than  to  live.

I.  The  EXPLANATION  OF  THIS  WISH.  1.  The  burden  of  bodily  suffering  or  weakness,
or  of  mental  anguish,  may  be  such  as  is  very  hard  to  bear ;  and  men  may  wish  to  lay ,
it  down  even  though  with  it  they  lay  down  the  load  of  life.  2.  The  memory  of  trouble,
calamity,  disaster,  may  be  so  distressing  that  even  annihilation  has  been  desired  rather
than  an  ineffaceable  record  of  woe.  The  Christian  cannot  desire  extinction  of  being,
but  he  may  hope  that,  in  passing  hence,  he  may  steep  his  soul  in  Lethe's  oblivious
waves.  3.  The  apparent  hopelessness  of  the  earthly  prospect  tempts  men  to  wish  to
die.  To  many  who  are  advanced  in  life,  crippled  in  body,  ruined  in  circumstances,
disappointed  in  life-plans,  this  earthly  existence  seems  to  present  no  prospects ;  death
seems  a  relief.

II.  The  blamableness  of  this  wish.  1.  It  implies  a  habit  of  discontent  and  of
murmuring.  Our  circumstances  are  appointed  or  permitted  by  a  kind  Providence ;  to
wish  to  escape  them  is  to  wish  to  avoid  the  discipline  ordained  for  us  by  our  heavenly
Father.  The  Christian  pilgrim  should  be  prepared  cheerfully,  or  at  least  patiently,  to
finish  his  path,  even  to  the  journey's  end.  2.  It  implies  an  undue  desire  for  rest.
Men's  notions  of  heaven  are  often  carnal  and  selfish ;  they  look  forward  to  release  from
labour  and  service ;  and  sometimes  they  wish  to  die  that  they  may  enjoy  the  sweets  of
repose.  But  it  should  be  the  desire  and  expectation  of  all  Christians,  that  they  may
serve  God  day  and  night  in  his  temple.  Surely  one  attraction  of  the  future  state  for
the  holy  nature  is  this — it  will  afford  opportunity  for  higher  and  purer  service.

III.  The  counteeactivb  to  this  wish.  This  is  to  be  found  in  perfect  submissive-
ness  to  the  holy  and  perfect  will  of  God.  Whilst  he  has  work  for  his  people  to  do  on
earth,  earth  is  the  best  place  for  them ;  when  he  wishes  them  to  enter  upon  heavenly
service,  he  himself  will  call  them  hence.

Vers.  10,  11. — 2%e  hreadth  of  the  Divine  pity.  The  close  of  this  very  remarkable
book  is  deserving  of  attention  and  admiration,  as  evidently  gathering  up  and  exhibiting
the  purpose  for  which  this  composition  was  designed.  Of  all  things  apprehensible  by
us  nothing  is  equal  in  interest  to  the  character  of  the  Supreme  Euler  and  Lord.  This
is  depicted  in  this  closing  passage  of  the  narrative  and  prophecy  in  the  most  attractive,
encouraging,  and  glorious  colours.

I.  God's  pity  contrasts  with  man's  hardness  and  beveritt.  Jonah,  though  a
prophet  of  the  Lord,  would  have  witnessed  the  destruction  of  Nineveh  with  equanimity
and  even  satisfaction.  It  might  have  been  supposed  that  a  sinful  and  fallible  being
would  have  been  more  compassionate.  But  for  the  supreme  illustration  of  pity  we
must  look  to  the  Father  of  all.

II.  God's  pity  is  excited  by  the  bpkctaolb  of  a  great  and  populous  oom-
ITDHITY  IN  DANGER  OF  DESTRUCTION.  Nineveh  was  at  the  other  end  of  the  scalej  so
to  speak,  from  the  palmcrist  which  grew  up  and  perished  in  a  few  hours.  It  was  an
ancient,  vast,  populous,  powerful,  famous  city.  "  Should  I  not  spare,"  asked  God  of
Jonah,  "Nineveh,  that  great  city?"     There  is  in  this  language  something  which


CH,  IT.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  8S

appeals  to  our  heart.  God  is  represented  in  the  most  amiable  and  attractive  light.
Such  sentiments  as  these  will  be  cherished  by  Qod-like  men,  by  those  Christ-like
hearts  that  sympathize  with  him  who  beheld  Jerusalem,  and  wept  over  it.

m.  God's  pitt  ib  intenbifibd  bt  the  sfeotaols  of  little  ohildben  exposed
TO  DKBTBUCTioN.  By  thoBB  who  are  described  as  unable  to  discern  between  their  right
hand  and  their  left  we  may  well  understand  babes  and  young  children  who  bad  not
sinned.  Tet  these  were  in  danger  of  being  overtaken  by  the  one  common  calamity
and  ruin.  The  tender  heart  of  the  All-Father  was  touched  by  the  possibility  of  such
a  catastrophe.  And  when  it  was  possible  to  avert  it — ^in  harmony  with  the  principles
of  the  Divine  government,  and  so  as  not  to  endanger  the  spiritual  interests  of  humanity
— it  was  a  joy  to  the  heart  of  God  to  spare  the  city  and  the  babes  of  the  city's  household.

Application.  1.  Let  the  hearers  of  the  gospel  take  advantage  of  the  sparing  mercy
of  the  Lord.  2.  Let  the  preachers  of  the  gospel  proclaim  the  spariag  mercy  of  the
Lord.  3.  Let  all  Christians  sympathize  with,  delight  in,  and  imitate,  the  sparing  mercy
of  the  Lord.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  ATJTHOR&

Vert.  1—4. — A  mitanthrope's  case  against  Divine  benevolence.  It  takes  a  good  deal
to  make  a  man  of  God  perfect.  After  a  whole  life's  discipline  the  old  man  of  sin  will
sometimes  show  his  baleful  features  at  the  window  of  the  soul.  Jonah  has  just  been
figuring  to  our  mind  as  a  changed  character,  returned  to  his  allegiance,  going  God's
errand  promptly,  and  doing  his  work  with  faithful  zeal.  But  here  he  forfeits  our  good
opinion,  almost  before  it  has  had  time  to  form.  The  patient's  cure  has  been  only
seeming,  or  else  he  has  suffered  a  bad  relapse.  At  any  rate,  the  narrative  leaves  him
on  a  spiritual  level  as  low  or  lower  than  it  found  him.  He  began  by  quarrelling  with
a  particular  command  of  God,  and  he  ends  by  quarrelling  with  his  moral  government
as  a  whole.  If  there  be  a  point  of  religious  progress  scored  at  all  in  connection  with
the  matter,  it  is  the  exceedingly  minute  one  that  at  first  he  tried  to  defeat  the  Divine
purpose,  and  at  last,  and  with  an  ill  grace,  he  submits  to  its  execution  as  inevitable.
And  it  may  be  noted,  as  a  qualifying  consideration,  that  aanctification  is  the  work  of  a
lifetime ;  and  therefore  we  can  look  for  no  very  material  change  in  the  few  daj  •  which
the  narrative  of  the  book  covers.

I.   A  MAN   WHO   HAB  FOUND   MEBOT   HIMSELF   MAY   TET  PBACTIOALLT  OBUDOE  IT   TO

OTHERS.  Misanthropy  is  Satanic.  The  devil  hates  men  utterly  and  intensely.  And
the  man,  if  there  be  such,  who  hates  men  instinctively,  and  would  destroy  them
unprovoked,  is  less  human  than  diabolicaL  Jonah  was  not  such  a  man.  There  were
considerations,  and  paltry  ones,  for  which  he  would  have  sacriliced  all  the  souls  in
Nineveh,  but,  apart  from  these,  he  wished  them  no  ill.  1.  One  of  these  considerationa
ivas  supplied  hy  egoism.  As  the  prophet  and  mouthpiece  of  God,  he  had  predicted  the
destruction  of  the  city,  even  to  the  naming  of  the  day,  and  his  credit  required  that  the
event  should  now  occur.  If  it  did  not,  his  prophecy  failed,  and  his  reputation  as  a
prophet  suffered,  both  with  the  Ninevites  and  with  his  own  people.  The  prospect  of
this  he  could  not  stand.  In  his  miserable  and  guilty  self-seeking  he  preferred  the
destruction,  soul  and  body,  of  a  million  people,  to  the  possible  discrediting  of  his  pro-
phetic claims.  Such  heartlessness  in  a  believing  man  seems  well-nigh  incredible.  But
it  is  far  from  unparalleled.  Every  Christian  worker  approaches  it  who  works  for  hii
own  credit  or  advantage,  and  not  for  the  salvation  of  men.  He  may  not  be  conscious
of  the  fact,  or  he  may  fail  to  realize  the  significance  of  it,  but  he  virtually  and  practically
prefers  that  men  should  perish  rather  than  that  he  should  be  deemed  a  failure.  His
reputation  as  a  Christian  worker,  and  his  success  in  that  character,  is  more  to  him  thaa
the  salvation  from  sin  of  all  to  whom  his  words  may  come.  2.  Anoiher  consideration
sectarianism  provides.  To  Israel  in  its  wickedness  a  whole  line  of  prophets  had  preached,
with  no  result  whatever,  save  their  own  extermination  (Acts  vii.52),  and  the  announce-
ment of  inevitable  doom  on  the  obdurate  race  (Amos  v.  27 ;  vii.  17).  The  NineviteB*
deliverance,  establishing  as  it  would  the  genuineness  of  their  turning  from  sin,  would
bring  into  unfavourable  contrast  the  obstinate  impenitence  of  Israel,  would  emphasize
the  needs-be  of  her  approaching  ruin,  and  would  amount  to  the  preservation  and


86  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH,  [oh.  nr.  1—11

encouragement  of  the  very  heathen  power  by  which  she  was  to  fall.  Then  the  over-
throw of  Nineveh  by  an  angry  God  would  have  been  a  terrible  example  to  quote  to
Israel,  and  a  rod  to  conjure  with  when  calling  on  them  to  fly  the  wrath  of  God ;  whilst
its  escape  the  prophet's  careless  countrymen  might  wrest  to  their  own  destruction,  and
from  it  argue  that  the  vengeance  denounced  would  likely  never  fall.  There  is  an  atti-
tude of  indifference  toward  the  perishing,  into  which  an  analogous  spirit  of  sectarianism
sometimes  causes  believers  to  falL  The  question  of  their  salvation  gets  mixed  up  with
some  question  of  denominational  loss  or  discredit.  We  desire  their  conversion,  and
desire  to  be  the  means  of  it.  But  we  don't  desire  it  supremely  or  disinterestedly.
We  don't  desire  it  apart  from  all  denominational  considerations.  The  idea  of  their
remaining  a  while  longer  iu  sin  would  be  almost  as  tolerable  to  us  as  that  some  rival
sect  should  win  their  gratitude  and  adherence  by  helping  them  into  the  kingdom.  This
is,  at  bottom,  the  spirit  of  Jonah  exactly.  It  is  putting  an  earthly  and  narrow  interest
before  the  eternal  life  of  souls.  It  is  a  spirit  unworthy  the  Christian  character,  and  a
shameful  stigma  on  the  Christian  name.  3.  Afv/r(her  consideration  may  he/otmd  in
the  surviving  misanthropy  of  a  half-sanctified  natwe.  God  desires  infinitely  the  highest
.well-being  of  men  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  11).  And  men,  in  proportion  as  they  are  God-like,
desire  it  too  (Rom.  ix.  1 — 4).  The  sinful  nature,  which  is  largely  selfish,  is  being
taken  away,  and  the  gracious  character,  which  is  essentially  benevolent,  ia  being
inwrought.  But  neither  process  is  complete  on  earth,  and  the  missionary  spirit,  which
is  their  joint  issue,  is  proportionally  weak.  It  was  so  with  Jonah.  He  shows  the  old
nature  strong  still  in  pride  and  petulance  and  ingratitude,  and  why  not  in  loveleasness,
its  characteristic  vice  ?  Such  a  man  is  incapable  of  understanding  the  tender  and
gracious  heart  of  God,  which  loves  men  absolutely  and  infinitely,  and  acts  in  every
respect  in  character.  He  is  incapable  of  desiring  supremely  the  highest  good  of  men,
for  he  has  never  climbed  to  the  high  spiritual  level  in  which  to  apprehend  his  own.  A
half-sanctified  man  is  considerably  more  than  half  selfish,  and  a  good  deal  less  than  half
benevolent.  If  we  would  know  what  it  is  to  travail  for  men's  salvation,  we  must  rise
to  a  love  of  God  baptized  into  the  likeness  of  the  Divine  love  out  of  which  it  springs.

II.  God's  ohabaotkb  is  constant,  whatevkb  else  mat  chanoe.  (Ver.  2.)  Jonah
changed,  and'  the  Ninevites  changed,  and  God's  treatment  was  changed  accordingly ;
but  the  Divine  character  and  rule  of  action  remained  the  same  throughout.  1.  Se
acted  strictly  in  character  in  this  case.  Jonah's  language  seemi  to  imply  a  charge  of
weakness  against  the  Divine  dealing  with  Nineveh.  On  no  other  assumption  can  we
understand  his  quoting  in  such  a  connection,  and  with  disapproval,  God's  own  revela-
tion of  the  character  in  which  he  desired  to  be  known  (Ezek.  zxxiv.  6).  And  the
supposition  is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that,  whilst  he  gives  literally  the  clauses  that
speak  of  God's  mercy,  he  leaves  out  the  clause  that  speaks  of  his  justice  (Exod.  xxxiv.
7),  and  substitutes  for  it  a  sentiment  of  his  own.  But  justice  and  mercy  met  in  the
whole  transaction.  The  Ninevites  were  mercifully  spared,  yet  not  unjustly.  They
might  in  justice  have  been  destroyed,  but  not  in  mercy  (isa.  Iv.  7 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  20).
Therefore  Jonah  absurdly  makes  it  a  charge  against  God  that  he  is  what  he  had  always '
gloried  in  declaring  himself  to  be.  So  blind  and  stupid  can  a  sulky  servant  be.  G^
need  not  overact  his  merciful  character  in  order  to  offend  such  people;  it  is  his  mercy
itself  with  which  they  have  a  quarrel.  2.  The  prophet  himself  affirms  the  Divine  con-
sistency. "God,"  we  are  told,  "repented  of  the  evil,"  etc.;  and  Jonah  says,  "1  knew
that  thou  art  a  gracious  God  .  . .  and  repentest  thee  of  the  evil."  The  thing  that  Jonah
knew  he  would  do  he  did.  His  action  wns  normal  and  entirely  consistent — such  action
as  he  has  always  taken,  and  will  take,  in  a  like  case.  He  repented,  in  fact,  yet  did  not
change.  He  did  what  it  would  be  a  change  to  cease  from  doing  in  the  circumstances.
He  threatened  Nineveh  sinning,  as  he  threatens  all,  and  then  he  spared  it  turning,  as
he  spares  men  in  every  a^^e.  His  repentance,  so  called,  is  his  method  co-ordinating
itself  with  the  changing  conditioni  of  life,  and  is  simply  an  aspect  of  his  immutability.

m.  The  pbater  of  the  self-seekeb  is  op  necessity  ill-advised.  (Ver.  3.)
Jonah's  prayer  was  hona  fides.  It  is  as  a  believer  he  prays.  His  spiritual  instinct
brings  him  in  his  unhappiness  to  a  throne  of  grace.  "  He  does  not  seek  a  refuge  from
Ood.  He  makes  God  his  Refuge  "  (Martin).  He  shows  a  surly  sincerity  in  unreservedly
■tating  what  is  working  in  his  mind ;  and  "  so  long  as  all  can  yet  be  declared  unto  the
Lord,  even  though  it  be  your  infirmity,  there  integrity  still  reigni"  (Martin).    Yet*


OH.  IT,  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  87

barring  the  quality  of  sincerity,  this  prayer  lacks  almost  every  other  element  of
acceptable  worship.  1.  It  is  inappropriate  in  its  matter.  (Vor.  3.)  It  is  not  abso-
lutely and  necessarily  wrong  to  pray  for  death.  Paul,^  persecuted  and  afflicted,  had
"a  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ."  It  is  easily  conceivable  that  a  believer,
broken  down  and  prostrated  with  incurable  disease,  should  pray  for  death  as  the  sole
available  release.  It  would  be  nothing  unbecoming  if  a  ripe  saint,  whose  life-work  is
done,  and  who  longs  for  rest,  should  make  its  early  coming  a  matter  of  prayer.  But
Jonah  was  neither  past  living  usefully  nor,  in  his  present  temper,  ready  to  die.  His
death,  if  allowed,  would  have  advanced  no  interest  either  of  his  own  or  of  others.
His  work  was,  humanly  speaking,  far  from  being  done,  and  his  life,  if  he  put  a  noble
interpretation  on  it,  might  be  of  gre»t  importance  in  the  world.  He  was  stupidly
wanting  to  fling  away  from  him,  instead  of  prizing  and  using  it,  one  of  God's  most
precious  gifts,  and  his  ovm  most  sacred  trust.  The  desire  to  die,  which  some  consider
the  cream  of  all  piety,  is  as  often  mistaken  as  appropriate,  and  far  less  often  a  duty
than  a  sin.  In  such  cases  men  "  ask  and  receive  not,  because  they  ask  amiss."  2.  It
is  improper  in  spirit.  One  can  easily  see  that  Jonah  was  in  no  praying  mood.  He  was
angry  and  insolent.  His  prayer  was  really  a  contentious  manifesto — the  joint  issue  of
arrogance  and  discontent.  As  such  it  was  utterly  offensive  to  God,  and  itself  a  new
sin  in  his  sight.  The  spirit  of  it,  however,  made  it  harmless,  as  it  secured  the  refusal
of  its  mischievous  request.  Our  union  with  Christ  is  a  condition  of  successful  prayer
(John  XV.  7).  The  guarantee  of  its  acceptability  is  our  dwelling  in  Christ:  the  cause
of  its  fitness  is  his  Word  dwelling  in  us.  The  Spirit  helps  the  believer's  infirmities,  and
in  these  qualities  we  have  the  outcome  of  his  work  (Bom.  viii.  26).  The  very  gist  of
prayer  is  a  leaving  of  ourselves  in  the  hands  of  God.  Its  inquiry  is,  "  Lord,  what  wilt
thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  and  its  request  is,  "  Lord,  here  am  I ;  send  me."  Such  a
request  is  offered  in  terms  of  our  Father's  will,  and,  being  ofiered  in  Christ,  is  ideal
prayer  to  God.  But  the  prayer  of  wilfulness,  of  Iretfulness,  of  carnal  suggestion  in  any
shape,  is  lacking  in  every  element  that  God  regards  or  can  accept.  "  For  let  not  such
a  one  think  that  he  shall  receive  anything  of  the  Lord."

IV.  God  answers  a  fault-findino  pbatbb  by  rebuking  the  bpibit  of  it.
The  rule  is  that  believing  prayer  is  answered  (Matt.  xxi.  22  ;  Mark  ii.  24).  It  is  a
special  qualification  of  the  rule  that  the  answer  comes  in  the  form  of  things  agreeable
to  God's  will.  Jonah's  prayer  had  enough  of  faith  in  it  to  secure  an  answer,  and  yet
enough  of  folly  to  necessitate  an  answer  very  different  from  the  one  desired  (ver.  4).
There  was  wonderful  condescension  here.  Jonah  makes  an  insane  request,  and  it  is
mercifully  ignored.  He  makes  it  in  a  sinful  way,  and  gets  the  thing  he  was  most  in
need  of — an  admonition.  The  words  imply :  1.  Are  you  angry  on  sufficient  grounds  f
An  enumeration  of  the  antecedents  of  his  anger  would  have  covered  Jonah  with  con-
fusion. His  contemptibly  egotistic  refusal  to  prophesy,  as  it  was  his  business  to  do,
had  not  so  much  been  punished,  as  forcibly  overcome,  and  then  forgiven.  His  life,
jeopardized,  in  the  natural  course  of  events,  by  his  own  infatuate  conduct,  had,  by  a
miracle  of  mercy,  been  ^ven  back  to  him  from  the  grave's  mouth.  His  recent
ministry  so  tardily  exercised  had  been  blessed  beyond  a  parallel,  to  the  saving  of  a
mighty  city  and  the  glorious  illustration  of  the  mercy  and  grace  of  Gkid.  These  grounds
of  feeling  are  the  only  grounds  which,  as  a  servant  of  God,  he  could  consistently  regard.
The  others,  which  bore  on  possible  results  to  his  own  official  prestige,  and  Israel's  moral
attitude  and  fate,  were  purely  speculative,  might  prove  unfounded  altogether,  and
whether  or  not  should  have  no  place  in  a  spiritual  mind.  A  true  prophet  is  a  man
who  speaks  for  God  unquestioningly,  who  acts  for  God  undauntedly,  who  is  in  fullest
sympathy  with  his  gracious  purposes,  and  who  knows  no  personal  considerations  in  his
work.  Well  might  Qod  ask,  "  Art  thou  wiser  than  I  ?  "  "  Is  thine  eye  evil  because
I  am  good?"  If  a  servant  may  have  an  interest  antagonistic  to  his  masters;  if  a
man  "  may  make  his  own  narrow  capacity  the  measure  by  which  to  judge  of  the
Divine  will  and  the  Divine  procedure  "  (Martin) ;  if  the  salvation  of  a  million  strangers
ii  nothing  in  the  balance  against  a  possible  hurt  to  a  few  of  our  own  friends ; — then
Jonah  was  fitly  angry,  and  we,  in  a  like  case,  may  fitly  be  angry  also.  The  words  also
imply :  2.  1$  your  anger  itself  a  right  thing  i  The  will  of  God  is  the  ultimate  reason
of  things.  The  way  of  God  is  unchallenguably  right.  The  office  of  censor  over  him
does  not  exist.   Thsre  is  no  provision  in  his  scheme  of  gorerament  for  our  being  angry,


88  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  it  I— 11.

and  no  place  in  the  chain  of  cause  and  effect  at  which  it  could  come  in.  We  do  it
solely  on  our  own  responsihility,  in  violation  of  the  Divine  harmonies,  and  at  our  own
risk  and  loss.  It  settles  nothing  outside  ourselves,  influences  nothing,  and  has  no
right  of  way  across  the  field  of  providence.  God  is  supreme,  and  men  are  in  his  bands,
and  all  duty  in  relation  to  his  government  is,  "  Thy  nrill  he  doae."  The  question  of
men's  salvation  is  God's  question  in  the  last  appeal.  He  sits  at  the  helm.  He  settles
who  shall  he  saved,  and  whether  any  shall  be  saved  (Bom.  ix.  11, 16,  22,  23).  The
conversion  of  sinners  is  but  the  evolution  of  his  purpose ;  the  glorification  of  saints  the
realization  of  his  plan.  Is  not  this  good  tidings  for  the  lost  ?  Seeking  God  as  he
thinks  with  all  his  heart,  the  anxious  sinner  fancies  sometimes  that  be  is  willing  and
God  is  not,  and  that  the  question  to  be  solved  is  the  question  of  overcoming  a  certain
Divine  inertia,  and  getting  God's  consent  to  his  entrance  into  life.  The  idea  is  a
delusion  of  Satan,  and  has  ruined  more  lives  than  could  be  told.  "  Ye  will  not  come
unto  me  that  ye  might  have  life."  That  is  Christ's  way  of  it.  "  As  I  live,  saith  the
Lord  God,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked ;  but  that  the  wicked  turn
from  his  way  and  live."  That  is  God's  gospel,  the  glorious  and  precious  truth.  God's
willingness  to  save  is  infinite.  He  waits  to  be  gracious.  It  is  you  that  are  not  willing,
f  ou  think  you  are,  and  you  may  be  in  some  respects.  But  you  are  not  willing  per-
fectly and  all  round.  There  is  a  secret  reservation  lurking  somewhere.  Search  well
and  see.  If  yon  had  ever  been  wholly  willing  for  a  single  instant,  you  would  that
instant  have  been  across  the  threshold  and  in  the  kingdom.  If  you  are  wholly  willing
now,  it  IS  the  golden  hour  of  your  life,  for  it  ia  the  beginning  of  the  new  life  in
Christ.— J.  E.  H.

Vers.  6 — 11. — Divine  mercy  formulating  its  own  apologeiie.  God  is  patient  and
persistent  to  a  marvel.  He  sticks  to  men  whom  we  would  unhesitatingly  cast  off,  and
bears  with  them  when,  to  our  mind,  patience  has  ceased  to  be  a  virtue.  His  keen  eya
sees  ground  for  hope  where  we  should  utterly  despair ;  and  he  goes  on  dealing  with
cases  that  we  should  regard  as  quite  beyond  treatment.  The  case  of  Jonah  was  one  in
point.  He  displayed  a  mulish  obstinacy,  and  a  tenacious  and  assertive  self-will,  on
which  anything  short  of  the  strong  arm  seemed  only  labour  thrown  away.  Yet  Gbd  is
neither  disgusted  nor  discouraged.  He  does  not  cease  to  strive ;  neither  does  he  resort
to  the  violence  that  would  seem  so  fitting.  His  mildly  suasive  measures  go  on,  and  go
on  calmly  and  confidently,  as  to  infallible  success.  Verbal  expostulation  has  failed,
but  that  if  only  one  agency  of  exhaustless  Divine  resource.  The  symbolic  method  of
teaching  still  remains,  and  may  prevail,  and  God  mercifully  tries  it  on  the  refractory
prophet  before  he  will  either  say,  "Cut  him  off  I"  or,  "Let  him  alone  1"  We  learn
here —

L  How    TENAOIOUSLT    A    8BRVANT    OF    GOD    MAT  OLIKO   TO  A   MUTINOUS   PROJECT.

(Ver.  5.)  Jonah's  leaning  toward  the  destruction  of  Nineveh  was  not  mere  caprice.  It
was  largely  selfish.  That  event  would  have  been  to  him  equivalent  to  a  new  credential
of  office.  The  heathen  abroad  and  Israel  at  home  he  could  have  referred  to  it  as  a
miraculous  authentication  of  his  word,  and  a  new  feather  in  his  official  cap.  Accord-
ingly, his  preference  went  and  his  influence  tried  to  work  in  that  direction.  In  this
mind  he  left  the  city.  He  would  not  mingle  with  the  people.  Their  abject  attentions
while  dreading  death,  and  their  possible  ridicule  if  it  did  not  come,  would  he  alike
distasteful.  His  mission,  moreover,  was  practically  fulfilled,  and  he  had  no  very  definite
business  to  detain  him  longer ;  whilst  there  would  be  a  natural  desire  to  be  out  of  the
city  when  its  fateful  hour  should  arrive.  There  was,  however,  a  reason  for  his  departure
a  good  deal  less  to  his  credit  than  any  of  these.  He  went  to  see  "  what  would  become
of  the  city."  Here  was  watching  for  souls  in  hideous,  baleful  travesty.  He  was
watching  for  their  salvation,  it  is  true,  but  watching  for  it  in  protesting  anger  and  fear.
He  cannot  bring  himself  to  believe  that  it  will  take  place ;  and  he  climbs  the  hills
overlooking  the  city  from  the  east  to  watch  develnpments  with  a  mind  divided  between
anger,  curiosity,  and  misgiving.  And  here  he  displayed  the  deliberation  and  resource
that  we  observed  on  other  occasions.  Anticipating  inconvenience  from  the  burning
heat,  he  built  himself  a  rustic  arbour  in  which  he  could  sit  in  the  pleasant  shade  and
comfortably  await  the  end.  It  is  humiliating  to  think  that  questions  of  earthly
interest,  questions  even  of  personal  convenience,  will  compete  succeisfiiUy  at  tunes


«auiT.l— 11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  9»

with  the  question  of  men's  salvation,  for  tiie  first  place  In  the  attention  of  Gkxl's  peopi*.
Words  have,  for  some  paltry  personal  consideration,  been  left  unspoken,  interview*
unsought,  measures  unattended  to,  on  which,  humanly  speaking,  the  question  of  some
one's  eternity  hung.  Those  who  know  God  and  speak  for  him  want  to  realize  that
their  doing  so  is  the  paramount  consideration,  with  which  there  is  no  other  matter  that
may  for  a  moment  come  into  competition.  A  Paul  *'  counts  not  his  life  dear  unto  him
that  he  might  finish  the  ministry  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  testify  the  gospel  of
the  grace  ot  Gxid  "  (Acts  zx.  24).  On  no  lower  level  can  we,  as  regards  the  perishing,
"  walk  in  love  as  Christ  also  loved  us."

II,  How  God  in  pbovidenoe  bi^bbes  sinnebs  against  hib  obaoe.  (Ver.  6.)  Jonah
had  just  complained  of  the  great  lenity  of  God.  But  he  is  only  quarrelling  with  his
own  mercy.  He  is  the  very  first,  as  he  was  the  very  last,  to  profit  by  that  lenity
himself.  The  God  who  offended  him  by  pitying  penitent  Nineveh  gave  him  unmingled
gratification  by  pitying  his  rebellious  self,  and  bringing  him  in  his  self-made  discom-
fort prompt  relief.  And  the  gourd  that  grew  so  timely  and  served  so  well  may  be
taken  as  a  type  of  the  Divine  compensatory  arrangements  in  connection  with  human
life.  1.  These  always  come.  God  does  not  forget  his  people,  and  cannot  disregard
their  troubles.  He  heeds  and  he  helps  them.  Wherever  there  is  the  burning  sun
of  calamity  there  is  the  gourd  of  some  ameliorating  circumstance.  They  do  not
intermit ;  if  they  did  our  well-being,  our  very  life,  would  intermit  also.  They  do  not
fluctuate  with  our  allegiance ;  if  they  did  they  would  be  at  the  ebb  perpetually.  They
flow  down  in  a  continuous  steady  stream.  "  No  father  like  God ;  none  feel  for  hia
children  like  him;  none  so  forgiving  and  ready  to  relieve ;  when  none  else  will  pity
them,  he  will;  and  in  the  face  of  manifold  provocations  the  Lord  remembereth  mercy.
When  they  become  sufferers,  the  Father's  bowels  of  compassion  melt  over  them.  We
have  a  High  Priest  that  is  soon  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities"  (Jones),
2.  They  always  suit.  Appropriateness  must  characterize  a  "  good  and  perfect  gift,"
such  as  all  God's  are.  They  are  not  at  right  angles  to  our  need,  but  along  the  line
of  it.  There  is  a  destroying  angel  to  rout  a  besieging  army  (2  Kings  xix.  35),  a  flow-
ing spring  to  quench  a  dying  woman's  thirst  (Gen.  xxi.  19),  an  earthquake  to  shake
open  prison  doors  (Acts  xvi.  26),  and  "  sufficient  grace  "  to  make  a  thorn  in  the  flesh
endurable  (2  Cor.  xii.  8, 9).  In  fact,  God's  helpful  action  bears  directly  on  our  sufferings
and  their  alleviation.  We  get  sometimes  what  we  ask  for,  and  always  what  we  need.
And  we  get  it  too  at  the  moment  we  need  it  most.  "  The  sea  is  opened  when  Israel
is  hemmed  in  on  every  side ;  the  manna  comes  down  when  they  have  no  bread ;  and
the  water  flows  from  the  rook  when  they  are  ready  to  die  with  thirst  (Ps,  xxvii.  10)  "
(Jones).  3.  They  do  for  us  what  our  own  skill  and  contrivance  have  failed  to  do.
Jonah's  booth  proved  insufficient  shelter,  and  in  the  hour  of  its  proved  inadequacy
the  gourd  grew.  God  allows  us  to  build  our  own  booth  first.  We  try  our  hand  at
improving  our  earthly  lot,  to  find  that  we  cannot  command  success.  We  lay  deep  plans
and  put  forth  stupendous  efforts,  and  then  flounder  and  stick  fast.  At  last  Ghxi,  who
has  been  awaiting  such  a  juncture,  steps  in,  and,  by  some  imthought-of  incident,  the
blocked  path  is  opened,  and  the  thing  is  done.  The  testimony  of  God's  people  every-
where has  been  that,  not  their  own  brain  or  arm,  but  "  the  good  hand  of  the  Lord,"  has
opened  their  path  and  made  their  life's  prosperity.  4.  They  are  ofttn  appreciated
without  being  traced  to  their  source.  "  Jonah  was  exceeding  glad  of  the  gourd."  And
well  he  might.  It  intercepted  the  broiling  sunshine,  and  converted  physical  distress
into  luxurious  ease.  Yet  he  rejoiced  in  its  grateful  shade  without  considering  it  to
be  God's  gift  or  a  blessing  to  thank  him  for.  It  is  so  that  many  of  our  mercies  are
received.  They  are  welcomed  and  prized  and  rejoiced  in.  We  are  exceeding  glad
of  them,  and  more  than  enough  are  exercised  about  them.  "  I  become  exceeding  glad
of  my  gourd.  My  heart  entwines  around  it.  This  pleasing  prospect;  this  budding
hope ;  this  successful  movement ;  this  welcome  visitant,  the  golden-haired  little  one
within  my  earthly  home,  crowing  in  my  arms,  searching  my  eye  for  the  kindling
glance  of  joy  and  love,  and  dancing  gleefully  on  Bnding  it ; — ah  I  in  many  a  form  my
gourd  may  grow ;  and  I  am  exceeding  glad  of  my  gourd,  even  when  I  quarrel  with
God"  who  gives  it  (Martin).  But  our  best  of  blessings  -ye  do  not  trace  to  their
heavenly  source.  We  take  them  iiaheeding  as  to  whence  or  where  they  come.  It  is
•  fault  of  our  life,  and  a  chief  cause  of  our  ingratitude  and  lack  of  lore,  that  Gkd'i  gifts


90  TUB  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  it.  1—11.

are  treated  often  as  our  own  gains,  and  so  are  godlessly  enjoyed.  They  are  understood
only  when  God  is  seen  in  them,  and  rightly  used  when  used  as  from  bis  hand ;  but,
received  with  the  dry  eye  of  ingratitude,  or  with  the  shut  eye  of  insensibility,  they
aie  deforced  of  their  Divine  element,  and  to  us  are  God's  gifts  no  longer.

III.  How  God  conpees  some  gifts  only  to  take  them  away  aoaih.  (Ver.  7.)
Jonah  got  his  time  of  the  gourd,  but  it  was  a  short  time.  For  one  day  he  reclined
luxuriously  beneath  its  shadow ;  the  next  came  the  worm,  and  his  shelter  was  gone.
It  is  so  with  many  comfortable  earthly  things.  God  gives  them  in  mercy,  and  seeing
them  either  inappreciated  or  idolized,  he  in  further  mercy  takes  them  away.  They
"  perish  in  the  using."  At  best  they  could  only  last  a  lifetime ;  often  they  do  not
last  so  long.  They  are  flowers  that  only  bloom  to  wither,  mists  that  melt  away  as
soon  as  the  sun  is  risen.  And,  whilst  this  is  true  of  them  as  a  class,  it  is  specially
true  of  some  varieties.  "  When  things  come  to  us  in  haste,  they  as  hastily  part  again ;
when  riches  come  too  quickly  they  quickly  take  their  flight;  sudden  glories  decay
suddenly;  the  fruit  which  is  soonest  ripe  is  found  to  be  soonest  rotten"  (Abbot).
There  is  in  the  sudden  removal  of  valued  blessings  a  needful  assertion  of  the  Divine
controL  The  things  we  have  are  not  our  own.  We  hold  them  at  God's  pleasure.
And  he  emphasizes  this  fact  occasionally  by  taking  away  the  thins;  or  the  good  of  it,
when  we  are  just  settling  down  for  a  whole  life's  enjoyment.  Then  we  make  idols
of  our  mercies  sometimes.  We  put  the  gift  into  the  Giver's  place.  The  most  efiiectuail
cure  for  this  is  to  be  left  without  it.  Our  Father  bestows  his  favours  "  not  with  a  view
to  make  man  happy  in  the  possession  of  them,  but  to  win  upon  man,  and  to  allure  his
heart  to  himself  by  his  gifts.  Abraham's  servant  did  not  bestow  the  jewels  of  silver
and  jewels  of -gold  and  raiment  on  Bebekah  to  make  her  joyful  in  a  heathen  land,  but
to  win  her  heart  to  Isaac  "  (Jones).

IV.  Calamity  shows  men  how  badly  they  could  do  without  God's  gifts.  (Ver.  8.)
The  withering  of  the  gourd  and  the  rising  of  the  hot  sirocco  were  timed  to  synchronize.
And  there  was  disciplinary  value  in  the  adjustment.  The  loss  of  a  gift  becomes  a
lesson  by  emphasizing  what  and  how  much  it  means.  Had  the  gourd  remained,  the
heat  would  have  been  little  felt.  Had  not  the  sirocco  followed,  the  withered  gourd
might  never  have  been  missed.  The  concurrence  of  the  two  events  and  their  obvious
adjustment  to  each  other  reveal  the  hand  of  God,  and  point  the  lesson  of  the  providence
beyond  mistaking.  So  misfortunes  often  march  on  us  in  companies,  and  support  eacb
other.  One  trial  prepares  the  way  of  another,  and  lays  bare  the  breast  for  its  darts
to  penetrate.  The  discipline  of  grace  is  a  lengthened  process,  and  advances  stage  by
stage  to  its  lofty  end  of  lust  killed  and  a  transfigured  life.

V.  Prom  oub  attitude  toward  oub  loved  objects  we  may  abque  up  to  God's
attitude  towards  his.  (Vers.  10, 11.)  Om:  creation  in  the  Divine  image  involves  this,
and  all  parabolic  teaching  takes  it  for  granted.  The  soul  is  a  miniature  of  God,  and
the  order  of  coming  to  pass  in  it  is  "  after  God."  Hence  the  unanswerableness  of  the
question  with  which  the  parable  and  the  book  both  close.  1.  ITie  things  we  love  art
paltry.  A  gourd  against  a  city,  a  worthless  plant  against  half  a  million  of  immortal
souls.  Such  is  a  sample  of  the  contrast  between  the  objects  of  God's  compassion  and
of  ours.  May  we  not  argue  that  the  compassion  itself  in  the  one  case  and  the  other
is  in  still  profounder  contrast?  Gnd's  love  and  mercy  have  reference  to  a  lost  race.
Ours,  unless  in  so  far  as  we  are  God- like,  refer  to  some  trifling  earthly  object.  Let  the
fact  be  realized,  and  the  lesson  is  learned — a  lesson  of  admiration  and  awe,  and  lowly
gratitude  and  love.  2.  We  have  hut  a  limited  interest  in  the  things  we  prize.  The
gourd  did  not  belong  to  Jonah.  He  "  did  not  make  it  grow."  He  got  the  use  of  -it
for  a  while,  but  that  was  all.  So  the  things  we  have  are  not  our  own.  They  are
left  with  us  as  a  loan,  and  held  as  a  brief  trust.  Our  attachment  to  them  has  no
element  of  ownership  in  it,  and  is  therefore  destitute  of  a  fundamental  excellence.  But
God  loves  souls  as  his  property  and  portion,  and  with  a  view  to  the  fruition  of  them
through  all  eternity.  His  is  indeed  a  sublime  affection — a  "  love  which  passeth  know-
ledge." 3.  We  have  done  hat  little  for  them.  (Ver.  10.)  "  For  which  thou  hast  not
laboured."  We  love  what  costs  us  something.  It  is  to  the  sickly  child,  which  has
cost  her  years  of  anxiety  and  care,  that  the  mother's  heart  cleaves  in  most  intense
affection.  Labour  and  sacrifice  for  an  object  bind  us  to  it  by  a  special  tie.  Created
by  «ui  skill  and  effort,  it  is  our  offspring  in  a  sense,  and  dear  accordingly.    This  tia


CH.IV.  1— 11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  M

was  absent  in  the  case  of  Jonah.  He  had  not  produced,  nor  contributed  to  tie  pro-
duction of,  the  much-lamented  gourd.  But  what  had  God  not  done  for  Nineveh  ?
His  were  the  lives  forfeited,  his  the  blessings  menaced,  his  the  repentance  which  led
to  the  reprieve.  In  pitying  Nineveh  God  was  pitying  the  work  of  hia  own  hands,  an
object  in  which  he  held,  as  a  vested  interest,  all  that  he  had  done  for  it  and  meant  to
do.  4.  They  are  of  brief  endurance.  "  Which  came  up  in  a  night,  and  perished  in  a
night."  The  time  element  is  an  important  one  in  all  attachments.  The  longer  they
have  been  growing  the  firmer  they  are.  Jonah's  gourd  was  lost  almost  as  soon  as
found,  and  could  not  have  beeo  the  object  of  any  settled  regard.  But  Nineveh  had
been  in  God's  heart  since  before  the  world  beaan,  and  many  in  it  were  to  be  his  joy
after  time  had  ceased  to  be.  His  love  had  in  it  the  incomparable  strength  of  con-
tinuance, an  aspect  of  "  the  power  of  an  endless  life."  What  an  overwhelming  argument
for  acquiescence  in  the  Divine  purpose  of  mercy  I  And  how  often,  in  the  giving  and
taking  away  again  of  some  form  of  earthly  good,  does  God  press  home  the  argument
on  men  who  are  quarrelling  with  his  will  1  My  gourd,  like  Jonah's,  may  have  grown
and  flourished,  "to  the  end,  perhaps,  that  it  may  wither  and  droop  and  die;  and  that
my  heart,  untractable,  may  at  last,  by  losing  it,  be  taught  to  feel  that,  if  the  object
which  my  poor  foolish  love  fastens  on  be  hard  to  part  with,  how  infinitely  wrong  in  me
to  desire  God  to  abandon  those  purposes  which  his  infinitely  wise  will  hath  cherished
from  eternity,  and  which  he  hath  bound  in  with  and  wrapt  around  my  destiny  at  once
to  bless  and  train  me  I "  (Martin).

Leara  from  this  how  to  conceive  of  the  value  of  the  souls  of  men.  They  are  th«
priceless  things.  God's  masterpieces  as  to  their  origio,  they  are  unparagoned  as  to
intrinsic  excellence;  whilst,  as  to  their  place  and  function,  they  are  the  crown  jewels
of  Christ,  and  the  objects  for  which  all  heaven  is  a  place  prepared.  Let  saint  and
sinner  mark  this  well.  To  barter  away  our  soul  is  a  transaction  which  will  not  profit
us,  though  we  "  gain  the  whole  world"  instead.  To  love  our  neighbour  as  ourself,  and
in  doing  so  supremely  to  love  his  soul,  is  "  more  than  all  whole  burnt  offerings  and
sacrifices."  To  love  God  supremely  is  to  combine  in  ideal  ratio  the  love  of  self  and  the
love  of  souls.  They  are  the  "  children  of  the  Highest,"  whose  hearts  are  the  home  of  such
kffection,  and  they  have  in  its  presence  the  fruition  of  their  inheritance  begun. — J.  E.  H.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Jonc^'i  displeasure.  ''But  it  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,  and  he
was  very  angry,"  aio.  This  is  not  a  wholly  unexpected  manifestation  of  character  la
Jonah.  His  was  evidently  a  strange  character,  full  of  contradictory  elements.  A  pro-
phet of  the  Lord,  who  can  yet  run  away  from  his  work-7-influenced  by  high  considera-
tions in  the  main,  yet  yielding  to  a  low  desire  for  personal  comfort — can  sleep  in  a  storm
while  pagans  are  at  prayer — yet  susceptible  of  profound  contrition  and  repentance — ■
frankly  owns  himself  the  cause  of  the  storm — had  ignominiously  consulted  for  his
comfort,  but  now  generously  sacrifices  his  life — in  depth  of  his  humiliation  becomes
wonderfully  penitent,  trustful,  and  obedient.  Notwithstanding  these  contradictions,  we
should,  perhaps,  hardly  have  expected  another  outbreak  of  his  lower  nature,  after  so
striking  a  Divine  discipline  and  subjugation,  and  so  remarkable  a  display  of  honesty,
courage,  self-sacrifice :  it  is  a  surprise  to  find  him  again  quarrelling  with  God's  appoint-
ment, discontented,  hard,  immerciful,  excited  and  grieved  at  the  respite  of  Nineveh.
There  is  a  certain  inconstancy  in  impulsive  natures;  there  is  a  desperate  activity  of  the
lower  propensities;  hence  our  need  of  Divine  guidance,  a  continual  need — God  alone  is
able  to  keep  the  very  best  from  falling.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take
heed  lest  he  fall."

L  Jonah's  oisPLEAStrBB.  (Ver.  1.)  Proposed  change  of  translation,  making  words
to  express  grief  rather  than  resentment,  is  hardly  called  for.  Evidently  Jonah  lost  self-
control,  and  gave  way  to  violent  excitement.  Here  is  another  proof  of  the  honesty  of
Bible  narrative.  It  gives  a  faithful  picture  of  human  infirmity — "  the  law  of  sin  in  the
members  warring  against  the  law  of  the  mind."  It  would  be  a  very  untrue  representa-
tion if  faults  corrected  once,  even  by  God,  were  represented  as  subdued  for  ever.  The
most  distressing  experience  of  true  Christians  is  tlTe  renewed  activity  of  their  infirmities
and  corruptions  even  »fter  profound  liumiliation  and  true  contrition.  "Who  can
understand  his  errors?  cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults.  Seep  back  thy  servant
also  from  presumpttiotu  ting  ;  let  them  not  have  dominion  over  me  "  (P«.  xix.  12,  13)b


M  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  [oh.  it.  1—11.

IL  Beabon  absioned  for  it.  (Ver.  2.)  God  too  merciful — his  mercy  on  this  occaiion
Judged  out  of  place.  Jonah's  truthfulness  as  a  prophet  seemed  to  be  compromised ;  ho
was  made  to  appear  foolish  in  the  eyes  of  men — the  whole  of  the  painful  experience  he
had  gone  through  shown  to  be  unnecessary ;  he  would  have  to  return  home  without
bringing  word  to  his  people  of  the  great  catastrophe  by  which  they  would  have  been
compelled  to  regard  Crod's  will.  Jonah  finds  confirmation  of  the  thought  that  had
influenced  him  at  first — God  too  merciful  to  inflict  great  judgments ;  he  seems  to  find  a
reason  for  his  original  rebellion,  and,  with  irreverent  honesty,  vindicates  himself  before
God.  A  very  great  aggravation  of  his  sin,  that  what  he  disliked  in  God  was  his  gracious-
ness  to  sinners.  The  mood  of  mind  which  Jonah  is  represented  as  expressing  openly
often  has  a  lurking  existence,  not  less  mischievous  because  half  concealed.  Mercy  of
God  is  sometimes  thought  to  be  excessive.  So  thought  Jews  when  Gentiles  were  to  be
admitted  to  Christian  Church.  Possibly  this  transaction  was  designed  to  foreshadow
that  event — Jonah's  strong  feeling  a  foreshadow  of  narrow  Jewiih  jealousy.  On  a  wider
theatre,  man's  terrible  selfishness  is  apt  to  prevail  even  over  all  considerations  of  mercy;
for  instance,  a  merchant  interested  in  fall  of  price  of  grain  is  apt  to  be  grieved  for  good
weather  and  plentiful  harvest — the  heir  of  a  ricb  man  (possibly  of  his  father)  disappointed
when  he  recovers  from  serious  illness — the  heart  is  apt  to  grieve  at  the  good  of  a
neighbour,  especially  of  a  rival — some  one  has  said,  "  There  is  something  even  in  the
troubles  of  our  friends  which  is  not  altogether  displeasing  to  us " — a  state  of  war  is
sometimes  desired  because  of' impulse  to  be  given  to  certain  branches  of  trade:  in  all
such  cases,  the  aspect  of  selfishness  is  simply  hideous — men  may  well  shrink  from
looking  at  such  pictures  of  themselves — ^yet  such  feelings  are  by  no  means  uncommon.
What  surprises  in  case  of  Jonah  is  that,  after  showing  himself  a  very  paragon  of  self-
sacrifice,  the  selfish  feeling  should  have  been  so  strong,  and  that  he  should  have  given
such  open  expression  to  it.

III.  Jonah's  pratkb.  (Ver.  3.)  He  asked  to  be  relieved  of  his  life,  which  had
become  too  burdensome  to  him.  See  here  the  sad  prevalence  of  carnal  spirit — no
acknowledgment  of  higher  wisdom  of  God,  of  the  way  in  which  good  might  be  brought
by  him  out  of  what  seemed  to  Jonah  to  be  eviL  See,  too,  the  sinfulness  of  a  despairing
spirit  in  servant  of  God — not  unnatural  in  men  of  world — complications  and  miseries
may  arise  which  overwhelm — misery  may  be  too  absolute  to  bear,  and  every  succeeding
step  may  only  aggravate  it — dreadful  condition  of  human  spirit  when  absolute  misery
closes  upon  it.  Such  should  never  be  the  condition  of  a  servant  of  God  while  in
possession  of  his  reason — sense  of  Divine  providence,  and  assurance  of  protection  and
guidance  should  repel  it — it  is  unbelieving  men  that  ask,  "Is  life  worth  living?"
Unbelief  and  suicide  go  together.  Observe,  in  Jonah's  case,  effect  of  tolerated  sin  on
his  spiritual  condition — he  loses  trust  in  God — does  not  see  how  God  can  save  him  even
from  himself — makes  no  such  request,  but  only  asks  him  to  take  away  his  life.  Some-
times it  seems  so  impossible  to  do  right,  that  we  are  willing  to  give  up  all  in  despair.
"  If  the  liglit  that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  I "

IV.  God's  BBMONSTRANCB.  (Ver.  4.)  "Doestthou  well  to  be  angry?"  Oh  the  gentle-
ness of  the  Divine  method  1 — Jonah's  thoughts  are  thrown  in  upon  himself — no  Divine
denunciation,  but  Jonah  made,  as  it  were,  judge  in  his  own  case,  asked  to  sit  over  him-
self and  say  if  his  feeling  was  right.  Besemblance  of  this  to  the  method  of  our  Lord
^his  way  of  putting  questions,  compelling  thought,  and  constraining  a  just  decision.
Bee  his  method  of  dealing  with  Simon  the  Pharisee  (Luke  vii.  42).  Facility  with
which  God  may  judge  us,  by  making  us  judges  of  ourselves.  Difference  of  our  actions
as  regarded  by  us,  and  as  seen  from  God's  point  of  view.  It  is  from  God's  point  ol
view  their  criminality  is  most  clearly  shown.  Hence  the  sense  of  unworthiness  we
feel  when  we  bend  the  kneo,  and  pour  out  our  spirit  before  God  at  night.  The  actions
that  at  the  time  seemed  right  enough  assume  aspect  of  sin  when  looked  at,  as  it  were,
with  God's  eyes.  In  the  present  case  no  such  efiect  was  made  on  Jonah ;  he  himself
comes  before  God  in  sullen,  selfish  spirit.  Even  God's  question  does  not  subdue  him.
Bumming  up  the  sins  of  Jonah's  spirit  in  this  transaction,  we  notice  :  1.  His  limiting
God.  There  was  but  one  way,  in  his  view,  in  which  the  right  thing  could  be  done.
Nineveh  must  be  destroyed.  To  that  he  had  made  up  his  mind,  and  his  whole  moral
nature  was  shaken  when  it  appeared  that  God  had  another  way.  2.  His  refusing
to  believe  in  the  efficacy  of  Divine  forbearance.    Rough  methods  of  dealinji  alone  an


CH.  IT.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK    OP  JONAH.  »3

believed  in  by  many — slaves  treated  with  fearful  violence — the  terrors  of  the  Inquisition
brought  down  on  heretics— offence  of  many  at  the  clemency  of  Lord  Canning  after
Indian  Mutiny — ^Ireland  must  be  scourged  with  fire  and  sword — scoundrels,  said
Carlyle,  must  suffer  the  unmitigated  doom  of  scoundrels.  God's  methods  more  mercif al
— he  seeks  to  win,  to  humble,  to  reclaim,  to  convert.  3.  His  readiness  to  sacrifice
a  vast  community  to  carry  out  his  own  idea.  His  want  of  regard  for  human  life —
a  common  feeling  of  the  time — in  Jonah's  view  all  that  vast  mass  of  life  was  not
to  be  considered,  provided  a  blow  was  struck  that  would  vindicate  his  authoi  ity,  and
impress  his  people.  4.  Impatience  of  spirit,  giving  birth  to  rash  desires  and  prayers.
Loss  of  self-control  is  a  very  humiliating  experience  in  one  who  desires  to  be  a  servant
of  God.  "  He  that  ruleth  his  spirit  is  better  than  he  that  taketh  a  city "  (Frov.  zvL
32)..  But  "  he  that  hath  no  rule  over  his  own  spirit  is  like  a  city  that  is  broken  down,
and  without  walls  "  (Prov.  xxv.  28).  How  unlike  Jonah  was  now  to  what  he  had
been  before !— W.  G.  B.

Vers.  6 — 11. — QocPs  remonstrance  with  Jonah.  "So  Jonah  went  out  of  the  city,
and  sat  on  the  east  side  of  the  city,  and  there  made  him  a  booth,  and  sat  under  it
in  the  shadow,  till  he  might  see  what  would  become  of  the  city,"  etc.  Jonah  appears
to  have  gone  out  of  the  city  and  taken  up  his  abode  in  the  booth  hefore  he  knew  that
Nineveh  was  to  be  spared.  As  Noah  entered  the  ark  before  the  Fioud  came,  and  waited
for  the  moment -when  the  judgment  of  Heaven  would  verify  the  warnings  of  a  hundred
and  twenty  years,  so  Jonah  entered  his  booth  before  the  expiry  of  the  forty  days,  and
waited  the  moment  when  the  judgment  of  Heaven  would  verify  his  warning.  We  can
imagine  him  speculating  on  the  form  the  judgment  would  take :  "  what  would  become
of  the  city  " — whether  it  would  perish  as  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  perished,  or  as  the
Tower  of  Babel,  or  as  the  walls  of  Jericho  had  fallen  down  in  presence  of  the  ark.
That  something  was  to  happen  he  appears  not  to  have  had  the  sligliiest  doubt;  this
may  account  for  his  mortification  when  he  found  that,  after  all,  the  city  was  to  be
spared.  The  revulsion  of  feeling  after  his  mind  had  been  wound  up  to  the  highest
pitch  of  expectation,  and  the  sense  of  having  been  befooled  before  men,  may  explain
the  vehemence  of  his  feeling.  In  rebuking  Jonah  it  pleased  God  to  do  so  by  means
of  an  acted  parable — ^the  parable  of  the  gourd.

L  Thb  gocbd  (or  Palma  Christi,  palmcrist,  as  some  suppose)  prepaebd.  (Ver.  6.)
Farther  indication  how  God  is  Lord  of  the  whole  earth  aud  all  therein.  This  book
shows  God  controlling  things  inorganic  (winds  and  waves,  ch.  L,  and  the  east  wind,
oh.  iv.  8);  vegetables  (the  gourd);  things  fortuitous  (the  lot);  animals  (the  great  fish);
reptiles  (the  worm) ;  also  men,  both  Jonah  and  the  Ninevites.  The  great  object,  both
of  the  transactions  themselves  and  of  this  record  of  them,  is  to  vindicate  the  universal
sovereignty  of  God,  both  natural  and  moral.  The  gourd  partly  natural,  partly  super-
natural ;  Otod'a  purpose  in  it  was  to  deliver  Jonah  from  his  grief.  So  far  as  supernatural,
a  pleasant  token  that  God  had  not  forsaken  him.  Natural  effect  to  ward  off  sun,  cool
the  air,  prevent  feverish  irritation,  keep  mind  and  body  calm  and  cool.  Jonah  probably
suffered  much  before  it  grew  up,  but  would  feel  immediate  relief  when  it  came.  Learn
herein  God's  ability  to  effect  important  results  by  simple  means — influence  of  mind
on  body,  and  body  on  mind :  "  Jonah  was  exceeding  glad  of  the  gourd."

II.  Thb  gourd  destroyed.  (Ver.  7.)  Again  an  important  result  due  to  a  trifling
cause — a  worm.  Figuratively  and  spiritually,  "  the  worm  Jacob  threshing  mountains"
(Isa,  xli.  15).  Apparent  collisions  and  contradictions  in  nature — one  force  seems  to
destroy  what  another  creates — as  if  there  were  a  Siva  as  well  as  a  Brahma — in  the
plan  of  God  all  work  together — it  was  alike  of  God  to  prepare  the  gourd  and  to  destroy
it — the  purposes  of  Divine  discipline  often  require  opposite  influences  at  different  times,
but  all  are  to  be  regarded  as  parts  of  a  gracious  plan :  "  I  will  sing  of  mercy  and  of
judgment"  (Ps.  oi.  1);  "All  things  are  yours,  whether  the  world,  or  life,  or  death,
or  things  present,  or  things  to  come  "  (1  Oor.  iii.  22).

III.  Jonah's  vexation.    (Ver.  8.)    Aggravation  of  his  uneasiness  by  the  vehement

east  wind whatever  comfort  of  mind  might  have  come  through  the  remarkable  origin

of  the  gourd  was  counteracted  by  this  wind,  which  seemed  a  token  of  God's  displeasure
^«ombined  distress  of  body  and  miud  in  Jonah — impulsiveness  of  his  nature  again
apparent— contrast  between  his  two  faintings — at  ch.  iL  7, "  when  my  loul  &inted  within


94  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oil  rr.  1—11.

me,  I  remembered  the  Lord ; "  here  "  he  fainted,  and  wished  in  himself  to  die  " — Jonah
his  own  reprover.  The  great  lesson — we  should  sit  loose  to  creature  comfort*,  like  the
gourd — thankful  for  them  while  we  have  them,  not  repining,  and,  above  all,  not
despairing,  when  we  lose  them.  Habakkuk's  spirit  the  model,  "  Although  the  fig  tiea
shall  not  blusaom,"  etc.  (iii.  17) — Jonah  walked  by  sight,  not  by  faith  ;  he  should
have  said,  "  When  heart  and  flesh  faint  and  fail,  God  is  the  Strength  of  my  heart,  uid
my  Portion  for  evermore."

"But  O,  thon  bounteous  Giver  of  all  good,
Tlion  art  of  all  thy  gifts  thyself  the  sum  t
Give  what  thou  mayst,  without  thee  we  are  poor,
And  with  thee  rich,  take  what  thou  wilt  away."

"  It  is  Impossible  to  help  '  moralizing '  on  the  worm  and  the  gourd.  .  .  .  They  are  felt
inwardly  to  be  emblems,  too  faithful,  of  the  swift-coursing,  closely  linked  Joy  and
sorrow  of  this  mortal  life.  The^»e  plant,  leafy-green,  type  of  our  comforts,  successes,
joys.  The  tingle  day  of  shade  it  furnished  to  the  healed  prophet  .  .  .  transiency  of
our  pleasure.  The  worm  ...  a  small  and  mean  creature,  may  be  a  very  formidable
enemy.  The  place  of  its  operations  probably  under  the  soil  .  .  .  agents  unknown  to
us  may  smite  in  secret  the  sources  of  prosperity.  The  time — morning — human  helps
and  hopes  often  wither  at  any  season  when  most  needed.  Utter  loss  ,  . .  warning  not
to  set  oar  affections  on  anything  which  ean  be  utterly  lost.  .  .  The  preparation,
indicating  how  God  orders  trials  for  our  good"  (Baleigh  abridged).  "Is  it  not  a
blessing  when  the  gourds  wither  ?  Is  it  not  a  mercy  in  God  to  sweep  them  away,
even  though  the  heart  should  be  half  broken  by  the  loss?  .  .  .  Many  will  bless
God  for  ever  because  their  gourds  were  withered.  Had  the  gourd  not  withered,
the  soul  would  not  have  been  saved;  and  the  withering  of  the  gourd  therefore
makes  the  anthem  of  the  saved  the  louder '\(T weed ie,  'Man  by  Nature  and  hy
Grace  ')•

lY.  God's  bemonstbanceb.  (Ver.  9.)  Bepetition  of  an  old  question,  and,  as  before,
without  evoking  a  suitable  answer.  We  may  note  man's  self-justifying  tendency— espe-
cially tendency  to  excuse  passion ;  excitement  of  passion  is  sometimes  so  great  that
even  a  question  from  God  fails  to  convict — Jonah's  mood  is  so  completely  self-justifying,
that  he  justifies  his  wish  to  die — as  if  his  suffering  was  really  beyond  what  could  be
borne.  Observe  the  unbecoming  attitude  and  spirit  before  God ;  the  true  attitude  of
sinners  is  that  in  Bom.  iii.  19,  "  that  every  mouth  might  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world
become  guilty  before  God."  Silence  is  the  true  condition  of  the  sinner,  as  far  as  justi-
fying pleas  concerned ;  or,  when  silence  is  broken,  such  words  as  the  publican's,  "  God
be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."

V.  Divine  application  op  the  goubd-uibtobt.  (Vers.  10, 11.)  Unexpected,  yet
felicitous,  adaptation  of  the  physical  to  the  moral — light  thrown  on  a  dark  providence
— a  foreshadow  of  revelations  of  many  enigmas  of  providence  yet  to  come.  The
argument  is  ad  hominem :  If  Jonah  would  have  spared  his  gourd,  why  should  God  not
spare  Nineveh  ?  It  is  also  a  fortiori :  If  the  fate  of  the  gourd,  a  perishing  and  trifling
thing,  was  an  object  of  concern  to  Jonah,  much  more  must  the  fate  of  such  a  city  as
Nineveh  be  an  object  of  concern  to  God.  Observe  the  force  of  the  how  much  more —
the  numbers  so  different — the  relative  endurance  of  the  two  objects — the  labour  bestowed
on  them — the  one  sensitive  beings,  the  other  nut.  The  special  reason  for  sparing
Nineveh ;  it  contained  more  than  a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  infants,  and  also
much  cattle.  God's  regard  for  children  is  here  set  forth — in  these  Eastern  countries
lives  of  children  were  little  thought  of — infanticide  was  common — in  some  countries
(Moab,  etc.)  children  were  made  to  pass  through  the  fire  to  their  gods — massacres  of
children  common  (Judg.  ix.  5;  2  Kings  ii.  1) — their  lives  precious  in  eyes  of  God,
even  though  pagan  and  uncircumcised — a  foreshadow  of  the  gospel  view :  "  of  such
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  " — children  may  perHdventure  ward  off  great  calamities —
children  in  great  cities  are  often  neglected — immense  proportion  of  deaths  occurs
under  the  age  of  five — mostly  due  to  preventible  causes — hence  sanitary  reform
becomes  a  great  duty — laws  of  healthy  upbringing  of  children  are  most  important-
spiritual  and  moral  oversight  not  less  so — the  New  Testament  rule  is,  "  Bring  them  up
in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord."     God's  regard  for  cattle — he  likes  to  see


OH.  IT.  1— 11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  W

them  enjoying  life — shrinks  from  what  needlessly  entails  or  destroys  it — thoughtless
and  needless  infliction  of  suffering  and  death  on  animals  is  a  great  sin  in  God's  eye.
The  prophet  is  sileoced  now — he  opeas  not  his  mouth.

The  narrative  ends  somewhat  abruptly ;  but  leaves  two  great  truths  full  in  view — i
the  littleness  of  man ;  the  greatness  of  God.  The  littleness  even  of  a  good  man,  one
who  in  his  deliberate  judgment  and  inmost  soul  honoured  God,  and  sought  to  serve
him,  but  was  very  excitable,  and  could  not  subdue  the  poor  impulses  of  the  lower  part
of  his  nature.  The  greatness  of  God,  Lord  of  the  earth  and  the  sea,  caring  for  his
creatures,  not  willing  that  they  should  perish,  but  that  they  should  be  saved.  Especi-
ally the  greatness  of  God  in  clemency,  compassion,  sparing  mercy ;  for  the  very
attributes  that  Jonah  depreciated  are  as  real  as  they  are  noble :  "  a  gracious  God  and
merciful,  slow  to  anger,  aad  of  great  kindness,  and  repentest  thee  of  the  evil."  This  is
emphatically  the  gospd  aspect  of  God's  character:  "just,  and  the  Justifier  of  him  that
believeth  in  Jesus  " — rich  in  mercy  and  great  in  love,  sending  his  Sou  into  the  world,
"  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  should  have  everlasting  life."
Let  us  cherish  the  view  of  the  Divine  character  that  Jonah  disparaged ;  it  is  the  only
hope  lor  us  sinners.  And  again  let  us  remember  how  the  men  of  Nineveh  have  not
passed  entirely  off  the  scene,- for,  as  our  Lord  said,  "The  men  of  Nineveh  shall  rise  up
in  judgment  against  the  men  of  this  generation,  and  shall  condemn  them;  for  they,
repented  at  the  preaching  of  Jonah ;  and,  behold,  a  greater  than  Jonah  is  here."— '
W.  G.  B.

Vers.  1 — 5. — Jonah's  grief.  There  "sat"  Jonah,  watching,  displeased  with  th«
Ninevites'  preservation,  grieved  at  the  gentle  dealings  of  their  Preserver.  And  God's
only  rebuke  of  him  was  the  gentle  question,  "  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  ?  "  In  his
mood  and  conduct  let  us  read  our  own.

I.  OuB  DISPLBASUBE.  Have  we  never  been  displeased  with  God's  ways?  It  may
have  been  as  patriots.  It  is  easy  to  be  resigned  to  judgments  that  come  upon  our
country's  enemies.  We  must  beware — beware  lest  we  encourage  in  ourselves  the  belief
that  the  great  work  of  God  among  nations  to-day  is  to  do  all  for  the  glory  of  England.
Jonah  was  displeased  that  his  country's  enemies  should  be  spared.  Tet  God  spared
them.  In  our  own  personal  history  have  we  never  been  displeased  with  God  ?-»-dis..
pleased  that  prosperity  has  been  denied  us,  who  could  so  wisely  have  used  it  ?  dis»
pleased  that  losses  and  afSictions  have  impoverished  us,  when  they  seemed  so  much
more  needed  by  others  who  have  been  free  from  them?  displeased  to  lose  our  one
child,  when  in  other  homes  the  many  are  spared  ?  displeased,  it  may  be,  that  even  the
one  has  been  denied  us  ?    Have  we  never  charged  God  foolishly  ?

II.  OuB  GBIBP.  Jonah  was  "  very  grieved  "  that  the  Ninevites  should  be  spared.
Better,  he  deemed,  that  they  should  perish.  Better  for  Israel  thus  to  be  quit  of  an
enemy.  Better  for  God,  as  thus  vindicating  his  righteousness.  Better  for  Jonah  himself
— thus  accredited  as  a  prophet  of  truth.  Grieved;  but  what  is  he  doing  with  his  memory?
He,  such  a  sinner  against  the  light,  had  been  spared;  then  why  not  these  repentant
heathen  ?  Ungrateful  Jonah  1  But  why  wonder  at  him  ?  Have  we  not  forgotten  the
Divine  goodness  ?  Have  we  not  been  grieved  at  God's  dealings  ?  Even  in  his  work  how
thwarted !  How  little  credit  do  we  get  to  what  we  expected  I  And  the  work  does  not
prosper  in  our  way.  Have  we  never  been  grieved,  angry,  with  God  ? — that  that  great
and  good  man  should  be  taken  away  in  the  midst  of  his  days?  that  that  youth  uf
high  promise  should  be  cut  down  when  the  bright  bud  was  just  showing  the  brilliant
flower  ?  that  God's  work,  where  most  successful,  should  be  threatened  with  hindrance
and  be  hindered  ?  that  our  work  for  him  should  be  obstructed,  and  we  get  so  little
commendation  for  it  when  we  had  deemed  we  deserved  it  so  much?  Grieved — and
therein  the  evil — by  regarding  Ood  as  at  fault.

III.  GuB  WATWABD  PBAYEB.  Jonah  longed  to  die.  His  work  seemed  to  fail  .because
Nineveh  was  spared.  Fail?  No;  it  was  a  transcendently  glorious  success.  A  sub-
lime and  ever-memorable  proof  of  the  Divine  mercy.  An  abiding  encouragement  to
all  coming  workers  for  God.  So  our  work,  when  we  count  it  a  failure,  may  in  God's
eyes  be  "  not  in  vain."  Huw  we  bear  ourselves  in  severe  trials  of  faith  will  show  what
spirit  and  character  we  are  of.  Let  no  wayward  prayer  be  ours.  In  our  peevishness  and
distrust  and  vexation  God  says,  "  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  ?  "     St  is  ever  rights


96  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  [oh,  it.  1—11.

His  way  is  perfect.     "  Consider  Jesus,  lest  ye  be  wearied  and  faint  in  your  minds."

What  is  oiir  grief  to  bis  ?

"  O  brothers,  let  us  leave  the  shame  and  sin
Of  taking  vainly,  in  a  plaintive  mood,
Tlie  holy  name  of  grief  I — holy  herein.
That,  by  the  grief  of  One,  came  all  our  good.*

As  with  bim  so  with  ns — the  way  of  the  cross  is  the  way  to  the  crown.— G,  T.  GL

Vers.  6 — 8. — Jonah  and  the  gourd.  Welcome  was  the  broad  shadow  of  the  gourd
rising  round  the  booth  and  above  it  1  The  great  glare  in  subdued  green  light  streamed
through  the  leaves  to  the  calmed  and  cooled  and  comforted  prophet.  Just  now  he
wished  to  die.  Now  be  was  willing  to  live — "  exceeding  glad  of  the  gourd."  Short-lived
was  bis  gladness.  Worm-smitten,  the  gourd  withered.  A  day  of  beauty  and  value,  and
then  the  end  of  it.  And  now,  unsheltered  by  the  plant,  exposed  to  branding  sun  and
burning  wind,  Jonah  longed  again  to  die.  Note  here :  Divine  discipline.  The  gourd,  worm,
wind,  divinely  sent,  have  each  a  ministry  for  the  prophet.  He  needs  correction  if  he  is
to  amend.  They  are  to  teach  him.   But  such  is  the  Divine  pitifulness  that  there  comes—

I.  The  lesson  of  bbfreshment.  There  was  sent  the  gourd  "  to  deliver  him  from
his  grief."  He  needed  a  shadow.  It  was  given,  and  the  plant  shielded  him  from  the
oppressive,  life-exhausting  heat.  The  gloom  of  bis  mind  had  been  increased  by  the
heat  of  the  booth ;  the  outer  had  aggravated  the  inber  weariness.  In  the  coolness  of
the  gourd  he  vras  calmed  and  soothed.  The  mind  afiects  the  body,  and  the  body  the
mind.  "Heaviest  the  heart  is  in  a  heavy  air."  Much  mental  and  even  spiritual
depression  must  be  put  to  the  account  of  physical  causes.  Jonah  sheltered  was
cheered  and  refreshed ;  gloom  became  gladness.  Did  he  rejoice  in  the  gourd  ?  How,
then,  must  God  rejoice  to  spare  his  human  creatures  I  And  did  Jonah  meanwhile,
"  glaid  of  the  gourd,"  with,  we  may  hope,  thankfulness  to  God  for  it,  think  that  after
all  God  was  favourable  to  his  bitter  longing  for  the  punishment  if  not  utter  destruc-
tion of  Nineveh  though  repentant  ?  If  so,  he  thought  wrongly.  Outward  prosperity
is  no  proof  of  the  Divine  approval.  In  doing  wrong,  in  feeling  wrong,  all  may  seem
to  go  well  with  us;  still,  it  is  none  the  less  wrong.  Are  we  in  accordance  with  Divine
truth  and  righteousness — our  will  in  harmony  with  the  Divine  ?  Then  aU  providences
are  in  reality  friendly,  and  "  even  the  night  is  light  about  us."

IT.  The  lesson  of  bbbbavement.  Did  Jonah  pity,  miss,  and  mourn  for  the  gourd  ?
Shall  not  God  have  pity  on  the  myriads  in  Nineveb  ?  That  was  the  lesson  of  his  loss
to  the  prophet.  But  how  reluctant  to  learn  itl  We  may  be  bereaved  of  our  strength,
competence,  loved  ones.  Ahl  how  Ood  is  bereaved!  "Shall  a  man  rob  God?"
What  multitudes  do — of  their  love,  loyalty,  servioel  He  appeals  to  each.  "  How  can
I  give  thee  up? "  he  says.  He  may  take  away  his  gifts.  It  is  the  more  fully  to  give
us  himself.  All  earthly  gourds  will  wither.  But  for  all  who  will,  there  is  an  abiding
shelter  from  every  storm;  a  living shAtur — Christ.  In  him,  though  the  tempests  come
of  sorrow,  bereavement,  death,  we  have  peace,  safety,  and  eternal  life. — Qt.  T.  0.

Vers.  10, 11. — An  argument  from  human  pity  to  Divine  mercy.  Jonah  is  met  on
his  own  ground.  From  hia  human  compassion  comes  the  irresistible  enforcement  of
the  argument  for  the  Divine  mercy.     Mark  the  contrasts.

I.  Pitt  on  the  goued  ;  pity  on  Nineveh.  Useful  had  been  the  gourd  to  Jonah.
It  had  made  life  tolerable ;  it  had  gladdened  him.  He  had  saddened  to  see  it  wither,
Borrowed  to  see  it  dead.  He  had  pity  on  it;  his  pity  would  have  spared  it.  Nor  was
be  wrong.  It  is  wdl  to  be  unwilling  to  see  aught  that  has  cheered  us  perish.  But  if
be  was  right  in  his  desire  to  spare  that  plant,  "should  not  I  spare  Nineveh?"  asked
God.  Should  a  plant  be  more  than  a  great  city?  Ood't  great  thought  is  upon  m«n.
How  the  Divine  pity  moved  over  repentant  Nineveh  1  How  the  blessed  Redeemer
longed  to  save  Jerusalem  I  On  his  last  visit,  with  what  other  eyes  than  those  of  hii
dbciplei  did  he  look  upon  it  1

"  They  shout  for  joy  of  heart,
But  he,  the  Ein^;,  looks  on  as  one  in  grief;
To  heart  o'erburdened  weeping  brings  relief^

The  unbidden  tear-drops  start."


oh.it.  I—IL]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  «

IL    Pmr    OH    THE     BHOBT-UTBD     OOUBD;     MTT     ON     THE     KlNKTITEg,     UUIOBTAIj

OBBATPKES.  That  ^urd  had  but  the  life  of  a  day.  Then  "  the  grace  of  the  fashion  of
it  perished."  So  frail  I  But  look  at  those  multitudes  in  Nineveh.  Few  there  had  so
brief  a  life  as  the  gourd.  And  all  of  them  were  heirs  of  immortality,  passing  to  ui
eternal  destiny.  How  the  human  transcends  all  lower  forma  of  life  t  Did  Jonah  pity
the  short-lived  plant?     Shall  not  God  pity  the  ever-living  multitude  in  the  city  ?

III.  Pitt  on  the  goubd  that  had  cost  Jonah  nothinq;  fitt  on  thx  vast
POPULATION  that  God  HAD  HASE  AND  UPHELD.  The  gourd  "Came  up  over"  Jonah;
unsought,  unhelped  by  him — came  to  him.  He  brought  it  not ;  he  kept  it  not  in  life.
He  had  done  nothing  for  it,  yet  how  he  mourned  its  decay  I  Mark  the  principle
implied  in  this  contrast  I  This — that  we  show  our  value  of  a  thing  by  the  labour  we
expend  upon  it.  This  also — that  our  sense  of  the  value  of  a  thing,  our  love  to  it,  grows
in  proportion  to  our  labour  for  it.  How  much  God  had  done  for  the  Ninevites !  They
were  all  his  creatures.  If  he  had  not  "laboured  for"  them,  he  bad  made  them.  He
was  the  Fountain  of  their  life.  They  lived  because  he  held  them  in  life.  He  could  not
lightly  let  them  perish;  he  was  their  Maker.  Jonah  had  "not  made"  the  gourd  to
"grow,"  But  God  had  made  the  Ninevites  to  grow;  bad  built  them  in  strength,  fed,
clothed,  preserved  them.  And,  as  with  ua,  the  more  we  do  for  another,  the  more  we
love  him ;  so  with  Gkxl  and  those  Ninevitei.  They  were  dear  to  him,  and  ever  dearer
because  of  what  he  had  done  for  them.

IV.  Pity  on  the  one  plant;  pitt  on  the  mant-peoplbd  city.  One  plant
called  out  Jonah's  yearning  tenderness.  But  what  was  that  to  a  man  t — a  man  made
in  God's  image,  "endued  with  sanctity  of  reason,"  dowered  with  immortality?  A
man?  Here  was  a  city  full  of  men.  00(2  knew  the  number.  But  in  this  plea  he  only
gives  the  number  of  the  children.  They  in  their  helplessness  and  innocence  were  pleas
with  him  for  the  preservation  of  the  city.  Beautiful,  efi'ectual  priesthood  of  children  I
They  are  unconscious  yet  mighty  intercessors  for  us.  One  hundred  and  twenty
thousand  of  them  are  in  Nineveh,  That  is  a  reason  why  God  should  spare  it.  Better
that  they  should  lire  than  die.  Heaven,  to  one  who  has  known  God's  grace  and
accepted  it,  temptation  and  overcome  it,  who  has  "  served  his  generation,"  will  be  a
nobler  world  than  to  an  infant  caught  in  his  unconsciousness  to  its  unexpected  bliss.
"  And  much  cattle."  Not  an  animal  in  Nineveh  but  is  worth  more  than  the  gourd.
Man's  Maker  is  it$  Maker.  And  he  who  made  man  made  it  for  man.  The  very  cattle
•re  a  plea  for  the  preservation  of  the  city.

Conclusive,  unanswerable  appeal  I  Jonah,  lo  ready  with  his  replies,  is  now  speech-
less. He  saw  that  God's  way  was  right.  Let  our  pity  to  things  and  persons  remind
us  of  God's  mercy.  A  mercy  almighty  and  "to  everlasting."  A  mercy  revealed  in
Christ.  A  mercy  to  be  accepted.  If  not,  if  rejected,  if  trifled  with  till  life  is  trifled
away — where,  where  can  we  look?    There  is  one  Saviour,  and  no  other  l-^G.  T.  0.

Ver.  11. — 2%e  imconseious  priesthood  of  children.  The  Ninevite  little  ones  effectually,
though  unwittingly,  interceded  with  God  for  the  preservation  of  Nineveh.  And  are
not  little  children  still  unconscious  intercessors  with  God?  1.  By  their  iunocence.
2%ey  have  not  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression.  2,  By  their
dependence.  Their  dependence  on  God  makes  them  the  dearer  to  God ;  their  depend-
ence on  their  parents  makes  their  parents  the  dearer  to  him,  3.  By  their  undeveloped
moral  possibilities.  What  a  work  in  the  earth  they  may  do  for  God  I  "  I  heard  the
voice  of  the  Lord,  saying.  Whom  shall  I  send,  and  who  will  go  for  us  ?  Then  said  " —
Ninevite  babe  and  suck^ig— "spare  me,  teach  me,"  and  then  in  the  future  "  send  me."
— G.  T.  0.

Ver.  11. — God's  consideration  for  animals.  The  "  much  cattle  "  in  Nineveh  a  ple«
with  QkA  for  the  preservation  of  the  city.  And  still,  be  animals  where  they  may :  1.
God  has  made  them.     2,  He  preserves  them.     "  His  full  hand  supplies  their  need."

3.  He  dowers  them  with  beauty,  or  swiftness,  or  strength,  with  sensibility  and  sagacity.

4.  He  makes  them  of  varied  serviceableness  to  man,  and  has  given  man  authority  over
them,  "  Thou  madest  him  to  have  dominion  over  all  sheep  and  oxen ;  yea,  and  the
beasts  of  the  field."  6.  "He  regardeth  the  life  of  the  beast;"  complacently,  in  their
"lower  pleasure* J "  pitifully,  in  their  "lower  pains;"  constantly  and  minutely,  "not

JONAH.  H


96  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [es.  it.  1—11.

one  falleth  on  the  ground"  without  him.  6.  He  would  have  them  praseiTed  from
cruelty  and  needless  destruction  (Exod.  ix.  19),  7.  It  in  God-like  to  cars  for  the  lower
animals.

"  He  prayeth  well  who  loTeth  well

Both  man,  and  bird,  and  beaat.
He  prayeth  best  who  loTeth  beat

All  things  both  great  and  small  |
For  the  dear  God,  who  loreth  oa,

He  made  and  loveth  all."

o.T.a

Vera.  6—8. — The  gourd,  the  worm,  and  the  east  wind.  Jonah  was  not  faultless  after
his  prayer  and  penitence.  He  undertook  his  work,  and  boldly  proclaimed  his  message
in  Nineveh.  His  success  was  beyond  expectation.  The  whole  city  was  moved,  and
all  the  inhabitants  fasted,  repented,  and  prayed.  And  in  the  mercy  which  is  ever  his
delight,  God  averted  the  threatened  disaster.  "  Bnt  it  displeased  Jonah  exceedingly,
and  he  was  very  angry."  He  was  Indignant  that  his  message  should  appear  to  be
imfalfilled,  and  angry  when  he  found  that  he  had  been  the  means  of  saving  from
destruction  the  most  dangerous  foes  of  his  own  country.  Any  one  who  reads  the  history
of  Europe  at  the  beginning  of  this  century  will  understand  this  feeling.  It  was  with
an  awful  sense  of  dread  that  our  grandfathers  heard  that  Napoleon  had  swept  into
Bussia  at  the  head  of  six  hundred  and  fifty-seven  thousand  veterans,  expecting  to
return  flushed  with  victory  to  complete  his  work  of  devastation.  When  the  news  came
that  of  all  that  great  host  only  eighty-five  thousand  men  had  escaped  from  the  horrors
of  war  and  frost  and  famine,  a  jubil»nt  shout  of  thanksgiving  went  up  to  Heaven,  led
by  the  Christian  Church  I  Sinful  though  Jonah's  feeling  was,  it  was  not  unnatural,
and  he  sat  himself  down  within  view  of  the  city,  hoping  and  praying  that  at  least
some  smaller  disaster  would  befall  it.  Our  text  shows  how  graciously  God  sought  to
bring  him  to  a  better  state  of  mind.  The  withering  of  the  gourd,  like  the  withering
of  the  fig  tree,  was  intended  to  be  an  epitome  of  human  experience.  Let  us  learn
from  it'—

I.  That  aix  oub  eabthlt  oomfobts  abb  or  God's  FBoyiDisa.  When  Jonah  set
himself  to  watch  what  would  become  of  the  city,  he  made  for  his  shelter  a  booth,
formed  of  the  interlaced  branches  of  trees,  which  imperfectly  kept  off  the  heat  of  the
sun.  And  God  prepared  a  gourd,  whose  broad  leaves  spread  over  the  booth  till  good
protection  was  given  from  the  scorching  heat,  which  even  seasoned  Arabs  dared  not
brave ;  and  Jonah  was  exceeiling  glad  of  it.  There  was  never  more  danger  than  there
is  nofv  of  the  non-recognition  of  God's  hand  in  nature  and  in  history.  The  clearness
witli  which  we  see  natural  phenomena  tends  to  make  less  credible  what  is  only
spiritually  discerned.  But  happy  is  the  man  who  finds  every  blessing  sweetened  to
him  by  the  thought,  "  God  gave  me  this."  The  great  purpose  of  all  his  dealings  with
us  is  to  bring  us  to  thought  about  himself.  Sometimes  he  turns  us  back  to  duty,  as
Jonah  was  turned,  by  a  storm ;  and  sometimes  he  brings  us  back  to  a  right  mind,  as
Jonah  was  brought,  by  a  blessing— strangely  coming,  and  then  as  strangely  going.

II.  That  our  earthly  blessinqs  abb  of  shobt  ddbation.  Their  brevity  is  as
much  God's  appointment  as  their  existence.  Notice  the  emphatic  declarations  in  our
text :  "  The  Lord  prepared  a  gourd ; "  "  The  Lord  prepared  a  worm  j "  "  The  Lord
prepared  a  vehement  east  wind."  In  other  words,  the  blessing  and  the  cause  of  its
removal  both  emanated  from  bim.  1.  3%e  gowd  withered  when  Jonah  reckoned  most
confidently  on  enjoying  it.  It  is  so  with  our  blessings  too.  Examples :  The  wealth
amasseil  with  such  difficnlty  seems  secure  at  last,  but  unexpectedly  it  vanishes.  The
child  nursed  through  all  the  perils  of  a  weakly  childhood  dies  in  the  fulness  of  man-
hood's strength,  etc.  2.  The  gourd  withered  from  a  small  and  secret  cause.  A  worm
at  the  root  killed  it.  Little  things,  preventible  things,  as  we  think  them,  often  cause
our  losses.  We  may  be  ruined  by  some  one  we  never  saw,  and  of  whom  we  never
heard.  A  nnble  reputation  may  be  blasted  by  a  silly  slander.  Yet  there  is  no  awful
fate  blindly  -triking  hither  and  thither*  there  is  no  hostile  power  supreme  over  human
events.  Of  every  loss  we  may  say,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away ;
blessed  be  the  Name  of  the  Lord."


OH.  IT.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  M


HL  That  tboublis  seldom  come  alone.  It  was  bad  enough  to  lose  the  shelter
of  the  gourd,  but  it  was  worse  to  find  a  vehement  east  wind  springing  up  just  after  it
withered— not  one  like  ours,  cutting  in  its  keenness,  but  one  singularly  depressing  and
relaxing  in  its  effects.  It  came  over  the  burning  desert  sands;  it  drank  up  fire  by  the
way ;  it  dried  the  skin,  and  filled  the  pores  with  dust,  and  beat  upon  the  wayfarer  like
the  blast  of  a  furnace.  Jonah  found  it  the  more  unbearable  because  his  shelter  was
gone.  Sorrow  comes  on  sorrow— financial  anxiety,  domestic  bereavement,  impaired
health,  unexpected  loss,  following  each  other  till  our  souls  are  orerwhelmed.  But  (jod
is  patient  with  us,  in  spite  of  our  angry  thoughts ;  he  pities  our  passionate  weeping,
and  waits  till  we  can  say  with  him  who  in  his  agony  prayed  yet  more  earnestly,  "  Thy
will,  not  mine,  be  done."

Conclusion.  While  Jonah  was  pitying  the  gourd  whose  beautiful  leaves  were
withered,  and  was  grieving  over  the  loss  of  its  shade,  God  pointed  him  from  it  to
Nineveh,  and  said,  "  If  you  sorrow  over  this,  how  much  more  do  I  sorrow  over  that  ?
You  have  not  laboured  for  this  gourd,  but  I  have  laboured  for  that  city.  The  gourd
could  never  be  worth  much,  but  what  might  not  Nineveh  be  if  only  its  people  were
redeemed  from  sin  ?  "  Thus  would  he  point  us  from  the  contemplation  of  life's  sadnesi
to  the  contemplation  of  its  sin.  He  would  remind  us  that  as  we  Would  sacrifice  any-
thing to  save  the  life  of  one  we  love,  so  he  has  given  his  only  Son  to  save  us  from  lin
and  death  etemaL — ^A.  B.

Vera.  6 — 8. — Ernblem*  of  man's  earthly  good,  and  God's  disciplinary  procedure,
"  And  the  Lord  God  prepared  a  gourd,  and  made  it  to  come  up  over  Jonah,  that  it
might  be  a  shadow  over  his  head,  to  deliver  him  from  his  grief.  So  Jonah  was  exceed-
ing glad  of  the  gourd,"  etc.  I  shall  use  these  verses  as  presenting  an  emblem  of
man's  earthly  good,  and  an  emblem  of  God's  disciplinary  procedure.

I.  As  AN  EMBLEM  OF  MAN'S  KABTHLY  GOOD.  I  take  the  "gourd"  to  represent  this.
What  this  plant  was,  whether  it  was,  as  some  suppose,  a  kind  of  encumber,  which
sprang  swiftly  from  the  soil,  and  covered  the  booth  which  Jonah  had  reared  and
under  which  he  sat,  or  a  kind  of  ivy  that  crept  up  and  overshadowed  his  dwelling,  or
some  plant  of  more  rapid  growth  and  more  luxuriant  foliage,  it  matters  not.  We  are
told  the  Lord  "  prepared  "  it.  It  was  some  indigenous  plant,  characterized  by  a  speedy
growth  and  abundant  leafage,  and  whose  growth,  perhaps,  was  stimulated  by  a  Divine
infusion  of  an  unusual  amotmt  of  vegetative  force.  It  was  a  great  blessing  at  the  time
to  Jonah.  It  screened  him  from  the  rays  of  the  Oriental  svm,  and  refreshed  his  sight
with  its  verdure.  And  it  is  said  that  "Jonah  was  exceeding  glad  of  the  gourd."
He  felt  that  it  was  good.  Now,  this  gourd  was  like  man's  earthly  good  in  three
aspects — ^in  its  development,  its  decay,  and  destruction.  1.  In  its  development.  (1)  It
came  out  of  the  earth.  The  gourd  was  not  a  plant  sent  down  directly  from  heaven.
It  grew  out  of  the  soil.  So  with  all  our  worldly  good.  From  the  earth  come  all  our
granaries,  our  wardrobes,  our  houses,  and  all  that  blesses  our  material  existence.  It  is
all  out  of  the  earth.  (2)  It  came  out  of  the  earth  by  Divine  agency.  It  was  not  the
less  a  Divine  gift  because  it  seemed  to  grow  in  a  natural  way.  God  produced  it.  He
"prepared"  it.  All  the  earthly  good  we  possess,  even  that  for  which  we  have  laboured
with  the  greatest  skill  and  persistent  industry,  is  the  gift  of  God.  He  it  is  that  gives
us  our  daily  bread,  and  that  furnishes  us  with  food  and  raiment.  2.  In  its  decay.
"  But  God  prepared  a  worm  when  the  morning  rose  the  next  day,  and  it  smote  the
gourd  that  it  withered."  Not  long,  perhaps  only  a  few  hours,  had  the  gourd  spread  its
shady  and  refreshing  influence  over  Jonah's  dwelling-place  before  the  worm  began  to
gnaw  at  its  vitals  and  soon  smote  it.  Mark  the  decaying  agent,  a  "  worm."  (1)  How
mean!  It  was  not  some  huge  quadruped  of  the  wild,  or  some  royal  bird  from  the
craggy  cliffs  or  towering  forests,  but  a  worm.  The  work  of  destruction  is  very  easy.
We  are  crushed  "before  the  moth."  (2)  How  prompt!  Decay  commenced  at  once.
"  When  the  morning  rose  the  next  day  "  it  had  done  its  work.  The  worm  of  decay
begins  its  work  with  the  commencement  of  our  earthly  good.  It  gnaws  at  the  founda-
tion of  mansions  as  soon  as  they  are  built,  at  friendships  as  soon  as  they  are  formed,  at
life  as  soon  as  it  begins.  "  As  soon  as  we  begin  to  live  we  all  begin  to  die."  This
worm  of  decay  is  working  everywhere.  (3)  How  secret!  It  works  unseen,  under-
ground.    It  gnaws  at  the  vital  roots.    It  is  an  unseen  agent.     Who  sees  the  worm


100  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  it.  1—1 L

that  strips  the  trees  in  autumn,  that  steals  strength  from  the  strongest  animal,  and
gnaws  away  the  life  of  the  youngest  ?  Verily  man  and  all  his  earthly  good  is  being
"  destroyed  from  morning  to  eyening."  3.  In  its  destruction.  "  God  prepared  a  vehe-
ment east  wind;  and  the  sun  beat  upon  the  bead  of  Junab, that  he  fainted, and  wished
in  himself  to  die."  "This  wind,"  says  an  old  expositor,  "  was  not  as  a  fan  to  abate
the  heat,  but  as  a  bellows  to  make  it  more  intense."  It  may  be  that  this  vehement
east  wind  was  that  terrible  simoom  which  was  common  in  that  land,  and  which  smote
the  four  corners  of  the  house  in  which  Job's  children  were.  How  desolate  is  the  pro-
phet now  I  The  burning  beams  of  the  sun  are  beating  on  his  head.  His  booth  is
destroyed,  his  gourd  is  withered  to  the  roots,  and  the  east  wind  like  a  breath  of  fire  ia
diying  up  the  current  of  life.  His  existence  became  intolerable.  He  wished  in  him-
self to  die.  Here,  theo,  is  a  picture  of  our  earthly  good.  However  abundant  in  its
nature  and  delicious  in  its  enjoyment,  like  this  gourd  it  must  go  from  us.  The  worm
will  gnaw  out  its  existence  and  the  east  wind  will  utterly  destroy  it,  and  when  it  ia
gone  and  we  are  stripped  of  everything  but  sheer  existence,  unless  Christ  is  formed  in
us  the  Hope  of  glory,  our  life  will  be  intolerable,  and  we  shall  seek  for  death  as  our
only  relief.

n.  As  AN  EMBLKH  OF  God'b  diboiflinabt  pbooedube.  The  Eternal,  in  order  to
get  Jonah  into  a  right  state  of  mind,  employs  a  variety  of  agency.  It  is  suggested :  1.
That  Ood  disciplines  man  by  /acts.  Precepts  and  theories  are  powerless  in  the  human
soul  compared  with  actual  facts.  "  I  have  heard  of  thee,"  says  Job,  "  by  the  hearing
of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  tbee."  Nature  is  a  system  of  facts.  Human  life  is
an  experience  of  facts,  the  Bible  is  a  record  of  facts,  and  by  facts  God  disciplines  the
huinan  soul.  The  gourd  was  a  fact,  the  worm  was  a  fact,  the  east  wind  was  a  fact,
and  these  facts  went  down  to  the  centre  of  Jonah's  soul.  2.  That  these/acts  are  varied
in  their  character.  Here  was  the  pleasant  and  the  painful.  The  gourd,  how  pleasant  I
the  simoom  and  burning  sun,  how  painfiil  t  So  now  God  employs  the  pleasurable  and
the  painful  to  discipline  our  souls  to  virtue.  He  employs  the  smaU  aud  the  gretU,
Here  was  the  insignificant  worm  and  vehement  wind.  "  Lo,  all  these  things  worketh
God  oftentimes  with  man,  to  bring  back  his  soul  from  the  pit,  to  be  enlightened  with
the  light  of  the  living  "  f  Job  xxxiii.  29,  30).  3.  That  these  facts  are  adapted  to  their
end.  Jonah  did  not  wish  that  mercy  should  be  shown  to  the  Ninevites.  He  desired
their  destruction.  This  was  his  state  of  mind,  and  a  bad  state  of  mind  it  was,  and
God  dealt  with  it  by  giving  him  a  lesson  in  personal  suffering.  He  taught  him  what
suffering  was.

Conclusion.  1.  Let  us  not  trust  in  earthly  good.  It  is  but  a  mere  gourd.  It  mnst
wither  and  rot.  "All  flesh  is  grass."  Trust  in  righteousness.  "Trust  in  him  that
liveth  for  ever."  2,  Let  us  improve  under  the  disciplinary  influences  of  Heaven.  Life
is  a  moral  school,  a  school  in  which  the  great  Father  seeks  to  make  his  children  meet
for  tlie  "  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light." — ^D.  T.

Yen.  9 — 11. — Ood  reasoning  with  man.  "And  God  said  to  Jonah,  Doest  thou  well
to  be  angry  for  the  gourd  ?  "  etc.  The  whole  Book  of  Jonah  develops  at  least  the
following  truths :  1.  That  the  regard  (^  Heaven,  even  under  the  old  dispensation,  was  not
confined  to  the  Jews.  Jonah  was  sent  to  Nineveh,  a  city  far  away  from  Judaea,  whose
population  had  neither  kinship  nor  sympathy  with  the  Jewish  people.  It  is  represented
as  a  bloody  city,  full  of  lies  and  robbery,  its  ferocious  violence  to  captives  is  portrayed
in  its  own  mnnuments.  The  opinion  that  once  prevailed  very  extensively  in  the
Christian  world,  and  which  still  prevails  to  a  certain  extent,  that  the  Eternal  Father
confined  his  interest  and  communications  entirely  to  the  descendants  of  Abraham,  ia
without  foundation ;  Nineveh,  Egypt,  and  Babylon  were  as  dear  to  him  as  Jerusalem.
He  revealed  himself  to  Pharaoh  as  well  as  to  Moses,  and  to  Nebuchadnezzar  as  well  as
to  Daniel.  2.  That  wickedness,  if  persisted  in,  must  end  in  ruin.  "  Arise,"  says
Jehovah  to  Jonah, "  go ...  to  Nineveh,  and  cry  against  it ;  for  their  wickedness  is  oome
up  before  me."  And  because  of  its  wickedness  it  was  on  the  verge  of  destruction.  So
it  ever  is,  sin  leads  to  ruin.  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  3.  T%at  true  repentance
will  rescue  a  people  from  their  threatened  doom.  Though  the  ruin  of  Nineveh  semned
•11  but  sattl^  to  take  place  in  about  forty  days,  yet  because  it  repented  the  terrible
doom  was  averted.    "  When  Gtod  saw  their  works,  that  they  had  repented  of  th«ir  evil


OH.  !▼.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OP  JONAH.  101

ways,  he  repented  of  the  evil  he  (aid  he  would  do  unto  them;  and  he  did  it  not"  (oh.
iii.  10).  It  is  ever  so.  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  hia
thoughts:  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  hare  mercy  upon  him ;  and  to
our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon."  Amongst  the  many  remar^ble  and  sugges-
tive passages  in  this  book,  not  the  least  striking  and  significant  is  that  which  I  have
now  selected  for  meditation.  I  shall  employ  it  to  illustrate  the  amazing  interest  Qod
takes  in  mankind.    This  is  seen —

L  In  Hia  seabonino  with  jl  man  who  is  in  a  bad  temfeb.  That  the  "High
and  Holy  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity "  should  notice  individual  man  at  all  is  a  con-
descension transcending  our  conceptions,  but  that  he  should  now  enter  into  an  argu-
ment with  one  who  is  under  the  influence  of  a  bad  temper  is  still  more  marvellous.
Jonah  was  "angry,"  and  the  intensity  of  his  anger  became  so  intolerable  that  he
wished  to  die.  "  Therefore  now,  0  Lord,  take  my  life,  I  beseech  thee;  for  it  is  better
to  die  than  to  live."  Why  was  he  angry  ?  1.  Because  of  the  Divine  compassion  shown
to  the  Ninevites.  Jonah  had  proclaimed  their  destruction  in  forty  days,  and  fully  per-
haps did  he  expect  that  the  truthfulness  of  his  word  would  be  attested  by  the  fact.
But  the  forty  days  passed  away,  and  no  thunderbolt  of  destruction  came ;  it  was  pre-
served, and  preserved  by  Groi  because  it  repented.  It  seems  that  he  would  sooner
have  seen  Nlueveh  in  ruins  than  have  had  his  word  falsified  before  the  people.  Hia
vanity  was  wounded.  He  thought  more  of  his  own  reputation  than  of  the  lives  of  •
teeming  population.  "Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry?"  The  question  implies  •
negative.  "  No ;  thou  doest  ill ;  thine  anger  is  a  sinful  anger."  There  is  a  righteoui
anger;  hence  we  are  commanded  to  "be  angry  and  sin  not."  Indignation  against
falsehood  and  meanness  and  selfishness  and  impiety  is  a  holy  passion — a  passion  that
must  often  flame  out  in  all  pure  hearts  in  passing  through  a  world  of  corruption  like
this.  This,  however,  was  not  the  aiiger  of  Jonah ;  his  anger  implied  vanity,  heartless-
ness,  and  irreverence.  2.  Because  of  the  loss  of  a  temporal  Messing.  The  gourd  that
grew  up  in  a  night  and  mantled  his  tent  with  its  luxurious  leafage,  thus  sheltering  him
from  the  rays  of  the  burning  sun,  was  felt  by  him  one  of  his  greatest  temporal
blessings,  "  He  was  exceeding  glad  of  the  gourd."  That  was  now  taken  from  him,
the  worm  gnawed  it  to  death,  and  as  the  hot  simoom  rushed  at  him,  and  the  rays  of
the  burning  sun  beat  upon  his  head,  he  deeply  felt  its  loss,  and  he  was  angry ;  he  was
angry  with  Gcd  for  depriving  him  of  this  blessing.  He  was  thtis  angry  with  the
Almighty  for  showing  compassion  to  the  Ninevites,  and  also  for  depriving  him  of  this
temporal  blessing.  His  anger  seems  to  have  been  not  a  passing  emotion,  not  a  moment-
ary flame,  but  a  fire  that  rendered  his  life  unbearable.  "  Let  me  die,"  he  says.  The
passions  of  the  soul  have  often  extinguished  the  natural  love  of  life  and  snapped  the
mystic  cord  that  unites  the  body  to  the  soul.  Now,  is  it  not  wonderful  that  the  great
God  should  condescend  to  reason  with  a  man  in  such  a  state  of  mind  ?  Man  is  wont
either  to  shun  the  individual  who  is  indignant  with  him,  or  to  hurl  anathemas  at  his
head.  Not  so  the  Infinite  Father.  Calmly  and  lovingly  he  reasons  with  his  indignant
enemy.  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord :  though  your  sins  be
as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow."

n.   :^  ms  BBABONINQ  WITH  A  HAN  WHO  IS  IN  A  BAD  TEMPEB  IN  OBDEB  TO  IMFBE8S

HIM  WITH  THE  BEALiTT  OF  HIS  COMPASSION.  "  Then  Said  the  Lord,  Thou  hast  had
pity  on  the  gourd,  for  the  which  thou  hast  not  laboured,  neither  madest  it  grow;
which  came  up  in  a  night,  and  perished  in  a  night :  and  should  not  I  spare  Nineveh,
that  great  city,  wherein  are  more  than  six  score  thousand  persons  that  cannot  discern
between  their  right  hand  and  their  left  hand ;  and  also  much  cattle  ?  "  The  Almighty
hereergues  from  Jonah's  pity  for  the  gourd — ^the  plant — to  his  compassion  for  Nineveh.
The  argument  is  from  the  less  to  the  greater.  It  you,  Jonah,  feel  pity  for  that  mere
vegetable  production  which  you  had  for  a  few  hours  only,  and  which  you  yourself  did
not  produce,  conceive  of  my  compassion  for  the  inhabitants  of  Nineveh,  The  com-
parison here  implied  between  the  plant  and  Nineveh  may  be  expressed  in  three  ques*
tions,  1,  Wliot  it  this  one  plant  to  the  men  that  inhabit  Nineveh  t  What  is  the
grandest  production  in  the  vegetable  world,  the  most  stately  and  symmetrical  tree
towering  as  the  king  of  the  forest,  to  one  human  being  ?  The  tree  is  the  production  of
the  earth,  cannot  think  of  its  Creator,  cannot  itself  alter  its  own  portion,  is  the  mere
creature  of  external  influences,  and  must  exhaust  itself  by  its  own  growth ;  but  man  is


lOa  THE  BOOK  OF  JONAH.  [oh.  it.  1—11

the  offspring  of  the  Infinite,  capable  of  tracing  his  existence  to  its  Source,  having  the
power  to  move  as  he  pleases,  and  endowed  with  powers  inexhaustible^  and  erer-
Increasing  development  1  But  if  a  plant  is  nothing  to  one  man,  what  is  it  to  the
thousandis  of  men  that  are  found  in  Nineveh  ?  Yon,  Jonah,  would  have  spared  the
one  plant :  shall  not  I  spare  the  million  of  men  ?  2.  What  is  this  one  plant  even  to  the
unconscious  in/ants  in  Nineveh  f  "  Wherein  are  more  than  six  score  thousand  persons
that  cannot  discern  between  their  right  hand  and  their  left  hand."  What  is  one  plant  to
a  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  unconscious  infants  ?  Oat  of  those  infants  wUl  grow
sagos,  poets,  saints,  kings  and  priests  unto  God.  What  men,  in  visiting  cities,  concern
themselves  with  the  babes  that  breathe  therein  ?  And  yet  the  purest,  divinest,  most
influential  portion  of  the  population  are  the  babes.  The  great  Father  regards  the
infant  popt^ation.  His  blessed  Son,  when  here,  took  babes  in  his  arms,  and  said,  "  Of
such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Even  one  babe  is  of  more  worth  in  the  universe
than  the  whole  vegetable  kingdom.  3.  WJiat  is  one  plant  to  even  the  irrational
creatures  in  Nineveh  t  "Also  much  cattle."  Though  the  cattle  are  below  cliUdren
in  the  scale  of  being,  they  are  greater  than  plants.  They  are  endowed  with  sensibili-
ties ;  they  have  locomotive  powers ;  and  for  their  use  the  vegetable  kingdom  exists.
God  has  an  interest  in  the  brute  creation.  "  He  openeth  his  liberal  hand,  and  supplies
the  need  of  every  living  thing,"  He  feeds  the  cattle  on  the  hills,  makes  provision  for
the  finny  tribes  of  ocean,  feeds  the  fowls  of  heaven,  and  prepares  nourishment  even  for
the  world  of  microscopic  existences.  If  God  thus  regards  those  creatures,  with  what
kindness  should  we  treat  them,  taking  care  that  they  suffer  not,  either  from  want  of
food  or  the  cruelty  of  man  1  Such  is  a  brief  and  imperfect  sketch  of  the  argument
here  employed  to  impress  Jonah  with  God's  compassion  for  Nineveh.  To  use  the
language  of  another,  "  It  is  very  beautiful ;  if  you  linger  over  it,  planting  your  feet  in
the  steps  of  it,  touching  the  several  links  of  it  as.you  pass  along,  you  will  say  it  is
beautiful.  The  skilfulness  with  which  it  is  introduced,  the  forbearance  with  which  it
is  conducted,  the  condescending  regard  to  the  prophet's  infirmities,  the  recognition  of
human  excellence,  the  delicate  allusions,  the  precious  truths  hidden  in  them,  the
accumulation  of  force  as  the  argument  goes  on,  the  comprehensive  linking  of  the
different  worlds  of  life  to  each  other — ^plants,  animals,  infants,  men — the  easy  toansition
from  one  to  another,  the  abruptness  of  the  close,  too,  indicating;  in  its  own  way  the
eompleteness  of  the  triumph, — ^  these  proclaim  the  argument  Divine."

CoNOLiTSioN.  What  subject  is  more  suited  to  cheer  and  sustain  our  hearts  amid  the
somewhat  saddening  associations  connected,  for  instance,  with  the  closing  of  the  year,
than  the  truth  that  the  great  God  is  lovingly  interested  in  mankind  ?  Every  year  as
it  passes  bears  away  objects  once  most  dear,  the  companions  of  our  youth,  and  the  dear
friends  of  our  riper  years.  And  how  dark,  dreary,  and  depressed  we  might  feel  without
the  assurance  that  amidst  all  these  changes  and  bereavements  the  great  Father  lives  on,
and  feels  the  deepest  and  most  vital  interest  in  our  weal  1  Though  years,  as  they  roll
on,  take  away  from  us,  and  from  our  world,  those  whom  we  have  known  and  loved,
the  great  Father  continues  here.  He  has  not  withdrawn  from  the  world  and  left  it  in
an  orphan  state,  dreary  and  desolate.  He  is  here — here  with  every  human  being,  here
reasoning  with  the  thoughtless,  enlightening  the  ignorant,  consoling  the  sad,  strengthen*
ing  the  weak,  guiding  the  perplexed,  restoring  the  lost.

"  God  liveth  ever  t
Wherefore,  soul,  despair  thou  never  I
What  though  thou  tread  with  bleeding  feet

A  thorny  path  of  grief  and  gloom,
Thy  God  will  choose  the  way  most  meet
To  lead  thee  heavenward,  to  lead  tbeo  home  |
For  this  life's  long  night  of  endnees
He  will  give  thee  peace  and  gladnoia.
Soul,  forget  not  m  thy  pains,
God  o'ei  all  for  ever  reigna,"

a'R


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


w


THE    BOOK    OF   JONAH.


CHAPTEB  L

THEHB  riOB

A  City's  Sin         ...            ...  ...  6

Fleeing  from  the  Lord        ...  ...  7

Nature  and  God   ...           ...  ...  7

Danger  and  Devotion          ...  ...  8

A  Good  Confession             ...  m.  9

Self-Sacrifice        ...            ...  ...  9

Effort  and  Prayer...            ...  ...  10

Pear,  Sacrifice,  and  Vows  ...  -...  10

A  Despicable  Deserter        ...  ...  10

An  Effective  Hue  and  Cry...  ...  13

A  Voluntary  Surrender      ...  ...  15

Storm-stilling  Extraordinary  ...  18

"  The  Sign  of  the  Prophet  Jonas"  ...  21

Jonah's  Call  and  Flight 24,37

The  Fugitive  arrested        ...  ...  25

The  Fugitive  convicted      ...  m.  27

The  Offender  sacrificed      ...  ...  29

Characteristics  of  Jonah     ...  ...  31

Jonah  God's  Messenger      ...  ...  32

Jonah  the  Fugitive             ...  ...  32

Jonah  reproved     ...            ...  ».  33

Jonah  detected     ...            .m  ...  31

The  Sailors'  Conduct          ...  ...  35

Jonah's  "DeProfundis" 35

Jonah  a  Prophetic  Sign  of  Christ  ...  36

The  Prophet's  Disobedience  ...  88

The  Divine  Interposition    ...  ...  39

God  speaking  to  Man  in  Meroy,  and
Man  fleeing  from  God  in  Disobedi-
ence   ...            ...            ...  ...  40

A  Bousing  Voice  to  Moral  Sleepers ...  41

CHAPTEB  n.

"Out  of  the  Depths"         .„  «.  45

Affliction  and  Prayer          .»  ...  46


Looking  toward  the  Temple             m.  46

Reme.ubering  the  Lord      ...            ...  47

The  Vanity  of  Idolatry      ...            ...  47

Piety  Triumphant               ...            „.  47

A  Unique  Oratory               ...            ...  48

Deliverance  waiting  on  the  Assured

Hope  of  it         ...            ...            ...  61

"  De  Profundis : "  Distress  and  Prayer  54

Triumph,  Thanksgiving     ...            ...  55

The  Value  of  Affliction  (as  seen  in

Jonah's  Prayer)               ...            ...  57

"Lying  Vanities"               57

Thankfulness        ...            ,.,            ,..  57

The  Prophet's  Prayer         ...            .„  67

CHAPTEB  in.

City  Preaching 61

National  Repentance          ...            ...  61

A  King's  Contrition           ...            ...  62

Ceremonial  and  Moral  Bepentance  ...  62

Hoping  for  Mercy               ...            ...  63

Man's  Bepentance  and  God's           ...  63
Peremptory  Beiteration  and  Prompt

Obedience          ...            ...            ...  64

A  Heatlien  City  in  Sackcloth           ...  67

Jonah's  Second  Call            ...            .^  70

The  Bepentance  of  Nineveh              ...  72
God  repenting      ...            ...                74, 77

Jonah  in  Nineveh              ...           „,  76

The  Preaching  that  God  bids          ...  76

Jonah's  Successful  Ministry  in  Nineveh  76

Missions  to  the  Heathen    ...           „.  77

CHAPTEB  IV.

Bepinlng  at  God's  Mercy   ...           «..  82

The  Long-suffering  of  God              .m  88


INDEX.


mm  MSI

Anger  lebuked    ...           ...          ...  82

The  Withering  of  Earthly  Consolation  83

Dedretodie        ...           ...           ...  84

The  Breadth  of  the  Divine  Pity  ...  81
A  Misanthrope'i  Case  agointt  Divine

BeneTolenee     ...           ...           ...  85

Divine   Mercy  formnlating  its   own

Apologetic       ...           ...           ...  88

Jonah's  Displeasnre           ...           ...  91

God's  Bemonstrance  with  Jonah      ...  93

Jonah's  Grief       m.           ...           m.  95


TflKMI  MflS

Jonah  and  the  Gonrd         ...           ...  M

An  Argument  from  Hnman  Pity  to

Divine  Merey  ...           ...           ...  OS

The  TJnconsoions  Priesthood  of  Chil-
dren  ...           ...          ....           ...  97

God's  Consideration  for  Animals      ...  97

The  Gonrd,  the  Worm,  and  the  East

Wind  ...           ...           ...           ...  98

Emblems  of  Man's  Earthly  Good,  and

God's  Disoiplinary  Prooednra       ...  99

Ood  reasoning  Trith  Man    ...           m<  100


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED   BY  THE

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER;
AND    BY   THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

MIC  AH.

(Ejeposition :
By  REV.  W.  J.   DEANE,  M.A.,

RECTOR  OF  ASHEN  ;

j^omiletics :
By  EEV.   S.   D.  HILLMAN,  B.A.

j^omilies  bg  l)arious  "i^Mtljors :

REV.  E.  S.  PROUT,  M.A.  REV.  A.  ROWLAND,  B.A.,  LLi,

REV.  D.  THOMAS,  D.D.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  Yoke  and  Toronto.


THE   BOOK   OF   MIOAH.


INTRODUCTION.


§  I.    SVBJEOT  or  TUB   BoOK.

Thi  Book  of  Micah,  in  oar  present  Hebrew  copies  and  in  the  Latin  Ynlgate
stands  sixth  among  the  minor  prophets;  in  the  Septaagint  it  is  placet
third.  Collected  apparently  into  one  volume  in  the  last  year  of  thi
prophet's  life,  it  contains  a  nnmber  of  prophecies  nttered,  perhaps,  a
different  times,  but  yet  connected  together  by  logical  sequence,  and  dis
playing  a  certain  symmetrical  arrangement.  Gaspari  suggests  that  he  thni
gathered  the  notes  of  his  various  discourses,  and  read  them  in  the  ears  o:
the  people,  in  order  to  assist  Hezekiah's  great  reformation.  Threatenint
and  promise  alternate  in  these  addresses,  upbraiding  and  pleading,  judgment
and  mercy.  There  is  very  much  that  is  common  with  Isaiah,  and  the  actna
words  in  both  are  often  identical.  Being  contemporaries,  and  confrontec
with  the  same  circumstances,  the  two  prophets  naturally  use  correspondinc
expressions  in  dealing  with  similar  subjects.  In  his  account  of  the  mora
corruption  that  prevails,  Micah  agrees  thoroughly  with  Isaiah,  though  h<
differs  from  him  in  not  touching  on  politics,  and  in  taking  a  more  hopelesi
view  of  the  reformation  of  Israel ;  in  his  Messianic  anticipations  he  is  as  cleai
and  precise  as  the  evangelical  prophet  himself.  Both  he  and  Isaiah  look  t<
the  great  world-empire  as  fatal  to  Israel,  though  Micah  calls  it  in  one  placf
(ch  T.  5,  etc.)  by  the  current  name  of  Assyria,  and  in  other  passages,  Babylon
The  state  of  Judah  before  Hezekiah's  reformation  was  most  unsati8<
factory.  Apart  from  the  idolatry  which  was  at  the  bottom  of  all  the  evil
that  prevailed,  we  gather  from  the  prophet's  denunciations  that  the  chiefs
of  the  nation  were  proud,  luxurious,  unscrupulous,  and  cruel ;  the  peasants
were  ground  down  by  exactions  and  deprived  of  their  legal  rights.  And
the  improvement  in  religion  which  Hezekiah  effected  had  not  extended
very  deep,  nor  produced  that  real  impression  which  we  are  wont  to  assume
"  ^gh  places  "  still  remained ;  practical  unbelief  widely  existed ;  coincident
with  the  worship  of  Jehovah  a  virtual  idolatry  was  practised.  Looking
inoAH.  k


INTRODUOTION  TO


sadly  on  all  this  evil,  Micah  knew  to  what  result  it  tended,  and  his  warn-
ings were  embittered  by  the  conBciousness  that  the  punishment  which  he
foretold  was  righteously  deserved,  and  would  not  now  be  averted  by  timely
repentance.

The  book  is  arranged,  for  rhetorical  purposes,  into  three  prophetical
addresses,  consisting  of  words  uttered  originally  at  various  times,  as  the
Spirit  within  moved  the  prophet  to  speak.  The  three  portions  have  a
generally  distinctive  character  and  a  certain  inward  connection.  The  first
is  chiefly  of  a  threatening  nature ;  in  the  second,  Messianic  hopes  pre-
dominate; the  third  is  hortatory,  urging  to  repentance  under  God's
chastening  hand,  in  remembrance  of  past  mercies  and  promised  salvation.

Micah  begins  with  a  grand  description  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to
judge  Israel  and  Jndah  for  their  sins  and  idolatry,  when  Samaria,  as  first
in  wickedness,  shall  be  first  to  fall  before  the  avenging  enemy ;  and  then
a  similar  fate  shall  happen  to  Jerusalem  and  Judaaa  (whose  towns  are  not
mentioned  in  strictly  geographical  order),  with  the  deportation  of  their
inhabitants.  The  sins  of  the  grandees  have  brought  this  judgment  upon
them.  There  are  found  in  them  oppression,  injustice,  and  violence.  The
false  prophets  only  pander  to  their  evil  lusts,  and  lull  them  into  false
security;  and  the  penalty  of  all  this  guilt  shall  be  removal  from  their
present  home.  But  God  will  not  cast  them  off  altogether ;  for  they  shall
yet  one  day  be  restored  in  triumph  (ch.  i.,  ii.).

In  the  second  part  the  prophet,  showing  the  necessity  of  the  judgment,
more  particularly  rebukes  the  cruelty  and  rapacity  of  the  great  men ;
denounces  woe  on  the  false  prophets  who  led  the  people  astray;  on  the
priests  who  taught  for  hire ;  on  the  judges  who  sold  their  sentences,  and
the  diviners  who  practised  their  cheating  art  for  lucre.  In  requital  for
these  enormities,  Zion  the  royal  seat,  Jerusalem  the  holy  city,  and  the
temple  the  house  of  God,  should  be  brought  to  desolation.  Then  a  con-
trast is  introduced.  This  triple  overthrow  shall  be  compensated  by  a
triple  restoration.  The  people  shall  return  from  captivity,  and  the  Lord's
house  shall  be  raised  on  high,  and  the  nations  shall  flock  unto  it  to  learn
piety  and  true  religion ;  Jerusalem  shall  be  inhabited  again,  increased  and
beautified ;  the  royal  power  shall  again  be  seated  in  Zion ;  Jehovah  himself
shall  reign  there  in  the  midst  of  universal  peace,  having  overthrown  all
the  peoples  who  once  rejoiced  in  Judah's  calamity.  The  Redeemer  shall
be  born  in  Bethlehem ;  his  kingdom  shall  extend  to  the  ends  of  the  earth ;
but  all  idolatry,  all  trust  in  the  arm  of  flesh,  must  be  removed  before  the
great  consummation  shall  occur  (ch.  iii. — v.).

In  the  last  part,  which  differs  from  the  preceding  portions  in  being  of
B  more  subjective  character,  Jehovah  is  represented  aa  holding  a  contro-
versy or  lawsuit  with  his  people,  justifying  his  conduct,  and  listening  to
their  rejoinder,  which  is  so  far  from  being  satisfactory  that  judgment  is
pronounced  upon  them.  Then,  in  touching  words,  Micah,  identifying  himself
with  the  people,  acknowledges  the  justice  of  the  sentence,  while  he  bewails


THE  BOOK   OF  MICAH.  lit


its  infliction ;  lie  repents  of  the  sins  which  have  occasioned  this  pnnishment,
IooIes  patiently  to  God,  and  puts  his  sole  trast  in  him,  and,  in  answer  to  his
prayers,  is  rewarded  by  the  promise  of  deliverance.  The  book  conclndes
with  a  trinmpbal  song,  celebrating  the  victory  which  God  will  achieve,  and
praising  the  mercy  and  faithfulness  which  he  always  has  shown  to  his
people  (ch.  vi.,  viL).

Snch  is  a  general  sketch  of  the  contents  of  this  book.  We  may  note,
besides,  that  in  it  are  contained  many  special  predictions ;  viz.  the
destraction  of  Samaria  by  Shalmaneser  and  his  successor  Sargon  (ch.  i.  6,
7)  ;  the  invasion  of  Jndah  by  Sennacherib  (ch.  i.  9 — 16) ;  the  overthrow
of  Jerusalem  and  the  temple  (ch.  iii.  12 ;  viL  13) ;  the  deportation
to  Babylon  (ch.  iv.  10) ;  the  return  from  exile ;  the  peace  and  happiness
under  a  theocratic  government,  and  the  spiritual  supremacy  of  Israel  (ch.
iv.  1 — 8, 13  ;  vii.  11,  14 — 17)  ;  the  Ruler  bom  at  Bethlehem,  of  the  family
of  David  (ch.  iv.  8 ;  v.  2)  ;  and,  as  it  seems,  the  destruction  of  Nineveh
and  Babylon  (ch.  v.  5,  6 ;  vii.  8,  10).  To  Isaiah  and  Micah  belong  the
two  clearest  and  most  unmistakable  prophecies  of  the  Messiah.  Isaiah
describes  his  birth  of  the  Virgin ;  Micah  pointed  out  the  place  of  hia
birth  so  plainly  that  when  the  Wise  Men  came  inquiring  where  the  King
of  the  Jews  was  bom,  the  answer  was  given  to  Herod  without  hesitation,
"  In  Bethlehem  of  Jndsea ;  for  thus  it  is  written  by  the  prophet  "  (Matt.  ii.
5).  Further,  Micah  declares  that  the  time  of  Messiah  shall  be  one  of
profound  peace  (ch.  iv.  1 — 7),  using  the  same  words  as  Isaiah  (iL  2,  eta).
He  intimates  that  the  glory  of  Messiah  shall  be  won  by  suffering  (ch.  iy,
8 — 13) ;  he  speaks  of  his  work  and  his  power  (ch.  v.  1 — 8) ;  and  ho
depicts  the  kingdom  of  Messiah  in  its  exterior  and  interior  organization
(ch.  V.  4,  8,  etc.).

§  n.    AUTHOB.

The  name  Micah  (Mtxotas :  Meixouts,  Sin. ;  MieluMcu  or  Mieha,  Vnlgate),
a  shortened  form  of  Michcna  (Jer.  xxvi.  18),  and  in  its  original  shape
Michajahu,  is  not  uncommon  in  the  Old  Testament  (Judg.  xvii.  1 ;  2  Chron.
xiii.  2  ;  xvii.  7  ;  Jer.  xxxvi.  11,  etc.)  ;  but  none  of  the  other  persons  so  called
are  of  much  note  in  the  sacred  story  save  Micaiah  the  son  of  Imlah,  who
prophesied  so  boldly  in  the  days  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xxiL).  It  is  probably
to  distinguish  him  from  this  last-named  personage  that  the  minor  prophei
is  termed  "  Micah  the  Morasthite,"  *'.«.  a  native  of  Moresheth-Gath.  The
LXX.,  indeed,  in  ch.  i.  1,  treat  the  appellation  as  a  patronymic,  tov  toI
MapaaOei  (Mupa^et,  Alex.)  ;  but  in  Jer.  xzxiii.  18  (xxvi.  18,  Hebrew)  thej
give  Mixauxs  o  Mapadinis :  and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  latter  rendering
is  correct.  Moresheth,  elsewhere  (Josh.  xv.  44 ;  2  Chron.  xi.  8),  as  some
say,  called  Mareshah,  was  noticed  by  St.  Jerome  as  a  small  village  neai
Eleutheropolis.  It  is  now  known  as  Mer'ash,  a  village  on  a  tel  about  a  mil*
south-east  of  Beit-Jihrin,  which  Dr.  Thomson  ('  Land  and  the  Book,'  pp
210, 214,  etc.),  after  Bobinson,  identifies  with  Eleutheropolis,  and  consider!


INTRODUCTION  TO


with  great  plausibility,  to  be  the  site  of  the  more  andent  Gath.  "  Micab
refers  to  Moresheth  as  thongh  it  was  a  suburb  of  Oath  (oh.  i.  10,  14).  By
coupling  the  two  names  together,  he  wrote  Moresheth- Ghtth,  probably  in
order  to  fix  the  place  of  the  less-known  suburb  by  the  name  of  the  main  city."
The  name  Micah  signifies,  "  Who  is  like  Jehovah  ?  "  We  are  reminded
by  it  of  the  challenge  in  Moses'  song  (Ezod.  xv.  11),  "  Wlio  is  like  unto
thee,  0  Lord,  among  the  gods  P  who  if>  like  thee  ? "  and  it  is  doubtless
with  reference  to  his  own  name  that  the  prophet  introduces  the  announce-
ment of  God's  great  mercy  with  the  words,  "  Who  is  a  Ood  like  unto
thee  P  "  (ch.  vii.  18).  The  name  of  Micah's  father  is  not  given,  so  that  he
was  probably  of  mean  origin,  most  likely  a  peasant,  as  Amos;  and  no
events  of  his  life  are  recorded.  Whatever  can  be  known  about  him  must
be  gathered  from  his  own  writings;  and  this  is  very  little.  He  was  a
Judsean,  and  prophesied  at  Jerusalem.  This  latter  fact  we  infer  not  only
from  the  mention  of  the  kings  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah,  under  whom
he  is  said  to  have  exercised  his  ministry,  but  from  the  circumstance  that
he  condemns  chiefly  the  corruptions  of  the  city,  and  makes  Zion  the  central
point  of  his  prophecies,  as  it  was  the  main  seat  of  the  evils  against  which
he  contended.  He  suffered  great  opposition  at  the  hands  of  the  false
prophets  (ch.  ii.  6),  who  were  now  beginning  to  exert  that  disastrous
influence  which  culminated  in  the  time  of  Jeremiah.  Disobedience  to
Ood's  enactments  had  always  been  common,  but  organized  hostility  to
God's  prophets  had  not  hitherto  been  the  normal  state  of  things.  Micah
was  destined  to  exercise  his  powers  under  obloquy  and  contradiction.  He
seems,  however,  to  have  gone  to  the  grave  in  peace,  before  the  fall  of
Samaria,  in  the  early  part  of  Hezekiah's  reigp.  His  birthplace  was,  accord-
ing to  Jerome  (Ep.  86,  '  Ad  Eustoch.'),  also  the  place  of  his  burial,  on  the
site  of  which,  in  Christian  times,  a  church  was  built.  Sozomen  ('  Hist,
Eccles.,'  vii.  28)  relates  that  his  remains  and  those  of  Habakkuk  were
discovered,  in  the  reign  of  Theodosius,  at  a  place  called  Berathsatia
(probably  the  same  as  Morasthi),  ten  stadia  from  Gila,  his  tomb  being
called  by  the  ignorant  natives,  in  their  own  dialect,  Nephsameemana,  which
he  interprets  fivijiJM,  vurr6v,  "  monumentnm  fidele."

§m.  Dkn.

The  superscription  of  our  book  states  that  Micah  prophesied  **  In  the  days
of  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah,  kings  of  Judah."  Modem  critics  see
reason  to  doubt  whether  this  title,  as  well  as  the  similar  ones  in  Hosea  and
Isaiah  (which,  however,  contain  the  name  of  Uzziah),  are  genuine.  They
ieem  them  to  be  later  additions  introduced  by  an  unknown  editor.  In  the
present  case  the  superscription  is  confirmed  by  the  contents  of  the  book.
Jotham  came  to  the  throne  in  b.O.  757 ;  Hezekiah  died  in  697 ;  and  thus
the  greatest  limit  attributed  to  his  ministry  would  be  sixty  years ;  while  the
interval  from  the  last  year  of  Jotham  to  the  first  of  Hezekiah,  B.o.  74& — 726,
allows  a  period  of  sixteen  years  as  the  minimum  duration  of  his  prophetical


THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.


activity.     In  either  oaae  he  is  contemporary  with  Isaiah,  and  with  the  latte;

portion  of  the  ministry  of  Amos  and  Hosea.   We  have  a  testimony  concerning

his  date  in  Jer.  xxvi.  18,  where  certain  elders  of  the  land  appeal  to  the  cas

of  Micah  as  one  who  asserted  unpopular  truths  in  the  time  of  Hezekiali

without  incurring  the  charge  of  blasphemy.     "  Micah  the  Morasthite,"  sai(

they,  "  prophesied  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah  King  of  Jadah,  and  spake  to  al

the  people  of  Judah,  saying,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  Zion  shall  b

ploughed  like  a  field,"  etc.,  quoting  ch.  iii.  12.     But  this  assertion  need  no

be  taken  as  necessarily  restricting  all  his  utterances  to  Hezekiah's  reign

The  elders  had  a  traditional  report  that  his  prophecies  originated  in  tha

period ;  "  He  was  habitually  prophesying,"  is  their  expression ;  but  that  n

part  of  the  collection  was  published  before  that  time  cannot  be  proved  b;

this  particular  reference.    It  seems  probable  that  the  various  propheciee

orally  delivered  on  difEerent  occasions,  were  committed  to  writing  am

gathered  into  one  volume  in  the  earlier  years  of  King  Hezekiah.     Ther

really  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  doubting  the  accuracy  of  the  superscriptioi

The  contents  of  the  book  are  quite  consistent  with  what  we  know  of  th

condition  of  the  Jewish  people  in  the  reigns  enumerated.     The  mention  o

"  the  high  places  "  still  existing,  and  the  corruption  and  demoralization  c

the  people  (ch.  i.  5 ;  ii.),  points  to  the  reigns  of  Jotbam  and  Ahaz  as  the  perio

when  the  first  section  of  the  book  was  originally  delivered  (see  2  Kings  x\

85 ;  rvi.  4 ;  2  Ghron.  xxviii.  4,  25).     The  prophecy  of  the  destruction  «

Samaria  (ch.  i.  6)  must  have  been  delivered  before  the  final  capture  of  tha

city  by  the  Assyrians,  B.C.  722,  in  the  fourth  or  sixth  year  of  Hezekial

Other  allusions  serve  to  supply  an  approximation  to  the  date  of  diSeren

portions   of  the  prophecy.     We  have  seen  that  ch,  iii.  was  uttered  i

Hezekiah's  day.    In  ch.  v.  10  Micah  declaims  against  the  chariots  an

horses  of  Judah,  which  were  doubtless  accumulated  during  the  prosperon

reign  of  XJzziah,  and  on  which  his  successor  Jotham  prided  himself  (2  Ghroi

xxvi.  11 — 16 ;  xxvii.  4—6  ;  Isa.  ii.  7).     When  he  bitterly  complains  of  "  th

statutes  of  Omri,"  and  "  the  works  of  the  house  of  Ahab  "  (ch.  vi.  16),  he.  i

denouncing  the  king  who  is  expressly  stated  to  have  "  walked  in  the  waj

of  the  kings  of  Israel  "  (2  Kings  xvi.  3).     It  is  more  likely  to  have  been  i

Ahaz's  time  than  in  Jotham's  that  idolatrous  rites  were  practised  in  Jerusalei

itself  J  for  the  latter  is  commended  because  he  walked  in  the  steps  of  h;

father  TJzziah,  and  "  ordered  his  ways  before  the  Lord  his  God  "  (2  King

XV.  34 ;  2  Ghron.  xxvii.  2, 6)  ;  and  the  allusion  to  human  sacrifice  (ch.  vi.  't

befits  the  time  of  Ahaz,  who  sacrificed  his  own  sons  to  Moloch  (2  Kings  xv

3  ;  2  Ghron.  xxviii.  3),  and  whose  example  was  probably  followed  by  other

That  half -service,  too,  of  which  Micah  complains  (ch.  iii.  11 ;  vi.  6),  whe

the  people,  in  the  midst  of  their  idolatry  and  wickedness,  yet  in  some  so;

"  leaned  upon  the  Lord,"  exactly  suits  the  character  of  Ahaz,  who,  thong

he  copied  heathen  altars,  resorted  to  the  brazen  altar  to  inquire  of  the  Loi

(2  Kings  xvi.  15),  and  offered  thereon  the  lawful  sacrifice.    The  prophei

of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  delivered  first  under  Jotham,  was  repeal


INTBODUOTION  TO


nnder  Hezekiah,  and  it  is  to  its  impreBaive  effect  at  that  time  that  the  elden
in  Jeremiah  allude.  Donhtless,  too,  in  those  early  years  of  Hezekiah  hii
ministry  came  to  an  end.  The  denunciations  of  idolatry  would  not  have
been  uttered  after  the  great,  though  partial,  reformation  of  religion,  which,
indeed,  could  not  have  been  fully  carried  out  till  Samaria  was  destroyed ;  for
otherwise  Hezekiah's  messengers  would  not  hare  been  able  unhindered  to
in-vite  all  Israel  to  join  in  the  celebration  of  the  Passoyer  (Pusey).  Of  the
parallel  passages,  ch.  iv.  1 — 5  and  Isa.  ii.  2 — 5,  it  has  been  much  debated
which  is  the  original  and  which  the  copy ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no  valid
reason  for  supposing  that  Micah  received  the  words  from  Isaiah ;  and  as  the
passage  in  the  former  book  occurs  in  close  connection  and  contrast  with
what  immediately  precedes,  while  in  Isaiah  the  connection  is  not  obvions,
most  critics  believe  that  the  words  were  originally  delivered  by  Micah ;  or
it  may  be,  as  Ewald  and  others  suggest,  that  both  prophets  adapted  to  their
own  purposes  an  older  prophecy  current  in  their  days.  That  there  is  a
close  connection  between  Isaiah  and  Micah  is  obvious.  It  may  be  that  the
two  prophets  addressed  difEerent  classes  of  the  populace— Isaiah  delivering
his  messages  to  the  higher,  Micah  to  the  lower,  with  which  by  descent
his  sympathies  were  closely  connected ;  but  they  worked  harmoniously
together,  strengthening  the  hands  of  Hezekiah,  and  confirming  the  fitithfnl
in  their  difficult  coarse  of  obedience  and  trust.

Some  critics  have  attributed  ch.  vi.  and  vii.  to  another  hand  and  a  later
date.  Certainly  they  do  not  suit  the  time  of  Hezekiah ;  but  they  may  have
been  composed  earlier,  under  other  circumstances,  and  placed  where  they
are  now  found,  not  as  fitting  their  present  position  chronologically,  but  aa
aiding  the  rhetorical  arrangement  of  the  book,  enforcing  the  previoni
menaces  and  confirming  the  promised  triumph.  Other  passageei,  the
genuineness  of  which  is  disputed,  will  be  noticed  in  the  Exposition.

§  TV.  Obngbal  Ohabacteb  of  thi  Work.

The  style  of  the  Book  of  Micah  is  remarkable.  It  is  rough,  as  befitting
its  peasant  author,  but  it  is  certainly  not  uncultivated ;  rugged,  perhaps,
but  pure,  clear,  and  intelligible.  It  abounds  in  tropes,'fignres,  paronomasias.
It  contains  sudden  transitions  of  subjects,  persons,  numbers,  genders,
which  denote  in  tbe  writer  a  quick  temper  and  an  excitable  mind,  carried
away  by  inward  impulse,  and  restrained  by  no  formal  rules  of  composition.
Micah  is  at  times  bold,  severe,  stem,  uncompromising ;  at  times  tender,
sorrowful,  loving,  sympathetic.  In  him  mercy  rejoices  against  judgment.
Brief  and  concise  in  his  description  of  misery,  he  dilates  with  exuberance
on  the  blessings  that  are  to  follow  the  day  of  darkness.  He  delights  in
comparing  God's  tenderness  and  regard  for  his  people  with  a  shepherd*!
care  for  his  flock.  Those  who  should  head  the  resistance  to  the  great
world-power  are  "  seven  shepherds  "  (ch.  v.  6).  His  last  prayer  to  God  it,
"  Peed  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  flock  of  thine  heritage  "  (oh.  viL  14).
He   does  not  so  much  preach  repentance  aa  aet  forth  God'a  dealings  to


THE   BOOK   OF   MIOAH.  vi

penona  vrho  knew  that  he  pardons  as  well  as  pnnisheB.  It  is  this  strong
conTiotion  of  the  intimate  connection  between  sin  and  punishment
repentance  and  forgivenesB,  which  occasions  those  startling  transitions  thai
meet  ns,  as  we  have  said,  so  continnally ;  where,  with  the  simple  COU'
jonotion  "and,"  and  with  no  farther  •logical  dependence,  the  prophet  con
trasts  wickedness  with  its  results,  punishment  with  blessing,  mercy  witl
comfort.  There  is  wonderful  energy  in  the  various  forms  of  his  addresses.
The  last  two  chapters  "  take  the  form  of  a  magnificent  colloquy,  and  are
indeed  the  first  prophetic  piece  of  a  purely  dramatic  plan  and  execution  "
(Farrar).  Elsewhere  at  one  time  he  commands,  at  another  he  entreats ;
now  he  nses  dialogue,  now  denunciation ;  he  addresses  the  whole  people
under  a  female  designation,  then  he  expostulates  with  individuals;  here
he  speaks  concerning  a  place,  there  directly  to  it ;  one  while  he  speaks  in
his  own  person,  and  again  in  that  of  his  nation ;  he  describes  a  calamity
as  past  in  one  passage,  as  future  in  another.  As  regards  his  language,
it  is  measured  and  rhythmical,  the  cadences  are  varied,  the  grouping  is
harmonions.  A  remarkable  analysis  of  these  divisi(ms  and  cadences,  both
in  Micah  and  other  prophets,  may  be  seen  in  Dr.  Posey's  '  Oommentary,'
pp.  273,  293.  The  verbal  plays  and  allusions  in  the  description  of  the
calamities  that  are  to  overtake  Judah  (ch.  i.)  are  unequalled  in  vigoui
and  abundance,  and  must  have  fallen  with  peculiar  force  upon  hearen
familiar  with  the  places  mentioned,  and  comprehending  with  awed
intelligence  the  meaning  of  the  denunciation.

One  obvious  fact  characterizing  the  book  (which  it  is  well  to  mention  in
view  of  neologian  theories)  is  that  it  exhibits  an  accurate  acquaintance
with  the  Pentateuch,  that  the  author  had  those  writings  before  him  when
he  put  his  prophecy  into  its  present  shape.  The  many  allusions  to  the
history,  the  actual  expressions  sometimes  used,  prove  this  beyond  question
The  Exposition  wiU  show  it  abundantly.  Farther,  other  books  of  the  canoi
were  known  to  Micah  besides  those  of  Moses.  He  refers  to  Joshua'i
division  of  the  promised  land  (ch.  ii.  4 ;  vi.  5),  to  David's  lament  over  San
and  Jonathan  (oh.  i.  10),  to  his  predecessor's  challenge  (ch.  i.  2 ;  1  Eingi
xxii.  28).  He  introduces  words  taken  from  the  Psalms  (e.g.  ch.  ii.  1 ;  iii
2,  etc. ;  vii.  2,  7,  etc.)  and  the  Proverbs  {e.g.  oh.  vi.  9,  11).  He  adopti
images  and  language  from  Amos  (oh.  ii.  3,  6,  11 ;  iii.  6).  It  must  be  addec
that  the  text  of  Micah  is  in  an  unsatisfactory  state,  having  suffered  mucl
from  corruptions.  Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  improve  it  bi
reference  to  the  ancient  versions;  but  little  success  has  attended  thesi
efforts,  as  the  versions  themselves  seem  to  have  been  founded  upoi
imperfect  copies,  and  the  conjectures  of  critics  have  not  afforded  mucl
material  help.

}V.    LrrKBATXTBE.

Of  the  earlier  oommentators  on  Micah  it  is  sufficient  to  mention  Ephraem  Sym
and  Theophylact.  Later  commentators  are  these ;  Bibliander,  *  Oomm.  in  Micham
(1634) ;  Luther ;  Gilby, '  Oomm.  upon  Mioha   (1551)  ;  Chytraang,  •  Expli(»tio  Michae


Till  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.

(1666) ;  Brentins,  <  Comm.  in  Michaaam '  (1580) ;  Pocock,  'Works,'  vol.  i.  (1740);  Justi,
'Micha  nea  ttbersetzt '  (1799, 1820);  Hartmann,  'Micha  neu  fibers.;'  Caspar!,  '&ber
Micha  den  Morasth.'  (1862) ;  Thomas,  Geneve  (1863) ;  Dr.  Cbeyne,  in '  Cambridge  Bible
for  Schools  and  Colleges'  (1886);  T.  Sharpe,  'Micah,  a  New  Translation'  (1876);
Eleinert,  translated  in  Lange's  <  Commentary  on  Old  Testament ; '  Orelli,  in  '  Kurzgef.
Eomm.'  (1888);  Rygsel,  '  Untersuchnngen,'  etc.  (1887);  J.Taylor,  'The  Massoretic
Text,' etc.  (1890).

{  YL  Abbanoeuismt  of  tee  Book  at  SEonom,

Fkrt  L  (Ch.  i.,  ii.)    Threatenings  and  judgments  on  Israel  and  Judah,  with  pre-
diction of  eventual  deliverance.

I  1.  (Cb.  i.  2 — 1.)    Introduction  to  the  prophet's  address.    The  nations  are  bidden
to  attend.

S  2.  (Ch.  i.  6 — 7.)    Judgment  denounced  on  Israel  for  its  sins.

{  3.  (Cb.  i.  8,  9.)    Micah  mourns  because  the  punishment  reaches  to  Judah.

§  4.  (Ch.  i.  10 — 16.)    That  kingdom's  fate  exemplified  by  the  fate  of  certain  of
her  cities.

{  6.  (Ch.  i.  16.)    Zion  is  called  to  mourn  for  her  captivity.

§  6.  (Ch.  ii.  1 — 6.)    Threat  justified  by  the  sins  of  oppression  of  which  the  princei
were  guilty.

S  7.  (Ch.  ii.  6 — ^11.)    Threat  further  vindicated,  with  a  glance  at  the  false  prophets
who  taught  the  people  to  love  lies.

{  8.  (Ch.  ii.  12, 13.)    Promise  of  deliverance  and  restoration.
Part  II.  (Cb.  iii. — v.)    Denunciation  of  the  crimes  of  the  grandees,  followed  by  a
promise  of  the  glorification  of  Zion,  the  birth  of  Messiah,  and  the  highest
exaltation  of  the  people.

§  1.  (Ch.  iii.  1 — 4.)    Sins  of  the  rulers,  and  their  punishment.

§  2.  (Ch.  iii.  6 — 8.)    Sins  of  the  false  prophets.

S  3.  (Ch.  iii.  9 — 12.)    Becapitulation  of  the  sins  of  the  three  classes — grandees,
priests,  and  prophets ;  consequent  destruction  of  Zion  and  the  temple.

§  4.  (Ch.  iv.  1 — 6.)    The  glory  of  the  temple-mountain,  and  realization  of  hap-
piness.

$  6.  (Ch.  iv.  6,  7.)    All  Israel  included  in  this  restoration.

§  6.  (Ch.  iv.  8 — 10.)    Revival  of  the  kingdom  of  David,  after  calamity  and  cap-
tivity.

§  7.  (Ch.  iv.  11 — 13.)    Zion  overcomes  all  enemies  in  God's  strength.

$  8.  (Ch.  v.  1 — 4.)    After  Zion's  degradation,  Messiah  shall  be  born  and  bring  tha
world  into  subjection.

§  9.  (Ch.  V.  5,  6.)    Under  his  rule  shall  be  peace.

§  10.  (Ch.  V.  7 — 9.)    He  shall  give  his  people  as  conquerors  and  saviours  to  the
nations.

§  11.  (Ch.  V.  10 — 15.)    He  shall  destroy  the  Instruments  of  war,  and  put  down
idolatry  everywhere.
Part  III.  (Ch.  vi.,  vii.)    Punishment  is  the  consequence  of  sin ;    repentance  is
the  only  ground  of  hope  of  participating  in  the  covenant  mercies.

§  1.  (Ch.  vi.  1 — 6.)    God's  controversy  with  his  people  for  their  ingratitude.

§  2.  (Ch.  vi.  6 — 8.)    The  people  ask  how  to  please  God,  and  are  referred  to  the
moral  requirements  of  the  Law.

§  3.  (Ch.  VI.  9 — 12.)    God  sternly  rebukes  prevailing  sins.

§  4.  (Ch.  vi.  13 — 16.)    He  threatens  punishment.

§  5.  (Ch.  vii.  1 — 6.)    Israel's  penitential  acknowledgment  ofthe  general  corruption.

§  6.  (Ch.  vii.  7 — 13.)    Confession  of  faith  in  God ;  assurance  of  the  fulfilment  ol
the  promised  restoration.

5  7.  (Ch.  vii.  14 — 17.)    The  people  pray  for  this  restoration,  and  the  Lord  assures
them  that  his  mercies  shall  not  fail,  and  hostile  nations  shall  be  humbled.

f  8.  (Ch.  vU.  18 — 20.)    Praise  of  God's  mercy  and  faithfulness.


THE    BOOK    OF    MIOAH.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  L
Ver.  1— eh.  ii.  13.— Part  I.  Thbbatbn-

□108  AND  JUDOMEMTB  ON  ISBABL  ISO  JUSAB,
WITH  FBEDIOTIOM  OF  Etentual  Deliteb-
ANOE.

Ver.  1. — The  ifueription,  or  heading^  of
the  book,  conveying  the  prophet's  authority.
The  word  of  the  Lord.  The  expreBsion
appliei  to  the  whole  contenta  of  the  book,  as
in  Hosi  i.  1  and  Zeph.  i.  1.  It  is  often  used
for  some  particular  message  to  a  prophet,
as  Jer.  i.  4, 11 ;  ii.  1 ;  Ezek.  iii.  16.  Uioah
the  Uorasthite;  i.t.  Mlcah  of  Moresheth-
Gath  (ver.  14),  a  village  in  the  lowland  of
Judaea,  near  Eleutheropolis,  some  twenty
miles  south-west  of  Jerusalem  (see  Intro-
duction, §  II.).  In  the  days  of  Jotbam,
Ahaz,  and  Eezekiah.  Thus  Mlcah  was  a
contemporary  of  Isaiah,  though  his  ministry
did  not  begin  as  soon  or  last  as  long  as
that  prophet's  (see  Isa.  i.  1);  he  was  a  little
later  than  Hosea  and  Amos,  who  prophesied
under  Uzziah,  the  father  of  Jotham.  Kings
of  Judah  are  mentioned  because  the
prophet's  mission  was  to  Judah,  as  the  line
of  election ;  but,  like  Amos,  he  prophesied
•gainst  Samaria  also.  However  divided,
the  two  nations  are  regarded  as  one  people.
Which  he  saw.  What  he  saw  in  vision  or
by  inward  illumination  he  here  relates  in
words.  Thus  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah,
Obadiah,  Kahum,  etc.,  are  called  "  visions."
Concerning  Samaria  and  Jerusalem.  Samaria
comes  first,  as  being  ripe  for  punishment,
•nd  the  first  to  feel  the  avenger.  The
oapittds  of  the  two  kingdoms  Israel  and
Judah  stand  for  the  people  themeelvei.

Vers,  2 — 1. — §  1.  ItUroduetion  to  the
prophee$  addre$$.  The  nation$  and  earth
aidf  are  mmmonei  to  attend  (he  tdlemm
announosnxnl.

Ver.  2.— Eaar,  all  y  ptople;  rather,  aU

laOAH.


ye  peoplei;  Beptnagint,  \m»L  All  nations
are  summoned  to  come  and  witness  th«
judgment,  and  to  profit  by  the  warning.
So  Micaiab,  son  of  Imlah,  the  bold  denouncer
•f  false  prophets  in  the  age  of  Ahab,  had
eried,  "Hear,  ye  peoples,  all  of  you"
(1  Kings  zxii.  28).  So  Moses,  in  his  song
(Dent,  zzzii.  1),  ealla  on  heaven  and  earth  to
listen  to  his  words  (comp.  Isa.  i.  2).  These
expressions  are  not  mere  rhetorioal  figures  ;
they  have  a  ipeoial  application.  Whatever
happens  to  Israel  has  a  bearing  on  the
development  of  the  kingdom  of  God;  the
judgments  on  the  chosen  people  are  not  only
a  warning  to  the  heathen,  but  bring  on  the
great  consummation.  All  that  therein  is;
literally,  the  fulness  thereof;  Vulgate,  pleni-
tudo  e/us;  Septuagint,  irdvrfs  oi  iv  air^,
"all  ye  that  are  therein"  (Ps.  xxiv.  1).
Let  the  Lord  Ood  (the  Lord  Jehovah)  be
witness  against  you.  Let  God  by  his  judg-
ments against  you,  viz.  Israel  and  Judah,
confirm  my  denunciation  (comp.  Dent.  xxix.
24).  From  his  holy  temple ;  i.e.  from  heaven,
as  ver.  3  shows  (1  Kings  viii.  30 ;  Fs.  xi  4 ;
Hab.  ii.  20).

Ver.  3. — Here  follows  a  grand  description,
in  figurative  language,  of  the  course  of
Divine  judgment,  and  of  God's  awful  majesty
and  resistless  power.  Out  of  his  place.  It
is  as  though  the  sins  of  Israel  had  roused
him  to  action.  God  is  hidden  except  when
he  displays  his  power  in  judgment  and
meroy  (see  note  on  Zeoh.  xir.  3).  Will
come  down.  An  anthropomorphic  expres-
sion, as  Gen.  xviiL  21.  The  high  places.
As  though  descending  fiom  heaven,  God
first  came  upon  the  tops  of  the  mountains
(see  note  on  Amos  iv.  13;  comp.  Deut.
xxxit  13).  The  phrase  would  imply  God'i
absolute  sovereignty  over  the  universe.

Ver.  4. — ^The  desoription  of  God's  advent
to  judgment  is  founded  on  the  idea  of  a
terrible  storm  and  earthquake,  perhaps
accompanied  with  volcanic  eruption,  though


THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.


[oh.  1. 1—16


evidenoe  of  Biieh  ernpUong  In  the  historical
period  ii  not  forthcoming.  The  deaoription
recalls  the  awfal  revelation  at  Sinai  (Exod.
zix.).  Shall  he  molten;  either  by  the  light-
ning or  the  Bhowers  of  rain  that  deEceiid
from  heaven.  The  mountains,  the  type  of
stability  and  strength,  fall  away  at  the
presence  of  the  Judge.  Septuagint,  aoKeu-
e^ffcToi,  "shall  be  shaken;"  Vulgate,  con-
eumentur  (Jndg.  v.  4,  5 ;  Pb.  xviii.  7,  etc. ;
Ixviii.  8 ;  zovii.  4,  5 ;  Amos  ix.  5).  Be
cleft;  Septuagint,  Tateha-oyrai,  "shall  melt."
The  valleys  shall  be  hollowed  out  into  chan-
nels by  the  force  of  the  water,  which  falls
in  torrents.  As  wax  (Ps.  Ixviii.  2 ;  zcvii.  5).
This  belongs  to  the  first  clause,  "  the  moun-
tains," etc.  As  waters.  This  belongs  to
the  second  clause.  The  cloven  plains  shall
melt  away  as  waters  disappear  down  a  pre-
cipice. The  idea  that  underlies  this  descrip-
tion is  that  the  inanimate  creation  shares  in
the  effects  of  the  judgment  on  man,  and  is
used  as  an  instrument  in  his  punishment.

Vers.  5 — 7. — §  2.  Judgment  u  denounced
on  Israel  for  its  tin.

Ver.  5. — The  prophet  shows  the  cause  of
this  punishment.  Transgression;  better,
apottaey,  which  the  people's  trangression
really  was.  Jacob.  Here  the  ten  tribes  and
Judah — the  whole  of  the  covenant  people.
In  the  latter  part  of  the  verse  the  term
includes  only  tlie  ten  tribes,  called  often
Israel  or  Ephraim,  All  this.  The  manifesta-
tion of  God's  power  and  wrath  described
in  vers.  3  and  4.  The  house  of  Israel.  The
ten  tribes,  Is  it  not  Samaria  t  She  is  naught
but  sin.  He  names  the  capitals  of  the  two
kingdoms  as  the  source  and  centre  of  the
idolatry  and  wickedness  which  pervaded  the
whole  country.  Samaria  was  built  by  Omri,
a  king  who  "  wrought  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the
Lord,  and  did  worse  than  all  that  were  before
him;."  and  In  it  his  son  Ahab  erected  a
temple  to  Baal  (1  Kings  xvi.  32),  and  it
became  the  chief  seat  of  idolatry  in  the  land.
What  are  the  high  places!  The  prophet
setms  to  say  that  Jerusalem  is  no  longer
the  Lord's  sanctuary,  but  a  collection  of
unauthorized  or  idolatrous  shrines.  These
were  buildings  or  altars  erected  in  con-
spicuous spots,  contrary  to  the  enactments
of  the  Mosaic  Law  (Dent.  xii.  11—14),  and
used  more  or  less  for  idolatrous  worship.
With  a  strange  perversity,  the  Jews  mixed
the  pure  service  of  Jehovah  with  the  rites
of  heathen  deities.  Even  the  best  kings
of  Judah  were  unable  wholly  to  suppress
these  local  sanctuaries  (see  2  Kings  xii.  3 ;
xiv.  4,  etc.).  They  were  found  even  In
Jerusalem  itself  (Jer.  xxxii.  35),  especially
In  the  time  of  Ahaz  (2  Kings  xvi.  4).  The
parallelism  of  this  clause  with  the  preced-
ing being  thought  defective  ("  high  places  "


being  not  parallel  with  "apostasy"),  the
Septuagint  readt,  i  l^aprla,  "  the  sin,"
followed  by  the  Syriao  and  the  Targum.
One  Hebrew  manuscript  confirms  the  read-
ing; but  it  is  probably  unauthorized,  and
has  been  ignorantly  introduced.  The
prophet  defines  the  sins  of  Samaria  and
Jerusalem.  The  sin  of  the  former  is
apostasy;  that  of  the  latter,  unauthorized
worship.  Instead  of  "  what "  in  both  places
the  Hebrew  gives  "who,"  implying  that
there  is  a  personal  cause,  the  two  capitals
being  personified,  Hezekiah's  partial  re-
formation had  not  taken  place  when  this  was
uttered.

Ver.  6. — I  will  make.  This  prophecy,
therefore,  was  delivered  before  the  destruc-
tion of  Samaria  in  the  fourth  year  of  Heze-
kiah.  Ab  an  heap  of  the  field ;  or,  into  a
heap  of  the  field,  like  a  heap  of  stones
gathered  off  a  cultivated  field  (oomp.  Isa.
V.  2).  Septuagint,  eis  oitapo^v\i,Kiov  aypoS,
"  the  hut  of  a  fruit^watcher."  As  plantingi
of  a  vineyard ;  into  the  plantings,  etc. ;  i.e.
into  mere  terraces  for  vines.  Such  shall  be
the  utter  ruin  of  the  city,  that  on  its  site
vines  shall  be  planted.  The  prophet  here
uses  a  description  of  complete  destruction
which  is  a  regular  formula  in  Assyrian
inscriptions,  where  we  read  of  cities  being
made  into  "  a  rubbish-heap  and  a  field."  The
expression  occurs,  e.g.,  in  a  monument  of
Tiglath-Pileser  (see  Sohrader, '  Keilinschr.,'
p.  419).  I  will  ponr  down  the  stones  thereof
into  the  valley.  Samaria  stood  on  a  hilly
platform  (1  Kings  xvi.  24),  with  a  sheer
descent  on  every  side,  and  when  it  was  over-
thrown its  stones  were  hurled  into  the  valley
surrounding  it,  as  may  be  seen  to  this  day.
"When  we  looked  down,"  says  Tristram
('Land  of  Israel,'  p.  136),  "at  the  gaunt
columns  rising  out  of  the  little  terraced
fields,  and  the  vines  clambering  up  the  sides
of  the  hill  once  covered  by  the  palaces  of
proud  Samaria,  who  could  help  recalling
the  prophecy  of  Micah  ?  Not  more  literally
have  the  denunciations  on  Tyre  or  on
Babylon  been  accomplished.  What  though
Sebaste  rose,  under  Herod,  to  a  pitch  of
greater  splendour  than  even  old  Samaria,
the  effort  was  in  vain,  and  the  curse  has
been  fully  accomplished.  In  the  whole
range  of  prophetic  history,  I  know  of  no
fulfilment  more  startling  to  the  eye-witnesB
in  its  accuracy  than  this."  Will  discover ;
will  lay  bare  (Ps,  oxxxvii.  7 ;  Kzek.  xiii.  14).

Ver.  7.— Graven  images.  The  stone  idols
(Isa,  X.  10).  Septuagint,  ^4  yKimrd,  The
hires  thereof.  The  word  properly  means,
"the  wages  of  prostitution."  Idolatry  is
viewed  as  spiritual  fomioation,  and  the  offer-
ings made  to  the  idol-templea  are  reckoned
to  be  harlot-gifts.  Hosea  speaks  in  th*
same  way  (ii  6,  8,  12 ;  ix.  1 ;  oomp.  Isa.


CH.  I.  1—16.]


TUE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.


zxiii.  17;  Ezek.  xvi.  31).  There  may  be  al-
lusion to  the  Bhamefiil  prnotioes  consecrated
with  tlie  nume  of  religion,  the  proceeds  of
which  went  to  the  support  of  idolatry  (see
Baruoh  vi.  43 ;  Herod.,  i  199 ;  Strabo,  xvi.  1).
Idols;  more  costly  images,  made  probably  of
or  plated  with  precious  metals.  For  she
gathered  it;  rather,  them,  the  images  and
idols,  from  the  otferlngg  made  by  idolaters.
spiritual  fornicators,  lience  called  the  hire  of
an  harlot.  They  shall  retnmto  the  hire  of  an
harlot.  The  treasures  obtained  by  idolatry
shall  go  to  another  idolatrous  people,  viz.
the  Assyrians;  the  dedicated  offerings  in  the
temples  at  Samaria  shall  he  carrier  I  off  to
Nineveh  to  adorn  the  temples  there  (comp.
Dan.  i.  2;  v.  3;  Ezra  i.  7).  The  sentence
seems  to  he  a  kind  of  proverbial  saying,
like  the  Latin,  Male  parta,  male  dildbuntur.
Sohegg  compares  the  German,  Wie  gewon-
«en,  $0  zerronnen,  and  Unrect  iSut  that  eein
Gut.  The  juilgment  on  Samaiia  was  exe-
cuted by  the  Assyrians.  Three  times  in  his
short  reign  of  less  than  six  years  did
Shalmaneser  IV.  invade  Israel.  Shortly
after  his  accession,  having  reason  to  suspect
the  fidelity  of  Hoshea,  he  "  came  up  against
him"  (2  Kings  xvii.  3),  and  so  overawed
him  by  the  exhibition  of  his  superior
power  that  the  King  of  Israel  submitted
without  a  struggle,  "  became  his  servant,
and  gave  him  presents,"  or  rendered  him
tribute.  But  Hoshea's  allegiance  was  not  yet
secured.  Encouraged  by  the  enterprise  and
success  of  the  Etliiopian  monarch  So,  or
Shebek,  who  had  defeated  and  sliln  the
Egyptian  king,  and  established  himself
firmly  on  the  throne  of  Upper  Egypt,
Hoshea,  in  reliance  on  Egyptian  aid,  again
threw  off  the  yoke  of  Assyria,  and  refused
the  customary  tribute.  His  punishment
was  speedy  ami  sharp.  Shalmaneser  had
no  difficulty  in  making  himself  master  of
his  person,  "shut  him  up  and  bound  him
in  prison."  On  a  fresh  act  of  rebellion,  of
what  nature  we  are  not  informed,  Shal-
maneser mode  his  third  attack.  This  time
he  was  everywhere  resisted,  and  ended  by
laying  liegu  to  Samaria  itself.  Before  this
city  his  forces  were  detained  for  more  than
two  years;  nor  was  it  till  B.O.  722,  when
apparently  his  own  reign  hail  come  to  an
end,  that  Samaria  was  taken,  his  successor
Sargon  claiming  the  conquest  as  appertain-
ing to  his  first  year  (Bawliuson,  ■  Ancient
Monarchies,'  ii.  ch.  ix.).

Vers.  8, 9. — §  3.  Micah  mournt  fcecouw  the
punishment  extends  to  Judah  also.

Ver.  8.  —  I  will  wail  The  prophet
marks  the  destruction  of  Samaria  with
these  outward  signs  of  mourning,  in  order
that  he  might  affect  the  minds  of  his  own
countrymen,  and  show  how  he  grieved  over


their  sins  which  should  bring  like  pnulih'
ment.  The  word  rendered  "  wail  meani
"  to  beat "  the  breast.  Septuagint,  K((i^cTa<  i
Vnlgate,  p^KSram.  Stripped  and  naked.  Th«
former  epithet  the  LXX.  translate  iw
irdSeros,  as  if  it  meant  "  barefoot ; "  and
they  refer  the  verse  to  Samaria,  not  to  Micah,
The  two  epithets  contain  one  notion ;  the
prophet  assumes  the  character,  not  merely
of  a  mourner,  who  put  off  his  usual
garments,  but  that  of  a  captive  who  was
stripped  to  the  skin  and  carried  away
naked  and  despoiled  (comp.  Isa.  xx.  2 — 4 ;
xlvii. 2, 3).  Dragons;  Septuagint, SpaK((>'T(»i':
Hebrew,  tannim,  "jackals"  (Job  xxx.  29;
Mai.  i.  3),  whoso  mournful  howling  is  well
known  to  all  travellers  in  the  East.  Owls ;
Septuagint,  Svyarepav  <reii>i\vav,  "  daughters
of  sirens ; "  Vulgate,  struthionum.  The  bird
is  called  in  Hebrew  bath  yaanah,  which
some  explain  "daughter  of  the  desert,"  or
else  refer  to  roots  meaning  either  "  to  cry
out"  or  "to  be  freed."  Doubtless  the
ostrich  is  meant.  Concerning  the  fearful
screech  of  this  bird,  Pusey  quotes  Shaw,
'Travels,'  ii.  349,  "During  the  lonesome
part  of  the  night  they  often  make  a  doleful
and  piteous  noise.  I  have  often  heard  them
groan  as  if  they  were  in  the  greatest
agonies."

Ver.  9. — Her  wound;  her  stripes,  tha
punishment  inflicted  on  Samaria.  Inourable
(comp.  Jer.  it.  18).  The  day  of  grace  is
past,  and  Israel  has  not  repented .  It  is  oom«.
The  stripe,  the  punishment,  reaches  Judah.
To  the  prophetic  eye  the  Assyrians' invasion
of  JudoB  I  seems  close  at  hand,  and  even  the
final  attack  of  the  Chaldeans  comes  within  his
view.  The  same  sins  in  the  northern  and
southern  capitals  lead  to  the  samr  fate.  Ha
is  come.  He,  the  enemy,  the  agent  of  the
"stripe."  Tlie  gate  of  my  people.  The
gate,  the  place  of  meeting,  the  well-guarded
post,  is  put  for  the  city  itself  (comp.  Gen.
xxii.  17;  Deut.  xxviii.  52;  Obad.  11).
Fusey  tliinkd  that  Micah  refers  to  something
short  of  total  excision,  and  therefore  thai
the  invasion  of  Sennacherib  alone  is  meant
(2  Kings  xviii.  13).  But  the  fore-shortened
view  of  the  prophet  may  well  include  the
final  ruin.

Vers.  10— 15.— §  4.  The  judgment  m
Judah  is  exemplified  by  the  fate  of  certain  0}
its  cities,  whose  names  the  prophet  connects  witl
Vieir  punishment  in  a  series  of  paronomasias

Ver.  10. — Declare  ye  it  not  at  Gath.  Thii
phrase  from  David's  elegy  over  Saul  (2  Sam
1.  20)  had  become  a  proverbial  saying,  depre
eating  the  malicious  joy  of  their  hostili
neighbours  over  the  misfortunes  that  befel
them.  Gath  is  mentioned  as  the  seat  of  thi
Philistines,  the  eoUNtaut  and  powerful  enemi


TUE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.


[CH.  1. 1— 16.


of  Judah,  (For  itg  Bituation,  see  note  on
Amos  Ti.  2.)  The  paronomasias  in  this
passage,  which  seem  to  modern  ears  artificial
and  puerile,  are  paralleled  in  many  writings
botli  Hebrew  and  classic,  and  were  natural
to  a  people  who  looked  for  mysticnl  meaning
in  words  and  names.  Thus  Gath  is  taken
to  signify  "Tell-town,"  and  the  clause  is,
"In  Tell-town  tell  it  not."  Weep  ye  not
•t  all ;  Vulgate,  laerymit  ne  ploretis ;  i.e.
*'  weep  in  sUence,"  or  "  hide  your  tears,"
that  the  enemy  may  not  know  your  grief.
As  in  each  of  the  other  clauses  a  town  is
mentioned,  aome  editors  would  here  read,
"  In  Acco  ('  Weep-town ')  weep  not  "-^Acoo
being  the  later  Ptolemaia,  the  modern  St.
Jean  d'Acre,  and  taken  here  to  represent
another  foreign  city  which  would  rejoice  at
Judah's  misfortunes  (see  Judg.  L  81).  The
Septuagint  alone  of  all  the  versions  seems  to
countenance  this  reading,  by  translating,'  Oi
'KvaxeXii  lai)  &youcoSa/i«Tc,  "  Ye  Enakim,  do
not  rebuild,"  which  has  been  resolved  into  oj
EK  'Axfl/i,  supposed  to  be  an  error  for  oi  tv
'Axi-  "Am  objections  against  this  reading
may  be  seen  in  Keil  and  Fusey.  There  is
a  play  on  the  words  in  both  these  clauses
(as  in  the  following  five  verses),  which  is
not  seen  in  the  English  Version,  hegath  al
taggidu,  and  bako  al  tibeku.  Knabenbauer
imitates  the  paronomasia  in  Latin, "  Cannis
ne  canite ;  Anconia  ne  angamini ; "  Ewald
and  Sohegg  in  German, "  In  Molln  meldet
nicht ;  in  Weinsberg,  weinet  nicht ;  "  Beuss
in  French,  "  N'allez  pas  le  dire  a  Dijon  I
N'allez  pas  pleurer  i  Ploermel  I "  In  these
puns,  as  we  should  call  them,  the  prophet  is
far,  indeed,  from  jesting.  "  He  sees,"  says
Dr.  Gheyne,  "like  Isaiah,  in  Isa.  x.  30,  a
preordained  correspondence  between  names
and  fortunes;"  and  he  wishes  to  impress
this  on  his  countrymen,  that  the  judgment
may  not  come  upon  them  unwarned.  In
the  house  of  Aphrah;  better,  at  Beth-le-
Aphrah,  i.e.  "House  of  dust;"  Vulgate,
t»  domo  puUerit.  The  site  of  Aphrah  is
unknown.  Some  identify  it  with  Ophrah  in
Benjamin  (Josh,  xviii.  23),  four  miles  north-
east of  Bethel;  others,  with  Qphrah  in
Philistia  (1  Chron.  iv.  14).  Most  of  the
towns  named  below  lie  in  the  Shephelah.
Keil  notes  that  the  word  is  pointed  with
■paihaeh  here  for  the  sake  of  the  paronomasia.
Soil  thyself  in  the  dust;  tprirMe  dutt  upon
thyself.  This  was  a  common  sign  of  mourn-
ing (comp.  2  Sam.  xiii.  19;  Jer.  vi.  26).
The  Hebrew  text  (in  contradistinction  to
the  margin,  Keri)  gives,  "  I  roll  myself,"  or
"I  have  besprinkled  myself,"  the  prophet
identifying  himself  with  the  people.  But
as  in  all  the  subsequent  passages,  not  what
the  prophet  does,  but  what  the  inhabitants
do,  is  the  point  impressed,  the  reading  of
the  Keri  is  here  to  be  preferred.     Vulgate,


pulrere  voi  eonspergite.  The  Septus  gint  hat
an  inexplicable  rendering,  kot4  y4Kura  yrjr
KuTairiaaffie,  "against  laughter  sprinkle
earth,"  which  Brenton  translates,  "sprinkle
dust  in  the  place  of  your  laughter."  With
this  section  (vers.  10 — IS)  should  be  com-
pared Isa.  X.  28 — 32,  whicli  describes  the
alarm  occasioned  by  Sennacherib's  invasion
of  Judah  from  the  north-east,  as  Micah
represents  his  progress  to  the  south-west.

Ver.  11. — Pass  ye  away.  Leave  you»
house.  Then  inhabitant  of  Saphii.  The
Hebrew  is  "  inhabitress,"  the  population
being  personified  as  a  virgin  (comp.  2  Kings
xix.  21 ;  Isa.  xlvii.  1).  "  Saphir "  means
"Fair  city."  It  is  placed  by  Busebius
('Onomast.')  between  Ascalon  and  Eleu-
theropolis;  it  is  now  identified  with  soma
ruins  named  Budfir,  five  miles  south-east  of
Ashdod.  Having  thy  shame  naked;  "in
nakedness  and  shame"  (Pusey);  Vulgate,
eonfuaa  ignominia.  The  prophet  contrasts
the  shame  of  their  treatment  with  the  mean-
ing of  their  city's  name,"  Go,  Fair-town,  into
foul  dishonour."  Septuagint,  KaToMouaa
KoKws  Tcbs  it6\eit  airri)s,  "  fairly  iinhabiting
her  cities."  St.  Jerome,  in  despair  of  ex-
plaining those  Greek  renderings,  says  here,
"Multum  Hebraicum  a  LXX.  interpre-
tatione  discordat,  et  tantis  tam  mea  quam
illorum  translatio  diffiuultatibus  involuta
est,  ut  si  quando  indiguimus  Spiritus  Dei
(semper  autem  in  exponendis  Scripturis
Sanctis  illius  indigemus  adventu),  nunc  vel
maxime  eum  adesse  cupiamns."  Zaanan  is
supposed  to  be  the  same  as  Zenan,  mentioned
in  Josh.  XV.  37.  The  meaning  of  the  name
is  doubtful.  It  is  taken  to  signify  "abound-
ing in  flocks  "  or  "  going  out."  Came  not
forth;  or,  it  not  come  forth.  The  parono-
masia seems  to  lie  rather  in  sound  than
sense,  and  is  variously  explained,  "Tlie
inliabitants  of  Flock-town  went  not  forth
with  their  flocks."  "  The  dwellers  of  Forth-
coming came  not  forth,"  •'.<•  to  flee,  or  to
fight,  or  to  aid  their  brethren;  or  did  not
escape  destruction.  Vulgate,  Non  est  egressa
qum  habitat  in  exitu;  Septuagint,  Ol/ie  i(rj\6e
KaToiKovaa  ^evvaip,  "She  who  dwelt  at
Sennaar  came  not  forth."  In  the  mourning,
etc.  These  words  are  best  joined  with^he
following  clause,  thus:  Tlie  mourning  of
Beth-ezel  talteth  from  you  its  standing ;  Le.
refuge  or  shelter.  Betli-ezel  is  explained,
"  House  at  one's  side."  "  Neighbour-town ;  "
so  the  prophet  would  say,  "  Neighbour-town
is  no  neighbour  to  you,"  affords  you  no  help.
But  various  other  explanations  are  given,
e.g.  "  Lamentation  makes  its  sure  abode  at
Beth-ezel  from  your  calamity."  This  may,
perhaps,  be  supported  by  the  rendering  of
the  LXX.,  A^ifxTBi  i^  i/uuv  v\Tiyiii>  oS^nji,
"  She  shall  receive  of  you  the  stroke  of
anguislL"     Dr.  Cbeyne  connects  the  whoU


OH.  I  1—16.]


THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.


▼erBe  with  one  idea,  "  Zaanan  would  wil-
lingly take  to  flight,  but  the  sound  of  the
mouraing  at  Beth-ezel  (which  might  mean,
'  the  house,  or  place,  at  one's  aide ')  fills  them
with  despair."  Taking  Beth-ezel  to  mean
•'  House  of  root,"  others  would  interpret,  on
account  of  the  public  sorrow, "  The '  house  of
root'  affords  no  firm  home  for  you."  Others,
again,"  The  lamentation  of '  The  near  House '
will  not  stop  near  it,  but  pass  on  to  other
places."  Beth-ezel  is  probably  the  Axal  of
Zech.  xiv.  5,  the  helh  being  dropped,  as  is
often  the  case.  It  was  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Jerusalem  (see  note  on  Zechariah,  Z.o.),

Ver.  12. — Uarotli;  bitterneti.  Its  site  is
unknown ;  but  it  was  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  Jerasalem.  Ewald  sug-
gests that  it  is  the  same  as  Maarath  (Josh,
zy.  59),  hod.  Beit  Ummar,  six  miles  north  of
Hebron.  Waited  carefully  for  good ;  waited,
expecting  succour.  But  the  better  transla-
tion is,  ierithed  in  anguigh  on  account  of
good,  which  they  have  lost,  whether  property
or  liberty.  But  evil  came ;  for  (or,  becauee)
evil  i$  come.  Unto  the  gate  of  Jerasalem
(comp.  Ter.  9).  The  prophet  refers  to  the
inyasion  of  the  Assyrian  kings,  Sargon  or
Sennacherib,  also  mentioned  by  Isaiah  (xxii.
7),  and  the  haughty  message  (Isa.  xxxvi.  2).
^  Ver.  13. — Lacbish.  A  very  strong  and
important  city  of  the  Canaanites,  hod.  Um
Ldkit,  about  fourteen  miles  north-east  of
Gaza,  which  was  captured  by  Sennacherib
after  a  long  siege  (2  Kings  xyiii.  14 ;  Isa.
xxxvi.  2;  xxxvii.  8).  In  the  British
Museum  tiiere  is  a  bas-relief,  brought  from
Assyria,  representing  Sennacherib  seated  on
ills  throne  while  the  spoil  of  the  city  of
Lachish  passed  before  him  (Sayce,  '  Fresh
Light  from  the  Monuments,'  pp.  123,  125).
Bind  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast.  Hamesi
your  horses  to  your  chariots,  that  ye  may
flee  and  escape  destruction.  The  phrase  is
like  the  Latin,  eurrum  jvngere  equit.  The
paronomasia  here  lies  in  the  sound, "  Inha-
bitant of  Lachish,  harness  your  rekkesh"
("runner,"  "coui-ser").  "Inhabitant  of
Horse-town,  harness  your  horses."  Septua-
gint,  }f/6il>os  apjiirav  koX  iimevdi'Taii,  "a
sound  of  chariots  and  horsemen ; "  Vulgate,
tumvltuB  quadrigss  ituporis  —  renderings
which  the  present  Hebrew  text  does  not  sup-
port. She  was  the  beginning,  etc.  How
Lachish  came  to  adopt  the  idolatry  of  Israel,
and  how  she  infected  Judah,  we  know  not.
AconnectionbetweenJerusalem and  Lachish
is  found  in  the  case  of  Amaziah  (2  Einga
xiv.  19),  but  nothing  bearing  on  religion  is
mentioned.  The  whole  clause  is  translated
by  Calmet,  Keil,  etc.,  thus:  "It  was  the
beginning  of  sin  to  the  daughter  of  Zion
that  the  iniquities  of  Israel  were  found  in
thee"  (comp.  oh.  vi.  16;  Amos  viii.  14).
The  particular  transgressions  meant  may  be


the  idolatry  of  Jehoram  (2  CJhron.  xxi.  6)  am
Aliaziah  (2  Chron.  xxii.  3,  4).

Ver.  14. — Therefore.  Because  Judah  ha
adopted  the  evil  practices  of  Israel.  Thi
prophet  here  addresses  Judah,  and  con
tinu>  B  to  do  so  to  the  .end  of  the  ohaptei
Shalt  thon  give  presents  to  Uoresheth-Gatli
The  "  presents  "  intended  are  parting  gilti
farewell  presents.  The  word  is  used  (
Kings  ix.  16)  for  the  dowry  given  to  i
daughter  when  she  is  married.  The  mean
ing,  therefore,  is  that  Judah  must  relinquisl
all  claim  to  Moresheth.  The  paronomasii
is  explained  in  two  ways.  As  Moreshet]
may  mean  "  possession,"  the  prophet  maj
be  understood  to  say,  "  Thou  shalt  give  u]
possession  of  Gath's  possession."  Or  th(
play  of  words  may  depend  upon  the  simi
larity  of  sound  between  Moresheth  anc
Meoratah,  "Betrothed"  (Deut.  xxii.  23)
"  Thou  shalt  give  dismissal  (bill  of  divorce
ment)  to  tlie  city  once  betrothed  to  thee.'
Moresheth-Gath,  Micah's  birthplace,  i
placed  just  south  of  Beit  Jibrin,  or  Eleu
theropolis,  about  twenty-fire  miles  fron
Gaza  (see  Introduction,  §  II.).  The  additioi
of  Gath  to  the  name  of  the  town  is  mean
to  mark  its  situation  as  in  the  immediati
neighbourhood  of  that  well-known  city.  Si
we  have  Bethlehem-Judah  (Judg.  xvii.  7)
Abel-Maim  or  -Maachah  (1  Kings  xv.  20
2  Chron.  xvi.  4).  Septuagint,  A^rci  ^{airo
ffTe?i\o/i€yovs  fois  KKijpoyofjiias  T46,  "  He  shal
cause  men  to  be  sent  forth  even  to  th(
inheritance  of  Geth ; "  Vulgate,  Dabi
emiesariot  super  heredidatem  Oeth.  To  giyi
sliilluchim  the  sense  of  "  messengers  "  seemi
to  be  unprecedented.  The  houses  of  Aohzil
shall  be  a  lie  (achtdb),  a  lying,  deceivinf
brook,  which  disappoints  the  hope  of  thi
wayfarer,  like  "  fundus  mendax  "  (Horat.
'Carm.,'  iil  1.  80).  Septuagint,  oIkov:
/twralovs,  "vain  houses;"  Vnlgate,  domti
mendacii.  The  city  shall  be  yielded  to  thi
enemy  and  lost  to  the  Judeeans.  Achzil
(Josh.  XV.  ii),hod.  Ain  Kezbeh,  eight  milei
north  of  Adullam,  is  probably  the  same  a
Chezib  (Gen.  zxxviii.  5),  where  Shelah
Judab's  son  by  Tamiir,  was  bom.  The  king
of  IsraeL  "  Israel "  is  here  equivalent  ti
Judah,  having,  according  to  the  predictioi
of  vers.  6,  7,  lost  its  political  existenci
(comp.  2  Chron.  xxviii.  19,  where  Ahaz  ii
called  King  of  Israel).

Ver.  15. — Yet  will  I  bring  an  heir  nnti
thee,  0  inhabitant  of  Hareshah.  "  Mare
shah "  sounds  like  MorasUah,  the  Hebrev
word  for  "inheritance;"  so  the  play  is,  "'
will  bring  an  inheritor  who  shall  claim  you
Heritage-town."  The  "heir"  is  the  As
Syrian  king,  Sargon,  into  whose  possessioi
the  city  shall  pass.  Mareshah  (Josh,  xv
44 ;  2  Chron.  xiv.  9)  was  near  Achzib,  Oni
mile  louth-eut  of  Beit  Jibrin,  and  i*  noi


THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.


Ton.  L  1— 161


called  Mer'aek.  He  shall  come,  eto. ;  better,
the  glory  of  hrcul  shall  come  to  Adullam;  i.e.
the  nobility  (comp.  Isa.  v.  13)  of  Israel  shall
fly  lor  refuge  to  Buoh  places  as  the  cave  of
Adullam,  David's  asylum  (1  Sam.  xxii.  1,2).
So  the  Vulgate.  The  LXX.  has,  KAupovo/tfa
«Q)S*OSuA\d/i^|fi  ^  5(i|aT?)s  Qvya/rpbs  'Iff/jo^jX,
"  The  inheritanoe  ahull  come  to  OduUam,
even  the  glory  of  the  daughter  of  Israel."
But  BoseumuUer,  Henderson,  Fuscy,  and
others  take  the  sentence  as  in  the  AutI  lorized
Version,  making  "  the  glory  of  Israel "  in
apposition  with  "Adullam,"  and  under-
standing by  "  he  "  the  heir  or  enemy.  One
knows  no  reason  why  AduUain  should  be
honoured  with  the  above-named  title;  so
the  rendering  given  above  is  preferable.
There  is  probably  a  paronomasia  intended,
"  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  set  (ad  olami)
tor  ever."  The  city  of  Adullam,  hod.  Aid-
el-Mah,  lay  ia  the  valley  of  Elah,  ten  miles
north-west  of  Hebron,  half-way  between
Sochoh  anil  Eeiluh.  It  was  of  great  an-
tiquity, being  mentioned  as  the  birthplace
of  Hirah,  the  friend  of  Judali  (Gen.  xxxviii.
12),  and  one  of  the  cities  fortified  by  Keho-
boam  (2  Ohron.  li.  7).  In  its  neighbourhood
is  the  celebrated  ciive,  Muglift  et  Khureitun,
which  is  pointed  out  as  the  traditional  hold
of  David,  and  which  lias  been  carefully  ex-
plored by  Mr.  Tyrwhitt  Drake,  of  the  Pales-
tine Exploration  Fuud  (see  Thomgon, '  Laud
and  the  Buok,'  pp.  332,  etc.).


Ver.  16. — {  S.  The  prophet  eattt  upon
Zion  to  mourn  for  htr  captivity.  Hake  tbea
bald.  The  Hebrew  word  implies  "  to  make
the  back  of  the  head  bald."  Micah  addresses
Zion  as  the  mother  of  the  children  who  ar«
to  be  led  into  captivity.  Shaving  the  head
in  sign  of  mourning  seems  to  have  been
retained  as  a  traditionary  custom  in  spite  of
the  prohibition  of  the  Law  against  certain
forma  which  the  practice  assumed  (see  Lev.
xix.  27;  Deut.  xiv.  1;  and  for  the  actual
custom,comp,  l8a.iii.  24;  Jer.vii.29;  and  the
note  on  Amos  viii.  10).  Poll  thee.  Cut  off
thy  hair,  nearly  synonymous  with  the  word
in  the  former  clause.  Thy  delicate  ohildien ;
literally,  the  children  of  thy  delighti ;  i.e.  the
children  who  are  a  joy  and  comfort  to  thee,
the  citizens  of  thy  kingdom  (comp.  ch.  U.  9).
Ab  the  eagle  (ne<a;r).  The  vulture  is  meant,
either  Futtur  percnopterus,  common  in  Egypt
and  Palestine,  which  is  bald  on  the  front  o{
the  head  and  neok,  or  more  probably  Vultur
fulvus,  the  griffon  vulture,  whose  whole  head
and  neck  are  destitute  of  true  feathers  (see
'Bible  Eduoiitor,'  ii.  247).  Into  captivity.
This  cannot  refer  exclusively  to  the  Assyrian
invasion,  wherein  very  few  captives  were
taken,  but  must  look  forward  to  the  Baby-
lonian deportation  in  ch.  iv.  10.  The  latter  '
calamity  alone  is  parallel  to  the  destmotion
of  Samaria  announoed  in  Ten.  6,  7  of  this
ehaptei.


HOMILETICS.

♦  er.  1. — True  spiritual  teachers.  A  preface  is  often  regarded  as  of  oomparatiye
unimportance,  and  many  readers  ignore  it  and  pass  on  to  the  jierusal  of  the  work
itself.  Let  not  this  preface  to  the  Book  of  Micah  be  thus  summarily  dismissed.
Every  word  of  God  is  "  profitable."  This  introductory  verse  is  very  suggestive  of
teachings  bearing  upon  holy  service  in  the  cause  of  (Jod  in  our  own  age.  The  Hebrew
prophets  were  not  merely  I'oretellers ;  they  were  also  the  religious  educators  of  the
pe  iple  amongst  whom  they  laboured.    We  are  reminded  here  that —

1.  True  spiritual  teaoheks  abb  entrusted  with  a  bevblation  fbosi  God.
Note:  1.  This  revelation  is  given  in  the  form  ^  words.  "The  word  of  the  Lord  that
came  to  Micah."  Thoughts  may  be  communicated  by  utterance,  actions,  and  In
writing.  In  the  olden  time  God  communicated  his  thoughts  to  Moses  on  the  mount
and  to  the  Israelites  by  the  living  voice,  and  to  the  seers  by  dreams  and  visions.  In
ail  times  be  has  unfolded  his  thoughts  in  actions  (Ps.  xix.  1,  2).  To  us  he  reveals
his  thoughts  in  the  written  Word.  And  it  is  just  in  proportion  as,  taught  by  the
Divine  Spirit,  we  enter  into  the  meaning  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  recognize  in  its
teachings  a  message  committed  unto  us  to  deliver,  that  we  are  qualified  to  be  teachers
of  spiritual  truth  (2  Cor.  v.  18,  19).  2.  2%t»  revelation  comes  to  us  stamped  with
Divine  authority.  "The  word  of  the  Lord."  There  was  no  tone  of  uncertainty
about  the  utterances  of  the  Hebrew  seers;  nothing  that  was  speculative,  theoretical,
problematical,  in  what  they  said ;  nothing  that  could  be  described  as  the  creation  of
their  own  fancy  and  imagination.  Whilst  each  prophet  retained  his  own  individual
peculiarities  and  natural  gilts,  so  that  a  pleasing  variety  meeta  us  in  their  writings,
each  announcement  was  accompanied  by  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord."  In  our  own  day  all  the
resources  of  sanctified  genius  and  endowment  should  be  laid  upon  the  altar  of  service
to  God;  but  let  all  uncertainty  be  dismissed.     The  messenger  must  not  betray  a


OH.  tl— le.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIGAH.

hesitating  tone,  as  though  doubtful  whether  he  has  any  message  to  delirer.  He  hi
glorious  certainties  to  announce,  an  authoritative  message  to  declare;  and,  wil
Confident  and  unwavering  trust,  should  go  forth  and  publish  the  bright  realities  of  oi
faith.  3.  This  revelation  is  made  very  real  to  the  inner  eonseiousnesi  of  the  teache
"  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Micah,"  "  which  he  saw  concerning  Samaria  an
Jerusalem."  It  was  an  inward  experience  with  the  prophet,  a  deep  inwrongb
conviction.  The  word  of  the  Lorii  took  possession  of  his  very  soul,  and  l>ecame  pai
and  parcel  of  his  very  being,  touching,  quickening,  inspiring  his  whole  nature.  Tl
cii'cumstances  of  his  nation,  too,  were  vividly  presented  to  him,  and  the  events  to  \.
fulfilled  were  as  real  as  though  they  had  already  taken  place  or  were  transpirin
before  his  eyes.  "  Which  he  saw."  The  same  expression  is  used  with  reference  t
Amos  (i.  1)  and  Habakkuk  (i.  1).  So  still :  "  That  wnich  we  have  heard,"  etc.  (John  :
1 — 3).  A  deeper  experimental  acquaintance  with  the  truth  to  be  proclaimed  woul
impart  to  the  heralds  of  it  a  holier  earnestness,  and  would  clothe  them  with  might
energy  and  irresistible  power.  "  Let  your  heart  take  in  by  its  secret  veins  that  whio
comes  pure  from  Heaven  in  showers  of  blessing :  so  shall  its  issues,  so  far  as  you
influence  extends,  contribute  to  fertilize  the  wilderness  "  (Arnot).  And  the  heart  mus
be  in  sympathy  with  those  to  whom  the  truth  is  to  be  communicated,  The  circum
stances  of  his  nation  pressed  upon  the  heart  of  Micah.  So  Ezekiel  (iii.  15)  and  Pai
(Eom.  X.  1).  George  Pox  said,  "  I  prayed  to  God  that  he  would  baptize  my  heai
intu  the  sense  of  ail  condition*,  so  that  I  might  be  able  to  enter  into  the  needs  an
sorrows  of  all"

II.  TaUB    BPIEITUAL    TEACHEUS    HAVE   OFTEN   BEEN   BAISED   UP    AND    PRKPAKED   FO

THEIB  WORK  IN  BETiBED  AND  OBscTTKE  PLACES.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  thill  came  t
Micah  the  Morasthite."  Many  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  sprang  from  humble  and  retire
localities.  Elkosh,  Gath-hepher,  Tbhbe,  Abel-Meholah,  Anathoth,  Moresheth-Gath,-
how  comparatively  insignificant  and  unknown  these  places  appeal'  I  and  yet  out  of  thei
respectively  came  Nahum,  JoQah,  Elijah,  Elisha,  Jeremiah,  and  Micah.  C!ountry  lit
has  its  special  advantages  by  way  of  preparing  the  mind  and  heart  for  holy  service.  ]
affords  a  better  opportunity  for  getting  the  spirit  affected  with  the  power  and  goodnet
of  God  as  expressed  in  his  works ;  for  scenes  of  natural  beauty  are  continually  unfolde
to  the  view,  and  of  which  the  citizen  is  deprived.  "  God  made  the  country,  man  th
town."  Quiet  retirement,  too,  is  more  available,  securing  thus  facilities  for  meditatiot
refiection,  and  heart-communion.  There  is  so  much  less  to  distract  and  divert  th
attention  than  is  presented  amidst  life  in  the  great  centres.  Yet  he  who  lives  i
retirement,  if  designed  for  prominent  service,  will  not  fail,  even  in  his  remoteness  froi
the  activities  of  city  life,  to  inform  himself  concerning  the  character  of  the  age  in  whic
he  lives,  and  to  keep  himself  abreast  with  it,  but  will  be  observant  of  "  the  signs  <
the  times,"  and  will  liamiliarize  himself  with  these,  even  as  Micah,  away  in  Moteshetl
Gath,  was  familiar  with  the  moral  and  spiritual  condition  of  his  people,  and  wit
the  doings  of  kings  and  .nobles,  prophets  and  priests.  It  is  often  a  soiirce  of  discourage
ment  to  some  engaged  in  service  to  God  that  they  are  called  upon  to  work  in  ver
retired  spheres,  and  they  ardently  long  for  more  scope  and  wider  influence.  It  shoiil
be  no  slight  consolation  to  such  that  their  spheres,  though  retired,  may  nevertheles
afford  them  far-reaching  power  for  good.  Perchance  under  their  care  may  be  thos
whom  God  has  designed  for  very  influential  service,  and  that  through  their  ministr
these  are  being  prepared  for  their  life-work;  and  that  in  due  course,  leaving  tl
village  and  going  forth  to  their  mission  in  city  or  town,  at  home  or  it  may  be  in  son:
far-uff  land,  they  will  carry  with  them  holy  influences  which  have  been  exerted  upo
them  by  one  who  may  never  be  known  to  fame,  but  whose  "witness  shall  be  in  heavei
and  whose  record  shall  be  on  high."

III.  TbITE  spiritual  TEAOHEBS  will  adapt  THEUSELVES  to  the    AQE  THET  ABE  1

SEEK  TO  iNFLUEKOE.  "  The  word  ...  in  the  days  of  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekial
kings  of  Judah."  An  examination  of  the  period  indicates  that  it  was  an  age :
Thoroughly  corrupt.  Nobles,  priests,  prophets,  had  alike  corrupted  their  way.  Mica
denounced  with  holy  boldness  the  sins  of  the  times  (ch.  iL  1, 2,  7 — 11 ;  iii.  1 — i,  6, 7
2.  Manifestly  formal.  In  sublime  diction  Micah  enforced  the  spirituality  of  genuii
vrorship  and  the  practical  character  of  sincere  piety  (ch.  vi.  6 — 8).  3.  Utter,
unjKiiii-itic.    With  loyal  ipirit  he  recalled  the  psut  of  their  national  hijtory,  whit


S  'THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  Eoh.i.1— 18.

should  have  stirred  their  hearts  anew  (ch.  ii.  12 ;  Ti.  4,  6 ;  vii.  14, 15,  20).  4.  Belting
in  darkness.  The  cup  of  iniquity  was  fast  filling.  The  fate  of  Samaria  was  sealed.
Jerusalem  also  was  reserved  for  desolation.  But  whilst  declaring  the  coming  judg-
ments, Micah  also  declared  the  Divine  mercy  to  the  penitent  (ch.  vii.  18),  and,  whilst
announcing  the  approaching  ruin,  he  looked  beyond  the  gathering  darkness  and  the  fall-
ing shadows,  and  saw  by  faith  "  the  mighty  Child"  appearing  in  the  obscure  village  uf
Bethlehem  in  an  age  to  come,  and  who  should  prove  liimaelf  "  a  Shepherd  more  royal
even  tbau  David,"  and  who  should  usher  in  "  a  peace  even  more  universal  than  that  of
Solomon  "  (ch.  v.  2).  And  so  did  this  distinguished  seer  adapt  himself  to  the  age  he
was  commissioned  to  serve.  And  in  like  manner,  he  who  would  work  successfully
in  the  present  day  must  fully  consider  the  nature  of  the  times,  and  the  special  needs  of
men.  Failure  does  not  always  arise  from  want  of  ability,  but  often  from  lack  of
adaptation.  The  thing  done  is  good  enough  in  itself,  but  is  not  suited  to  the  occasion.
There  is  a  Hindu  proverb,  "  The  chariot  is  weak  at  sea,  and  the  ship  on  land."  la
no  respect  did  the  Divine  Master,  the  great  Prophet  of  the  Church,  more  thoroughly
excel  all  other  instructors  than  in  the  marvellous  suitability  of  all  his  methods  and
utterances  to  the  deepest  needs  of  those  amongst  whom  he  laboured.

Learn :  1.  To  depend  upon  God  for  the  teaching  of  his  Spirit,  and  to  receive  the
truth  from  him,  2,  To  gather  up  strength  in  retirement  for  future  service.  3.  To
seek  to  be  inspired  with  holy  courage,  so  as  to  declare  all  the  counsel  of  God.  4.  To
strengthen  your  hearts  amidst  present  difficulties  and  darkness  by  the  prospect  of  that
full  and  complete  salvation  which  shall  be  accomplished  by  Christ.

Vers,  2 — 7. — The  Divine  Judgments  against  Israeil.  Micah  was  a  prophet  of  Judah,
and  had  special  reference  in  his  prophecy  to  that  kingdom.  StUl,  he  referred  also  to
the  kingdom  of  Israel.  In  these  verses  he  directed  attention  to  the  tribulations  speedily
to  come  upon  the  kingdom  of  Israel ;  and,  whilst  his  words  have  referenoe  to  "  the
dead  past,"  they  suggest  lessons  for  all  times.     Consider —

L   The  DiYINK  JTTDOMENTS  AOAINST  TBB  EINODOU  of  IbBAEL  as  HSBB  rBKOIOTED.

Kote :  1,  Their  occasion.  (Ver.  6.)  The  secular  historian  has  his  account  of  the  causes
of  the  calamities  which  overtook  the  Jewish  people.  He  traces  these  to  lust  of
power  and  dominion  on  the  part  of  the  ancient  monarchies,  Assyrian,  Chaldean,  Baby-
lonian, by  which  they  were  attacked  and  conquered.  But  the  true  spiritual  teacher
probes  deeper,  and  seeks  to  get  at  the  root  of  it  all,  and  finds  this  to  be  *tn — ^national
transgression  (ver.  5),  There  were  three  stages  in  the  downward  progress  of  the
nation,  (1)  Degeneration  in  worship.  Jeroboam,  influenced  by  mere  political  con-
siderations and  worldly  policy,  set  up,  at  Dan  and  Bethel,  new  seats  of  national
worship,  and  represented  the  Divinity  under  the  outward  figure  of  the  sacred  calf.
Thus  did  he  "  sin  and  make  Israel  to  sin."  (2)  Degeneration  in  the  form  of  toorldltness.
The  reign  of  Omri  was  marked  by  the  nation's  growtii  in  pride  and  self-sufficiency,  in
the  arts  and  luxuries  of  life.  He  founded  Samaria,  and  made  it  the  capital  of  the
country.  "  The  town  sloped  down  from  the  summit  of  the  hilk  A  broad  wall  with  a
terraced  top  ran  round  it.  It  stood  amidst  a  circle  of  hills  commanding  a  view  of  its
streets  and  slopes,  itself  the  crown  and  glory  of  the  whole  scene.  Its  soft,  rounded,  oblong
platform  was,  as  it  were,  a  vast  luxurious  couch,  in  which  its  nobles  rested,  securely
propped  and  cushioned  up  on  both  sides,  as  in  the  cherished  corner  of  a  rich  divan  "
(Stanley's  « Jewish  Church,'  ii.  239,  240),  (3)  Degeneration  resulting  from  foreign
alliances,  and  specially  the  union  of  Ahab  to  Jezebul,  and  the  consequent  establish-
ment in  the  land  of  the  Phoenician  worship,  the  heathen  temples  rising,  and  worship  to
Ashtaroth  and  Baal  being  presented  side  by  side  with  the  degenerate  worship  ofiered  to
the  God  of  heaven.  These  evils  wrought  their  natural  effects  in  the  moral  degradation
cf  the  land,  calling  for  those  Divine  judgments  which  the  prophet  here  declared  to  be
impending.  Drunkenness  and  revellings  prevailed  (Hos.  iv.  11 ;  vii.  6) ;  immorality
reigned  (Hos,  iv.  13;  vii.  4;  Amos  ii.  7);  oppression,  swearing,  lying,  theft,  murder,
were  crimes  of  constant  occurrence  (Hos.  iv,l,  2),  2.  Their  necessity.  (Ver.  3.)  "For,
behold,  the  Lord  cometh  out  of  bis  place  " — a  striking  sentence  employed  to  express  the
necessity  that  existed  for  retribution  to  be  exercised,  "  God's  place  "  is  his  mercy.
He  is  love.  He  is  good  and  gracious.  It  is  his  nature  to  show  compassion.  Let  all
prominence  be  given  to  this  characteristic  of  our  God.     We  cannot  dwell  too  much


OT.  L  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.


upon  it,  and  can  never  exhaust  the  rich  theme.  " God  is  love,"  and  mercy  is  "hi
place."  But  there  are  times  when  there  is  a  stem  necessity  for  him  to  "come  forti
out  of  his  place."  He  is  not  only  loving,  he  is  also  righteous,  and  he  is  righteou
because  he  is  loving.  True  love  excludes  partiality,  and  true  justice  requires  that  mei
be  dealt  with  according  to  their  actions ;  so  that,  if  God  would  be  true  to  his  characte
•s  a  Ood  of  love,  both  the  recompense  of  the  good  and  the  punishment  of  the  evi
is  demanded.  We  are  to  warn  men  of  the  terrible  and  far-reaching  consequences  c
sin,  and  whilst  joyfully  proclaiming  "  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord,"  we  are  alsi
to  declare  with  true  solemnity  the  fact  of  "  the  day  of  vengeance  of  our  God."  Whils
delighting  to  speak  of  mercy  as  his  dwelling-place,  we  must  also  declare  that  there  is  thi
necessity  for  him  "  to  come  forth  out  of  his  place  "  to  vindicate  the  right  and  to  punisl
the  wrong.  3.  Hieir  teverity.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  This  is  set  forth  here  in  striking  metaphor
God  is  represented  as  treading  upon  the  high  places,  the  pride  of  the  haughty  being  ai
the  dust  beneath  his  feet.  His  judgments  are  described  as  fire,  vmder  the  influence  o
which  the  mountains  should  be  molten  and  the  valleys  be  cleft ;  whilst  as  wax  melt
before  the  fire,  and  as  the  rushing  waters,  poured  over  a  steep  place,  no  more  return
but  are  scattered  in  spray  and  dissipated  in  vapours,  so  should  the  evil-doers  at  lengtl
be  brought  to  nought.  Samaria,  the  centre  of  the  nation,  and  the  source  whenc*
proceeded  noxious  and  pestilential  influences,  should  be  brought  to  utter  desolatioi
(vers.  6,  7).  This  stem  sentence  was  literally  fulfilled  (see  Porter's  '  Giant  Cities  oi
Bashan,'  p.  227;  Stanley's  'Jewish  Church,'  ii.  311,  312).  4.  Their  equity.  Thi
prophet,  like  other  seers,  summons  the  nations  and  the  earth  to  bear  testimony  to  thi
rightnesa  which  marks  all  God's  judgments  (ver.  2).  The  acknowledgment  of  th(
universe  shall  be  that  the  Divine  judgments  are  "  true  and  righteous  altogether."

II.  The  beabino  or  the  stobt  or  Isbael'b  aniLT  and  fall  upon  national  lifi
nr  THE  FBESENT  DAT.  1.  It  wams  US  that  if  we  use  the  pre-eminence  God  has  assigned
to  us  as  a  nation,  simply  with  a  view  to  our  own  aggrandizement  and  the  furtherance
of  our  own  selfish  ends,  if,  instead  of  worshipping  him,  and  living  with  a  single  eye  tc
his  glory,  we  prostrate  ourselves  before  wealth  and  luxury,  ease  and  sloth,  human
reason  and  human  applause,  God  will  be  against  us,  and  will  come  forth  "  out  of  hit
place"  to  judgment,  and  national  decay  and  death  will  assuredly  follow.  A  haughty
Frenchmau  once  taunted  an  English  captain,  saying,  "  When  will  you  English  letch
Calais  again  ? "  The  captain  replied,  "  When  your  sins  shall  weigh  down  ours !  "
2.  It  reminds  us  how  essential  it  is,  in  order  to  national  prosperity,  that  the  soTereign
should  be  a  pattern  of  every  virtue ;  that  rulers  should  not  only  be  men  of  wisdom  and
foresight,  but  also  (}od-fearing ;  and  that  religion,  spiritual  and  practical,  should
characterize  all  classes  of  the  community.  3.  It  indicates  to  us  the  forbearance  of  God
in  sparing  our  nation,  despite  all  the  defections  which  have  marked  us  as  a  people,  and
'should  lead  us  to  repentance  and  a  new  life.  And  this  must  be  personal  and  individual.
"  He  who  would  reform  the  world  must  first  improve  himself."  Then  let  us  each  "  fear
God,  and  keep  his  commandments,"  and  so  prove  gocd  citizens  of  the  land  we  love.
And  conscious  of  our  weakness,  as  Nature  in  all  her  helplessness  offers  herself  to  the
kindly  influence  of  the  sun  and  the  refreshing  effects  of  the  shower,  so  let  us  offer  oui
hearts  to  the  quickening  and  fertilizing  influences  of  God's  Sijirit,  that  as  Nature  becomes
clothed  with  verdure,  so  we  may  abound  in  all  holy  graces,  and  in  us  the  Lord  and
God  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  abundantly  glorified  I

Yera.  5.  9,  and  13  (last  clauses). — The  contagiousness  of  tin.  Great  prominence
should  be  given  in  Christian  teaching  to  the  sad  and  solemn  fact  of  sin.  Would  we
lead  men  to  prize  the  redemption  wrought  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  to  appreciate
his  unutterable  love  expressed  in  his  "  obedience  unto  death,"  we  must  seek  to  bring
h(mie  to  them  a  sense  of  that  sinfulness,  from  the  thraldom  and  evil  consequences  of
which  he  came  to  deliver  aU  who  trust  in  him.  The  Hebrew  prophets  present  to  us
in  this  respect  an  example  well  worthy  of  imitation.  We  find  in  their  writings  bright
allusions  to  the  deliverance  to  be  wrought  "  in  the  fulness  of  time "  by  the  Messiah,
whose  heralds  they  delighted  to  be,  and  whose  "day"  they  "saw  afar  off;"  but
accompanying  these  words  of  hope  were  heart-searching  utterances,  now  indignant  and
scathing,  and  anon  tender,  pathetic,  wailing,  all  designed  to  bring  home  to  the  con-
science and  heart  a  keen  sente  of  evil-doing,  and  to  lead  men  to  bow  themselves  low  in


10  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  L 1—16.

penitence  for  the  wrong  they  had  done.  We  have  brought  very  conspionously  before
us  in  these  verses  the  contagious  influence  of  sin.    Observe—

L  The  mischief  is  herb  tbacbd,  in  the  first  instance,  to  Lachieh.  (Connect
vers.  9  and  13.)  Lachish  was  oae  of  the  most  powerful  of  the  cities  of  Judah.  It  was
strongly  fortified,  and  formed  the  cavalry  dep&t  for  the  nation.  Sennacherib  spared  no
effort  to  reduce  it,  and,  when  he  had  succeeded,  he  sent  from  it  his  boastful  and  con-
temptuous message  to  Hezekiah.  The  Assyrian  monuments  represent  the  taking  of
this  city  by  the  Assyrians,  and  indicate  how  that  the  victors  regarded  this  as  a  great
triumph.  Geographically,  no  city  of  Judah  was  more  remote  from  the  kingdom  of
Israel  than  this;  yet  it  was  through  this  city  that  the  idolatry  of  Israel  found  its  way
into  Judah.  Lachish  was  "the  beginning  of  sin  to  the  daughter  of  Zion:  for  the
transgressions  of  Israel  were  found  in  her."  How  this  came  to  pass  we  can  only  con-
jecture. Rehoboam  fortified  Lachish.  Maachah,  his  favourite  wife,  cherished  a  warm
attachment  to  the  worship  of  foreign  divinities,  and  may,  through  this  channel,  have
introduced  this  foreign  worship  into  her  country ;  and  in  this  way  probably  Lachish
became  "  the  beginning  of  sin  to  the  daughter  of  Zion."  And,  the  gates  once  opened,
the  pernicious  influence  spread,  until,  despite  certain  attempts  at  reformation,  the  land
became  thoroughly  infected,  and  the  poison  so  prevailed  that  we  read,  "  Her  wound
is  incurable,"  etc.  (ver.  9),

II.  Another  influence  that  operated  in  bringing  about  this  morally  diseased  condi-
tion of  Judah  was  the  alliance  formed  by  Jehoshaphat  with  the  house  of  Omki,

AND    which  EESTJLTED    IN  THE    MABRIAQB  OF  JeHOBAM,    SON   OF  JeHOSHAPHAT,    WITH

Athaliah,  daughter  of  Ahab.  Athaliah  was  a  wicked,  powerful  woman,  possessed
of  fierce  determination,  cool  and  calculating,  yet  of  dauntless,  resolute  spirit.  She
heard  of  the  overthrow  of  her  father's  house,  and  of  the  sad  end  of  Jezebel,  and  the
intelligence  but  strengthened  her  resolve  that  the  worship  of  Baal,  uprooted  in  Samaria,
should  have  a  home  in  Jerusalem.  And  this  she  secured  for  it,  with  all  its  pernicious
influence  (Stanley's  '  Jewish  Church,'  ii.  334,  335).

III.  The  remaininq  powerful  pernicious  influence  is  to  be  found  in  thb
ACCESSION  OF  Ahaz  TO  THE  THRONE.  It  was  during  his  reign  that  Micah  prophesied;
and  when  we  think  of  the  superstitious  character  of  Ahaz,  how  that  he  caused  new
idolatrous  sanctuaries  to  rise  on  every  hand,  established  the  worship  of  Moloch  under
the  very  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  devoted  his  son  to  sacrifice,  casting  him  into  the  fire,
need  we  wonder  at  the  prophet  crying  with  deep  distress,  "What  are  the  high  places
of  Judah?  Are  they  not  Jerusalem?"  Beginning  at  Lachish,  in  the  very  extreme
border  of  the  land,  the  contagious  influences  spread  until  the  whole  nation,  even  to  its
very  centre,  had  become  infected  (ver.  9).  So  is  it  ever.  There  is  the  commencement
of  the  downward  course,  "  the  beginning  of  the  sin,"  leading  on  to  general  depravity
and  defilement.

Learn :  1.  To  be  watchful  against  "  the  beginnings "  of  evil.  2.  Christ  suffered
"  without  the  gate,"  that  he  might  deliver  us  from  sin  and  bless  us  by  turning  us  from
our  iniquities  (Acts  iii.  26).  3.  Into  "the  new  Jerusalem"  there  entereth  not
anything  that  defileth  or  worketh  abomination,  or  maketh  a  lie;  but  there  all  God's
perfected  ones,  freed  from  the  curse  and  blight  of  sin,  shall  serve  him  in  holiness  and
love  for  ever.

Ver.  8. — The  prevalence  of  sin  the  source  of  grief  to  the  good,  L  Thb  fact.  The
good  in  all  a^es  have  mourned  over  sin  and  its  consequences  (Ps.  cxix.  136 ;  Jer.  ix.  1 ;
Luke  xix.  41,  42).  In  ver.  8  we  have  pictured  to  us  the  distress  of  one  thoroughly
coble  and  good,  true  and  patriotic,  occasioned  by  the  prevailing  ungodliness  and  the
calamities  of  which  he  had  to  speak.  With  a  vivid  sense  of  the  evils  of  the  times  and
of  the  coming  judgments,  this  prophet  (as  others  before  him)  flung  aside  his  mantle
and  went  about  beating  his  breast,  and  pouring  forth  wild  shrieks  and  lamentations.
By  "the  dragons"  is  meant  "the  jackals,"  and  by  "the  owls"  is  intended  "the
ostriches."  Of  the  former  we  read,  "  The  jackals  make  a  lamentable  howling  noise,  so
that  travellers  unacquainted  with  them  would  think  that  a  company  of  people,  women
•r  children,  were  howling  one  to  another"  (Pucocke).  And  of  the  latter,  another
writes,  "  During  the.lonesome  part  of  the  night  tliey  nften  make  a  doleful  and  piteous
BoiM.    I  have  often  heard  them  groan  as  if  they  were  in  the  greatest  agoniea,"  (Shaw's


CH.  I.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK   OF  MICAH.  11

'  Trayels  *).  Bo  that  when  the  prophet  speaki  of  making  "  a  wailing  like  the  Jackals,
and  mourning  like  the  ostriches,"  he  intimates  that  he  would  give  way  to  the  intensity
of  grief  and  distress,  in  view  of  the  prevailing  iniquity  and  its  prospective  punishment,

II.  The  causes.  This  grief  arises  from  :  1.  Regard  for  the  honour  of  that  holy  and
perfect  Being  against  whom  all  sin  is  directed.  2.  Esteem  for  his  pure  and  holy  Law,
of  which  Law  all  sin  is  a  violation.  3.  Love  of  righteousness.  4.  Deep  compassion
for  those  who  are  thus  led  captive  by  evil.

III.  Thb  limitations.  The  manifestation  of  this  grief  should  be  restrained  when
its  expression  would  furnish  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  God  to  blaspheme  (ver.  10).
Quoting  the  expression  from  David's  elegy,  "  Tell  it  not  in  Q-ath,"  Micah  bids  the
good,  "  weeping  to  weep  not,"  the  idea  being  that  prudence  should  mark  them  even  in
their  sorrow  over  sin;  that  a  restraint  should  be  placed  by  them  even  upon  their
mourning  over  the  prevailing  evil,  rather  than  by  their  demonstrations  of  sorrow  they
should  cause  the  adversaries  of  God  and  of  his  people  to  blaspheme  and  triumph.  We
should  be  prepared  to  endure  much,  instead  of,  by  giving  way,  presenting  an  advantage
to  the  foes  of  God,  and  furnishing  them  with  the  opportuaity  of  pouring  contempt
upon  his  Name.

Vers.  11 — 16. — Sorrow  foUwiing  in  tht  train  of  evil.  L  This  tbuth  is  skt  pobth
hj  these  verses  m  pobtioal  lanouaoe.  The  prophet  does  not  mention  the  land
of  Judah,  but  he  singles  out  a  number  of  places  in  the  country,  and  addresses  them  by
name,  employing  phraseology  calculated  to  produce  a  strong  impression  concerning
the  grief  and  sadness  that  should  overspread  the  nation.  We  may  fittingly  compare
with  this  a  similar  passage  in  the  book  of  Micah's  contemporary,  Isaiah  (x.  28 — 32).
In  both  passages  these  distinguished  skiers  described,  in  terms  of  pathetic  sadness,  the
sorrows  which  should  come  upon  the  land  in  coasequence  of  the  nation's  guilt.  The
trials  thus  predicted  did  not,  however,  come  in  all  their  intensity  so  speedily,  for
the  nation,  under  the  influence  of  Hezekiah,  bowed  itself  low  in  penitence,  and  pro-
ceeded to  reform  the  prevailing  evils.  The  Assyrian  army  was,  in  consequence,
divinely  checked  in  its  onward  march ;  the  destroying  angel  accomplished  his  work
of  terrible  destruction  in  the  camp  of  the  Assyrians,  and  a  respite  was  granted  to
Judah  (Isa.  xxxvii.  36).

II.  This  teuth,  thus  ilhisteatkd,  admits  op  the  widest  application.
Sorrow  ever  follows  in  the  course  of  evil.  A  life  of  obedience  to  God's  revealed  will  ia
the  only  way  in  which  happiness,  real  and  lasting,  may  be  secured.  The  rabbins  say
that  "when  Adam  had  tasted  the  forbidden  fruit,  his  head  ached."  The  highest
authority  has  declared  that  "  the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard,"  and  that  "  whatsoever
a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also  reap "  (Gal.  vL  7).  An  old  writer  has  compared  a
life  of  worldliness  to  one  on  the  stream,  and  following  the  river's  course.  He  passes
through  very  lovely  scenery.  There  are  the  sweet  meadows,  green  woods,  the  fertile
pastures,  magnificent  buildings,  strong  forts,  famous  cities,  but  at  last  he  comes  to  tha
ealt  sea.  So  the  stream  of  worldliness  may  yield  you  many  a  passing  delight,  but  the
end  to  which  it  conducts  is  truly  desolate  (Thomas  Adams).  Have  we  not  served  sin
long  enough  ?  All  time  is  too  long  that  is  given  to  that  service.  It  is  enough.  The
time  past  shall  suffice  us  in  which  to  have  wrought  the  will  of  the  evil  one.  We  cast
ourselves  at  thy  feet,  0  Lord  ;  deliver  us  from  the  power  and  dominion,  the  shame  and
sorrow,  of  sin  ;  and  help  us  to  live  the  manly  and  godly  life  1

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Yer.  ?. — T%e  Lord  God  a  witness  against  sinners.  God  never  leaves  himself  without
witness  among  men.  He  bears  witness  perpetually  to  them — ^by  the  gifts  of  his  hand
(Acts  xiv.  17),  by  the  still  small  voice  within,  and  by  the  voice  of  his  messengers.  God
has  borne  and  still  bears  witness  to  us  on  behalf  of  Christ  This  may  be  illustrated
from  John  v.  31 — 39,  wliere  our  Lord  speaks  of  three  ways  in  which  the  Father  testified
on  his  behalf.  1.  By  the  mission  of  John  the  Baptist,  representing  preachers  and
teachers.  2.  By  his  works  (to  us,  miracles  of  grace,  converts  to  Christ).  3.  By  the
written  Word.    We  have  to  add  God's  witness :   4.  By  the  resurrection  of  Christ  (Acts


12  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  [oh.  1. 1— 1«.

zvii.  31).  6.  By  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts  t.  32).  In  all  these  ways  God  ii
bearing  witness /or  ut.  So  even  in  his  uhastisements  (1  Cor.  xi.  32).  But  if  we  heed
not  these  testimonies /or  us,  we  must  be  prepared  at  any  time  to  hear  the  voice  of  God'l
proyidence  calling  for  judgments  (vers.  3,  4),  and  thus  witnessing  against  us.  When
such  judgments  fall,  Q-od  will  be  able  to  testify :  (1)  That  we  have  had  abundant
privileges.  Illustrate  from  1  Sam.  xii.  6 — 15.  (2)  That  we  have  had  fair  warning  and
have  neglected  it,  as  did  Samaria  (2  Kings  xviL),  and  Judah  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  11 — 21),
and  the  later  Jews  (Acta  xiii.  46).  (3)  That  his  judgments  are  so  righteous  that  God
can  summon  all  people  to  observe  and  justify  them  (cf.  Deut.  xxiz.  24 — 28).  "  It  is
a  bitter  case  when  our  provoked  Lord  is  provoked  to  go  out  of  doors  to  the  Btreeta
with  his  beloved's  faults."  They  proceed  from  the  very  temple  of  his  holiness  (cf.
Bev.  XT.  3 — 6,  where  the  songs  of  vindication  and  the  angels  of  vengeance  are  coupled
together).  God  never  hesitates  to  give  reasons  for  his  judgments  (Prov.  i.  24 — 27;
Jer.  xxix.  23 ;  Mai.  iL  14 ;  iii.  6).  Such  judgments  as  fall  now  are  but  predictions  and
earnests  of  the  great  judgment  awaiting  the  ungodly.  God,  who  will  then  be  •
witness  against  ns,  warns  us  now  of  sonoe  of  the  ways  in  which  he  will  then  testify.
He  will  bring  as  witnesses :  (1)  The  Law  (John  v.  45).  (2)  The  gospel  (John  xii.  47).
(8)  Our  outward  privileges.  Illustrate  from  Josh.  xxiv.  26,  27.  So  there  may  be
cited  against  us — the  pulpit  from  which  we  heard  the  Word,  and  the  preacher  who  in
it  "  testified  repentance  towards  God,"  etc.  (Acts  xx.  21).  (4)  The  less  privileged  of
our  brethren  (cf.  Luke  xL  31,  32).  (5)  Our  misused  talents  (Jas.  T.  1 — 4).  (6)
Our  words  (Matt.  xiL  37).  (7)  Our  consciences  (John  viii.  9 ;  Bom.  ii.  15).  If  true
now,  how  much  more  then  1  Lest  God  should  be  a  witness  against  us  then,  we  must,
by  repentance,  faith,  and  obedience,  secure  his  testimony  now,  like  Enoch  (Heb.  xi.  5 ;
cf.  Ps.  cxivii.  11).  Then  we  shall  hare  the  testimony  of  our  brethren  (Bom.  zvL
6 — 13;  3  John  3 — 6)  and  of  our  own  consciences  (2  Cor.  i.  12),  and  shall  be  able  to
anticipate  without  fear  the  final  verdict  of  God  (Bom.  viii.  33,  34). — E.  S.  P.

Ver.  6. — Sins  in  tht  metropolis.  God's  interposition  by  judgment  is  threatened  on
acconnt  of  the  nation's  sins.  The  greatness  of  their  privileges  involved  special  respon-
sibilities and  chastisements  (Amos  iii.  2).  These  sins  are  traced  to  their  sources  in
the  capitals  of  the  two  kingdoms.  A  metropolis  is  a  centre  of  influence  for  good  or  for
evil.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  histories  of  both  the  Hebrew  kingdoms.  The
northern  kingdom  had  in  succession  three  capitals :  (1)  Shechem,  where  the  apostasy
of  Israel  began  (1  Kings  xii.  25 — 33).  (2)  Tirzah,.the  home  of  Jeroboam  (1  Kings
xiv.  17),  the  scene  of  civil  strife  (1  Kings  xvi.  9, 17, 18),  and  of  the  court  of  Omri  of
sinister  memory  (ch.  vi.  16),  for  half  his  reign.  (3)  Samaria,  the  seat  of  monarchy
for  two  hundred  years.  Among  the  sins  specially  charged  by  the  prophets  against
Samaria  we  find  pride  (Isa.  ix.  9),  luxury  and  licentiousness  (Isa.  xxviii.  1 — 4 ;  Amos
vi.  1 — 6),  incorrigible  treachery  (Hos.  vii.  1),  contemptuons  disregard  of  God  and  his
worship  (Hos.  viiL  5  ;  Amos  viii.  14),  oppression  of  the  poor  (ch.  iii. ;  Amos  iv.  1).  In
Judah  the  high  places  were  an  offence  to  God,  which  even  good  kings  did  not  entirely
suppress,  so  that  Jerusalem  may  be  said  to  have  been  responsible  for  them,  and  did
not  escape  the  infection  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  -1 — 4,  23 — 25)  nor  the  denunciations  of  the
prophets  (Isa.  i.,  v. ;  xxviii.  14 — 19).     We  are  thus  reminded  of —

I.  Thb  eesponsibilitibs  attachiko  to  a  mktbopolis.  It  is:  1.  The  seat  of
government,  where  kings  anri  rulers  live  and  exert  great  personal  influence,  and  where
laws  are  passed  which,  if  bad,  may  corrupt  the  national  conscience  and  deprave  social
life.  2.  One  chief  centre  of  public  opinion,  where  the  most  educated  and  cultivated
congregate.  3.  The  fountain  of  fashion.  4.  The  gathering-place  of  the  rural  popula-
tion, where  the  opinions  and  practices  of  the  citizens  may  be  speedily  imbibed.
Illustrate  from  the  influence  of  Paris  during  the  second  empire,  culminating  in  the
craze  for  war,  which  brought  ruin  on  the  country  in  1870 ;  or  from  the  influence  of
Constantinople  and  its  pachas  on  the  present  condition  of  the  Turkish  empire.  Such
capitals  are  centres  of  corruption,  like  diseased  lungs  where  the  blood  is  deteriorated
rather  tlian  purified.

II.  Lessons  aeb  suqoebted  fob  all  classes  of  eesidents  nr  a  metropolml
1.  For  the  court,  lest  they  be  like  Jeroboam,  "  who  made  Israel  to  sin."  2.  For  legis-
lators.    Illustrate  from  the  demoralizing  effects  of  many  of  our  past  licensing  acta.


CH.  1. 1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  15

3^  For  editors  of  newspapers  and  other  leaders  of  public  opinion.  It  was  these  who
were,  to  a  large  extent,  responsible  for  the  Crimean  War.  4.  For  the  leaders  of  fashion,
who  may  foster  habits  of  extravagance,  of  peril  to  health,  or  even  of  cruelty  in  matters
of  dress.  6.  For  men  of  business ;  the  exchanges  of  the  metropolis  giving  a  tone  to
the  commercial  customs  of  the  country.  6.  For  artisans,  whose  trades  unions  may
help  or  injure  their  fellow-workmen  scattered  in  the  provinces.  7.  For  preachers,
whum  many  gather  from  all  parts  to  hear,  and  who  may  give  a  tone  to  the  preaching
of  the  country.  8.  For  Church  members.  Heresy  or  worldliness  in  metropolitan
Churches  may  soon  spread  among  rural  Churches  muntaining  a  simpler  faitb  and
practice  (cf.  Matt.  t.  14, 16;  Rom.  i.  8).— B.  S.  P.

Vers.  1,  2. — Divine  revelation.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  that  came  to  Micah  the
Morasthite  in  the  days  of  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah,  kings  of  Judah,  which  he  saw
concerning  Samaria  and  Jerusalem.  Hear,  all  ye  people;  hearken,  0  earth,"  etc.
Micah  calls  himself  a  Morasthite  because  he  was  a  native  of  Moresheth-Gath,  a  small
tuwn  of  Judsea.  He  prophesied  in  the  days  of  Jotham,  Ahaz,  and  Hezekiah,  kings  of
Judah,  and  his  prophetic  mission  commenced  soon  after  that  of  Isaiah.  He  was
contemporary  with  him,  as  well  as  with  Hosea  and  Amos.  His  prophecies  were
directed  to  Samaria,  the  capital  city  of  Israel,  and  also  to  Jemsalem.  Hence  we  find
denunciations  against  Samaria  mingled  with  prophecies  concerning  Judah  and  Jeru-
salem. One  of  his  predictions,  it  seems,  saved  the  life  of  Jeremiah,  who  would  have
been  put  to  death  for  foretelling  the  destruction  of  the  temple,  had  not  Micah  foretold
the  same  thing  a  hundred  years  before.  The  book  is  commonly  divided  into
three  sections — ch.  i.  and  ii. ;  ch.  iii.  to  v.;  ch.  vi.  andvii.  Each  of  these  opens  with  a
summons  to  hear  God's  message,  and  then  proceeds  with  expostulations  and  threaten-
ings,  which  are  followed  by  glorious  promises.  His  style  is  bold,  fiery,  and  abrupt,
and  has  not  a  little  of  the  poetic  grandeur  of  Isaiah.  His  sudden  transitions  from  one
subject  to  another  often  make  his  writings  difficult  to  explain.  "It  is  not,"  says
Delitzsch,  "a  little  remarkable  that  Micah  should  adopt  as  the  first  sentence  of  his
prophecy  that  with  which  his  namesake  concluded  his  denouncement  against  Ahab  "
(1  Kings  xxii.  28).  Hengstenberg  is  of  opinion  that  "he  quoted  the  words  designedly,
in  order  to  show  that  bis  prophetic  agency  was  to  be  considered  as  a  confirmation  of
that  of  his  predecessor,  who  was  so  zealous  for  God,  and  that  he  had  more  in  common
with  him  than  the  bare  name."  We  may  take  these  words  as  suggesting  certain
thoughts  concerning  Divine  revelation,  or  the  Bible.

I.  It  is  the  "  Word  of  the  I-oed."  What  is  a  word  ?  1.  A  mind-manifesting
power.  In  his  word  a  true  man  manifests  himself,  bis  thought,  feeling,  character ;  and
his  word  is  important  according  to  the  measure  of  his  faculties,  experiences,  attain-
ments. Divine  revelation  manifests  the  mind  of  God,  especially  the  moral  character-
istics of  that  mind — his  rectitude,  holiness,  mercy,  etc.  2.  A  mind-influencing
power.  Man  uses  his  word  to  influence  other  minds,  to  bring  other  minds  into
sympathy  with  his  own.  Thus  God  uses  his  Word.  He  uses  it  to  correct  human
errors,  dispel  human  ignorance,  remove  human  perversities,  and  turn  human  thought
and  sympathy  into  a  course  harmonious  with  his  own  mind.

II.  It  18  "THE  WOBD  OF  THE  LoRd"  HADE  TO  INDIVIDUAL  MEN.     It" Came  tO  Micah

the  Morasthite."  It  did  not  come  to  all  men  of  his  age.  and  country  in  common.  It
came  to  him  and  a  few  more.  Why  certain  men  were  chosen  as  the  special  recipients
of  God's  word  is  a  problem  whose  solution  must  be  left  for  eternity.  If  it  be  said — The
men  to  whom  God  made  special  communications  were  men  whose  mental  faculties,
moral  genius,  and  habits  specially  qualified  them  to  become  recipients,  and  if  all  men
had  the  same  qualifications,  all  would  have  Divine  communications,  the  difficulty  is  not
removed  by  this ;  for  it  might  still  be  asked — ^Why  have  not  all  men  such  qualifica-
tions ?  The  fact  remains  that  "  Holy  men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  by  the
Holy  Ghost,"

III.  It  is  "  THE  WoKD  or  the  Lobd"  made  to  individtjal  men  foe  all  hanehtd.
"  Hear,  all  ye  people ;  hearken,  0  earth,  and  all  that  therein  is  I "  God  did  not  speak
to  any  individual  man  specially  in  order  that  the  communication  might  be  kept  to
himself,  but  that  he  might  communicate  it  to  others.  He  makes  one  man  the  special
recipient  of  truth  that  he  may  become  the  organ  and  promoter  of  it.     God'i  Word


14  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  [oh.  i.  1— 1«,

is  for  the  world,  and  the  man   who  has  it  should  give   it  forth.     God  enlightens,
renoyates,  and  saves  man  by  man. — D.  T.

Vers.  3 — 7. — Ood^s  procedure  in  relation  to  tin.  "For,  behold,  the  Lord  Cometh
forth  out  of  his  place,  and  will  come  down,  and  tread  upon  the  high  places  of  the
earth,"  etc.  This  is  a  highly  figurative  and  sublime  representation  of  the  Almighty  in
his  retributive  work,  especially  in  relation  to  Samaria  and  Jerusalem.  He  is  repre-
sented as  leaving  his  holy  temple,  coming  out  of  his  place,  and  marching  with
overwhelming  grandeur  over  the  high  places  of  the  earth,  to  deal  out  punishment  to
the  wicked.  "Behold,  the  Lord  cometh  forth  out  of  his  place,  and  will  come  down,
and  tread  upon  the  high  places  of  the  earth.  And  the  mountains  shall  be  molten  under
him,"  etc.  "  The  description  of  this  theophaiiy,"  says  Delitzsch,  "  is  founded  upon  the
idea  of  a  terrible  storm  and  earthquake,  as  in  Ps.  xviii.  8.  The  mountaius  melt
(Judg.  T.  4;  Ps.  Ixviii.  8)  with  the  streams  of  water  which  discharge  themselves
from  heaven  and  the  valleys  split  with  the  deep  channels  cut  out  by  the  torrents
of  water.  The  similes  '  like  wax,'  etc.  (as  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  2),  and  '  like  water '
are  intended  to  express  the  complete  dissolution  of  mounti\ins  ami  valleys.^  The
actual  facts  answering  to  this  description  aie  the  destructive  influences  exerted  upon
nature  by  great  national  judgments."  The  reference  may  be  to  the  destruction
of  the  King  of  Israel  by  Shalmaueser,  and  the  inva^iion  of  Judah  by  the  armies  of "
Sennacherib  and  Nebuchadnezzar,  by  the  latter  of  whom  the  Jews  were  carried  away
captive.  The  passage  is  an  inexpressibly  grand  representation  of  God's  procedure  in
relation  to  sin.     Let  us  look  at  this  procedure  in  two  aspects.

I,  As  IT  APPEARS  TO  THE  EYE  OF  MAN.  The  Bible  is  eminently  anthropomorphic:
it  presents  God  to  man  iu  human  attributes  and  modes  of  operation.  Two  thoughts
are  suggested :  1.  God,  in  dealing  out  retribution,  appears  to  man  in  an  extraordinary
position.  "  He  cometh  forth  out  of  his  place."  What  is  his  place?  To  all  intelligent
beings  the  settled  place  of  the  Almighty  is  the  temple  of  love,  the  pavilion  of  goodness,
the  mercy-seat.  The  general  beauty,  order,  and  happiness  of  the  universe  give  all
intelligent  creatures  this  impression  of  him.  But  when  confusion  and  misery  fall  on  the
sinner,  the  Almighty  seems  to  man  to  come  out  of  his  "  place  " — to  step  aside  frum  his
ordinary  procedure.  Not  that  he  does  so ;  but  in  man's  view  he  seems  to  do  so.  The
Immutable  One  does  not  change  his  purpose.  His  purpose  is  benevolent,  though  in
carrying  it  forward  it  necessarily  brinas  misery  to  those  who  oppose  it.  Judgment  is
God's  strange  work  (Isa.  xxviii.  21).  He  comes  out  of  his  place  to  execute  it.  2.  God,  in
dealing  out  retribution,  appears  to  man  in  a  terrific  aspect.  He  does  not  appear  as  in
the  silent  march  of  the  stars  or  the  serenity  of  the  sun;  but  as  in  thunder-storms  and
volcanic  eruptions.  "  The  mountains  shall  be  molten  under  him,  and  the  valleys  shall
be  cleft,  as  wax  before  the  fire."  I'hough  the  Almighty  is  as  beniiiU  and  serene  when
bringing  deserved  suffering  upon  the  sinner  as  he  is  when  filling  heaven  with  gladness,  yet
to  the  suffering  sinner  he  always  seems  terrific.  He  seems  to  be  rending  the  heavens,
cleaving  the  mountains,  and  tearing  the  earth  to  pieces.  God  is  evermore  jiresented
to  an  intelligent  creature  according  to  the  moral  state  of  his  soul.

II.  As  IT  AFFECTS  A  SINFUL  PKOPLE.  In  God's  procedure  in  relation  to  sin,  what
disastrous  effects  were  brought  upon  Samaria  and  Jerusalem  I  1.  God,  in  his  procedure
in  relation  to  sin,  brings  material  ruin  upon  people.  "  Therefore  I  will  make  Samaria
as  an  heap  of  the  field,  and  as  plantings  of  a  vineyard :  and  I  will  pour  down  the  stones
thereof  into  the  valley,  and  I  will  discover  the  foundations  thereof."  It  means  utter  ruin.
Sin  brings  material  destruction  upon  a  people,  brings  on  commercial  decay,  poktical
ruin,  destroys  the  health  of  the  body,  and  brings  it  ultimately  to  the  dust.  Sin  brings
material  ruin.  2.  God,  in  his  procedure  in  relation  to  sin,  brings  mental  anguish  upon
a  people.  "  And  all  the  graven  images  thereof  shall  be  beaten  to  pieces,  and  all  the
hires  thereof  shall  be  burned  with  the  fire,  and  all  the  idols  thereof  will  I  lay  desolate."
A  disruption  between  the  soul  and  the  objects  of  its  supreme  affections  involves  the
greatest  angtiish.  The  gods  of  a  people,  whatever  they  may  be,  are  these  objects,  and
these  are  to  be  destroyed.  "  The  graven  images  thereof  shall  be  beaten  to  pieces."
The  divinities,  the  fanes,  the  priests — all  shattered.  Such  is  the  ruin  which  sin  brings
on  A  people.

CONCLUSION.     Mark  well  that  God  has  a  course  of  conduct  in  relation  to  sin;  a*


OH,  1.1— 16.J  TllE   BOOK   OP   MICAH.  18

rather,  that  God,  in  hU  beneficent  march,  must  ever  appear  terrible  to  the  sinner  and
bring  ruin  on  his  head.  It  is  the  wisdom  as  well  aa  the  duty  of  all  intelligent  creature!
to  move  in  thought,  sympathy,  and  purpose  as  God  moves — move  with  him,  not
against  him.  To  move  with  him  is  to  see  him  in  all  the  attraction  of  Fatherhood ;  to
move  against  him  is  to  see  him  in  all  the  horrors  of  an  infuriated  Judge. — D.  T.

Vers.  8, 9. — Moral  incwrablenesa.  "  Therefore  I  will  wail  and  howl,  I  will  go  stripped
and  naked :  I  will  make  a  wailing  like  the  dragons,  and  mourning  as  the  owls.  Fur
her  wound  is  incurable;  for  it  is  come  unto  Judah;  he  is  come  unto  the  gate  of  my
people,  even  to  Jerusalem,"  These  verses  have  been  thus  translated  :  "  Therefore
will  1  lament  and  howl ;  1  will  go  spoiled  and  naked ;  I  will  keep  lamentation  like  the
jackals,  and  mourning  like  the  ostriches.  For  her  stripes  are  malignant ;  for  it  comes
to  Jufiah,  reaches  to  the  gate  of  my  people,  to  Jerusalem."  Micah's  intention  is  not
only  to  exhibit  publicly  his  mourning  for  the  approaching  calamity  of  Judah,  but  also
to  set  forth  in  a  symbolical  form  the  fate  that  awaits  the  Judseans.  And  he  can  only
do  this  by  including  himself  in  the  nation,  and  exhibiting  the  fate  of  the  nation  in  his
own  person.  "  Wailing  like  jackals  and  ostriches  is  a  loud,  strong,  mournful  cry,
those  animals  beiog  distiDguished  by  a  mournful  wail."  We  shall  take  these  words  aa
suggesting  the  subject  of  moral  incurableness,  Samaria  and  Jerusalem  were,  in  a
material  and  political  sease,  in  a  desperate  and  hopeless  condition.  Our  subject  is
moral  incVfrableness,  and  we  make  two  remarks  concerning  it.

I.  It  is  a  condition  into  which  men  mat  fall.  1.  Mental  philosophy  shows  this.
Such  is  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  that  the  repetition  of  an  act  can  generate
an  uncontrollable  tendency  to  repeat  it ;  and  the  repetition  of  a  sin  deadens  altogether
that  moral  sensibility  which  constitutionally  recoils  from  the  wrong.  The  mind  often
makes  habit,  not  only  second  nature,  but  the  sovereign  of  nature.  2.  Observation  shows
this.  That  man's  circle  of  acquaintance  must  be  exceedingly  limited  who  does  not
know  men  who  become  morally  incurable.  There  are  iceurable  liars,  incurable  misers,
incurable  sensualists,  and  incurable  drunkards.  No  moral  logician,  however  great  his
dialectic  skill,  can  forge  an  argument  strong  enough  to  move  them  from  their  old  ways,
even  when  urged  by  the  seraphic  fervour  of  the  lughest  rhetoric.  3.  2%e  Bible  shows
this.  What  did  Solomon  mean  when  he  said,  "  Speak  not  in  the  ears  of  a  fool,  for  he
will  despise  the  wisdom  of  thy  words  "  (Frov.  xxiii.  9)  ?  What  did  Christ  mean  when
he  siud,  "Give  not  that  which  is  holy  to  the  dogs,  neither  cast  ye  your  pearls  before
swine"?  And  again,  "  If  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the
things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace  1  But  now  they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes  "  ?  We
often  speak  of  retribution  as  if  it  always  lay  beyond  the  grave,  and  the  day  of  grace
as  extending  through  the  whole  life  of  man ;  but  such  is  not  the  fact.  Betribution
begins  with  many  men  here ;  the  day  of  grace  terminates  with  many  before  the  day
of  death.  There  are  those  who  reach  an  unconvertible  state ;  their  characters  are  stereo-
typed and  fixed  as  eternity.

II.  It  is  a  condition  fob  the  profodndbst  lamentation.  At  the  desperate  con-
dition of  his  country  the  prophet  is  brought  into  the  most  poignant  distress.  "  There-
fore I  will  wail  and  howl,  I  will  go  stripped  and  naked  :  I  will  make  a  wailing  like
the  dragons,  and  mourning  as  the  owls."  Christ  wept  when  he  considered  the  moral
inouiableness  of  the  men  of  Jerusalem.  "0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem!"  etc.  There  is
no  sight  more  distressing  than  the  sight  of  a  morally  incurable  soul.  There  is  no
building  that  I  pass  that  strikes  me  with  greater  sadness  than  the  Hospital  for  "  Incur-
ables;" but  what  are  incurable  bodies  compared  to  morally  incurable  souls?  There
are  anodynes  that  may  deaden  their  bodily  pains,  and  death  will  relieve  them  of  their
torture ;  but  a  morally  incurable  soul  is  destined  to  pass  into  anguish,  intense  and  more
intense  as  existence  runs  on,  and  peradventure  without  end.  The  incurable  body  may
not  necessarily  be  on  injury  to  others ;  but  a  morally  incurable  soul  must  be  a  curse  as
long  as  it  lives.  Were  we  truly  alive  to  the  moral  state  of  wicked  men  around  us,  wo
should  be  ready  to  break  out  in  the  words  of  the  prophet,  "  Therefore  I  will  waU  and
howl,  I  will  go  stripped  and  naked,"  etc. — D.  T.

Ver,  13, — Be  quick.  "  Bind  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast."  These  words  are
addressed  to  the  inhabitants  of  Lachish.    "  This  place  appears  to  have  formed  the  link


1«  THE  BOOK   OP   MICAH.  [oh.  i.  1— IB

of  idolatry  between  Israel  and  Judah.  Lying  in  the  Shepholah,  a  fortified  place  of
great  importance,  she  was  the  first  city  in  Judah  that  was  led  away  by  the  sin  of
Jeroboam;  and  from  her  the  infection  spread  till  at  length  it  reached  Jerusalem  itself.
In  the  prospect  of  a  sudden  attack,  it  behoTed  the  inhabitants  to  use  all  despatch  in
removing  their  families  and  what  property  they  could  take  with  them  to  a  distance.
Lachish  was  besieged  by  Sennacherib  before  making  the  threatened  attack  on
Jerusalem  "  (2  Kings  xviii.  14).  Our  subject  is  promptitude  in  action.  "  Bind  the
chaiiot  to  the  swift  beast."

I.  Be  quick  nt  toob  matbbial  ENaAQEMiNTS.  Man  has  material  duties ;  these  are
as  sacred  and  as  binding  as  spiritual  ones.  Indeed,  the  distinction  between  the  secular
and  the  spiritual  is  not  real,  but  fictitious.  A  man  should  be  quick  in  all  his  legitimate
temporal  engagements,  whatever  they  may  be.  Whatever  is  to  be  done  must  be  done
at  once.  "  Be  diligent  in  business."  By  quickness  I  do  not  mean  the  hurry  of  confu-
sion, but  adroit  ezpertness,  skilful  promptitude.  As  Shakespeare  says,  "  What  the
wise  do  quickly  is  not  done  rashly."  1.  Z%e  quicker  you  are,  the  more  you  will  accom-
plish. An  expert  man  will  accomplish  more  in  an  hour  than  a  slow  man  in  a  day.
2.  The  quicker  you  are,  the  letter  for  your  faculties.  The  quick  movement  of  the  limb
is  healthier  than  the  slow ;  the  quick  action  of  the  mental  faculties  is  more  invigorating
than  the  slow.  As  a  rule,  the  quick  man  is  in  every  way  healthier  and  happier  than
the  slow.  3.  The  quicker  you  are,  the  more  valuahle  you  are  in  the  market  of  the  world.
The  skilful  man  who  cultivates  the  habit  of  quickness  and  despatch  increases  his
commercial  value  everyday.  Those  trades  unions  that  enact  that  all  of  a  craft  should
be  paid  alike,  however  they  work,  enact  an  absurdity  and  an  injustice.  One  quick  and
skilful  man  may  accomplish  as  much  in  one  day  as  six  slow  men,  though  equally
clever.     Be  quick,  then,  in  business.     "  Bind  the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast."

II.  Bk  quick  in  toub  iNTELliECTUAii  puBSUiTS.  Tou  have  an  enormous  amoimt
of  mental  work  to  do,  if  you  act  up  to  your  duty  and  discharge  your  mission  in  life.
You  have  nuinifold  faculties  to  discipline,  numerous  errors  to  correct,  vast  and  varied
knowledge  to  attain.  "  The  soul  without  knowledge  is  not  good  "  (Prov.  xix.  2).  No,
not  good  either  to  itself  or  others.  Be  quick.  1.  2%e  quicker  you  are,  the  more  you
will  attain.  The  more  fields  of  truth  you  will  traverse,  the  more  fruits  yon  will  gather
from  the  tree  of  knowledge.  Some  men  in  their  studies  move  like  elephants,  and  only
traverse  a  small  space.  Others,  like  eagles,  sweep  continents  in  a  day.  The  quick  eye
will  see  what  escapes  the  dull  eye ;  the  quick  ear  will  catch  voices  unheard  by  the  slow
of  hearing.  2.  The  quicker  you  are,  the  better  for  your  faculties.  It  is  the  brisk
walker  that  best  strengthens  his  limbs,  the  brisk  fighter  that  wins  the  greatest  victories.
It  is  by  quick  action  that  the  steel  is  polished  and  that  weapons  are  sharpened.
Intellectual  quickness  whets  the  faculties,  makes  them  keen,  agile,  and  apt.  "  Bind
the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast."

III.  Be  quick  in  toub  bpibitual  affaibs.  1.  Morally  you  have  a  work  to  do  for
your  own  soul.  It  is  in  a  ruined  state,  it  is  like  the  "  field  of  the  sluthful "  and  the
"  vineyard  of  the  man  void  of  understanding  "  of  which  Solomon  speaks ;  it  needs  culti-
vation. The  work  is  great  and  urgent.  2.  Morally  you  have  a  work  to  do  for  others.
There  are  souls  around  you  demanding  your  most  earnest  efforts,  etc.  (1)  Be  quick  ;
the  work  must  be  done  during  your  life  here,  if  ever  done.  (2)  Be  quick  ;  your  life  here
is  very  short  and  uncertain.  (3)  Be  quick ;  the  longer  you  delay,  the  more  difficult  it
is  to  do.  Be  quick  :  "  Whatsoever  your  hand  findoth  to  do,  do  it  with  your  might ;  for
there  is  no  knowledge  nor  device  in  the  grave  whither  we  are  all  hastening."  "  Bind
the  chariot  to  the  swift  beast."

"  Oh;  let  all  the  soul  within  yon
For  the  truth's  sake  go  abroad ;
Stillvc!  let  every  nerve  and  sinew
Tell  on  ages— tell  for  God."

(A  0.  Coie.)

D.  T.


OK.  n.  1  —13.]


THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.


XT


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB   n.


Vers.  1 — 5.—  §  6.  The  prophet  justiflei  hit
threat  hy  recounting  the  $ins  of  which  the
grandeet  are  guilty.

Ver.  1. — The  prophet,  himielf  one  of  the
people,  first  inveighs  Bgaiiut  the  gins  of
injustice  and  oppieBsion  of  the  poor.
Devise  .  .  .  work  .  .  .  practis*.  A  grada-
tion. They  are  not  led  into  these  sins  by
others;  they  themselves  conceive  the  evU
purpose  in  their  own  heart ;  then  they  pre-
pare and  mature  their  scheme  by  reflection ;
then  they  proceed  to  execute  it.  Work  evU ;
•'.«.  prepare  the  means  for  carrying  out  their
conception  (oomp.  Isa.  xli.  4).  Upon  their
beds.  At  night,  the  natural  time  tor  reflec-
tion (oomp.  Job  It.  13 ;  Ps.  iv.  4 ;  xxxvi.  4).
Is  light.  Far  from  shrinking  from  the
light  of  day  in  putting  into  effect  their  evil
projects,  they  set  about  their  accomplish-
ment as  soon  as  ever  the  morning  allows
them.  Beoanse  it  is  in  the  power  of  their
hand.  Their  might  makes  their  right.
(For  the  phrase,  oomp.  Gen.  xzxi.  29 ;  Frov.
iii.  27.)  As  the  word  el  may  be  taken  to
mean  "God"  as  well  as  "power,"  some
render  here,  "For  their  hand  is  their  god,"
comparing  the  boast  of  Mezentios  in  Virgil,
•.a:neid,'x.  773—

"  Dextia  mihi  Deus  et  telnm  qnod  missile
libro."

The  Yulgate  has,  Quoniain  eontra  Deum
eft  manut  eorum;  liXX.,  Ai6ri  obx  xipav  irphs
rhv  Behu  x«V"*  auToiv,  "  Because  tliey  lifted
not  up  their  hands  unto  God."  So  the
Syriao,  with  the  omission  of  the  negative.

Ver.  2. — They  carry  out  by  open  violence
the  fraud  which  they  have  devised  and
planned  (comp.  Isa.  v.  8;  Amos  iv.  1).
Covet  fields.  Compare  the  case  of  Ahab
and  Naboth (1  Kings  xxi).  The  command-
ment against  coveting  (Kxod.  xx.  17)  taught
the  Jews  that  God  regarded  gins  of  thought
as  well  as  of  action.  The  Law  forbade  the
alienation  of  landed  property  and  the  transfer
of  estates  from  tribe  to  tribe  (Lev.  xxv.  23 —
28;  Xumb.  xxxvi.  7).  A  rich  man  might
buy  a  poor  man's  estate  subject  to  the  law
of  jubilee ;  but  these  grandees  seem  to  have
forced  the  sale  of  property,  or  else  seized  it
by  force  or  fraud.  Oppress ;  Vulgate,  calum-
niabantur.  The  Hebrew  word  involves  the
idea  of  violence.

Ver.  3. — The  sin  shall  be  followed  by  its
appropriate  punishment.  As  they  devised
evil,  God  will  devise  a  penalty.  This  family,
The  whole  people  (Amos  iii.  1).  An  evil.  A
ehastiaement,  a  judgment  (Amos  iii.  6).   Ye.


The  prophet  suddenly  addresse*  them,  ihs
"  family.^'  Your  necks.  He  speaks  of  the
calamity  as  a  heavy,  galling  yoke,  from
which  they  should  be  unable  to  free  them-
selves (oomp.  Hos.  X.  11).  This  yoke  is  their
conquest  and  exile  at  the  hands  of  foreignerg
(comp.  Jer.  xxvii.  12).  Haughtily.  With  head
erect.  Septuagint,  op9oi.  Their  pride  shall
be  brought  low.  This  time  is  evil ;  full  of
calamity,  which  is  announced  in  the  follow-
ing verses.  The  words  occur  in  Amos  v.
13,  but  the  evil  there  spoken  of  is  moral
(comp.  Eph.  V.  16).

Ver.  4 — In  that  day.  The  evil  time  men-
tioned in  ver.  3.  A  parable  (mcuhal) ;  pro-
bably here  "a  taunting  song."  The  enemy
shall  use  the  words  in  which  Israel  laments
her  calamity  as  a  taunt  against  her  (Hab.  ii.
6).  And  lament  with  a  doleful  lamentation.
The  Hebrew  gives  a  remarkable  alliteration,
Nalmh  nehi  niheyah  ;  Septuagint,  @privTt9i)irf-
rai  Bprivos  iv  jueAei,  "Lament  a  lamentation
with  melody ;  "  Vnlgate,  Cantdbitur  eanti-
cum  cum  euavitate ;  "  Wail  a  wail  of  woe  "
(Pusey).  The  Syriao  coincides  with  the
LXX.  By  taking  the  three  words  as  cog-
nates, we  get  a  very  forcible  sentence ;  but
most  modern  commentators  consider  niheyah
not  a  feminine  formation,batnipfa.  of  the  sub-
stantive verb  hayah ;  hence  the  words  would
mean, "  Lament  with  the  lamentation ; "  "  It
is  done,"  they  shall  Qay;  "we  are  utterly
spoiled."  Thus  Cheyne.  The  lamentation
Mgins  with  "It  is  done,"  and  continues  to
the  end  of  the  verse.  The  verbs  are  used
impersonally — "one  shall  take  up,"  "one
shall  lament,"  "  one  shall  say ; "  but  it  ia
plain  that  the  last  two  refer  to  the  Jews  who
shall  utter  the  given  dirge,  which  in  turn
shall  be  repeated  as  a  taunt  by  the  enemy.
We  are  utterly  spoiled.  According  to  the
second  of  the  explanations  of  the  pi;eceding
clause,  these  words  expand  and  define  the
despairing  cry,  "  It  is  done  I "  In  the  other
case,  they  are  the  commencement  of  the
lamentation.  Septuagint,  Ta\aiircipia  Ira-
\atTrapli<raiiey,  "We  are  miserably  miser-
able." The  complaint  is  twofold.  First,
the  once  flourishing  condition  of  Israel  ia
changed  to  rain  and  desolation.  Secondly,
He  hath  changed  (elMngeth)  the  portion  of
my  people.  This  is  the  second  calamity:
he,  Jehovah,  passes  our  inheritance  over  to
the  hands  of  others;  the  land  of  Canaan,
pledged  to  us,  is  transferred  to  our  enemies.
Septuagint,  Kare/ieTpiiSii  ill  axoiviif,  "  hath
been  measured  with  a  line."  How  bath
he  removed  it  [the  portion]  from  me!
Tills  is  better  than  the  alternative  render-
ing, "How  doth  he  depart  trom  me?"
Taming  away  he  hath  ^vided  ooi  fields  j


18


THK  BOOK  OF  MIC  AH,


[CH.  II.  1— li


ntther,  to  an  apoetate  he  divideth  our  fields.
The  apostate  is  the  King  of  Assyria  or
Chaldea ;  and  he  is  so  named  as  being  a
rebel  against  Jehovah,  whom  lie  might  have
known  by  the  light  of  natural  religion
(comp.  oh.  V.  15;  Bom.  i.  20).  Tins  was
fulfilled  later  by  the  colonization  of  Sama-
ria by  a  mixed  population.

Ver.  5. — Therefore  thou.  Because  thou,
the  tyrannical,  oppressive  grundee  (vers.  1,
2),  liast  dealt  with  tliy  neighbour's  land
unjustly,  therefore  thou  shalt  have  none
that  shall  cast  a  cord  {the  line)  by  lot  {for
a  lot) ;  i.e.  thou  shalt  have  no  more  inheri-
tance in  Israel.  The  "  line  "  is  the  measuring-
line  used  in  dividing  land,  as  Anjos  vii.  17.
The  reference  is  to  the  original  distribution
of  the  land  by  lot  in  Joshua's  time  (see
Josh.  xiv.  2,  etc.).  In  the  congregation  of  the
Lord.  The  Lord's  own  people,  whose  polity
was  now  about  to  be  dissolved.  Hitzig,
Beuss,  and  Orelli  suppose  that  this  verse
contains  a  threat  against  Micah  himself  on
the  part  of  the  ungodly  Jews,  intimating
that  they  will  punish  him  for  presuming  to
prophesy  against  them,  and  that  he  shall
die  without  leaving  children.  But  this
seems  far-fetched  and  inailmissible.

Vers.  6 — 11. — §  7.  The  threat  announced  in
ver.  3  i>  further  vindicated  and  applied  to
individual  tirnien,  with  a  glance  at  the
falie  prophete  who  taught  the  people  to  love
lia.

Ver.  6. — Prophesy  ye  not ;  literally,  drop
ye  not,  as  Amos  vii,  16  (where  see  note).
The  speakers  are  generally  supposed  to  be
the  false  prophets  who  wish  to  stop  the
months  of  Micah  and  those  who  are  like-
minded  with  him.  This  b  probably  correct ;
but  these  are  not  the  only  speakers ;  the
people  themselves,  the  oppressing  grandees,
who  side  with  the  popularity-hunting  seers,
are  also  included  (see  note  on  ver.  12).
Say  they  to  them  that  prophesy;  rather,
thm  they  prophesy  {drop).  Micah  uses  their
own  word  sarcastically,  "  Do  not  be  always
rebuking ; "  "  Thus  they  rebuke."  The  rest
of  the  verse  belongs  to  the  same  speakers,
and  should  be  rendered,  "They  shall  not
prophesy  of  these  things ;  reproaches  never
cease."  The  great  men  and  the  false
prophets  complain  of  the  true  prophets  that
they  are  always  proclaiming  misfortune  and
rebuking  the  people,  and  they  bid  them
leave  such  denunciations  alone  for  the  future.
The  passage  is  very  difficult,  and  its  inter-
pretation has  greatly  exercised  commenta-
tors ;  the  above  is  virtually  the  explanation
of  Ewald,  Hitzig,  Caspari,  and  Clieyne.
Orelli  makes  the  two  last  clauses  Micah's
answer  to  the  interdict  of  the  adversaries,
' Should  one  not  prophesy  of  these  things?


Should  reproaches  (against  the  true
prophets)  never  cease  ?  "  We  prefer  tho
interpretations  gireu  above,  and  consider
the  prophet's  reply  to  be  given  in  the  next
verse.

Ver.  7. — The  prophet  answers  the  inter-
dict of  the  speakers  in  the  preceding  verse
by  showing  that  God's  attributes  are  un-
changed, but  that  tlje  sins  of  the  people
constrain  him  tu  punish.  0  thou  that  art
nimed  the  house  of  Jacob.  Other  reuderings
of  these  words  are  given,  viz.  "  Ah  1  what  a
saying  1 "  or,  "  Is  this  a  thing  to  be  said,  O
houseof  Jacob?  "  The  versions  of  the  LXX.,
*0  \4yuy  oIkos  'laKclijS,  ic.t.\.,  and  of  the
Vulgate,  Dieit  domus  Jacob,  do  not  suit  the
Hebrew.  If  we  adopt  the  rendering  of  the
Authorized  Version,  we  must  consider  that
Micah  addresses  those  who  gloried  in  their
privilege  as  the  family  of  Jacob,  thougii  they
had  ceased  to  be  what  he  was,  believing  and
obedient.  "  O  ye  who  are  only  in  name  and
title  the  chosen  nation  "  (conip.  Isa.  xlviii.  1 ;
John  viii.  33,  39).  Professor  Diiver  {Ex-
positor, April,  1887)  obtains  the  very  suitable
meaning,  Num  dioendum,  "  Shall  it  be  said,
O  house  of  Jacob,  Is  the  ear  of  the  Lord
shortened?"  etc.,  by  the  change  of  a  vowel-
point.  Somewhat  similarly  Orelli,  "  Is  this
the  speech  of  the  house  of  Jacob?"  viz.
— Should  Jehovah  be  impatient  (as  these
threats  declare  him  to  be)  ?  or  were  these  bis
doings  ?  The  following  clause  is  Jehovah's
answer  to  the  objection.  Is  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord  straitened  t  or,  slwrtened.  Is  he  less  long-
suffering  than  Jehovah  of  heretofore?  Will
you  accuse  Johovah  of  impatience  ?  "  Short-
ness "  of  spirit  is  opposed  to  longanimity  (see
Prov.  xiv.  29).  Aje  these  his  doings  1  Are
these  judgments  and  chastisements  his  usual
doings — that  which  he  delights  in  ?  Is  the
cause  of  them  in  him  ?  Is  it  not  in  you  (Lam.
iii.  33;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11;  ch.  vii.  IS)?  Do
not  my  words  do  good,  eto.  ?  This  may  be
Jehovah's  answer  to  the  previous  questions,
or  Micah's  refutation  of  the  complaint.  The
Lord's  word  is  good, his  action  isa  blessing,
but  only  to  him  who  does  his  commandments
(P».  xviii.  25,  26;  xxv.  10;  ciii.  17,  etc.;
Luke  1.  50).

Ver.  8. — ET3n  of  late;  Imto/late;  literally,
yesterday,  implying  an  action  recent  and  re-
peated. Septnagint,  e/nrpoaSev,  "before;"
Vulgate,  e  contrario.  The  prophet  exempli-
fies the  iniquity  which  has  led  God  to
punish.  They  are  not  old  oifenoes  wliioU
the  Lord  is  visiting,  but  sins  of  recent  and
daily  occurrence.  My  people  is  risen  up  as
an  enemy.  A  reading,  varying  by  a  letter
or  two,  is  rendered,  "  But  against  my  people
one  setteth  himself."  But-  there  is  no  valid
reason  for  altering  the  received  text ;  espe-
cially as,  according  to  Ewald,  the  present
reading  may  be  taken  in  a  causative  sense.


OH.  n.  1 — 13.]


THE   BOOK  OF   MIOAH.


19


"  They  set  np  my  people  as  an  enemy,"  i.e.
the  grandees  treat  the  Lord'*  people  as
enemies,  robbing  and  plundering  them.
This  translation  obviates  the  difSculty  of
referring  the  words,  "my  people,"  in  this
Terse  to  the  oppressor,  and  in  ver.  7  to  the
oppressed.  Aqoording  to  the  usual  view,
and  retaining  the  authorized  rendering,  the
meaning  is  that  the  princes  exhibit  them-
selves as  enemies  of  the  Lord  by  their  acts
of  violence  and  oppression,  which  the
prophet  proceeds  to  particularize.  Septua-
gint,  'O  \a6s  fiov  fls  ^x^P""  ""TeWr),  "  My
people  withsbMd  as  an  enemy."  Te  pnU
off  the  robe  with  the  garment ;  ye  violently
strip  off  the  robe  away  from  the  garment.
The  "  robe  "  (eder)  is  the  wide  cloak,  the
mantle  sufficient  to  wrap  the  whole  person,
and  which  was  often  of  very  costly  material.
The  "garment"  (mlmak')  is  the  principal
inner  garment,  or  tunic.  There  may  be  an
allusion  to  the  enactment  which  furbade  a
creditor retainingthepledged  garment  during
tlie  night  (Exod.  xxii.  26,  etc.).  Septuagint,
KarivavTi  rrjs  elpiiVTjs  aiiTOv  t^v  Sophv  aiiTov
i^eSetpav,  "  Against  his  peace  they  stripped
off  hia  skin."  From  them  that  pass  by
secTuely  as  men  averse  from  war.  This  is
probably  the  correct  translation.  The
grandees  rob  those  who  are  peaceably  dis-
posed, perhaps  strip  their  deotors  of  their
cloaks  as  they  pass  quietly  along  the  road.
The  versions  vary  considerably  from  the
received  Hebrew  text.  The  LXX.  (with
which  the  Syriac  partially  agrees)  has,  ToD
iupf\eir9at  e\ir(5os  (rvvrpiijiiiov  iroKeiiov,  "  To
remove  hope  in  the  destruction  of  war;"
Vulgate,  Eos  qui  traneibant  nntplieiter  con-
vertistie  in  beUum.  From  this  rendering
Trochon  derives  the  paraphrase — ^Ye  treat
them  as  if  they  were  prisoners  of  war.
Hitzig  considers  that  the  reference  is  to
fugitives  from  the  northern  kingdom  who
passed  through  Judsea  in  their  endeavour
to  escape  the  evils  of  the  war,  leaving  wives
and  children  in  the  hands  of  the  Judseans.
But  these  treated  the  refugees  harshly.

Ver.  9. — The  women  of  my  people.  Tlie
prophet  refers  to  the  widows,  who.  ought  to
have  been  protected  and  cared  for  (comp.
Isa.  I.  2).  The  LXX.,  with  which  the
Arabic  agrees,  renders,  fiyoifievoi  \aoS  fiou,
"  the  leaders  of  my  people."  Have  ye  oast
out.  The  word  expresses  a  violent  expul-
sion, as  Gen.  iii.  24.  Their  pleasant  houses ;
literally,  the  home  of  their  delights  (ch.  i.
16).  The  house  which  was  very  dear  to  them,
the  scene  of  all  their  joys.  My  glory.  All
the  privileges  which  they  enjoyed  as  God's
people  and  his  peculiar  care  are  called  "  the
ornament"  of  the  Lord  (comp.  Ezek.  xvi.  14).
The  "  glory  "  is  by  some  commentators,  but
not  so  appositely,  referred  to  vesture  ex-
elnsively.  These  fatherless  children  had  been


ruthlessly  stripped  of  their  blessings,  eithei
by  being  forced  to  grow  up  in  want  and
ignorance,  or  by  being  sold  into  slavery  and
carried  away  from  their  old  religions  asso-
ciations. For  ever.  The  oppressors  never
repented  or  tried  to  make  restitution ;  and
so  they  incurred  the  special  woe  of  those  who
injure  the  poor,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow
(Pusey).  The  Septuagint  has  no  connection
with  the  present  Hebrew  text  of  this  veise,
reading,  '£77/0-0x6  Spariv  a'mvtois,  "  Draw  ye
near  to  the  everlasting  hills,"  and  previously
introducing  a  gloss,  Aiek  to  Troyi/pet  iirirr}-
Sev/xara  aliTwv  i^waBnirar,  "They  were  re-
jected because  of  their  evil  practices."
Jerome  explains  the  Greek  mystically,  de-
spaii'ing  of  the  literal  interpretation  in  its
present  connection.

Ver.  10. — Arise  ye,  and  depart.  The
prophet  pronounces  the  oppressors'  punish-
ment— they  shall  be  banished  from  their
land,  even  as  they  have  torn  others  from
their  home.  This  is  not  your  rest.  Canaan
had  been  given  as  a  resting-place  to  Israel
(Deut.  xii.  9,  10;  Josh.  i.  13;  Ps.  xcv.  11),
but  it  should  be  so  no  longer.  Because  it  is
polluted.  The  land  is  regarded  as  polluted
by  the  sins  of  its  inhabitants.  The  idea  is
often  found;  e.g.  Lev.  xviii.  25,  28;  Numb.
XXXV.  33 ;  Jer.  ii.  7.  It  shall  destroy  you,
even  with  a  sore  destmotion.  The  land  is
said  to  destroy  when  it  ejects  its  inhabitants,
as  though  the  inanimate  creation  rose  in
judgment  against  the  sinners.  The  Bevised
Version,  with  Eeil  and  others,  translates,
Beeaase  of  unoleanness  that  destroyeth,  even
with  a  grievous  destruction;  Septuagint,
^ie<p0dpriTe  <p9op^,  "Ye  were  utterly  de-
stroyed ; "  Vulgate,  Propter  immunditiam
ejus  corrumpetvr  putredine  pessima.  The
Authorized  Version  is  correct.

Ver.  11. — Such  prophets  as  speak  un
welcome  truths  are  not  popular  with  the
grandees ;  they  like  only  those  who  pander
to  their  vices  and  prophesy  lies.  This  was
their  crowning  sin.  If  a  man  walking  in
the  spirit  and  falsehood  do  lie.  "  The  spirit
and  falsehood"  may  be  a  hendiadys  for  "a
spirit  of  falsehood,"  or  "  a  lying  spirit,"  as
1  Kings  xxii.  22  (comp.  Ezek.  xiii.  2,  3,  17).
But  it  is  better  to  render,  If  a  man  walking
after  (conversant  with)  the  wind  and  false-
hood  do  lie.  Wind  is  symbolical  of  all  that
is  vain  and  worthless,  as  Isa.  xxvi,  18;
xli.  29.  The  Septuagint  introduces  a  gloss
from  Lev.  xxvi.  17,  KoTe5i(4x97)T£  oirSevii
SidxovTos,  "  Ye  fled,  no  one  pursuing  you,"
and  translates  the  above  clause,  nyev/ia
larricre  i)/eS5os :  "  spiritus  statuit  mendacium,
t.«.  finem  posuit  mendacii"  (St.  Jerome);
Vulgate,  Utinam  nan  eisem  vir  habent
ipiritum,  et  mendacium  potiui  loquerer.  I
will  prophesy  unto  thee,  etc.  These  are  the
words  of  a   false  prophet.     "  Prophesy,"


20


THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.


[cH.  II.  1 — la.


"drop,"  as  ver.  6.  Of  win©  and  of  strong
drink,  Concerning  temporal  blessings,
dwelling  on  God's  promises  of  material
prosperity  (Lev.  xxvi.  4,  etc. ;  Deut.  xxviii.
4,  11)  in  order  to  encourage. the  grandees  in
self-indulgence.  He  shall  even  he  the
prophet  of  this  people.  Such  a  one  is  the
only  prophet  to  whom  the  great  men,  the
representatives  of"  this  people,"  will  listen.


i  8.  Promiie  of  restoration


Vers.  12, 13.—
and  deliverance.


Ver.  12. — The  prophet,  without  any  pre-
face, introduces  abruptly  a  promise  of  re-
storation after  exile,  a  type  of  the  triumph
of  Messiah.     Some  commentators,  indeed,
regard  this  and  the  following  verse  as  the
language  of  the  false  prophets ;  others,  as  a
denunciation  of  punishment,  not  a  promise
of  deliverance;  others,  as  a  late  interpo-
lation.   But  the  style  is  entii-ely  Micah's
(comp.  ch.  It.  6,_  7),  the  promise  is  a  true
one,  and  suoh-like  sudden  transitions  are
common  in  the  prophetical  books  (comp.
e.g.  Isa.  iy.  2 — 6;  Hos.  i,  10;  xi.  9;  Amos
ix.  11) :  so  that  we  need  not  resort  to  the
hypothesis  that  some  connecting  link  has
dropped  out  of  the  text,  or  that  the  clause
is   misplaced;    and  we  are  fully  justified
in  considering  the  paragraph  as  inserted
here  in  its  right  position,  and  as  predic-
tive of  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  after
captivity.    Micah  would  seem  to  imply — I
am  not,  indeed,  as  one  of  the  false  prophets
who    promise    you    earthly  good    without
regard  to  your  moral  fitness  for  receiving
God's  bounty;  neither  am  I  one  who  has
no  message  but  of  woe  and  calamity ;  I,  too,
predict  salvation  and  happiness  for  aremnant
of  yon  after  you  have  been  tried  by  defeat
and  exile.     I  will  sorely  assemble.    This
presupposes  dispersion  among  the  heathen,
such  as  is  foretold  in  eh.  i.  8,  etc. ;  ii.  4,  etc.
0  Jacob,  all  of  thee.    The  promise  extends
to  the  whole  nation,  whether  called  Jacob
or    Israel,  as   ch.  i.  5;    but  still  only  a
remnant,  i.e.  that .  portion  of   the   nation
which  should  make  a  good  use  of  adversity,
and  turn  to  the  Lord  with  sincere  repent-
ance (comp.  Isa.  X.  20,  eto. ;  Jer.  xxxi.  8 ;
Ezek.  xxxiv.  II,  etc.;  Zeph.  iii.  12,  etc.).
Some  see  In  the  term  "  remnant "  an  allu-
sion to  the  people  that  were  left   in   the
northern  kingdom  after  the  fall  of  Samaria.
As  the  sheep  of  Boirah.    There  were  two  or
more  towns  so  named.— one  in  Sidon,  for
which  see  note  on  Amos  i.  12;  and  anotlier,
hod.  Buzrah,  on  the  south  border  of  the
Hauran.     This  is  mentioned  in  Jer.  xlviii.
24,  as  one  of  the  cities  of  Moab,  a  district
celebrated  for  its  flocks  (2  Kings  iii.  4);
hence  "  sheep  of  Bozrah  "  may  have  become
a  proverbial  saying.    Many    oommentiitors


take  Botsrah  as  an  appellative,  meaning
"fold,"  in  agreement  with  the  Vulgate,
quasi  gregem  in  ovili,  and  Ohaldee,  as  well
as  Aquila  and  Symmachus,  The  parallelism
in  the  following  words  seems  to  favour  this
view.  The  LXX.  reads  differently,  render-
ing, iy  eKiiliet,  "  In  trouble."  Thus,  too,  the
Syriao.  As  the  flook  in  the  midst  of  their
fold ;  rather,  at  a  flock  in  the  midst  of  its
pasture.  They  shall  make  great  noise,  etc.
Like  a  numerous  flock  bleating  in  its  fold,
so  shall  the  returned  Israelites  be,  prosperous
and  happy,  celebrating  their  salvation  with
praise  and  exultation  (comp.  Ezek.  xxxiv.
31).  Septuagiut,  'EfoAoSj'rai  e|  avdpdniev,
"They  shall  leap  forth  from  among
men,"  which  St.  Jerome  explains  as  mean-
ing that  the  repentant  Israelites  shall
rise  above  worldly  things  and  aspire  to
heaven.

Ver.  13. — The  breaker  is  come  (gone)  up
before  them.  Micah  depicts  Israel's  re-
deiription  under  the  figure  of  release  from
captivity.  The  passage  is  clearly  Messianic,
and  can  neither  be  considered  an  interpola-
tion nor  tortured  into  a  declaration  of  the
siege  and  ruin  of  Samaria  or  Jerusalem.
"  One  that  breaketh  "  is  a  liberator,  a  leader
that  overcomes  all  obstacles  which  oppose
Israel's  return.  There  may  be  an  allusion  in
tlie  first  instance  to  a  human  leader,  such  as
Zerubbabel,  in  analogy  witli  Moses  and
Joshua  in  old  time,  but  the  real  conqueror
intended  is  generally  regarded  as  Messiiih.
The  Breaker-up  is  supposed  to  be  a  title  of
the  Messiah  well  known  to  the  Jews  (see
Pusey  ;  and  Pearson,  '  Exposition  of  the
Creed,'  art.  vii.,  note  y').  This  interpreta-
tion is  rejected  by  Professor  Driver  {Ex-
positor, April,  1887),  who  considers  the
"  breaker-up  "  to  be  "  either  a  leader  or  a
detachment  of  men,  whose  duty  it  was  to
break  up  walls  or  other  obstacles  opposing
the  progress  of  an  army."  But  is  not  thia
to  introduce  an  agency  unknown  to  these
times  ?  Was  there  any  special  body  of  men
trained  and  maintained  for  this  particular
duty?  This  "breaker-up,"  according  to
Dr.  Driver's  conception,  "advances  before
them,  breaking  through  the  gates  of  the
prison  in  which  the  people  are  confined;  tliey
follow,  marching  forth  triumphantly  through
this  open  way ;  their  king,  with  Jehovah  at
his  side  (Ps.  ex.  5),  heads  the  vioforioiu
procession  (Exod.  xiii.  21;  Isa.  Iii.  12)."
They  have  broken  up;  broken  forth,  or
through.  The  captives  co-operate  with
their  leader.  Have  passed  through  the  gate,
eto.  The  prophet  speaks  of  a  solemn,
regular  removal,  Uke  the  Exodus  trom
Egypt,  which  no  human  power  can  oppose
Their  king.  The  same  as  Jehovah  in  th«
neit  clause  (Isa.  xxxiii.  22).  He  shall
lead  the  host,  as  he  headed  the  Israelites


OB.  n.  1—18.]


THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.


21


when  theT  left  the  house  of  bondage
(Ezod.  xiil.  21).  The  prediction  may  look
forwaid  to  the  final  gathering  of  Israel,


which  St.  Paul  leemi  to  contemplate  when
he  writes,  "And  soaU Israel  shall  be laTed"
(Bom.  zi  26).


H0MILETI08.

Yen.  1 — 11. — DelineatioM  of  deep  tran$greision,  righteous  retr^tion,  and  DMn*
equity.  We  have  in  these  verses  three  pictures,  drawn  by  a  master-hand,  and  very
suggestive  of  practical  teaching.

L  A  PICTCBB  OF  DEEP  TBAN8GBESSI0N.  (Vsrs.  1, 2, 8,  9.)  Obscrve  delineated  in  it :
1.  The  abuse  of  privilege.  (Ver.  1.)  What  a  boon  is  night  1  "The  season  of  repose  j
the  blessed  barrier  betwixt  day  and  day,"  when  the  hum  and  bustle,  the  anxiety  and
fatigue,  of  business  is  suspended,  when  the  tired  artisan  rests  from  his  toil ;  when  the
Toyager  on  the  wide  sea  forgets  awhile  the  perils  of  the  main ;  when  the  warrior  ceases
for  a  time  to  hear  the  roar  of  the  cannon  and  to  face  the  foe ;  and  when  all  nature  is
hushed  to  slumber,  save  the  weary  watchers  by  the  bed  of  suffering,  and  wakeful,
loving  mothers  tending  their  dear  ones  in  their  quiet  nests.  We  bless  God  for  the  day
with  its  early  sunrise,  its  noontide  glory,  its  evening  shades ;  but  we  bless  him  also
for  the  night,  with  her  sable  mantle,  her  vague  solitude,  her  quiet  rest.  And  this
high  privilege  was  grossly  abused.  "  Woe  to  them  that  devise  iniquity,  and  work  evil
upon  their  beds  1"  (ver.  1).  It  was  not  that  evil  thoughts  im willingly  invaded  their
minds,  but  that  they  deliberately  planned  evil — they  devised  it.  It  is  one  thing  for
evil  thoughts  to  enter  the  mind  in  its  quiet  hours  unbidden ;  it  is  quite  another  to
entertain  these;  and  worst  of  all  is  it  to  "devise"  these,  and  in  the  very  seasons  given
to  man  for  rest,  to  be  found  plotting  and  contriving  harm.  So  has  it  ever  been  with
the  ungodly,  that  they  have  abused  God's  best  gifts  (Ps.  xxxvL  4 ;  Prov.  iv.  16).  2.
2%«  non-improvement  of  opportunity.  (Yer,  1.)  Each  morning  comes  bearing  to  us  a
new  gift  of  time  from  our  God.  With  our  waking  hours  comes  the  Divine  call  to  fresh
service.  Strength  has  been  gathered  up,  now  to  be  expended  in  the  improvement  of
the  opportunities  of  holy  service  which  will  assuredly  arise.  Happy  they  who  begin
the  day  with  God,  and  then  go  forth  to  hallow  every  engagement  of  Ufe,  and  to  use  for
him  every  opportunity  which  may  be  given —

"  True  hearts  spread  and  heave
Unto  their  God,  as  flowers  do  to  the  sun :
Give  him  thy  first  thoughts,  so  shalt  thou  keep
Him  company  all  day."

The  grave  charge  here  urged  was  that  with  the  breaking  of  the  day  they  went  forth  to
renew  their  evil  deeds;  that  the  fresh  strength  imparted  to  them  by  Gkid  became
employed  by  them  against  him ;  the  evil  plotted  by  them  in  the  night  they  went  forth
with  the  morning's  dawn  to  commit ;  the  energies  which  ought  to  have  been  conse-
crated to  God  they  devoted  to  dark  and  daring  deeds  of  impiety.  "When  the
morning  is  light,  they  practise  it,  because  it  is  in  the  power  of  their  hand  "  (ver.  1).
S.  The  perversion  of  power.  (Vers.  2,  8,  9.)  Both  Micah  and  Isaiah  laid  stress  upon
the  prevailing  sin  of  covetousness,  leading  the  mighty  and  influential  to  pervert  the
power  and  influence  they  possessed,  to  the  injury  of  the  feeble  and  obscure,  oppressing
and  tyrannizing  over  them.  Thus  they  are  charged  here  with  (1)  unscrupulously
depriving  them  of  their  inheritance  (ver.  2) ;  (2)  stripping  of  their  raiment  peaceful,
unoffending  persons  (ver.  8);  (3)  driving  widows  from  their  houses,  and  causing
fatherless  children  to  suffer  from  want  and  neglect  (ver.  9).  In  this  way  the  sad
picture  of  shameless  sin  here  presented  to  us  is  rendered  increasingly  dark  through  the
prevailing  sin  of  covetousness,  leading  to  harsh  oppression  and  grievous  wrong.  4.  2%«
wilful  rejection  of  light  and  preference  of  darkness.  (Vers.  6,  11.)  To  the  true
prophets  of  the  Lord,  who  sought  to  bring  home  to  them  a  sense  of  their  guilt,  and  to
lead  them  to  return  unto  the  Lord,  they  said,  "  Prophesy  ye  not "  (ver.  6),  whereas  to
lying  spirits  they  would  readily  give  heed  (John  iiL  19,  20).

IL  A  PIOTDBE  OF  KEBITED  CHASTISEMENT.  (Yers.  3,  4,  6, 10.)  The  uutin  feature
in  this  picture  is  the  illustration  it  affords  of  the  retributive  character  of  the  Divine
chaatiBement  for  sin.    Observe:  1.  They  had  "devised"  evil  against  others;   now


M  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  [oh.  n.  1— la

God  would  "devise"  evil  against  them  (rer.  3).  2.  They  had  oppressed  others;  now
they  should  be  oppressed  (ver.  3),  and  even  their  own  sad  elegies,  wrung  from  them
through  their  sorrow,  should  be  taken  up  and  repeated  against  them  in  sheer  mockery
by  their  oppressors  (vers.  4,  6).  3.  They  had  voluntarily  chosen  their  false  prophets
and  had  welcomed  their  lying  words,  and  they  should  now  get  no  comfort  from  the
words  of  hope  which,  in  the  dark  days,  should  \fe  spoken  by  jfas  true  prophets,  and
which  should  prove  consolatory  to  the  remnant  of  God's  people  who  hfld  remained
faithful  (ver.  6).  4.  They  had  cast  out  the  widows  and  the  fatherless,  and  they  should
be  themselves  cast  out  (ver,  10).  We  look  on  this  picture  of  coming  chastisement,
and  we  learn  from  it  that  retribution  follows  sin ;  we  see  in  it  an  Old  Testament
illustration  of  the  New  Testament  assurance  that  "  whatsoever  a  man  sowetb,  that
shall  he  also  reap  "  (Oal.  vL  7,  8).

HL  A  noTUBE  OF  THE  DiviNE  EQUITT.  (Ver.  7.)  God,  through  his  prophet,
expostulated  with  the  people  who  had  acted  so  unworthily,  who  bore  the  name  of
Israel,  but  who  so  dishonoured  their  pious  ancestry ;  and  declared  to  them  that  hia
ways  were  not  unequal ;  that  rectitude  and  mercy  characterized  all  his  operations ;
that  through  all  he  had  been  seeking  their  good ;  that  it  was  not  his  will  that  the
threatened  woes  should  befall  them ;  that  this  was  entirely  their  own  act ;  and  that
neither  their  sins  nor  their  sorrows  could  truthfully  be  charged  upon  him.  There  are
many  such  passages  scattered  throughout  the  prophetical  writings,  in  which  God
deigned  to  expostulate  with  the  erring — ^passages  which  are  inexpressibly  tender  and
touching  (Jer.  ii.  5 ;  Isa.  v.  4 ;  xliii.  22,  25).  So  Christ  to  the  Jews  of  his  day,  when
they  took  up  stones  to  stone  him,  asked, "  For  which  of  these  works  do  ye  stone  me  ?  "
(John  X.  32).  And  the  same  Divine  voice  expostulates  with  us  in  our  sinfulness ;  and
our  response  should  be,  "  Unto  thee,"  etc.  (Dan.  ix.  6,  7).  These  Divine  expostula-
tions are  the  arrows  of  conviction  coming  from  God  to  the  hearts  of  men,  and  which,
unlike  the  poisoned  arrows  of  the  ancients  that  carried  death  in  their  flight,  carry  mercy
and  life  into  the  human  souL

Vw.  l.—Ood?i  teays  vindicated.  In  this  verse  three  important  questions  are  asked,
and  in  the  answers  to  these  lies  the  clear  vindication  of  God's  ways  in  his  dealings  with
transgressors.

I.  "  Is  THE  Spibit  of  the  Lobd  8TBAITENED  ? "  {.e.  When  his  judgments  over-
take men  for  their  sins,  is  this  to  be  regarded  as  a  token  that  God's  loving-kindness
and  long-sufiering  have  failed?  No;  his  compassions  never  fail.  "His  mercy
endureth  for  ever."  What,  then,  is  the  explanation  ?  It  is  that  such  Divine  judgments
are  imperatively  demanded.  They  are  so :  1.  In  vindication  of  the  Divine  rectitude.
If  sin  went  unpunished,  the  Divine  righteousness  might,  indeed,  be  questioned.  It
was  this  consideration,  and  not  a  spirit  of  vindictiveness  which  called  forth  "  the
imprecatory  psalms,"  in  which  chastisement  was  invoked  upon  the  workers  of  iniquity.
2.  In  the  interest  of  the  wrong-doen  themselves.  It  is  not  for  the  advantage  of  trans-
gressors themselves  that  they  should  be  allowed  to  go  on  unblushingly  in  sin.  The
Divine  long-suffering  may  operate  in  checking  and  bringing  such  to  a  stand;  in
chastening  them  with  a  view  to  their  reformation.  3.  In  order  to  the  promotion  of  the
well-being  of  society  at  large.  Jehovah  is  the  sovereign  Buler ;  the  universe  is  his
domain ;  and  it  may  be  essential,  in  order  to  the  good  of  the  race,  that  he  should  at
times  interpose  in  judgment.  "When  his  judgments  are  abroad  in  the  earth,  the
inhabitants  thereof  learn  righteousness"  (Isa.  xxvi.  9).

II.  "Aeb  these  his  doings  ?"<.«.  is  God  the  Author  and  Cause  of  the  evils  men
have  to  experience  when  they  stray  from  righteousness?  No;  he  cannot  be;  these
are  to  be  traced  to  the  wrong-doers  themselves,  and  are  the  outeome  of  their  misdeeds.
The  sinner  is  his  own  punisher.  The  woes  which  befall  him  he  has  worked  out  for
himself.  "Judas  fell  from  the  ministry  and  apostleship,  that  he  might  go  to  his  own
place."  "  Men  meet  with  all  sorts  of  bitter,  painful,  and  bad  things  in  their  life,  just
because  they  are  bitter,  painful,  and  bad  themselves,  and  do  not  see  that  this  ii  the
root  of  their  misery  "  (Bushnell).

IIL  "  Do  NOT  MY  WOBDS  DO  GOOD  TO  HIM  THAT  WALKETH  DPBIGHTLT  ?  "   Assuredly  ;

and  hence,  if  this  good  is  nussed,  must  it  not  be  because  there  is  a  lack  of  obedienoe  is
those  who  miss  it,  so  that  the  responsibility  is  entirely  theirs  ?


oil.  11.  i-ia.J  TUK   UUOK   Vb"   MiCAd.  23

Ver.  7. — TAe  beneficial  influence  of  God's  wards  upon  the  obedient.  By  the  "  words  '
of  God  we  understand  the  utterances  of  his  gracious  mind.  These  were  communi-
cated unto  the  fathers  by  the  prophets ;  in  "  the  fulness  of  time "  they  were  made
known  by  his  Son ;  to  us  they  are  given  in  the  Scriptures  of  eternal  truth.  Their
lAfluence  upon  us  depends  upon  our  attitude  towards  them  and  upon  the  spirit  we
cherish.  If  our  aim  is  to  live  a  godly  life,  and  to  pursue  the  path  of  rectitude  aud
obedience,  they  will  prove  truly  helpful  to  us.

I.   Qod'B  "WOBDS"   "do   GWOD"   to   the   UPBIQHT  in   HEABT,  ABIT    EBSPECT8  THEIS

PEBSONAli  AND  iNDiTiDnAL  LIFE.  They  becomc  thxis  benefited :  1.  Physically ;
being  preserved  by  these  teachings  from  those  excesses  into  which  the  ungodly  often
fall  (Pb.  xci.  16  ;  cxix.  95).  2.  Mentally ;  their  minds  being  directed  to  the  sublimest
themes,  by  meditating  upon  which  their  intellectual  faculties  become  purified  and
strengthened.  Men  possessed  of  the  highest  intellectual  endowments  have  acknuw-
ledged  their  deep  indebtedness  to  the  holy  words  of  God,  and  have  accepted  them  with
the  profoundest  reverence  and  the  wannest  gratitude.  3.  In  the  darkest  seasons  of
their  life  "  God's  words  "  have  cheered  and  comforted  them,  and  through  the  sanctifying
influence  of  these  they  have  been  rendered  in  times  of  severest  trial  so  tranquil,  and  so
calm  in  death  that  it  may  be  said —

"  The  night-dews  fall  not  gentlier  on  the  ground,
Nor  weary,  worn-out  winds  expire  so  soft"

IL     Gk)D'B   "  WOBDS "    "  DO    GOOD "    TO    THE    UPBIGHT    IN    HEART,   AS    IT    BESPEOTt

THEIB  SOCIAL  EELATIOKSHIPS.  1.  Their  healthful  influence  is  experienced  in  the
home-life  of  the  obedient.  In  such  homes,  selfishness,  coldness,  jealousy,  anger,  strife,
are  avoided  ;  and  love,  sympathy,  union,  harmony,  are  continually  cherished.  God's
words  are  daily  recalled  to  mind,  and  the  voice  of  praise  and  prayer  continually  ascends
to  their  Author.  "  Good  "  is  thus  experienced.  There  is  written  on  such  abodes,  in
characters  legible  and  golden,  the  inscription,  "  Peace."  Day  by  day  the  members  of
such  households  become  united  in  a  firmer  bond  to  each  other  and  to  God.  Yea,  it  is
theirs  to  enjuy  in  the  home  of  earth  constant  foretastes  of  the  home  of  heaven.  2.
And  their  healthful  influence  is  experienced  in  the  intercourse  of  man  with  man.
God's  words  give  special  enforcement  to  the  principle  of  mutual  regard  which  should
be  cherished  by  the  children  of  men.  In  proportion  as  the  power  of  his  utterances  is
realized  will  the  servant  be  led  to  promote  the  best  interests  of  the  employer,  and  the
employer  to  act  generously  towards  even  the  humblest  in  his  service.  The  holy
teachings  of  our  God  impel  those  who  truly  accept  them  to  minister  to  the  necessities
of  the  distressed,  and  to  endeavour  to  alleviate  human  suffering  and  woe.  Love  is
indeed  the  essence  of  all  that  he  has  spoken.  And  abounding  in  loving  teachings  for
the  guidance  of  its  recipients  in  their  social  and  everyday  life,  God's  "  words  "  promote
the  ^ood  even  of  those  who  unconsciously  come  within  the  range  of  their  influence.

III.  God's  "  wobds  "  "  do  good  "  to  the  dpbioht  in  hbabt,  as  it  bespbots  theib'
POLITICAL  influence.  The  men  who  are  under  the  sway  of  these  pure  words  which
God  bath  spoken  are  the  true  promoters  of  the  national  weal.  Nations,  in  order  to
their  real  prosperity,  need  to  hear  and  heed  the  voice  of  God  speaking  to  them  as  to
Is  ael  of  old,  and  saying,  "And  now  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee  but  to  fear
the  Lord  thy  God,  to  walk  in  all  his  ways  .  •     /or  thy  good  t "  (Deut.  x.  12,  13).

Vers.  12,  13. — "  Olorious  things  "  tpoken  of  the  true  Israel.  No  member  of  "  the
goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets  "  had  a  more  vivid  sense  of  the  ultimate  eutranchise-
iirent  from  all  evil,  awaiting  the  race,  to  be  effected  by  the  Messiah  in  due  course,  than
was  possessed  by  "Micah  the  Morastbite."  Even  as  in  the  opening  portion  of  his
prophecy,  he  Ungertfd,  in  thought  and  expression,  upon  the  prevailing  ungodliness,
marking  on  every  hand  confusion  and  strife  and  wrong,  he  could  yet  see  coming  "the
age  of  gold,"  when  peace  and  harmony,  purity  and  righteousness  should  secure  the
victory;  and  of  that  glorious  age,  lol  he  here  sings.  Just  what  the  oasis  is  to
the  surroimding  desert,  or  the  silver  lining  to  the  dark  cloud,  or  the  momentary  pause
in  the  storm,  when  for  an  instant  the  noise  of  the  waves  is  stilled,  telling  of  th«
comii^  calm,  that  these  two  verses  seem  to  be  to  the  first  three  chai)ters  of  this  book
of  Scripture,  and  by  their  bright  and  hopeful  tone  the  hearts  of  "  the  remnant "  who


24  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  [oh.  iH— 13.


deplored  the  abounding  Iniquity  of  the  times  became,  we  doubt  not,  lifted  up  with
devout  thankfulness  and  inspired  with  renewed  strength.  Are  we  to  understand  these
bright  passages  scattered  throughout  this  prophecy,  and  alluding  to  a  glory  to  be
realized  in  the  future,  as  referring  simply  to  happier  days  to  be  experienced  by  the
Jewish  nation,  or  are  they  to  be  regarded  as  having  a  more  comprehensive  range  ?
Whilst  believing  firmly  that  a  glorious  destiny  is  before  the  Hebrew  nation,  and  that
the  working  out  of  that  destiny  shall  be  not  only  for  its  own  spiritual  good,  but  also  for
the  enrichment  of  the  world  (Eom.  xi.  12),  yet  we  should  lose  much  of  the  force  of
the  prophetic  Scriptures  in  their  allusions  to  "  the  latter-day  glory,"  by  limiting  their
utterances  thus.  We  should  not  half  realize  the  depth  of  meaning  underl3ring  these
verses  by  simply  regarding  the  passage  as  setting  forth  that  the  Jews,  after  a  -penoA  of
captivity  in  Babylon,  should  return  again  to  their  own  land.  Prophecy  was  designed
to  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord  Christ.  And,  thus  viewed,  it  was  marked  by  progres  .
sive  stages.  The  work  began  in  the  revelation  made  through  Moses  of  the  will  and
Law  of  God.  Then,  after  a  time,  followed  the  era  of  Samuel,  who,  with  his  contempo-
raries and  successors,  laboured  to  maintain  true  religion  in  Israel,  chosen  of  Clod  as  the
nation  through  whom  his  purposes  of  mercy  were  to  be  unfolded.  And  following
these,  we  come  to  the  age  of  written  prophecy,  in  which  the  holy  seers,  whilst  not
neglecting  the  claims  of  their  own  nation,  took  a  wider  range  of  vision  and  looked
forward  to  a  new  covenant  affecting  all  nations,  and  to  the  coming  of  the  Messiah  aa
One  who  should  establish  a  spiritual  kingdom,  whose  claims  were  to  be  urged  upon  all
the  world,  and  unto  whom  men  of  every  nation  and  kindred  and  tribe  should  turn,  thus
forming  the  spiritual  Israel  over  whom  the  Messiah  should  reign  in  righteousness  (see
Dr.  Payne  Smith's  'Prophecy  a  Preparation  for  Christ').  Micah  notably  belonged  to
this  more  advanced  period  of  the  prophetic  development,  and.  hence  his  bright  anticipa-
tions of  the  glorious  future  are  to  be  understood  as  having  this  wider  scope.  He  was
contemporary  with  Isaiah,  who  constantly  represented  the  Lord  as  reigning  over
the  whole  earth,  and  even  the  far-distant  lands  as  bringing  unto  him  their  tribute.
We  are  led  to  ask — How  did  they  gain  these  broad  and  far-reaching  conceptions  of  aU
the  nations  as  gathering  together,  and  becoming  loyal  to  the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  and
becoming  one  as  being  alike  citizens  of  the  heavenly  King  ?  It  was  not  natural  for
them  to  cherish  such  a  notion  as  this.  It  involved  their  breaking  away  from  their
national  traditions,  and  it  did  violence  to  all  their  prejudices  as  Jews.  The  Hebrews
regarded  themselves  as  the  elect  of  God,  chosen  by  him  out  of  every  nation  to  the
highest  dignity  and  honour.  How,  then,  did  this  conviction,  of  the  world-embracing
character  of  the  blessings  of  the  Messiah's  reign  become  developed  in  the  minds,  and
expressed  in  the  burning  words  of  enthusiasm,  by  the  tongues  of  men  who  shared  in
the  national  bias  ?  There  is  no  explanation  of  this  remarkable  phenomenon  save  one,
even  that  they  had  it  wrought  in  tliem,  and  were  led  to  embrace  it  and  proclaim  it  by
•the  inspiration  of  God's  own  Spirit  (Gal.  i.  12).  "  Glorious  things  "  are  here  spoken  of
the  true  Israel,  the  spiritual  kingdom  of  the  Bedeemer,  the  Church  of  the  living  God.
Observe —

1.  Enlaboemknt.  (Yer.  12.)  The  goud  in  the  land  were  but  few.  The  vast
multitudes  of  the  people,  of  all  sorts  and  conditions,  had  corrupted  their  way.  They
had  turned  aside  to  the  practice  of  iniquity  in  all  its  forms.  It  seemed  as  though  true
piety  would  soon  be  extinguished  in  the  land.  The  hearts  of  the  few  who  amidst  the
prevailing  faithlessness  were  found  faithful  were  naturally  despondent  and  depressed.
And  the  words  of  hope  here  spoken  by  the  propliet  were  specially  designed  for  the
comfort  and  help  of  such.  God,  by  the  mouth  of  Ijis  holy  prophet,  reminded  such
that  as  there  would  befin  conseauence  of  the  nation's  guilt,  the  scattering  and  the
dispersing,  so  there  should  come  a  time  of  revival  Hnd  regathering.  The  true  Israel
should  not  perish.  As  the  shepherd  gathers  together  the  scattered  members  of  his
flock,  so  "  the  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace,"  now  to  be  dispersed  through
sins  not  their  own,  should  be  watched  over  in  their  exile,  and  eventually  be  gathered
as  forming  part  of  the  Messiah's  flock.  Nor  they  alone ;  but  as  in  the  ^arly  days  of
their  national  history,  the  more  they  were  persecuted  the  nmre  they  multiplied  and
grew,  so,  as  the  result  of  the  sorrows  now  in  store,  I  here  should  be  secured  a  great
spiritual  increase.  Yea,  further,  whilst  "  all  Israel  ^nould  be  saved,"  "  the  fulness  of
the  Gentiles"  should  also  come  in.     And  hence  the  obedient  should  be  so  multiplied


OB.  n.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  ffl

in  number  that  they  should  he  as  "  the  sheep  of  Bozrah,"  the  wealth  of  which  oondstec
in  the  ahundaace  of  its  flocks  and  herds ;  indeed,  lo  nnmerous  should  they  be,  thai
they  should  make  "  great  noise  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of  men  "  (ver.  12).  Then
are  times  whea  we  get  depressed  and  sad  at  heart  in  holy  service,  and  specially  whei
we  m{irk  the  vast  portions  of  the  human  race  as  yet  untouched  by  the  sacred  and
saving  influences  of  God's  truth.  We  cry,  "  How  long,  0  Lord,  how  long  ?  Why  it
his  chariot  so  long  in  coming  ?  "  But,  courage  I  it  will  not  be  ever  thus.  The  Divine
purpose  is  to  flood  the  world  with  the  light  of  truth,  and  to  gather  a  multitude  out  o<
every  nation,  and  kindred,  and  tonguis,  and  people.  There  shall  be  enlargement.  The
Messiah  "  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  be  satisfied."  "  Of  the  increase  of  hii
kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end."  This  is  sure  ;  it  is  certain ;  it  cannot  fail.  "  The
mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  sptiken  it."

XL  Secubitt.  "As  the  flock  in  the  midst  of  their  fold"  (rer.  12).  One  of  the  most
impressive  and  encouraging  of  the  figures  of  speech  employed  in  Scripture  to  reveal  tc
us  the  Divine  character  is  that  in  which  the  Lord  is  referred  to  as  the  Shepherd  folding
the  flock  in  his  care.  True,  the  figure  is  suggestive  of  niuch  that  is  calculated  to
humble  us ;  for  if  he  is  our  "  Shepherd,"  then  are  we  "  the  sheep  of  his  pasture,"  and  as
such  are  very  helpless  ourselves,  in  the  midst  of  the  dangers  by  which  we  are
surrounded,  and  very  prone  by  reason  of  our  weakness  to  wander  from  the  fold ;  but
then  the  beautiful  simile  encourages  us,  assuring  us  that  the  Lord  will  be  our  Strength
in  weakness,  that  he  will  defend  us  amidst  every  peril,  and  that  in  all  our  strayings  he
will  follow  us  with  a  view  to  restoring  us  by  his  power  and  grace.  Since  he  is  "  the
Shepherd  of  Israel,"  his  people  are  secure  "  as  sheep  In  the  midst  of  their  fold."  And
this  protection  will  be  afforded  to  "  his  own,"  even  amidst  the  gloomiest  experiences  of
their  life.  There  are  times  when  even  the  best  of  men  are  called  upon  "  to  walk  in
darkness,"  having  "  no  light."  And  what  is  needed  in  such  seasons  is  the  spirit  of  holy
trust,  a  trust  which  will  repose  unswervingly  in  the  good  Shepherd's  feithfulness  and
love,  and  which  wUl  take  comfort  in  his  rod  and  staff,  in  the  tokens  of  his  presence,
the  conviction  of  his  sovereign  sway,  and  the  assurances  of  his  Word.  So  Micah  would
kave  the  tired,  yet  true-hearted,  in  his  day  feel ;  and  so  should  such  in  all  ages  realize,
that  in  the  care  of  God  they  are  as  secure  from  harm  as  "  the  flock  in  the  midst  of
their  fold,"  watched  over  by  the  faithful  shepherd's  continual  care.

III.  Delitebance.  (Yer.  13.)  The  passage  indicates  that  not  only  shall  there  be
protection  afforded  in  the  times  of  peril,  but  also  deliverance  out  of  danger.  It  is  in
this  connection  that  Micah  here  introduces  into  the  words  of  hope  he  was  uttering
an  allusion  to  the  Messiah.  He  referred  to  him  as  "  the  Breaker,"  going  on  before  his
servants,  overcoming  and  breaking  through  every  hindrance  to  their  advancement;
they  following  him  and  through  him  becoming  themselves  triumphant.  "  The  Breaker
is  come  up  before  them,"  etc.  (ver.  13).

IV.  HoNODB.  "  And  the  Lord  at  the  head  of  them  "  (ver.  13).  Through  all  it  wag
their  privilege  and  distinction  to  be  associated  with  the  Lord  Most  High.  The  true
Sbechinah-glory  was  theirs.  And  when  at  length  the  conflict  should  be  past,  and  the
time  of  "storm  and  scattering  "-should  have  ended,  the  all-presiding  Love  would  still
be  at  their  head,  their  everlasting  Light,  their  eternal  Glory.  "  His  name  shall  he  in
their  foreheads  "  (Rev.  xxii.  4) ;  "  They  shall  be  his  people,  and  he  will  be  their  God."
They  shall  dwell  with  him,  and  he  abide  with  them ;  and  from  the  constant  experience
of  his  love  and  favour  their  blessedness  shall  perpetually  flow,  and  flow  on  for  ever-
more. Thus  this  messenger  of  the  Lord  appears  to  have  turned  away  his  thoughts  for
a  moment  from  the  burden  of  woe  he  was  delivering,  and  to  have  fixed  his  mind  upon
that  brighter  era  which  should  at  length  dawn  upon  the  world  sin  had  darkened  and
defiled..  We  do  well  also  to  keep  that  era  in  view,  and  in  anticipation  of  it  "in
patience  to  possess  our  souls."

Ver.  18.— The  Breaker,  In  these  words  the  prophet  represents  the  Messiah  as  going
before  his  people,  removing  every  barrier,  overcoming  every  obstruction,  preparing  the
way  for  them,  and  bringing  them  through  every  difficulty.  This  representation  was
frequently  made  by  the  Jewish  prophets,  and  the  title, "  The  Breaker-through "  was
familiar  to  the  Jews  as  one  of  the  titles  of  the  Messiah.

L  Thu  title  has  its  appucation  to  the  Messiah  ih  hib  bslatiokship  to  ths


26  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  [oh.  n.  1—13,

UMIVEBSAL  Cbuboh.  The  ultimate  victory  and  glory  of  the  Church  of  God  is  assured
Such  is  God's  eternal  purpose,  and  which  by  his  sovereign  power  he  wid  eventually
accomplish.  Obstacles  to  the  fulfilment  of  this  purpose  are  continually  arising.  Impedi*
ments  are  placed  in  the  way.  Active  opposition  has  been  offered  to  the  advancement
of  the  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteousness,  "  The  kings  of  the  earth  set  themselves,"
etc.  (Fs.  ii.  2).  Or  when  not  thus  actively  engaged  against  the  truth  they  have  often
taken  such  measures  in  the  interests  of  theii  own  worldly  policy  as  have  seriously
impeded  the  progress  of  truth.  Hoary  systemB  of  idolatry  also  have  long  held  sway
over  millions  of  the  human  race,  and  the  glory  due  unto  the  Lord  has  been  given  to
"  graven  images."  Yet  "  the  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  sure,"  and  the  purpose  he
has  purposed  shall  be  accom|>lished.  And  with  respect  to  its  accomplishment  the
Messiah  is " the  Breake/r-through"  He,  " the  Leader  and  Commander  of  his  people,"
shall  go  before  them,  casting  down  the  imaginations  and  frustrating  the  designs  of  the
evil,  "opening  the  blind  eyes,  bringing  out  the  prisoners  from  the  prison,  and  them
that  sit  in  darkness  out  of  the  prison-house."  Every  mountain  shall  become  a  plain
before  him.  He  shall  go  on  conquering  and  to  conquer,  until  at  last  there  shall  rise
the  cry  of  victory,  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world,"  etc.  (Rev.  xi.  15).

IL  This  title  has  its  application  to  the  Messiah  also  in  the  belationship
H8  sustains  to  HIS  SEBVANTB  INDIVIDUALLY.  It  is  a  title  which  may  be  accounted
precious,  not  only  to  the  Church  of  God  as  a  whole,  but  also  to  each  servant  of  the
Lord.  It  is  interesting  to  notice  how  that  Christ,  in  one  of  his  memorable  discourses,
associated  this  thought,  of  his  going;  before  his  servants  with  a  view  to  their  being
brought  through  every  difficulty,  with  his  references  to  himself  as  "  the  good  Shep-
herd ;  "  so  that  in  the  recorded  words  of  Jesus  (John  x.  3,  4)  we  find  the  very  same
association  of  figures  of  speech  which  were  here  employed  by  Micah ;  for  Christ  said  of
himself  as  the  Shepherd,  "  He  calleth  his  own  sheep  by  name,  and  leadeth  them  out ; "
"  He  goeth  before  them,  and  they  follow  him."  And  may  not  the  writer  of  the  Epistle
to  the  Hebrews  have  had  the  words  Micah  here  employed,  and  the  words  of  Christ
alluded  to,  in  mind  when  he  wrote  of  the  Saviour  as  being  "  the  Forerunner  "  of  his
peoijle  (Heb.  vi.  20)  ?  Christ  has  gone  before  his  servants,  and  has  gaiiied  the  victory
over  their  spiritual  foes.  He  has  conquered  the  evil  one.  In  his  life  he  conquered,
for  not  once  did  the  adversary  gain  the  ascendancy  over  him ;  and  in  his  death  he
conquered,  for  then  "  he  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  and  made  a  show  of  them,"
etc.  (Col.  iu  16).  He  has  conquered  the  world,  and  could  say  to  his  disciples, "  I  have
overcome  the  world."  And  he  has  conquered  death  and  the  grave,  fulfilling  the
triumphant  declaration,  "  0  death  !  I  will  be  thy  plagues  I  0  grave  I  I  will  he  thy
destruction"  (Hos.  xiii.  14;  Is*,  xxv.  8).  Thus  he  is,  in  the  interests  of  each  of
his  servants,  "  the  Breaker^  By  his  victory  he  has  so  weakened  the  strength  of  our
spiritual  adversaries  as  to  render  the  conflict  comparatively  easy  to  us.  We  have  to
encounter  foes  already  delVated  by  our  Lord.  We  have  to  face  enemies  already
dispirited  by  failure,  and  who  know  assuredly  that  the  time  of  their  triumphing  is  short.
Beautiful  representation  of  the  Messiah  this  1  " The  Breaker"  who  removes  all
difficulty  out  of  the  way  of  his  servants ;  who  has  gone  before  them  to  clear  the  ground,
to  cast  down  every  obstruction,  to  make  "  the  crooked  things  straight,  and  the  rough
places  plain,"  that  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  may  be  revealed."  Let  us  hear  his  voice
saying  to  us,  as  he  thus  leads  us  on,  "  Follow  me ;  "  and  be  it  ours  (1)  cheerfully,  (2)
trustingly,  (3)  and  courageously  to  obey  the  great  Captain's  call,  and  to  enter  through
him  into  honour,  glory,  and  immortality  1

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — S.^Deliberate  sins  bringing  predestined  pimishmenta.  We  8M  here —
I.  Ths  qenesib  of  obuie.  Three  stages  are  described.  1.  Sinful  desires  art
cherished  in  the  heart.  These  sinners  "  devise  iniquity,"  think  over  it  (Ps.  vii.  14),
imagine  it  (the  same  word  as  in  1  Sam.  xviii.  25,  referring  to  Saul's  thought  and  plan
to  secure  David's  death),  dwell  on  it ;  for  wickedness  is  "  sweet  in  their  mouth  "
(Job  XX.  10 — 12).  Illustiate  from  the  licentious  thoughts  of  David  (2  Sam.  xi.  2,  8)  or
Aiunon  (2  Sam.  xiii.  1,  2),  the  covetous  thoughts  of  Ahab  (1   Kings  xxi.),  or  the


OH.  n.  1—13.]  THE   BOOK  OF  MICAH.  Zi

BElvioua  and  revengeful  thoughts  of  Haman  (Esth.  iiL  6,  6 ;  see  Jas.  i.  14, 16).  Here
sin  is  not  traced  during  its  growth.  From  its  birth  St.  James  passes  on  to  its  maturity:
"  The  sin,  when  it  is  full  grown,  bringeth  forth  death."  But  Micah  points  out  stages  in
its  growth.  2.  Plans  of  wickedness  are  deliberately  contrived.  They  "  work,"  prepare
or  fabricate,  "  evil  upon  their  beds."  In  their  hours  of  rest  they  "  cannot  cease  from
sin."  On  their  beds,  where  they  might  enjoy  the  sleep  of  God's  beloved,  where  in
wakeful  hours  they  might  commune  with  God  and  their  own  hearts  (Ps.  iv.  4;  xvi.  7;
Ixiii.  6 ;  civ.  34),  they  plot  their  crimes  (Ps.  ixxvi.  4 ;  Prov.  iv.  16).  If  they  want
allies  they  hesitate  not  to  secure  the  aid  of  the  false  witness,  the  procuress,  the  dishonest
lawyer,  the  bribed  judge.  lUust. :  Jezebel ;  the  priests  (Matt.  ixviiL  11 — 14) ;  the
assassins  (Acts  xxiii.  12 — 15).  3.  The  plot  is  executed  in  a  crime,  They  act  promptly,
early,  showing  no  signs  of  repentance  or  reflection  (Jer.  viii.  6) ;  in  the  daylight,  without
shame  (Esth.  vi.  4 ;  Matt,  xxvii.  1,  2) — "  swift  to  shed  blood,"  or  defraud,  or  debauch.
Might  constitutes  their  right ;  "  impiously  mighty  and  mighty  in  impiety,"  "  because
it  is  in  the  power  of  their  hands."  "  Dextra  mihi  Deus  "  (Virgil).  They  are  reckless
of  the  ruin  caused  to  an  innocent  man  or  a  whole  family  robbed  of  their  heritage
(Neh.  v.  1 — 5),  or  of  their  head  (1  Kings  xxi.  13),  or  of  the  flower  of  the  flock,  some
beloved  child  more  precious  than  any  heritage  (2  Sam.  xii.  1 — 9).

II.  Its  niBviTABLB  connection  with  eeteibution.  While  sinners  are  coveting,
plotting,  plundering,  God  is  watching,  devising,  and  framing  punishment.  This  is :  1.
Predestined ;  on  the  ground  of  deliberate  sin.  God's  "  therefores  "  have  all  the  force  of
demonstrativereasouing(Prov.  i.  31;  Isa.  Ixv.  12,etc.).  2.  Hard  to  be  borne.  Compared
to  a  yoke.  Contrast  the  yoke  of  the  Father's  discipline  (Lam.  iii.  27),  and  of  the
Redeemer's  service  (Matt  xL  29,  30).  If  these  yokes  are  contempUiouslycast  away,  the
evil  yoke  of  punishment,  a  "  yol?e  of  iron,"  is  prepared  (Deut.  xxviii.  48 ;  Jer.  xxviii.  14).
S.  Inevitable.  See  the  striking  figures  in  Amos  ix.  1 — 4  and  Zech.  xiv.  16 — 18  (God'i
manifoldinstrumentsof  punishment);  of.  1  Tim.  vi. 9, 10.  4.  Humiliating.  "Neither
shall  ye  go  haughtily."  How  often  the  retribution  on  the  proud  or  the  extortioner  is
strikingly  appropriate  to  their  sin  1  Man's  skill  in  successful  sinning  is  outmatched  by
Gkid's  wisdom  is  punishing  (Job  iz.  4).  When  God's  wisdom  and  power  are  both
arrayed  against  us,  it  is  an  evil  time  indeed.  5.  Utterly  disastrous.  A  revolution  in
their  entire  circumstances  (ver.  4).  Thus  the  consequences  of  sin  may  be  irreparable  in
this  world ;  but  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  tells  of  a  forgiveness  whereby  gin  may  be
righteously  forgiven,  and  the  eternal  consequences  may  be  cut  off  (Isa,  xliii.  25 ;
John  v.  24).— B.  S.  P.

Ver.  6. — An  impious  veto }  a/atcU  withdrawal.  We  adopt  as  our  rendering  of  this
difficult  verse,  "  Prophesy  not ;  they  ihall  indeed  prophesy ;  they  shall  not  prophesy  to
these ;  shame  shall  not  depart."    We  see  here —

L  Ak  impious  veto.  Men  may  seek  to  put  their  veto  on  a  faithful  messenger  in
various  ways.  1.  By  seeking  to  persuade  him  to  utter  smooth  words.  Thus  Micaiah's
integrity  was  first  assailed  (1  Kings  xxii.  13).  So,  too,  in  the  later  days  of  Amos  (ii.  12,
where  the  corruption  of  prophets  as  well  as  of  Nazarites  is  suggested)  and  of  Isaiah
(xxx.  9 — 11).  2.  By  direct  veto,  supported  by  threats,  uttered  or  implied,  as  iu  the  case
of  Amos  (vii.  10 — 13).  3.  By  direct  persecution.  Micaiah  was  imprisoned ;  Jezebel
"  cut  off  the  prophets  of  the  Lord,"  and  sought  to  slay  Elijah.  Conspiracies  were
formed  against  the  liberty  and  the  life  of  Jeremiah  (xx.  1,  2 ;  xxvi.  8, 9).  God's  faith-
ful witnesses  are  always  odious  to  "  the  beast "  and  those  who  bear  his  mark  (Eev.  xi.
7 — 10).  Successive  steps  in  this  impious  veto  are  seen  in  the  experience  of  Christ's
apostles  (Acts  iv.  1—3,  18—21 ;  v.  17,  18,  26 — 40).  4.  By  stubborn  neglect  or
haughty  contempt.  These  are  virtually  a  veto  on  faithful  preachers  (cf.  Isa.  xxviii,
9 — 12  ;  liii.  1).  It  is  as  though  their  hearers  said,  "Spare  your  breath,"  etc.,  or  in  still
ruder  phrase,  "  Shut  up ! "  For  they  actually  prefer  such  teachers  as  those  alluded  to  in
ver.  11,  who  encourage  them  in  sin  and  delusion  (Deut.  xxix.  19,  20).  The  contempt
with  which  preachers  and  their  messages  are  often  regarded  are  a  temptation  to  abandon
the  work.  They  say, "  Drop  not "  (Hebrew),  which  seems  almost  equivalent  to  "  Drivel
not.*"  We  hear  of  "  the  decay  of  preaching,"  and  know  by  how  many  it  is  neglected.
To  say,  "  We  do  not  care  to  hear  your  message,"  is  much  the  same  as  to  say,  "  Prophesy
not."    And  the  neglect  of  God's  truth  by  courteous  and  even  complimentary  hearen  ia


as  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  n.  1— 1&

a  sore  temptation  to  an  earnest  preacher  who  watches  for  souls  not  for  smiles  (Ezek.
xxxiii.  30—32).    To  this  impious  veto  a  reply  comes  in  the  form  of —

II.  A  FATAL  WITHDRAWAL.  We  hear  three  sharp,  decisive  messages.  1,  "  They
shall  prophesy,"  God's  servants  shall  continue  to  do  so  under  the  constraint  of  both  a
Divine  command  aad  an  irresistible  impulse.  Both  these  are  illustrated  in  the  history
of  Jeremiah,  who  shrank  from  his  mission  (L  6 — 19 ;  xy.  10;  xx.  7,  8),  yet  undertook
it  (ii.  1),  and  returned  to  it  again  and  again  (xt.  16, 16;  xx.  9).  St.  Paul  is  another
example  (Acts  xxvi.  16 — 20 ;  Gal.  i.  15, 16 ;  see  too  Acts  xx.  24 ;  1  Oor.  ix.  16).  Men's
impiety  shall  not  frustrate  God's  purposes.  2.  "  HieyshaU  not  prophesy  to  these."  The
ministry  shall  be  withdrawn  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  9 ;  Amos  viii.  11 — 13 ;  and  see  1  Maoo.  iv.  46 ;
ix.  27 ;  xiv,  41);  or,  if  continued,  it  will  be  of  no  avail  because  of  the  hardness  of
heart  of  the  hearers  (Ezek.  iii.  24 — 27).  Both  these  threats  are  illustrated  by  the  treat-
ment of  the  gospel  by  the  Jews,  and  of  the  Jews  by  the  apostles  (Acts  xiii.  46,  47 ;
xxviii.  23 — 28).  Many  now  are  subject  to  a  similar  sentence.  They  nominally  attend
some  pastor's  ministry,  but  practically  are  without  it,  because  deaf  to  the  message  it
brings  to  them.  Then  the  threat  against  God's  ancient  vineyard  is  fulfilled,  "  I  will
also  command  the  clouds  that  they  rain  no  rain  upon  it"  (Isa.  v.  6).  Showers  of
blessing  are  dropping  on  others,  but  their  hearts  are  dry,  like  Gideon's  fleece  when  the
iioor  around  was  soaked  with  dew.  3.  "  Shame  shall  not  depart."  By  silencing  God's
messengers  they  hoped  to  silence  the  reproaches  of  conscience  and  the  shame  they  felt
at  the  prophet's  rebukes.  But  in  vain.  The  fact  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  messengers
was  itself  a  shame  to  the  people ;  like  the  withdrawal  of  an  ambassador  because  he
had  been  shamefully  treated  (ulust. :  2  Sam.  x.  1 — 4;  Boman  ambassador  insulted  at
Tarentum ;  and  cf.  Luke  x.  16).  This  shame  was  the  fruit  of  their  own  doings,  and
was  thus  bound  up  with  their  future  history.  It  became  more  and  more  aggravated,
owing  to  the  degrading  influence  of  sin.  The  wrath  of  God  abode  on  them,  whereas,
by  repentance  and  faith,  it  might  have  been  removed  (cf.  John  iii.  36  with  ix.  41).
The  final  issue  of  shameful  sin  must  be  a  resurrection  "  to  shame  "  and  "  condemna-
tion" (Dan.  xiL  2;  John  v.  29).— E.  S.  P.

Ver.  7. — Judgment,  Qod't  strange  work ;  mercy,  his  delight.  Adopting  as  our  trans-
lation, "  0  thou,  called  the  house  of  Jacob,  is  the  patience  of  Jehovah  short  ?  Are
these  his  doings  ?  Do  not  his  words  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly  ? "  we
learn  two  truths  respecting  God.

L  Judgment  is  God's  "  steange  wobk."  1»  The  people  are  reminded  of  this  by
their  very  na/me.  It  is  a  great  honour  but  a  grave  responsibility  to  have  a  good  name
and  ancestry  (John  viii,  39 ;  Acts  iii.  25).  What  sacred  associations  clustered  around
the  name,  "  house  of  Jacob "  1  The  personal  history  of  their  ancestor  Jacob  gave
great  significance  to  the  name,  "  God  of  Jacob  "  (Ps.  xlvi.  11).  The  history  of  Jacob
shows  that  he  had  to  do  with  a  God  who  is  forbearing  to  sinners;  who  enters  into
covenant  with  men,  and  renews  that  covenant  even  with  the  unworthy  children  of
godly  parents ;  who  is  the  Hearer  of  prayer,  and  condescends  to  represent  himself  as
being  overcome  by  it ;  who  bestows  eternal  life  on  those  who  die  in  faith  (Exod,  iii.  6 ;
Matt.  xxii.  31,  32).  Similar  lessons  might  be  learned  from  God's  treatment  of  "  the
house  of  Jacob  "  which  name  they  gloried  in.  They  could  look  back  to  a  long  cata-
logue of  mercies  (Ps.  Ixxviii.,  cv.,  cvi.).  Yet  the  very  fact  that  they  bore  this  name
made  more  glaring  the  contrast  between  it  and  their  real  character  (vers.  5,  6 ;  Hos.
.  xii.  2—7 ;  John  viii.  33 — 40;  Rom,  ii.  17 — 29).  Apply  to  the  name  we  English  bear
as  a  Christian  nation.  2.  An  appeal  is  made  to  their  judgments  as  to  the  character  of
God.  "Is  the  patience  of  Jehovah  short?"  Let  God  testify  to  them  (Exod,
xxxiv.  6,  7),  and  Moses  respond  (Numb,  xiv,  17 — 20),  and  David  take  up  the  strain

iPs,  ciii.  8 — 10),  and  the  long  lives  of  the  ungodly,  and  late  repentances  confirm  the
)ivine  words,  and  their  own  consciences  confess  that  Jehovah  is  a  long-suffering  God,
3.  They  are  reminded  that  Ood  is  not  responsible  for  sin,  and  has  nophasv/re  in  punish-
ment. "  Are  these  his  doings  ? "  We  take  it  as  a  moral  axiom  that  God  is  not
responsible  for  sin,  unless  the  sun  can  be  held  responsible  for  the  shadows  caused  by
opaque  objects  (Jas,  i.  13;  1  Jphn  i,  5),  At  the  best,  sin  is  the  corruption  of  what
God  made  good ;  e.g.  selfishness  is  depraved  self-love  ;  envy  is  fallen  emulation ;  and
so  with  other  sins.      In  regard  to  punishment  we  know  that  "he  doth  not  affliot


OH.  II.  1—13.]  TUB  BOOK  OF  MIUAH.  29

willingly,"    He  presides  over  his  own  laws  and  executes  his  threats ;  but  It  is  sin,  not
God,  who  is  the  great  destroyer.    '•  Eml  shall  slay  the  wick«i"  (Ps.  xxxIt.  21).

n.  Mebot  18  God's  delight.  "  Do  not  my  words  do  good,"  etc.  ?  The  special
reference  seems  to  be  to  God's  words  through  his  prophets,  so  that  it  was  a  glaring  sin
as  well  as  folly  to  try  to  silence  God's  prophets  (ver.  6),  whose  words  were  so  whole-
some (Jer.  XV.  16),  because  they  revealed  God's  Name,  and  therefore  the  path  of  peace
and  safety  (Ps.  ix.  10).  The  prophets  would  have  grievously  misrepresented  God's
Name  if  they  had  spoken  comfort  to  the  wicked  in  their  wickedness  (isa.  iii.  10,  11),
Contrast  Zedekiah  with  Micaiah  and  Elijah  in  their  conduct  towards  Ahab ;  and  of.
Ezek.  xiii,  with  Ps.  xviii.  25,  26 ;  xxxiv,  16, 16.  To  us  God's  words  do  good  still  more
abundantly.  The  psalmist's  words,  "  Thou  hast  magnified  thy  word  above  all  thy
Name,"  are  true  of  the  revelation  of  God  in  "  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel."  Yet
even  the  gospel,  though  offering  mercy  to  the  vilest,  can  do  good  only  to  those  who  deal
truly  with  it  and  thus  walk  uprightly.  The  perversion  of  the  greatest  blessing  may
be  the  most  fatal  curse.  The  word  of  life  will  be  the  word  of  judgment  (John  xii,  48) ;
ministers  may  become  a  "  savour  of  death,"  and  Christ  a  stone  that  shall  grind  to
powder.  "  When  the  gospel  becomes  deadly  to  a  man,  it  is  a  terrible  thing ;  to  die  of
a  gospel  plague  is  a  terrible  way  of  dying  "  (John  Howe).  The  revelation  of  God's
delight  in  mercy  by  Christ's  sacrifice  for  sinners  makes  it  possible  for  the  vilest  to
walk  uprightly.  But  salvation  is  from  sin  itself.  Character  is  essential  to  heaven,  or
even  God  could  not  make  it  heaven  to  us. — E.  S.  P.

Ver.  10. — Sin,  the  great  disturber.  It  has  been  so  from  the  beginning ;  it  will  be  so
to  the  very  end.

I.  Sin  was  the  dibtubbeb  of  the  eabliebt  eabthlt  Fabadise.  It  was  not  the
serpent  or  the  temptation,  but  Adam's  sin,  that  destroyed  our  first  parents'  rest.  They
might  have  known  of  the  presence  of  the  tempter,  have  seen  his  trail,  heard  his  hiss,
and  been  conscious  of  his  solicitations,  and  yet  have  continued  in  the  rest  of  unbroken
confidence  in  God.  But  when  sin  entered  their  hearts,  rest  fled,  and  guilt,  shame,  and
fear  took  its  place.  If  allowed  to  remain  in  the  garden,  it  would  no  longer  have  been
an  Eden,  a  Paradise  to  them.  The  groans  of  creation  begin  to  mingle  with  the
reproaches  of  their  own  hearts.  But  the  voice  is  heard,  "  Arise,  and  depart,"  etc.
(Gen.  iii.  22— 24).

II.  Sin  ejected  the  fibst  inhabitants  of  Canaan.  Even  then  it  was  "the
glory  of  all  lands,"  a  splendid  inheritance  (G«n.  xiii.  10 ;  Numb.  xiv.  7,  8 ;  Deut.
viil,  7 — 9).  But  sin  of  the  foulest  kind  was  there.  Vice  and  crime  rendered  real  rest
impossible.  The  land  is  represented  as  stained,  saturated  with  sin,  no  longer  able  to
tolerate  any  further  iniquity  (cf.  Gen.  xv,  16);  but  ready  to  "spue  out"  its
inhabitants  (Lev.  xviii.  24^ — 28  ;  xx.  22,  23).  The  summons  went  forth — Arise,  and
depart,  yet  not  to  exile,  but  to  utter  destruction,

III.  Sin  0HAN8ED  the  .best  of  Canaan  into  a  land  or  unbest  to  the  chosen
nation.  Canaan  was  promised  as  one  of  God's  rests — -not  the  highest,  but  none  the  less
real  (Deut.  xii.  9 ;  Ps.  xcv.  11).  What  a  rest  it  might  have  been,  enriched  with  its
natural  resources,  blessed  with  peace  and  brotherhood  among  the  tribes,  and  crowned
with  the  assurance  of  Divine  protection  (Exod.  xxxiv.  24 ;  Deut.  xii.  10).  A  dim
vision  of  the  fulness  of  rest  they  might  have  enjoyed  was  seen  in  the  reign  of  Solomon
the  peaceful  (1  Kings  iv.  25).  But  throughout  their  whole  history  they  allowed  sin
to  mar  their  inheritance  and  break  in  upon  their  rest.  There  were  periods  of  special
demoralization,  as  in  the  days  of  the  judges  and  of  the  later  kings.  They  cast  out
the  fatherless  and  the  widow  (ver.  9),  they  plundered  the  peaceable  (ver.  8),  they
indulged  in  some  of  the  abominations  of  the  old  Canaanites  (1  Kings  xxii.  46 ;  2  Kings
ixiii.  7).  They  could  therefore  have  no  rest  themselves,  but  were  doomed  to  exile
(Rev.  xiii.  10).  The  land  is  represented  as  once  more  taking  sides  with  God  and
turning  against  those  who  abused  his  goodness.  The  false  report  of  the  spies  (Numb.
xiii.  32)  received  a  fulfilment,  as  Moses  foretoU  (Lev.  xxvi.  18 — 35)  and  Ezekiel
described  (xxxvi.  13 — 19),  as  though  an  earthquake  or  a  flood  drove  the  sinners
far  away  (Amos  viii.  8).  Illust. :  Pompeii.  So  has  it  been  in  the  history  of  nations
ever  since  (wars,  slavery,  despotism,  revolutions,  etc.).  Illustrate  from  the  Indian
oliief  with  his  tribe  fleeing  from  his  foes,  till,  on  the  banks  of  a  splendid  river,  h«


30  THE   BOUK    OF   MlUAa.  (.oh-  li-  i— iS^


stuck  his  spear  Into  the  ground,  exclaiming,  "  Alabama  I "  "  Here  w«  rest  I "    But

m  vain.

IV.  Sin  breaks  the  rest  of  the  happiest  home.  A  young  bride  and  bridegroom
may  think  they  have  reached  the  goal  of  earthly  happiness.  But  unless  Christ  occupies
in  their  hearts  the  place  which  he  claims,  and  which  ho  alone  can  fill,  they  may  soon
learn  that  sin  is  a  great  disturber,  even  in  a  domestic  Eden.  Augustine's  words  are
founii  to  be  true,  "  0  God,  thou  hast  made  us  for  thyself,  and  our  heart  is  restless  till  it
rents  in  thee."  Sickness,  suffering,  death,  and  other  fruits  of  sin  stir  up  their  nes*.
(Deut.  xxiii.  11),  and  remind  them  that  their  rest  is  polluted  and  therefore  insecure.

V.  Sin  invades  and  nsTiiRBS  even  the  adopted  family  op  God.  For  "death
passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  ill  have  sinned,"  so  that  "  ourselves  also  which  have
the  firstfruits  of  the  Spirif_  groan  within  ourselves  "  (Rum.  v.  12 ;  viii.  23).  We
rejoice  to  know  that  "  here  we  have  no  continuing  city,"  because  it  is  polluted.  But
already  we  know  of  a  rest  in  Christ  (Matt.  li.  28,  29 ;  Heb.  iv.  3),  which  will  be
perfected  into  a  rest  viith  Christ  (Heb.  iv.  9),  when  we  shall  have  completely  "  escaped
the  corruption  which  is  in  the  world  by  lust,"  and  be  made  fully  "  partak'-rs  of  the
Divine  nature"  (2  Pet.  i.  4).  To  us  the  summons,  "Arise,  and  depart,"  will  be  the
signal  of  emancipation ;  the  curse  will  be  changed  into  a  blessing,  for  we  shall  "  depart
to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better." — E.  S.  P.

Ver.  13. — God  the  great  Bond-breaker.  There  is  a  marked  contrast  between  the  tone
of  vers.  10,  11  and  that  of  vers.  12,  13.  God  delights  in  such  contrasts.  He  loves  to
turn  from  threats  to  promises.  Judgment  is  his  strange  work ;  mercy  is  his  delight.
The  dispersion  of  his  people  is  a  painful  necessity,  their  restoration  is  a  joy  to  him.
Hence  the  jubilant  tone  of  the  concluding  verses  of  this  chapter.  The  great  Bond-
breaker  is  God  himself.    Apply —

I.  To  the  breaking  of  the  Babylonish  bondage.  Cyrus  was  a  bond-breaker.  In
a  certain  sense  the  words  are  applicable  to  him  (Ezra  i.  2 — i,  etc.).  But  above  him
was  the  greater  Deliverer,  whom  Cyrus  hixaself  recognized,  who  had  long  before  pre-
dicted deliverance  (Isa.  xlv.  1 — 6),  and  who  now  puts  it  into  the  heart  of  the  Persian
monarch  to  act  as  his  servant.  Before  God  interposed,  the  captives  were  but  as  a  flock
of  sheep  (ver.  12)  whom  a  fold,  not  to  say  a  fortress,  could  restrain.  Till  the  seventy
years  of  destined  captivity  were  fulfilled  no  breaker  could  release  that  flock  ;  but  then
"the  man  that  executeth  my  counsel  from  a  far  country"  appeared  (Isa.  xlvi.  9 — 11).
When  God  broke  through,  it  was  an  easy  thing,  even  for  those  timid  sheep,  to  pass
through  or  to  break  through  any  gate  (like  Peter  passing  the  iron  gate  of  his  prison).
As  they  streamed  forth  from  Babylon,  Zerubbabel,  "  the  Prince  of  Judah"  (Ezek.  i.  8),
led  them.  But  there  was  another  invisible  Leader,  of  a  nobler  royalty  than  Zerubbabel
— "their  King,"  who  went  before  them  (Isa.  xlix.  8 — 10;  lii.  12).  See  Exod.  xiii.  21:
there  the  symbol  was  visible  ;  now  the  invisible  King  was  seen  by  the  eye  of  prophetic
faith.  Learn  to  recognize  th«  Divine  hand  in  all  national  deliverances  ;  as  did  David
(2  Sam.  V.  20),  and  Queen  Elizabeth  at  the  destruction  of  the  Armada  (medal  and  its
inscription,  "  AfBavit  Deus,  et  dissipuntur  "),  and  godly  monarchs  in  later  days.

II.  To  DELIVERANCE  FROM  THE  BONDAGE  OP  SIN.  "  The  Word "  was  the  Divine
Deliverer  of  Israel  from  Babylon  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9),  and  is  so  of  us.  The  Jews  recognized
"  the  Breaker  "  as  a  title  of  Messiah  their  Prince.  In  this  work  of  spiritual  deliverance
he  was  foretold,  and  now  is  revealed  as :  1.  A  Bond-breaker,  (Isa.  xlii.  7 ;  xlix.  8, 9, 24,
25.)  2.  A  Leader  and  Commander,  (Isa.  Iv.  4.)  3.  A  Redeemer  at  the  cost  qfconjlict,
(Isa.  Ixiii.  1 — 6.)  4.  A  Shepherd-King  (Ezek.  xxxiv.  23.  24) ;  who  gains  supremacy
by  dying  for  the  flock  he  seuks  to  deliver  (John  x.  11,  27 — 30;  Heb.  ii.  9 — 15).  5.  A
Saviour  from  foes  within  as  well  as  oppressors  without.  (Matt.  i.  21 ;  Titus  ii.  14.)  6.
Who  shall  save  all  Israel  at  last.  (Isa.  lix.  20,21;  Bom.zi.  26.)  In  both  these  deuver-
ances  the  redeemed  have  their  appointed  work.  Israel  was  bidden  to  humble  them-
selves in  repentance  (Lev.  xxvi.  40 — 42),  to  pray  in  faith  (Jer.  xxix.  12, 18),  and  to
accept  the  Lord  as  their  Redeemer  and  Leader  (Hos.  i.  11).  And  we,  too,  are  com-
manded to  repent,  to  "  believe  in  the  Name  of  his  Son  Jesus  Christ "  (Acts  xvii.  30 ;
1  John  iii.  23),  and  thus  to  work  "  the  work  of  God  "  (John  vi.  29).  Then  Christ  our
Bond-breaker  will,  for  us,  break  through  the  power  of  evil  habit,  of  this  oresent  evil
ivorld,  and  of  the  infernal  oppressor  of  our  souls.


IH.  11.1— 13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  SI


"  The  world,  with  sin  and  Satan,

In  vain  oni  march  opposes ;
By  &ith  we  shall  break  through  them  Ul,

And  ling  the  long  of  Moses."

B.  8.  P.

Vers.  1—4. — Avarice.  "  Woe  to  them  that  devise  iniquity,  and  work  evil  upon
their  beds  1  when  the  morning  Is  light,  they  practise  it,  because  it  is  in  the  power  of
their  hand,"  etc.  The  prophet,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  foretold  the  judgment  that
would  befall  both  kingdoms  on  account  of  their  apostasy  from  the  living  God.  He
begins  this  chapter  by  denouncing  the  rapacious  avarice  of  their  leading  men.  Oppres-
sion is  one  of  the  greatest  social  crimes ;  alas  I  one  that  has  been  prevalent  in  every  age
and  land  ;  a  crime  this,  too,  which  the  Bible  denounces  with  great  frequency  and  with
terrific  force.  Avarice,  or  greed,  is  the  spring  and  spirit  of  all  oppression.  In  the  text
ire  have  this  rapacious  avarice  presented  to  us  in  three  aspects.

I.  Scheming  in  the  night.  The  avaricious  men  "devise  iniquity  and  work  evil
upon  their  beds."  When  avsirice  takes  possession  of  a  man,  it  works  the  brain  by
night  as  well  as  by  day.  It  keeps  the  intellectual  faculties  busy  in  the  stillness  of
nocturnal  hours.  What  schemes  to  swindle,  defraud,  and  plunder  men  are  fabricated
in  this  London  of  ours  every  night  upon  the  pillow !  Perhaps  there  is  no  passion  that
takes  a  stronger  hold  upon  man  than  this,  and  that  moves  his  intellect  with  such
concentration  and  constancy.  It  has  been  called  "the  great  sepulchre  of  all  other
passions."

II.  Working  in  the  dat.  "When  the  morning  is  light,  they  practise  it,  because  it  is
in  the  power  of  their  hand."  Delitzsch  renders  this,  "  In  the  light  of  the  morning  they
carry  it  out,  for  their  hand  is  their  god."  The  idea  is,  perhaps,  that  which  they  esteem
most  is  the  worldly  gain  of  their  avaxlcious  labour.  So  it  ever  is  ;  gain  is  the  god  of
the  greedy  man.  He  sacrifices  all  his  time  and  labour  on  its  altar.  Before  it  he  pros-
trates his  soul.  Tour  avaricious  man  in  the  day  trots  about  the  streets,  the  shops,  the
markets,  like  a  hungry  hound  in  search  of  food.  Shakespeare  compares  such  a  man  to
a  whale,  which  plays  and  tumbles,  driving  the  poor  fry  before  him,  and  at  last  devomrs
them  all  at  a  mouthful.  Such  whales  have  I  heard  of  on  the  land,  who  never  leave
gaping  till  they've  swallowed  the  whole  parish— church,  steeple,  bells,  and  all.

III.  SuFFEBiNO  IN  THE  JUDGMENT.  "  Therefore  thus  saith  the  Lord ;  Behold,
against  this  family  do  I  devise  an  evil,  from  which  ye  shall  not  remove  your  necks,"  etc.
Judgment  comes  at  last ;  and  in  the  judgment,  as  these  words  give  us  to  understand,
the  punishment  will  correspond  with  the  sin.  "  Because  they  reflect  upon  evil,"  says
Delitzsch,  "to  deprive  their  fellow-men  of  their  possessions,  Jehovah  will  bring  evil
upon  this  generation,  lay  a  heavy  yoke  upon  their  necks,  under  which  they  will  not
be  able  to  walk  loftily  or  with  extended  neck."  Ay,  the  time  will  come  when  the
avaricious  millionaire  will  exclaim,  "  Wo  be  utterly  spoiled."  "  Go  to  now,  ye  rich
men,  weep  and  howl  for  your  miseries  that  shall  come  upon  you,"  etc.  (Jas.  v.  1). — D.  T.

Ver.  7. God's  truth.    "  0  thou  that  art  named  the  house  of  Jacob,  is  the  Spirit  of

the  Lord  straitened  ?  are  these  his  doings  ?  do  not  my  words  do  good  to  him  that
walketh  uprightly  ?  "  "  Thou  called  house  of  Jacob,  is  the  patience  of  Jehovah  short
then  ?  or  is  this  his  doing  ?  Are  not  my  words  good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly  ?  "
Such  is  a  modem  translation.  We  prefer  the  translation  of  Henderson,  as  follows :
"  What  language,  0  house  of  Jacob  1  Is  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  shortened  ?  Are  these
his  operations?  Do  not  my  words  benefit  him  that  walketh  uprightly?"  These
words  seem  to  be  a  reply  to  an  objection  raised  against  the  prophets  in  the  preceding
verse.  The  objector  did  not  approve  of  predictions  so  terribly  severe.  "  It  is  not
strange,"  says  Matthew  Henry,  "  if  people  that  are  vicious  and  debauched  covet  to
have  ministers  that  are  altogether  such  as  themselves,  for  they  are  willing  to  believe
that  God  is  so  too."  There  are  people  in  all  congregations  who  revolt  at  the  pro-
clamation of  any  doctrines  from  the  pulpit  that  chime  not  in  with  their  love  of  ease
and  their  cherished  notions,  and  especially  so  if  such  doctrines  are  unfamiliar  to^heir
ears.  They  desire  the  old  things  to  be  iterated  without  end,  and  with  as  little  change
of  form  and  note  as  possible.  The  text  may  be  taken  as  a  reproof  to  luch.  Jt  Ba\ »
two  things  to  them.


32  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH,  [oh.  n.  1—18,

I.  That  the  Spibit  ot  Divine  tbttth  cannot  be  bbstbainbd.  "  Is  the  Spirit
of  the  Lord  straitened?  "  There  is  no  limit  to  truth ;  it  is  an  ocean  that  has  no  shore,
a  field  whose  erer-springlDg  seeds  are  innumerable.  Men's  theological  systems,  even
the  largest  of  them,  have  narrow  limits.  They  are,  as  compared  to  Divine  truth,  only
as  a  barren  rood  to  a  fertile  continent;  a  little  sand-pool  to  the  mighty  Atlantic.  It
is  not  "  straitened."  It  has  no  limit.  To  every  true  minister  this  Spirit  has  some-
thing fresh  to  suggest,  and  which  he  is  bound  to  propound  and  enforce.  "  The  Lord
huth  yet  more  light  and  truth  to  break  forth  from  his  Word."

II.  That  the  pbaotiob  of  Divine  teuth  cannot  but  do  good.  "Do  not  my
words  do  good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly  ?  "  Though  you  have  never  heard  the
particular  truth  before,  though  it  may  be  too  severe  to  please  you,  though  it  may  clash
with  all  your  prejudices  and  wishes,  if  you  practise  it,  it  will  do  you  good.  1.  It  it  to
be  practised.  It  is  not  fitted  merely  for  speculation,  systematizing,  controversy,  and
debate ;  it  is  for  inspiring  the  activities  and  ruling  the  life.  It  is  a  code  rather  than  a
creed ;  it  is  not  something  to  play  about  the  brain,  the  imagination,  or  the  emotions,  but
to  possess,  permeate,  and  transform  the  whole  life.  It  must  be  incarnated,  made  flesh,
and  dwell  in  the  land.  2.  When  practised  it  is  a  blessing.  "  Do  not  my  words  do
good  to  him  that  walketh  uprightly?"  Yes,  they  do  good — when  they  are  trans-
lated, not  into  languages  and  creeds,  but  into  living  deeds,  A  man  gets  good  only  as
he  builds  up  a  noble  character.  But  what  is  a  good  character  ?  It  is  made  up  of  good
habits,  and  good  habits  are  made  up  of  good  acts,  and  good  acts  are  but  the  forms  and
expressions  of  God's  words  and  ideas. — D.  T.

Vers.  8,  9. — Sin  an  antagonist,  "  Even  of  late  my  people  is  risen  up  as  an
enemy :  ye  pull  oflF  the  robe  with  the  garment  from  them  that  pass  by  securely  ap  men
averse  from  war.  The  women  of  my  people  have  ye  cast  out  from  their  pleasant
houses ;  from  their  children  have  ye  taken  away  my  glory  for  ever."  This  chapter
refers  to  the  character  and  doings  of  Israel  during  the  last  nine  years  of  Ahaz.  A
very  dark  period  in  Israelitish  history  was  this.  "  We  are  told  in  2  Ohron.  xiviii.  24,
25  that  Ahaz  shut  up  the  doors  of  the  temple,  and  erected  altars  in  every  corner  of
Jerusalem.  We  may  safely  conclude,  from  the  language  of  Micah  (ii.)  and  Isaiah
(xL),  that  when  he  did  so,  abominations  of  every  kind  overran  the  land.  A  prophet
like  Micah  was  no  longer  permitted  to  speak.  The  testimony  of  Isaiah  (vii.,  viii.)  had
borne  no  fruit ;  the  fruitlessness  of  invoking,  the  aid  of  Assyria  had  taught  him  no
better.  Ahaz  did  not  repent,  like  Manasseh,  but  persisted  in  his  evil  ways.  What
a  melancholy  course  of  conduct  I  Like  Uzziah,  Ahaz  was  denied  honourable  burial
(2  Ohron.  xxviii.  27).  The  prophet  here,  in  denouncing  the  sins  which  were  then
most  prevalent  in  Judah  and  Ephraim,  alludes  expressly  to  the  acts  of  oppression  and
violence  then  common,  and  tells  them  that  for  these  they  would  be  driven  out  of  the
land."    The  verses  lead  us  to  look  at  sin  in  the  aspect  of  an  antagonist,  and  suggest —

I.  That  it  is  an  antagonist  to  the  Divine.  "  Even  of  late  [margin, '  yesterday ']
my  people  has  risen  up  as  an  enemy."  "  It  is  not  stated,"  says  Delltzsch,  "  against
whom  the  people  rise  up  as  an  enemy ;  but,  according  to  the  context,  it  can  only  be
against  Jehovah."  Sin  is  an  antagonist  to  God;  it  lifts  up  the  soul  in  hostility  against
its  Maker.  We  are  told  that  the  carnal  mind  is  at  enmity  with  God ;  it  is  not  only
alienated  from  him,  but  in  deadly  opposition  to  him.  Unregenerated  men  say  that  they
are  not  conscious  of  any  enmity  in  their  hearts  towards  their  Maker ;  on  the  contrary,
sometimes  they  feel  a  passing  glow  of  gratitude  and  adoration  for  him.  But  it  is  the
conduct  of  a  man  that  proves  the  settled  state  of  his  heart.  What  though  a  man  may
say  that  he  has  no  unkind  feeling  towards  me,  on  the  contrary,  that  ho  has  some
amount  of  respect;  if  he  pursues  a  course  of  conduct  that  he  knows  is  in  direct
opposition  to  my  wishes,  interests,  and  reputation,  can  I  believe  him?  I  judge  his
state  of  heart  towards  me,  not  by  his  words,  but  by  his  habitual  conduct.  Thus  men
prove  their  enmity  to  God;  they  pursue  a  course  of  life  which  they  know  is  repugnant
to  his  nature,  hostile  to  his  government,  and  injurious  to  the  order  and  happiness
of  his  universe.  1.  This  enmity  is  most  unjustifiable.  Enmity  sometimes  admits  of
justification,  but  never  in  this  case.  "  Tbey  hated  me  without  a  cause."  There  ii
nothing  in  his  character  or  procedure  to  justify  one  spark  of  animosity  in  any  intelligent
creature  in  the  universe  towards  him.    2.  This  enmity  is  moat  wicked.    It  is  against


OH.  n.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  83

reason  and  justice.  The  character  and  relations  of  God  are  snoh  as  to  demand  the
supreme  love  of  all  his  intelligent  creatures.  3.  This  enmity  is  most  miserable.
Enmity  to  God  is  the  fountain  of  all  the  misery  in  the  universe ;  it  is  the  root  of  all
the  cursed  passions  of  the  soul.    The  soul's  salvation  is  in  love,  its  damnation  is  in  enmity.

II.  That  it  is  an  antagonist  to  the  human.  "  Ye  pull  ofif  the  robe  with  the
garment  [margin,  'over  against  the  gurmeot']  from  them  that  pass  by  securely
as  men  averse  from  war."  Not  content  with  the  outer  garment,  ye  greedily  rob
passers-by  of  the  ornamental  robe  fitting  the  body  closely  and  flowing  down  to  the
feet ;  and  this  you  do,  not  to  enemies,  but  to  friends,  to  those  who  are  "  averse  from
war."  More,  "  The  women  of  my  people  have  ye  cast  out  from  their  pleasant  houses."
The  widows  of  the  men  slain  by  you  in  battle  you  have  deprived  of  their  homes.  They
"  devoured  widows'  houses."  This  was  not  all.  "  Prom  their  children  have  ye  taken
away  my  glory  for  ever."  The  oi-phan  children  you  have  despoiled.  In  all  this  there
is  the  manifestation  of  sin,  as  an  antagonist  to  human  rights  and  human  happiness.
Sin  puts  man  against  his  brother ;  hence  the  slanders,  quarrels,  litigations,  wars,  that
are  rife  in  every  human  society.  John  says,  "  If  a  man  love  God,  he  will  love  his
brother."    The  converse  of  this  is  true  too.    If  a  man  hate  God,  he  will  hate  his  brother.

CoNCLDSiON.  Look  at  sin  as  an  antagonist  to  God  and  man,  shun  it  with  horror,
and  battle  against  it  with  all  the  force  of  your  being.  This  is  the  great  battie  of
life.— D.  T.

Ver.  10. — The  soul's  exodus.  "Arise  ye,  and  depart;  for  this  is  not  your  rest:
because  it  is  polluted,  it  shall  destroy  you,  even  with  a  sore  destruction."  "  The
prophet,  having  overthrown,  in  vers.  7 — 9,  the  objection  to  his  threatening  prophecies
by  pointing  to  the  sins  of  the  people,  now  repeats  the  announcement  of  punishment,
and  that  in  the  form  of  a  summons  to  go  out  of  the  land  into  captivity,  because  the
land  cannot  bear  the  defilement  consequent  upon  such  abominations"  (Delitzsch),
This  injunction  does  not  mean  either  of  the  three  following  things :  1.  It  does  not  mean
the  termination  of  our  mortal  life.  Life  is  a  talent  which  we  should  guard.  Suicide
is  a  crime.  2.  It  does  not  mean  neglect  of  material  interests  and  duties.  We  are
commanded  to  be  diligent  in  business,  etc.  3.  It  does  not  mean  absolute  retirement
from  the  world.  The  life  of  the  hermit  is  a  sin  against  our  social  afiections,  the  claims
of  our  species,  and  the  commands  of  the  Bible.  What,  then,  shall  we  take  it  to  mean  ?
The  rising  of  the  soul  above  the  dominant  materialism  of  this  life.  It  is  the  setting  of
the  "affections  upon  things  above."  It  is  the  exodus  of  the  soul  from  the  Egypt
of  a  dominant  materialism.  There  are  three  reasons  suggested  here  for  this  moral
exodus  of  the  spirit.

I.  There  is  no  best  for  the  soul  in  a  dominant  materialism.  "  This  is  not
your  rest."  There  are  fonr  forms  in  which  this  dominant  materialism  exists  amongst
us,  and  in  neither  of  which  can  the  son!  find  rest.  1.  There  is  the  gross,  sensual  form.
The  sensualist  and  the  voluptuary  live  in  this;  but  they  have  no  rest.  Ask  the
epicurean  and  the  debauchee.  2.  There  is  the  thoroughly  secular  form.  The  man
who  is  absorbed  in  the  work  of  making  money  lives  here ;  but  he  finds  in  it  no  rest.
Ask  the  man  who  has  become  the  creature  of  business,  etc.  3.  There  is  the  intellectual
form.  The  region  of  mere  flesh  wisdom,  flesh  arts,  and  flesh  literature — poetry  and
novels  that  appeal  to  the  flesh.  There  is  no  rest  for  the  soul  here.  Ask  Byron,
Burns,  Dryden,  Churchill,  etc.  4.  There  is  the  religious  form.  There  is  a  fleshly
religion  amongst  men — a  religion  of  pictures,  music,  pompous  rites  and  ceremonies,  all
appealing  to  the  senses.  There  is  no  rest  for  the  sovd  here.  Let  it  "  arise,  then,  and
depart."

II.  There  is  pollution  for  the  soul  in  it.  To  allow  the  material  in  any  form  to
rule  us  is  a  sin.  1.  Season  shows  this.  Mind  was  made  to  govern  matter ;  the  senses
were  made  to  be  the  servants,  not  the  sovereign,  of  the  soul.  2,  Conscience  testifies
this.  Conscience  is  everlastingly  protesting  against  the  dominion  of  the  flesh.  3.  The
Bible  declares  this.    The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God  (Bom.  vili.  7).

III.  Thbeb  is  danger  to  the  soul  in  materialism.  "It  shall  destroy  you."
"  B«  not  deceived ;  God  is  not  mocked :  for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also
reap ,  ?or  he  that  soweth  to  his  flesh  shall  of  the  flesh  reaplcorruption  "  ((Jal.  vi.  7,  8).
For  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death.    The  work  of  soul-destruction  is  going  on  every

laoAH.  s


84  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAfl.  foH.  ii.  1—13.

moment;  the  loul  decays  in  this  state.    Force  of  intellect,  discriminatioD  of  judgment,
freedom  of  will,  BensibiUty  of  conscience,  elasticity  of  soul,  are  being  destroyed.

CoNOLUBiON.  Arise,  tnenl  The  voice  of  philosophy,  the  voice  of  history,  the  voice
of  the  Bible,  and  the  voice  of  departed  sainte,  all  combine  in  the  injunction,  "  Arise,
and  depart  I "— D.  T,

Yer.  11. — JfnMTf  popular  preacher.  "  If  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit  and  falsehood
do  lie,  saying,  I  will  prophesy  unto  thee  of  wine  and  of  strong  drink ;  he  shall  even  be
the  prophet  of  this  people."  Henderson's  translation  of  this  verse  is  worth  quoting :
"  If  any  one  conservant  with  mind  and  falsehood  lie,  saying,  I  will  prophesy  to  thee  ot
wine  and  strong  drink,  even  he  shall  be  the  prophet  of  this  people."  This  is  Micah's
idea  as  to  the  kind  of  prophet,  or,  as  we  should  say,  pulpit,  the  men  of  Israel  would
willingly  and  unanimously  accept.  Now,  if  we  look  a  little  into  the  sketch  here  of
this  popular  preacher,  we  shall  find  that  he  was  marked  by  two  things  which  always
tend  to  make  a  preacher  generally  acceptable  to  thoughtless  men  in  every  age.

I.  By  emptiness  of  vmo.  "  If  a  man  walking  in  the  spirit  and  falsehood  do  lie,"
or,  as  in  the  mar^n,  "  walk  with  the  wind,  and  lie  falsely."  He  has  nothing  in  his
mind  but  wind,  vain  conceits,  vapid  notions;  no  deep  thought,  no  rich  store  of
information,  no  well-digested  belief  or  profound  conviction.  He  walks  with  the  wind.
His  movements  are  the  swellings  of  wind,  his  voice  the  echoes  of  wind.  Now,  the
kind  of  preacher  that  the  Israelites  desired  is  the  kind  of  preacher  that  is  in  general
request  almost  everywhere.  What  thoughtful  man  of  any  extensive  acquaintance
with  the  religious  world  does  not  know  that,  as  a  rule,  the  less  brain,  intelligence,
conviction,  a  preacher  has — if  he  possesses  the  gift  of  passion,  voice,  and  utterance — the
more  attractive  he  will  be  to  the  people  in  general  ?  -  He  is  the  man  who  attracts  the
crowd.  The  causes  of  this  are  obvious.  The  more  empty  a  man  is,  the  more  fliient
he  is.  The  pauses  in  speech  necessitated  by  thoughtfutness  are  never  pleasing  to  the
thoughtless ;  they  like  the  rattling  flow.  The  empty  mind  has  generally  a  glib  tongue.
Again,  the  more  empty  a  man  is,  the  more  dogmatic.  The  thoughtful  man  can  only
suggest  and  hint,  and  cautiously  and  reverentially  submit  his  doctrines.  For,  as  a
thinker,  he  has  touched  difiSculties  and  mysteries  at  every  point ;  he  can  only  speak
with  modesty.  This,  to  the  people,  is  more  or  less  distastefiU;  they  want  dogmatism,
positiveness,  assurance,  amounting  to  audacity.  This  the  empty  man  can  give.  The
more  empty  a  man  is,  the  more  somnific.  The  people  do  not  like  mental  effort  in  their
pews ;  what  they  want  is  gentle  titillation  and  spiritual  dreaminess.  This  the  empty
man  can  and  does  supply.

II.  Bt  MiNisTEBiiro  TO  PLEASE.  "  I  wiU  prophesy  unto  thee  of  wine  and  of  strong
drink."  These  prophets  would  accommodate  themselves  to  their  hearers'  tastes  and
habits,  and  sanction  their  indulgences.  They  would  not  disturb  their  consciences  nor
strike  against  their  prejudices,  but  talk  to  them  in  such  a  way  as  to  leave  them  satisfied
with  themselves.  The  preacher  who  can  do  this,  who  can  enunciate  his  discourses
in  such  a  way  as  to  avoid  interference  with  the  tastes,  habits,  and  pleasures  of  the
people,  will  always  be  poptilar.  Oh,  it  is  sad  to  think  of  the  thousands  of  sermons  that
are  preached  every  year  by  our  clergy  and  our  ministers  which  interfere  in  no  measure
with  the  sinful  delights  of  the  people,  which  leave  them  in  the  full  indulgence  of  their
wine,  strong  drink,  and  other  carnal  gratifications  I

Conclusion.  Such  a  preacher  as  this  popular  preacher  is,  for  many  reasons,  the
greatest  curse  to  his  race.  I  see  but  little  hope  for  the  progress  of  Christianity  or  for
the  spiritual  reformation  of  mankind,  until  the  pulpits  of  Christendom  are  closed
for  ever  against  such  men.  Oh,  haste  the  time  when  none  shall  assume  the  solemn
ofiice  of  preacher  but  those  who,  by  the  manifestation  of  the  truth,  "  commend  them-
de'ves  to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  2)  I

"I  venerate  the  man  whose  heartis  tine,
Whose  bands  are  pure,  whose  doctrine  and  whose  life.
Coincident,  exhibit  luoid  proof
Thai  he  is  honest  in  the  saored  cause.
To  inch  I  render  more  than  mere  respect,
'Whose  actions  say  that  they  respect  themselves."

(Cowper.)

D.  T.


OH,  n.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  88

Vers.  12, 13. — Gospd  vwrk.  "  I  will  surely  assemble,  0  Jacob,  all  of  thee ;  I  wiU
surely  gather  the  remnant  of  Israel ;  I  will  put  them  together  as  the  sheep  of  Bozrah,
as  the  flock  in  the  midst  of  their  fold :  they  shall  make  great  noise  by  reason  of  the
multitude  of  men.  The  breaker  is  come  up  before  them :  they  have  broken  up,  and
have  passed  through  the  gate,  and  are  gone  out  by  it :  and  their  king  shall  pass  before
them,  and  the  Lord  on  the  head  of  them."  "I  will  surely  gather  thee  entirely,  0
Jacob;  I  will  surely  collect  the  remainder  of  Israel;  I  will  put  them  together  like  the
sheep  of  Bozrah,  like  a  flock  in  the  midst  of  their  pasture :  they  shall  be  in  commotion,
because  of  the  multitude  of  men.  The  Breaker  is  gone  up  before  them,  they  break
through  and  pass  to  the  gate,  they  go  out  at  it ;  the  king  passeth  on  before  them,  even
Jehovah  at  their  head"  (Henderson).  The  prophet  here  passes  from  threats  to
promises,  from  a  dark  present  to  a  bright  future.  The  future  was  to  embrace  two
things.  1.  A  grand  gathering,  Jacob  and  the  remnant  of  Israel  were  to  be  "  gathered  "
as  a  mighty  flock  in  the  fruitful  and  lovely  region  of  Bozrah.  The  scene  of  the
gathering  would  be  like  the  rich  pastures  of  Bozrah,  and  the  numbers  of  the  gathered
would  be  enormous.  "They  shall  make  great  noise  by  reason  of  the  multitude  of
men."  2.  A  triumphant  ddiveranet.  "  The  breaker  is  come  up  before  them."  Who
is  the  breaker?  If  reference  is  here  made  to  Jewish  bonds,  it  was  to  Moses;  if  to
Babylonish  captivity,  it  was  to  Cyrus ;  if  to  the  bondage  of  the  devil,  it  was  to  Christ.
We  shall  apply  the  words  to  illustrate  the  grand  work  of  the  gospel.  "The  fulfilment
of  this  prophecy,"  says  Delitzsch, "  commenced  with  the  gathering  together  of  Israel  to
its  God  and  King  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  and  will  be  completed  at  some  future
time,  when  the  Lord  will  redeem  Israel,  which  is  now  pining  in  dispersion,  out  of  the
fetters  of  its  unbelief  and  life  of  sin.  We  must  not  exclude  all  allusion  to  the  deliver-
ance of  the  Jewish  nation  out  of  the  earthly  Babylon  by  Cyrus ;  at  the  same  time,  it
is  only  in  its  typical  significance  that  this  comes  into  consideration  at  all,  viz.  as  a
preliminary  stage  and  pledge  of  the  redemption  to  be  effected  by  Christ  out  of  the
spiritual  Babylon  of  this  world."  Taking  the  words,  then,  as  an  illustration  of  gospel
work,  two  thoughts  are  suggested.

I.  UmnoATioN.  "  I  will  put  them  together  as  the  sheep  of  Bozrah."  Men  are
morally  divided ;  there  is  a  schism  in  the  great  body  of  humanity.  Men  have  not  only
lost  interest  in  their  fellows,  but  an  antipathy  prevails  amongst  them.  They  are
scattered  abroad  in  different  countries,  under  different  governments,  and  in  connection
with  different  religions  and  interests.  The  great  work  of  the  gospel  is  to  bring  men
together,  to  gather  them  together  in  some  moral  Bozrah,  to  unite  them  in  the  fold
of  Christi  How  is  this  to  be  done  ?  Not  by  any  political  compact,  or  ecclesiastical
concordat,  or  social  organization.  These  things  can  never  unite  souls  together ;  they
have  been  tried  a  thousand  times,  but  failed.  There  is  only  one  way,  and  that  is  the
presentation  of  an  object  of  supreme  moral  attraction  to  all  men.  That  object  the
gospel  presents;  it  is  Christ.  It  was  predicted  that  unto  him  should  tbe  gathering  of
the  people  be,  and  that  he  should  gather  together  in  one  the  children  of  God  that  are
scattered  abroad.  And  he  himself  said,  "  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up  .  .  .  will  draw  all  men
unto  me."  There  ia  in  him  what  is  not  found  anywhere  else — that  which  can  attract
with  equal  power  all  souls,  and  centralize  in  him  the  strongest  sympathies  of  all  hearts.
Men  can  only  become  socially  united  to  each  other  in  brotherly  love  by  first  becoming
united  to  Christ.  The  true  union  of  souls  is  like  the  union  of  planets  having  one  centre
of  light,  life,  and  rule.  As  a  matter  of  philosophy,  I  proclaim  that  there  is  nothing
but  the  gospel  that  con  hush  the  discords,  heal  the  divisions,  and  terminate  all  ware
and  strifes  amongst  men ;  and  historically  I  declare  nothing  else  Ao*  ever  done  any-
thing successfully  towards  it.

II.  BMANCiPATioif.  "  The  breaker  is  come  up  before  them :  they  have  broken  up,
and  have  passed  through  the  gate."  Men  everywhere  are  in  moral  bondage.  They  are
the  slaves  of  sin  and  the  devil.  "  Carnal,  sold  under  sin."  Moral  bondage  is  the  worst
of  all  bondage;  it  is  a  bondage  (1)  connected  with  self-compunction ;  it  is  a  bondage
(2)  of  the  soul,  the  self;  it  is  a  bondage  (3)  that  death  cannot  terminate.  Who  shall
free  man  from  this  bondage  ?  Who  is  the  Moses  that  will  take  us  out  of  this  Egypt,
the  Cyrus  that  will  free  us  from  this  Babylon  ?  There  is  One,  and  but  One — Christ.
He  is  the  "  Breaker."  He  snaps  the  chains,  breaks  open  the  prison  gates,  .ind  lets  the
soul  into  the  true  light  and  liberty  of  life.  He  came  to  preach  liberty  to  the  captive,
knd  to  open  the  prison  doors  of  them  that  are  bound.


86


TOE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.


[oh.  m.  1 — ^12.


CoNOLUBiON.  Blessed  gospel,  speed  thy  work  I  Bring  all  the  scattered  sections  of
the  world  together,  and  unite  them  together  by  uniting  them  to  one  common  centre —
Christ.  Break  the  moral  chains  that  bind  the  faculties,  sympathies,  and  souls  of  men
to  sin  and  the  devil.  Bring  on  the  moral  jubilee  of  the  race,  and  let  the  clarion-blast
of  liberty  be  heard  through  all  the  land. — D.  T,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  ra.

Vei.  1— oh.  T.  15.— Part  II.  Denokou-
TiON  OF  THi  Crimes  of  tbe  Grandees,

FOLLOWED    BT  A  PeOMISE  OF  THE  GlOBIFI-
OATION    OF    ZiON,   THE   BiRTB   OF    MESSIAH,

AND   THE   Highest   Exaltation   of   the
People.

Vers.  1 — 4. — $  1.  8ini  of  the  ruler$,  and
their  punishment.

Yer.  1. — Tbe  prophet  denounces  tbe  sins
of  tbe  rulers,  false  prophets,  and  priests;
and  begins  with  the  injustice  aud  oppression
practised  by  the  great  men.  And  I  said.
Tbe  new  address  is  thus  intioduced  as  being
analogous  to  tlie  denunciations  in  the  pre-
ceding chapter,  which  were  interrupted  by
tlie  promise  of  deliverance,  to  which  there
is  no  reference  here.  0  heads  of  Jacob;
synonymous  with  prinoei  of  the  honse  of
Israel  (comp.  ver.  8;  oh.  L  5).  Miuab
addresses  the  beads  of  families  and  tbe
officials  to  whom  the  administration  of
justice  appertained.  These  magistrates  and
judges  seem  to  have  beeu  cliiefly  members
of  the  royal  family,  at  any  rate  in  Judab;
see  Jer.  xxi.  11, 12  (Obeyne).  Septuagint,  ol
KardKotiroi  oXkov  *l<rpa^\,  **ye  remnant  of
the  house  of  Israel."  Is  it  not  for  yju
to  know  judgment  1  Ye,  of  all  men,  ought
to  know  what  is  just  and  foil,  and  to  prac-
tise it  (compare  the  opening  of  the  Book  of
Wisdom).

Yer.  2. — The  good  .  .  .  the  evil;  t.e.
goodness  and  wickedness.  Septuagint,  ra
Ka\i,  Tck  irovripi  (Amos  V.  14,  etc. ;  John  ill.
20 ;  Rom.  i.  32).  Who  pluok  off  their  skin
from  off  them.  They  are  not  shepherds,  but
butchers.  We  have  the  same  figurative
expression  for  merciless  extortion  and
pillage.  Ezekiel  mukes  a  similar  complaint
(xxxiv.  2—4).  Cheyne  sees  in  this  and
the  following  verse  a  possible  allusion  to
cannibalism  as  at  least  known  to  the
Israelites  by  hearsay  or  tradition.  There  is
B  passage  in  Wisdom  (xii.  6)  which  some-
what countenances  the  idea  that  the
Canaanites  were  guilty  of  this  enormity,  but
it  is  probably  only  a  rhetorical  exaggeration
of  tbe  writer.  In  the  present  passage  the
terma  seem  to  be  simply  metaphors  taken
from  the  pr«paimtion  of  meat  for  human


food.  Bach  an  allnslon  i*  natural  is  the
month  of  one  who  bad  jnst  been  speaking
of  Israel  as  a  flock  (ch.  IL  12).

Yer.  3. — The  idea  of  the  last  verse  is
repeated  here  with  more  emphasis.  Tbe
people  are  treated  by  their  rulers  as  cattle
made  to  be  eaten,  flayed,  broken  up,  chopped
into  pieces,  boiled  in  the  pot  (comp.  Fs.
ziv.  4).  (For  an  analogous  figure,  see  Ezek.
xxxiv.  3—5.)

Yer.  4. — The  merciless  shall  not  obtain
mercy.  Then,  wlien  the  day  of  chastisement
has  come,  "  the  day  of  the  Lord,"  of  which,
perhaps,  the  prophet  spoke  more  fully  when
lie  originally  delivered  this  address.  He
will  not  hear  them.  A  just  retribution  on
those  who  refused  to  hearken  to  the  cry  of
the  poor  and  needy  (comp.  Ps.  xviii.  41 ;
Prov.  i.  28 ;  Jer.  xi.  11 ;  Jas.  ii.  13).  As  they
have  behaved  themselves  ill  in  their  doings ;
according  at  (hey  have  made  their  actiont
evil,  or  hecaute  they  have,  etc. ;  io/ff  &v  (Sep-
tuagint).

Yers.  5 — 8. — S  2.  Sine  of  the  fait*  prophete
who  led  (he  people  aitray,

Yer.  5. — Concerning  the  prophets  (oh.  ii.
11).  These  are  the  lying  propliets  of  whom
Jeremiah  complains  (Lum.  ii.  14).  That  bite
with  their  teeth,  and  cry,  Feaoe.  Yery  many
commentators  take  the  phrase,  "  bite  with
tbe  teeth,"  to  mean  "  eat,"  so  that  the  clause
signifies  that  the  prophets  when  bribed  with
food  predict  peace  and  happiness  to  people.
The  antithesis  of  tbe  following  clause  seems
to  require  this  explanation,  whioh  is
further  supported  by  the  Cbaldee.  But  it
is  quite  unprecedented  to  find  the  word
translated  "  bite  "  (nashakh)  in  the  sense  of
"  eat,'  or  as  it  is  taken  here, "  to  have  some-
thing to  eat ; "  wherever  it  oceurs  it  means
"  to  bite  like  a  serpent,"  to  wound  (see  Gen.
xlix.  17;  Numb.  xxi.  8,  9;  Amos  v,  19;
ix.  S).  The  parallelism  of  the  succeeding
member  does  not  compel  us  to  put  a  forced
interpretation  upon  the  word.  These  venal
seers  do  vital  harm,  inflict  gravest  injury,
when  they  proclaim  peace  whore  there  is  no
peace ;  by  such  false  comfort  they  are  really
infusing  poison  and  death.  He  that  pntteth
not  into  their  months.  If  any  one  does  not
bribe  them,  and  so  stop  their  evil  mouthi
They  oTen  prepara  war  against  him.  Th«
Hebrew  exprewion  ia,  **  they  oonsecrate  "  of


OH.  III.  1—12.]


THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.


37


"  sanctify  war."  There  may  be  allusion  to
the  religious  rites  aooonipanying  a  dei'lara-
tion  of  war  (Jer.  vi.  4 ;  Joel  iii.  9) ;  but
Micah  seems  to  mean  that,  if  the  customary
bribes  are  withheld,  these  prophets  announce
war  and  calamity  as  inevitable;  they  pro-
claim thsm  in  God's  name,  as  spealiing  with
his  sanction  and  under  his  inspiration  (comp.
Jer.  xxiil.  16,  etc.;  Ezek.  ziii.  19;  see  note
on  Zeph.  i.  7).

Ver.  6.— Hight  shall  be  unto  you,  that  ye
shall  not  have  a  vision.  The  Hebrew  is,
"  from,"  or  "  without  a  vision."  Septiiagint,
ii  ipaa-eas, '-'  out  of  vision ; "  Vulgate,  pro
visions.  Hence  some  interpre  t  this  as  spoken
to  the  false  propliets,  who,  to  punisli  their
lying  prophecies  and  pretended  revelations,
shall  be  overwhelmed  with  calamity.  But
it  is  best  taken  as  still  addressed  to  the
rulers,  and  Micah  tells  how  that  in  the  time
of  their  distress  there  shall  be  no  prophecy  to
direct  them  (comp.  1  Sam.  xxviii.  6 ;  Prov.
i.  28;' Lam.  ii.  9),  "Night  shall  be  unto
them  without  a  vision."  "Night "  and  "dark-
ness "  are  metaphors  for  calamity,  as  in  all
languages.  That  ye  shall  not  divine ;  with-
out divination.  Septuagint,  iie  ftavrelas,
"out  of  proplipcy."  Parallel  and  identical
in  meaning  with  the  preceding  clause.  The
enn  shall  go  down  over  the  prophets ;  i.e.  ■
over  the  false  prophets.  The  sun  of  their
prosperity  shall  set.  Micah  seems  to  derive
his  imagery  from  the  phenomena  of  an
eclipse  (oomp.  Jer.  xv.  9;  Amos  viii,  9).
The  day.  The  time  of  their  punishment  (oh.
ii.  4 ;  Amos  v.  18).

Yer.  7. — Shall  the  seers  be  ashamed.  The
false  prophets  shall  be  ashamed  because
their  oracles  are  proved  to  be  delusive.  They
shall  all  cover  their  lips;  the  upper  lip;  i.e.
the  face  up  to  the  nose,  in  sign  of  mourn-
ing and  shame  (see  Lev.  xiii.  45;  Ezek.
xxiv.  17,  22).  It  is  equivalent  to  covermg
the  head  for  the  same  reason,  as  Esth,  vi.  12 ;
Jer.  xiv.  4.  Septuagint,  KaTa\a\iiaovin
Kol  aliTav  irdvT€s  avTol,  taking  the  verb  to
mean  "  shall  open  "  (not  "  cover  ")  their  lips
against  them.  For  there  is  no  answer  of
God.  There  was  no  revelation  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  9 ;
Ezek.  vii.  26).  Septuagint,  Aiin  oIk  eo-raj
&  iraxoiaif  aurav,  "  Because  there  shall  be
none  that  hearkeneth  unto  them."

Ver.  8. — Micah  contrasts  his  own  powers
and  acts  with  those  of  the  false  prophets.
I  am  foil  of  power  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.
Micah  asserts  that  he  speaks  and  aot8_  by
the  direct  inspiration  of  God;  he  claims
three  gifts  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  Holy
Spirit  to  enable  him  to  effect  hig  purpose.
The  first  of  these  is  «  power  "—such  might
imparted  te  him  that  his  words  fall  with  force
and  proclaim  their  Divine  origin  (comp.
Lnke  L  17;  Acts  i.  8).  The  second  gift  is
judgment— the  righteous  judgment  of  Ood;


this  fills  his  mind  and  comprises  all  his
message.  The  tliird  !>:ift  is  might,  i.e.  ■
holy  courage  that  enables  him  to  face  any
danger  in  delivering  his  testimony  (oomp.
2  Tim.  i.  7).  Ill  these  points  he  is  in
strong  contrast  to  the  false  prophets,  who
were  not  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  Goi'.
spake  not  witli  power,  called  good  evil,  and
evil  good,  •  were  timid  and  time-serving.
Jacob  .  .  .  Israel.  The  two  are  identical
as  in  ver.  1,  and  the  clauses  in  which  they
occur  contain  the  same  thought  repeated
for  emphasis'  sake.

Vers.  9 — 12. — §  3.  Reoapitulation  of  the
tins  of  the  three  classes — rulers,  priests,  and
prophets,  with  an  announcement  of  the  de-
struction of  Zion  and  the  temple.

Ver.  9. — The  prophet  exemplifies  his
courage  by  delivering  in  full  tlie  denuncia-
tion with  which  he  commenced  (ver.  1 ;  see
note  there).  Hear  this.  What  follows.  Per-
vert all  equity.  Ye,  who  by  your  position
ought  to  be  models  and  guardians  of  justice
and  equity,  violate  all  laws,  human  and
Divine,  make  the  straight  crooked,  distort
every  notion  of  right  (comp.  Isa.  lix.  8).

Ver.  10. — They  build  up  Zion  with  blood
Blood  is,  as  it  were,  the  cement  that  binds
the  building  together.  They  raise  palacee
with  money  gained  by  extortion,  rapine,
and  judicial  murders  like  tliat  of  Naboth
(1  Kings  xxi. ;  comp.  Jer.  xxii.  13,  etc. ;
Ezek.  xxii.  27;  Hab.  ii.  12).  Cheyne  thinks
this  to  be  a  too  dark  view  of  the  state  of
public  morals,  and  would  therefore  consider
"  blood  "  to  be  used  for  violent  conduct  lead-
ing to  ruin  of  others,  comparing  Isa.  i.  15 ;
lix.  3;  Prov.  i.  11.  In  these  passages,  how-
ever, actual  bloodshed  may  be  meant ;  and
we  know  too  little  of  the  moral  condition  of
Judsea  at  this  time  to  be  able  to  deoido
against  the  darker  view.

Ver.  11. — Judge  for  reward.  The  very
judges  take  bribes  (Isa'  i.  23 ;  Ezek.  xxii.  12),
which  the  Law  so  stringently  forbade  (see
Bxod.  xxiii.  8;  Deut.  xvi.  19,  etc.).  The
priests  thereof  teach  for  hire.  The  priests
were  bound  to  teach  and  explain  the  Law,
and  decide  questions  of  religion  and  ritual
(Lev.  X.  11;  Deut.  xvii.  11;  xxxiii.  10;
oomp.  Hag.  ii.  11,  etc.).  This  they  ought
to  have  done  gratuitously,  but  they  corruptly
made  it  a  source  of  gain.  Divine  for  money.
The  accusation  in  ver.  5  is  repeated.  Thes*
false  propliets  sold  their  oracles,  pretending
to  have  a  suitable  revelation  when  paid  for
it  (Ezek.  xxii.  28;  Zeph.  iii.  3,  4).  Yet
wUl  they  lean  upon  the  l0Td._  These
priests  and  prophets  were  worshippers  ot
Jehovah  and  trusted  in  him,  as  though  he
could  not  forsake  his  people.  They  had
faith  without  love,  divorced  religioa  ftoM


88


THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.


[cB.  m.  1 — H.


morality,  made  a  certain  outward  conformity
serve  for  righteongnesB  and  trutlu  Is  not
the  Lord  among  ns  ?  (Ezod.  zvii.  7).  Aa
though  the  very  fact  that  they  had  in  their
midst  the  temple,  wherein  Jehovah's  pre-
sence was  assured,  would  protect  them  uom
all  harm,  whatever  their  conduct  might  he.
Such  presumptuous  confidence  is  reproved
by  Jeremiah  (vii.  4,  8,  etc. ;  comp.  Amoa  v.
14,  and  note  there).

Ver.  12. — This  is  the  prophecy  quoted
by  the  elders  to  King  Jehoiakim  (Jer.  zxvi.
17,  etc.).  It  may  have  l>een  delivered  before
Hezekiah's  time  originally,  and  repeated
in  his  reign,  when  it  was  productive  of  a
reformation.  The  denunciation  is  a  mourn-
ful contrast  to  the  announcement  in  ch.  ii.
12 ;  but  it  was  never  completely  fulfilled,
being,  like  all  such  judgments,  conditioned
by  circumstances.  Therefore  ...  for  your
Bake.  For  the  crimes  of  rulers,  priests,  and
prophets.  Shall  Zion  ...  be  ploughed  as
a  field.  Three  localities  are  speoifled  which
destruction  shall  overtake — Zion,  Jerusalem,
and  the  temple.  Zion  means  that  part  of
the  city  where  stood  the  royal  palace.  The
prophecy  relates  primarily  to  the  destruc-
tion of  the  city  by  the  Chaldeans,  when,  as
Jeremiah  testifies  (Lam.  T.  18),  Zion  was
desolate  and  foxes  walked  upon  it.  The
expression  in  the  text  may  be  nyperbolioal,
but  we  know  that  the  ploughing  up  of  the
foundations  of  captured  oitie*  is  often
alluded  to.  Thus  Horace,  *Otrm..'L  16,
20—


"...  imprimeretqne  murb
Hostile  aratnun  exeroitna  insolens."
(Comp.  '  Propert,'  iiL  7,  41 ;  and,  for  the
whole  passage,  Isa.  xxxii.  13,  14.)  "The
general  surface  of  Mount  Zion  descends
steeply  eastwards  into  the  TyropoBon  and
Kidron,  and  southwards  into  the  Valley  of
Hinnom.  The  whole  of  the  hill  here  is
under  cultivation,  and  presents  a  most
literal  fulfilment  of  Micah's  prophecy"
(Thomson,  'The  Land  and  the  Book,'  p.
540).  "  From  the  spot  on  which  I  stood,"
says  Dr.  Porter,  "  I  saw  the  plough  at  work
in  the  little  fields  that  now  cover  the  site
of  Zion  "  ('Illustrations  of  Bible  Prophecy,'
p.  17).  Jemsalem  ahall  beoome  heaps.
The  city  proper  shall  become  heaps  of  ruin*
(Jer.  ix.  11 ;  Neh.  it  17 ;  iv.  2).  Sep-
tuagint,  &s  oirvpo^vAiiiciov  tarat,  "as  a
storehouse  for  fruits,"  as  in  Ps.  Ixxviii.
(Ixxix.)  1.  The  mountain  of  the  house.
The  mountain  on  which  the  temple  waa
built.  Mount  Moriah,  and  therefore  the
temple  itself,  no  longer  mentioned  as  the
Lord's  dwellLag-place.  As  the  high  places
of  the  forest ;  or,  a$  wooded  heights,  return-
ing, as  it  were,  to  the  wild  condition  in
which  it  lay  when  Abraham  offered  hia
aaoriflce  ttiereon.  In  the  time  of  the
Maccabees,  after  its  profanation  by  the
heathen,  the  account  speaks  of  shrubs
growing  in  the  courts  as  in  a  forest  or  in
one  of  the  mountains  (I  Maco.  It.  38).  Such
was  to  be  the  fate  of  the  temple  in  whiok
{hey  pnt  their  trust  and  made  thdr  boast.


HOMILETICa

Vers.  1 — 12. — T^  dbutt  tf  influence.  Qod  has  imparted  to  all  men  the  power  of
influencing  others.  We  diuly  exert  an  influence  either  for  good  or  for  eviL  They  who
know  us,  and  who  come  into  contact  with  us,  are  the  better  or  the  worse  as  the  result
of  such  knowledge  and  agaociation.  The  nature  of  our  influence  depends  upon  our  own
character.  Whether  this  subtle  power  we  all  possess  is  to  result  in  good  or  ill  depends
altogether  upon  what  we  are  ouraelvea.  Let  the  life  be  pure  and  holy,  fed  and  sustained
by  those  hidden  springs  which  take  their  rise  in  the  throne  of  G-od,  and  then  a  healthy
and  helpful  influence  will  assuredly  follow,  as  effect  follows  cause.  The  extent  of  the
range  of  a  man's  inflaenoe  depends  ver;^  much  upon  the  social  position  he  occupies.
The  more  prominent  a  man  is  among  his  fellows,  the  wider  will  be  the  circle  of  his
influence.  In  every  community  there  will  be,  of  necessity,  positions  of  special  promi-
nence to  be  occupied.  To  desire  to  occupy  these  for  the  sake  of  being  prominent,  and
accounted  great,  is  indeed  a  very  poor  ambition ;  but  to  desire  to  reach  these  in  the  hope
of  gaining  and  using  for  good  the  additional  influence  thus  acquired;  whilst  "rising  in
the  world,"  to  be  also  ascending  the  heights  of  holiness  and  goodness,  and  in  ascending
thus  to  reach  out  the  hand  of  help  to  others  and  to  assist  them  to  climb  above  the
mists  of  error  and  sin,  is  an  aspiration  that  is  truly  noble ;  and  happy  is  it  for  com-
munities when  such  men  rise.  When  good  men  are  exalted  "  the  city  rejoiceth."
These  verses  present  to  us  a  pidnliil  example  of  the  opposite  of  all  this.  Note  we  have
here —

I.  Gbeat  nTFLuraox  obosslt  abttbid.  Three  influential  classes  in  the  kingdom
of  Judah  are  specially  referred  ta  1.  ITie  princes ;  Le.  the  ruling  class,  the  judges  and
magistrates,  these  functions  being  exercised  by  members  of  the  royal  family  (Jer


OH.  in.  1— 12.J  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  89

xxL  11, 12).  2.  The  priests ;  I.e.  members  of  the  Jewish  priesthood,  taking  part  in  the
eerrices  of  tlie  temple,  aod  also  in  teaching  the  people.  3.  The  prophets ;  i.e.  not  the
men  who  were  specially  inspired  of  God,  like  Micah,  but  men  who  claimed  to  possess
a  desire  to  work  for  God,  who  were  trained  in  "  the  schools  of  the  prophets,"  and  who
became  a  very  numerous  class  in  the  land,  and  took  an  important  part  in  the  education
of  the  community.  In  these  three  classes  we  have  comprehended  the  most  influential
men  iu  the  land ;  men  who,  by  virtue  of  their  position,  ought  to  have  exerted  the
wisest  and  most  salutary  influence  upon  the  people.  But  instead  of  this  the  very
opposite  was  actually  the  case.  They  who  should  have  been  "  the  salt  of  the  earth  "
were  "as  salt  which  had  lost  its  savour."  The  princes,  instead  of  righteously
administering  the  Law,  sought  their  own  enrichment.  They  accepted  bribes  ("  The
heads  thereof  judge  for  reward,"  ver.  11),  and  they  utterly  sacrificed  the  rights  and
interests  of  the  people.  "  They  built  up  Zion  with  blood  "  (ver.  10),  «.«.  they  reared
their  luxurious  palaces  and  increased  their  own  store  of  wealth  by  perverting  equity,
and  by  unrighteous  decisions.  Their  unjust  judgments,  their  extortions  and  oppres-
sions, so  pressed  upon  the  people  that  the  very  life-blood  of  the  nation  was  drained.
Under  the  expressive  figure  of  cannibalism,  the  seer  describes  the  effect  of  their
rapacity  (vers.  2, 3).  The  prophets  also  were  utterly  mercenary.  If  the  bribe  was  only
given,  they  prophesied  as  desired.  "  They  caused  the  people  to  err,  biting  with  their
teeth  [i.e. feeding  upon  the  bribe]  and  crying.  Peace"  (ver.  5);  but  only  let  the  bribe  be
withheld,  and  they  altered  their  tone  and  became  the  heralds  of  evil  tidings  (ver.  5).
Nor  were  the  priests  behind  in  cherishing  the  same  spirit,  "  The  priests  teach  fo^
hire "  (ver.  11).  The  support  of  the  Jewish  priesthood  was  provided  for  by  special
Divine  arrangement.  The  tenth  in  Israel  was  apportioned  to  the  sons  of  Levi  as  their
inheritance  (Numb,  xviii.  20 ;  Deut.  xviii.  2).  But  though  thus  provided  for,  such
was  their  greed  that,  "  producing  the  answer  of  God  upon  the  receipt  of  money,  they
sold  the  grace  of  the  Lord  for  a  covetous  price"  (Jerome).  And  so  did  these  prominent
and  distinguished  classes  in  the  kingdom  of  Judah  abuse  the  great  influence  which
had  been  bestowed  upon  them.  History  repeats  itself;  and  there  have  been  times  in
the  development  of  other  nations  which  have  presented  the  counterpart  to  that  which
is  here  recorded  respecting  the  kingdom  of  Judah  (see,  for  example,  the  state  of  Europe
during  the  age  preceding  "  the  Reformation,"  as  described  by  D'Aubign^, '  History  of
the  Information,'  bk.  i.  ch.  iii.).

II.  The  abuse  of  influence  BESULTiNa  IN  OALAUiTT.  1.  To  the  abusers  them-
ulvet.  The  prophet  declared  that  the  day  of  retribution  would  duly  come,  and  that
in  that  day  of  Divine  manifestation  in  judgment  (1)  the  rulers  should  be  requited  for
their  evil  deeds  "  measure  for  measure  "  (ver.  4),  and  in  the  time  of  trial  should  find
no  help  in  God,  for  he  would  hide  his  face  from  them  (ver.  4) ;  (2)  the  false  priests
and  prophets  should  be  overtaken  by  judicial  blindness  (ver.  6),  shame  and  confusion
should  be  theirs,  as  the  coming  events  brought  to  light  the  falsity  of  their  declarations
(ver.  7),  and  the  Divine  oracles  would  be  silent  in  that  day  (ver.  7).  2.  To  the  nation.
The  land  they  were  seeking  to  "  build  up  "  by  unrighteous  deeds  should  be  brought  to
nouf;ht,  and  the  responsibility  of  its  overthrow  would  rest  upon  them.  "  Therefore
shall  Zion  for  your  sake  be  ploughed  as  a  field,"  etc.  (ver.  12).

"  Learn :  1.  The  blessinij;  of  influence  well  directed.  2.  The  boon  those  who  in  high
places  exert  such  an  influence  confer  upon  %  community.  3.  The  need  of  constant
intercession  with  God  on  behalf  of  the  leaders  of  a  nation,  ia  order  that  peace  and
prosperity  may  reign.    "  I  exhort,"  etc.  (1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2).

Yers.  1 — 12. — Avarice.  There  is  nothing  wrong  in  a  man's  seeking  to  acquire
riches.  Money  ,is  good.  Its  possession  is  to  be  desired,  since  it  carries  with  it  the
means  of  surrounding  its  possessor  with  the  comforts  of  life,  and  at  the  same  time  gives
him  the  ability  to  impart  good  to  those  who  are  less  favoured  and  in  circumstances  of
need.  The  very  endeavour  also  to  secure  this  calls  into  exercise  such  qualities  as
industry  and  thrift,  which  are  truly  commendable.  It  is  rather  the  love  of  money,
and  the  inordinate  desire  for  it  for  its  own  sake,  that  merits  condemnation.  Worldly
treasure  becomes  the  greatest  possible  curse  when  it  is  accounted  by  men  the  chief
good.  It  will  buy  up  everything  else.  Time,  inielleci,  justice,  truth,  conscience,
the  most  sacred  rights  of  humanity,  will  be  bartered  for  this ;  and  every  true  well*


K  THE  BOOK  OP  MIGAH.  [oh.  iii.  1— la

wisher  of  the  race  will  endeavour  to  stem  the  eTer-swelling  torrent,  and  to  present
motives  to  turn  the  energies  and  enterprises  of  the  world  into  another  and  higher
direction.  This  chapter  may  be  vietred  as  illustrative  of  the  deplorable  evils  and  the
fatal  results  of  this  spirit  of  avarice.

I.  Thb  deplobable  evils  connected  with  avarice.  1.  It  saps  the  foundationt
of  equity.  (Ver.  1.)  These  rulers  understood  the  Law,  but  being  so  thuroughly
possessed  by  the  mercenary  spirit,  they  failed  to  administer  it  righteously — were  partial
in  their  decisions,  favouring  those  who  offered  the  most  tempting  bribe,  and  thus  caused
the  legal  adminisiration  in  the  land  to  become  rotten  and  corrupt.  2.  It  leadt  to
oppression  and  cruelty.  (Vers.  2,  3,  10.)  The  one  concern  of  the  princes  was  to
enrich  themselves  and  to  find  themselves  surrounded  with  all  luxuries  and  splendours ;
and  hence  they  cared  not  to  what  lengths  of  extortion  and  fraud  an<l  oppression  they
went,  or  what  suffering  might  be  involved,  if  only  they  could  cnmpass  this  end.  3.  It
renders  its  siibj'ect  unfaith/ul  in  the  discharge  of  the  most  sacred  trusts.  No  trust  can
be  more  sacred  than  that  committed  to  the  man  who  is  constituted  a  teacher  of
spiritual  truth,  and  upon  whom  it  devolves  to  direct  men  in  the  ways  of  righteousness
and  God ;  but  here  (ver.  5)  we  have  such  catchin?  the  spiiit  of  covetousness,  and,  as
the  result,  proving  altogether  faithless  to  God  and  to  the  consciences  of  men,  prophe-
sying, "  peace "  to  those  who  bribed  them,  and  "  war "  to  those  who  withheld  the
mercenary  gift.  4.  It  excites  the  spirit  of  self-confidence  and  self-sufficiency.  These
leaders  of  the  people,  whilst  acting  thus  at  variance  with  the  true  and  the  right,  yet
finding  their  ill-gottea  gains  increasing  in  their  hands,  boasted  that  evil  could  not  reach
them  (ver.  H).

II,  The  fatal  results  op  avarice.  1.  Loss  of  the  Divine  favour.  For  "  covetous-
ness is  idolatry,"  and  Gnd  will  not  give  his  glory  to  another  (ver.  4).  2.  Non-apprehen-
sion of  spiritual  realities.  (Ver.  7.)  3.  Complete  frustration  of  their  designs.  The
palaces  they  had  built  up  with  blood,  and  the  city  they  had  defiled  by  their  iniquity,
should  come  to  nought,  and  in  its  overthrow  all  that  they  had  unrighteously  souaht  to
secure  for  themselves  should  perish  (ver.  12).  Tney  who  boast  that  they  are  "  full  and
increased  in  riches,  and  have  need  of  nothing,"  are  in  reality  the  most  needy  and
desolate.    Spenser,  in  '  The  Faery  Queene,'  has  described  their  true  condition —

*  Most  wretched  wight  whom  nothing  might  suffice.
Whose  greedy  lu&t  did  lack  in  greatest  store.
Whose  need  had  end,  but  no  end  covetize,
Whose  wealth  was  want,  whose  plenty  metde  him  poor,
Who  had  enough,  yet  wishM  evermore."

Ver.  8. —  Worldly  and  spiritual  power :  a  contrast.  In  this  verse  the  prophet  seems
to  place  himself  in  contrast  with  the  false  prophets  to  whom  he  had  referred.  They,
and  the  priests  and  rulers  with  whom  they  were  in  association,  may  be  taken  as  repre-
senting the  worldly  power  of  that  age,  whilst  he  represented  that  spiritual  power  which
is  inspired  in  the  true  servants  of  God  by  the  working  of  his  own  Spirit.  It  is
instructive,  in  reading  this  chapter,  to  contrast  these  worldly  and  spiritual  forces.

I.  The  former  is  power  often  employed  to  crush  ;  the  latter  is  powbb  eveb

EXERTED   TO   SAVE.

II.  The  fobmbk  is  poweb  beingino  blight  upon  those  who  comb  undeb  its

INFLUENCE  ;  THE  LATTEB  IS  POWER  THE  EXERCISE  OF  WHICH  EVEB  RESt7LTS  IN  BLESSINO.

III.  The  FORMER  IS  POWEB  THE  PUTTING  FORTH  OF  WHICH  IS  PROMPTED  BY  SELFISH-
NESS ;  THB   LATTEB   18  THE  OUTCOME  OF   LOVE.

IV.  The  fobmeb  brings  bhamb  and  dishonocb  upon  those  who  employ  it  ;  thb

LATTER  yields  TO  ITS  POSSESSORS  PRESENT  DISTINCTION,  AND  SHALL  SECURE  TO  THEN
IMPERISHABLE  BENOWN.

Vers.  8—12. — Gifts  for  Divine  service.  I.  Theib  katubb.  (Ver.  8.)  1.  "  Power."
(Ver.  8.)  Weak  as  the  prophet  felt  himself  to  be,  he  was  conscious  of  a  Divine
influence  resting  upon  him  and  inspiring  him,  clothing  him  with  holy  energy  and  irre-
sistible might.  His  mind  and  heart  had  been  brought  into  an  enjoyment  of  the  highest
an  I  holiest  fellowship  with  the  Invisible  and  Eternal.  His  soul  was  animated  by  the
inward  witness  of  the  Father's  love.    His  whole  nature  was  quickened  so  that  the


OH. ml— 12.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  U

spirit,  instead  of  being  ruled  by  the  body,  had  the  body  as  its  willing  instrument,  and
all  acting  in  concert  with  the  will  of  God.  God  dwelt  in  him  and. he  in  God.  .  His
spiritual  life  was  healthy  and  vigorous.  His  was  the  strength  of  a  man  who  felt  that
he  had  been  called  to  engage  in  a  work  demanding  peculiar  gifts  and  endowments  in
order  to  its  successful  discharge,  but  that  all  he  thus  wanted  God  would  bestow,  so  as
to  render  him  efficient ;  and  hence  he  was  ready  for  service — full  of  inward  strength,
"  full  of  power."  2.  "  Judgment."  (Ver.  8.)  The  reference  is  not  to  judgment  in  the
sense  of  being  able  to  discriminate  character  (although  this  is  very  desirable),  but
judgment  ia  the  sense  of  enlightenment  to  understand  the  message  to  be  delivered.
Here  was  a  messenger  who  knew  what  to  say ;  who  did  not  go  forth  with  a  sense  of
uncertainty,  but  as  one  who  had  received  his  message  and  was  prepared  without
hesitation  to  deliver  it.  3.  "  Might."  The  idea  is  that  of  courage.  He  not  only  knew
what  to  say,  but  was  ready  to  say  it  fearlessly.  Humble  in  origin,  bom  and  trained  up
in  obscurity,  hs  cowered  not  even  before  princes  and  nobles,  but  rather  caused  them  to
tremble  by  the  holy  boldness  with  which  he  declared  unto  them  "all  the  counsel
of  God."

II.  Theib  sotmcB.  (Ver.  8.)  "  But  truly  I  am  full  of  power  by  tlie  Bpirit  of  Ike
Loird."  These  words  betray  no  egotism  on  the  part  of  the  prophet.  Had  he  simply
affirmed  himself  to  be  a  man  of  power,  he  had  doubtless  laid  himself  open  to  the  charge
of  manifesting  that  "  self-praise  "  which  is  "  no  recommendation ; "  but  the  qualifying
sentence  entirely  frees  him  from  the  charge — " by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord"  He  was
inwardly  strong ;  he  was  enlightened  to  know  what  he  ought  to  utter  in  God's  name,
and  he  was  prepared  to  go  forth  and  to  say  it  with  unffinching  courage,  because  there
rested  upon  him  "  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,"  and  he  was  inspir»l  by  God's  own
Spirit.

III.  Theib  bxeboise.  "  He  declared  unto  Jacob  his  transgression,"  ete.  (ver.  8),
With  an  inspiring  consciousness  of  the  presence  with  him  of  the  Lord  he  served ;  with
a  clear  perception  of  the  character  of  the  age  and  of  the  announcements  he  was  to  make
in  God's  name,  and  with  a  boldness  no  adverse  force  could  intimidate,  because  divinely
sustained,  he  went  forth  to  his  appointed  service,  reproved  the  rulers  for  their
unrighteous  judgments  and  their  acceptance  of  bribes,  and  their  acts  of  cruelty  and
oppression  (vers.  9,  10),  chastised  the  priests  and  prophets  for  degrading,  by  their
mercenary  conduct,  the  high  functions  they  were  called  upon  to  discharge  (ver.  11),
and  predicted  the  coming  overthrow  of  the  nation,  fastening  upon  these  guilty  leaders
the  responsibility  of  occasioning  the  impending  doom  (ver.  12).  The  liistory  of  the
Church  of  God  through  all  ages  tells  of  men  thus  inspired  by  God's  Spirit  with
"power"  and  "judgment"  and  "might;"  and  hence  who  nobly  fulfilled  their  com-
mission. Feter  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  Paul  before  kings  and  governors,  Luther
before  the  Diet  of  Worms,  Knox  carrying  on  the  work  of  Beformation  in  Scotland,
Whitefield  and  the  Wesleys  in  the  work  of  revival — there  rested  upon  the  heads  of
these  true  servants  of  the  living  God  the  tongues  of  heavenly  fire ;  their  arms  were
nerved  by  the  might  of  omnipotence,  and  there  dwelt  in  them  the  wondrous  spirituot
force  that  shall  yet  regenerate  the  world.  There  are  difficulties  connected  with  service
to  God  in  the  present  as  in  all  past  times ;  yet  these  should  not  dishearten  or  daunt
us,  but  in  the  Divine  strength  we  should  courageously  meet  these  and  contend  against
them  until  they  are  all  overcome.  It  betrays  the  possession  of  a  weak  faith,  and  seems
to  indicate  that  he  does  not  realize  what  Divine  resources  are  available  to  him,  if  a
man  in  his  work  for  God  sits  down  before  the  difficulties  of  his  position  as  a  worker,
dispirited  and  fretful.  Shall  we  manifest  less  courage  in  reference  to  spiritual  service
than  men  exhilrit  in  the  ordinary  pursuits  of  life?  Shall  we  acknowledge  ourselves
baffled  and  beaten  when  the  mighty  energy  of  God's  own  Spirit  is  available,  and  may
be  ours  if  we  will?  There  was  exhibited  on  one  occasion  at  the  Bciyal  Academy  a
striking  picture  of  a  gallant  knight  mounted  on  his  charger  and  approaching  a  dark
cavernr  His  steed  was  represented  as  drawing  back  through  fear,  and  the  dogs  following
as  shrinking  through  terror;  but  lol  the  knisiht  wears  a  countenance  untouched  by
alarm.  There  mny  lie  perils  ahead,  but  he  recks  not,  for  his  hand  grasps  the  cross  and
his  trust  is  in  the  living,  loving  Lord.  Let  our  trust  be  thus  centred,  and  no  difficulty
lying  before  u«,  or  no  antagonism  against  which  we  may  have  to  contend  in  holy
lervice,  shall  be  able  to  daunt  us,  but  we  shall  say,  "  Who  art  thou,  0  great  mountain^


42  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  in.  1—12.

berore  Zerubbabel  tbou  shalt  become  a  plain."  We  should  "  covet  earnestly  the  best
gifts,"  and  above  all  seek  to  be  "  endued  with  power  from  on  high."

Ver.  10. — National  siaMity.  I.  The  endeavodb  to  seocbe  national  btabiutt
18  LAUDABLE  AND  TO  BE  coMUENDED.  Frinces,  Bobles,  leaders  of  the  people  of  all
classes,  ought  to  seek  to  Jmild  up  Zion  and  Jerusalem ;  and  earnest,  enthnsiastio  effort
directed  to  this  end  is  honourable  and  worthy  of  all  praise.

II.  This  besult  can  alone  be  gained  by  biqhteoub  means.  National  strength
and  stability  has  its  very  foundations  in  truth,  rectitude,  justice,  and  goodness.

III.  TUE  ADOPTION  OP  ANT   OTHEB  METBODS    MUST   INEVITABLT  BESULT  IN  DI80BAOE

AND  DECAY.  These  rulers  built  up  Zion  with  "  blood,"  t.e.  oppression,  wrong,  cruelty;
and  Jerusalem  with  "  iniquity,"  perverting  all  that  was  true  and  right ;  and  hence,
despite  the  semblance  of  outward  prosperity,  the  process  of  decay  and  dissolution  was
going  on,  and  became  at  length  completed  in  the  ruiu  of  the  nation  (ver.  12).

IV.  ThBT  are  the  TBUB  patriots  who  LIFT  UP  THE  VOICE  OF  WABNINO,  AHB  WHO
EXPOUND    AND    ENFORCE    THE    PRINCIPLES    OF    BIOHTE0U8NESB.      To    adopt    this   COUTSe

specially  in  a  worldly,  self-indulgent  age  is  sure  (1)  to  render  the  teacher  unpopular
with  many ;  (2)  hence  it  requires  holy  courage  and  daring  ;  (3)  which  will  be  possessed
in  proportion  as  the  man  is  "  moved  by  the  Holy  Ohost"

Ver.  11. — The  ministry  viewed  in  relation  to  "  hire."  The  Jewish  priests  and  prophets
were  the  teachers  of  the  people  in  matters  of  religion  and  morals.  They  exercised  "  the
teaching  faculty ; "  and  this  must  form  a  prominent  feature  in  those  who  devote  them-
selves to  the  work  of  the  ministry  in  every  age  (1  Tim.  iii.  2 ;  Col.  i.  28 ;  2  Tim.  iL
15  ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2).  The  power  of  the  pulpit  in  these  modern  times  depends  very  largely
upon  the  maintenance  of  its  teaching  efBciency.  The  men  the  Church  requires  as  its
ministers  are  such  as  will  come  furth  week  by  week  not  to  utter  a  number  of  weary
platitudes,  but  to  enforce  living  truths,  and  to  present  these  in  forms  fresh  and  new.
Note—

I.  Such  "  laboubbrs  "  abe  "  worthy  of  their  hibb."  The  support  of  the  Jewish
priesthood  was  arranged  under  the  Law  (Deut.  xviii.  2) ;  the  prophets  also  received
temporal  gifts  in  recognition  of  their  services  (1  Sam.  ix.  7, 8).  In  the  New  Testament
this  principle  of  pecuniary  acknowledgment  being  made  for  spiritual  service  is  distinctly
enunciated  (Luke  x.  7 ;  1  Cor.  ix.  7,  14).

n.  To  BENDEB  THIS  SERVICE  FOB  THE  SAKE  OF  THE  "  HIEE  "  IB  BELF-DEOBAODia,  AND

IS  AN  OFFENCE  TO  GoD  AND  THE  GOOD.  1.  Jt  leads  to  mere  officialism.  2.  It  results  in
the  perversion  of  truth,  the  character  of  the  message  being  made  to  depend  upon  the
nature  of  the  bribe  and  the  desire  to  gratify  those  who  offer  it.  3.  It  gives  rise  to
sheer  hypocrisy.  "  Yet  will  they  "  (i.e.  hypocritically)  "  lean  upon  the  Lord  and  say,  Is
not  the  Lord  among  us?"  (ver.  11).  4.  It  awakens  vain  self-confidenee.  "None  evil
can  come  upon  ns"  (ver.  11).  5.  It  incurs  fearful  responsibility.  "The  blood  of
souls  "  will  be  required  of  such.  The  ruin  of  Zion  and  Jerusalem  was  here  fastened
upon  such.  "  Therefore  shall  Zion  for  your  sake,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  How  hoDourable  is
the  work  of  the  faithful  minister  of  truth !  How  essential  it  is  that  they  who  engage
in  it  should  experience  the  Divine  call,  and  should  guard  well  theu:  hearts  so  that  they
may  be  true  to  themselves  and  may  render  acceptable  service  to  others!  Whatever
their  "  hire"  here  may  be,  how  glorious  is  the  reward  awaiting  all  who  are  found  true
in  this  calling ;  for  "  when  the  chief  Shepherd  appears  they  shAll  receive  the  crown  of
life  "(1  Pet.  v.  4).

Ver.  12. — The  desolating  effects  of  sin.  The  Book  of  Micah  may  popularly  be  con-
sidered as  consisting  of  three  sections — the  first  setting  forth  national  guilt  and  corrup-
tion (ch.  L — iii.);  the  second  (ch.  iv.  v.)  as  presenting  glimpses  of  a  brighter  and
better  age ;"  and  the  third  (ch.  vi.  vii.)  as  unfolding  the  nature  and  importance  of
sincere  and  practical  religion,  and  the  Divine  mercy  to  all  who  thus  turn  to  Gfod  and
serve  him  with  all  their  hearts.  The  verse  before  us  closes  the  first  part  of  the
prophecy,  and  presents  to  us  the  culmination  of  a  course  of  impiety  and  iniquity.  We
have  described  here  that  "death"  which  "sin  when  it  is  finished"  ever  "brineeth
forth  "  (Jas.  L  16).    Notice—


OH.ni.  1— 12.J  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH,  49

I.  The  HI8T0HICAL  FACT  OF  THE  MATERIAL  DESOLATION  WHICH  WAS  TO  BESULT  FROM

THE  PREVAILING  NATIONAL  TBAS8QRBSSI0N.  (Ver.  12.)  Observe :  1.  This  prophecy  wot
doubtless  oft  repeated  by  the  prophet.  That  it  was  uttered  by  him  during  the  reign  of
_  Hezekiah  is  clear  from  Jeremiah  (xxvi.  17,  19).  But  it  had  probably  been  uttered  by
him  previously,  for  the  words  which  follow  (ch.  iv.  1 — 3),  and  which  are  closely  connected
with  them,  were  quoted  by  Isaiah  from  Micah  during, the  earlier  reign  of  Jotham
(Isa.  ii.  2 — 4).  The  prophets  enforced  their  teaching  by  constant  reiteration.  "  To
write  the  same  things,"  etc.  (Phil.  iii.  1).  2.  The  faithful  utterance  of  thit  "dark
saying  "  was  the  means  of  working  a  temporary  reformation.  (See  Jer,  xxvi.  17, 19.)
It  might  have  exposed  the  seer  to  the  greatest  peril.  To  declare  such  evil  omens  at  a
time  when  the  prosperity  of  the  land  was  reviving  under  the  wise  rule  of  Hezekiah
might  have  involved  the  prophet  in  suffering,  and  even  death.  But,  happily,  it  had  its
desired  effect;  it  caused  the  king  and  the  people  to  buw  before  God  in  humiliation,
and  "judgment"  against  the  evil  works  which  had  been  wrought  "was  not  pxecuted
speedily  "  (Jer.  xxvi.  19).  3.  Though  thus  delayed,  the  destruction  of  the  land  was
ultimately  effected.  Dean  Stanley  observed  in  reference  to  this  prediction  by  Micah,
*'  The  destruction  which  was  then  threatened  has  never  been  completely  fulfilled.  Part
of  the  south-eastern  portion  of  the  city  has  for  several  centuries  been  arable  land,  but
the  rest  has  always  been  within  the  walls.  In  the  Maccabean  wars  (1  Maco.  iv.  38)
the  temple  courts  were  overgrown  with  shrubs,  but  this  has  never  been  the  case
since  "  ('  Jewish  Church,'  iL  464).  It  is  possible  to  be  too  literal  in  our  interpretations,
and  the  facts  of  history  are  simply  sufBcient  to  indicate  how  entirely  that  which  Micah
predicted  (ver.  12)  has  come  to  pass  (see  Bichardson's  'Travels,'  p.  859;  Keith  on
'  Prophecy,'  p.  257 ;  Porter's  '  Handbook,'  p.  92).

II,  Consider  this  as  symbolical  of  that  spiritual  desolation  which  is  ever
THE  OUTCOME  OF  EVIL.  It  is  the  natural  tendency  of  sin  to  render  the  transgressor
desolate  in  heart;  indeed,  a  man  cannot  indulge  in  a  course  of  evil  without  his  inner
self,  his  spiritual  being,  becoming  waste.  A  man  yields  to  the  sin  of  avarice,  and
perhaps  as  the  result  of  its  indulgence  he  gains  his  hundreds  and  thousands,  gets  the
best  of  many  a  bargain,  and  at  length  amasses  a  fortune ;  but  then  he  loses  peace  of
mind,  kindliness  of  heart,  the  joy  resulting  from  cherishing  all  generous  impulses,  and
probably  also  his  soul ;  so  that  whilst  in  the  worldly  sense  he  has  succeeded,  he  has
prospered  at  a  terrible  sacrifice,  even  the  withering  of  his  highest  and  noblest  powers;
he  has  "  got  on,"  has  "  risen  in  the  world,"  but  his  heart  is  left  void  and  desolate.  So
also  is  it  with  unholy  ambition.  We  think  of  Sennacherib  saying  to  Hezekiah,
"  Where  are  the  gods  of  Hamath  ?  "  etc.  (Isa.  xxxvi.  19, 20),  thus  proclaiming  defiantly
his  victories ;  or  of  Herod  sitting  upon  his  throne,  arrayed  in  gorgeous  apparel,  making
his  oration  to  the  people,  and  priding  himself  in  their  flattery  as  he  heard  their  cry,  "  It
is  the  voice  of  a  god,  and  not  of  a  man  "  (Acts  xii.  21,  22) ;  and  whilst  on  the  one
hand  we  see  in  them  representatives  of  the  lovers  of  power,  of  outward  show,  of
flattery  and  applause,  we  see  on  the  other  hand  men  who,  amidst  all  these  outward
pretences,  were  inwardly  empty,  waste,  desolate.  And  there  may  be  this  spiritual
desolation  amidst  much  'of  apparent  good.  It  does  not  follow  that  because  a  man  is
beciming  thus  spiritually  desolate,  his  heart  is  necessarily  closed  against  all  that  is
good,  or  that  because  a  man  is  susceptible  of  some  good  he  is  not  spiritually  becoming
waste.  There  may  be  love  of  kindred  with  all  those  praiseworthy  acts  to  which  this
may  prompt.  There  may  be  large  and  generous  sympathies.  Attention,  too,  may
even  be  paid  to  religious  observances ;  and  yet  with  all  this  the  heart  may  be  closed
to  the  heavenly  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  may  be  found  at  length  a  moral
waste  (Prov.  iv.  23).  Think  of  the  inestimable  value  of  that  Sacrifice,  the  design  of
which  was  the  putting  away  of  sin  and  the  raising  to  honour  and  dignity  those  whom
siu  had  covered  with  ignominy  and  had  plunged  into  ruin.  Our  very  desolation  has
rendered  us  the  objects  of  the  special  concern  of  the  Most  High  (John  iii.  16).  Trusting
to  Christ,  we  become  delivered  from  sin  with  all  its  thraldom  and  misery.  And  the
nappy  era  shall  at  length  dawn,  to  which  we  look  forward  with  longing,  expectant
aearts,  when  the  entire  moral  aspect  of  the  uuivene  shall  be  changed,  and  "the
leaert  rejoice  and  blossom  as  the  rose,"


44  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH,  [oh.  ni.  1—12.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  8. — Oodft  gift  of  a  faithful  ministry.  The  expression,  "  But  truly  (o^V"
implies  a  contrast  to  what  precedes.  The  false  prophets  were  in  alliance  with  the
tyrannical  princes,  and  were  destined  to  humiliation  and  to  the  utter  loss  of  whatever
power  they  once  possessed.  But  Micah,  conscious  of  a  Divine  calling  and  of  fidelity  ta
it,  can  point  to  himself  as  an  illustration  of  God's  precious  gift  of  a  faithful  ministry.
Note—

I.  Its  QiTALnriOATlOKS.  The  fundamental  one  is :  1  The  indwdling  of  the  Spirit  of
Ood.  The  true  prophet  or  minister  magnifies  his  ofiSce,  but  does  not  exalt  himself.
He  traces  all  he  has  to  Clod,  as  does  St.  Paul  (1  Cor.  xt.  10 ;  1  Tim.  L  12—16).
Pretenders  to  the  prophetic  or  pastoral  office  were  "  sensual  (^ffuxucaOf  ^'^^  having  the
Spirit,"  inspired  only  by  tlie  spirit  of  the  world,  or  of  self;  but  true  ministers  can  use  St.
Paul's  words  (1  Cor.  ii.  12),  for  they  are  relying  on  their  Divine  Master's  promise  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  2.  Hence  spiritual  power.  It  may  be  special  and  superhuman,  such  aa
prophets  and  apostles  enjoyed.  But  the  more  valuable  power  is  that  which  enables  \ia
to  witness  for  Christ  (Acts  i.  8),  to  exert  a  holy  influence  (2  Cor.  ill.  2,  3),  and  to
preach  "  in  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power."  Power  is  a  general  term ;  the
Divine  Spirit  manifests  his  presence  by  a  diversity  of  gifts  appropriate  to  special
necessities.  Two  of  these  are  mentioned  here  as  needed  by  the  prophet  and,  in  truth,
by  every  faithful  minister.  3.  Judgment,  including  such  thoughts  as  these — a  clear
sense  of  Ood's  equity  in  his  dealings  (Ezek.  xviii.),  an  impartial  utterance  of  God'a
sentences  (Jer.  L  16 — 19),  and  therefore  discrimination  in  all  his  messages  and  in  his
treatment  of  his  hearers,  "  doing  nothing  by  partiality,"  "  rightly  dividing  the  Word  of
truth,"  "  warning  every  man  and  teaching  every  man."  Such  a  ministry  will  emit
light  as  well  as  heat,  will  show  discretion  as  well  as  zeal.  4.  Moral  courage,  "  Might,"
8uch  as  the  apostles  sought  and  received  (Acts  iv.  29 — 31 ;  c£  Eph.  vi.  19, 20 ;  Col.  iv.
4;  2  I'im,  i.  7).  All  these  gifts  are  needed  in  a  high  degree—"  full,"  etc.  "  However
the  Lord  may  bless  the  meanest  gifts  of  such  as  be  honest,  yet  neither  are  ministers  to
be  empty  vessels  nor  swelled  with  uatentation,  but  a  large  measure  of  real  furniture  is
to  be  sought  after."  All  these  qualifications  were  more  or  less  fully  manifested  in  the
true  prophets  of  God ;  e.g.  Elijah  (Eoolus.  xlviiL  1),  Isaiah  (Iviii.  1),  Jeremiah  (ri.  11,
27),  Ezekiel  (iii.  8 — 11),  and  many  others.

II.  Its  diffioultibb.  The  main  difficulty  here  suggested  arises  from  its  relation  to
the  sins  of  men.  1.  The  burden  of  the  Lord  laid  on  ministers  requires  them  to  be
willing  to  be  used  in  the  disagreeable  task  of  convicting  communities  and  individuals  ot
sin.  This  may  be  traced  in  the  lung  prophetical  and  apostolical  succession  of  God'a
true  ministers,  including  such  illustrious  names  as  Moses,  Samuel,  Nathan,  Elijah,
Daniel,  John  the  Baptist,  Peter,  and  Paul.  We  too  must  be  prepared  to  show  to  the
Church  and  to  individuals  their  sins  in  trade,  their  transgressions  of  the  royal  law  in
their  conduct,  whether  towards  servants  or  masters.  Thus  we  may  seem  tc  many
"men  of  strife,"  or  even  enemies  (Gal.  iv.  16).  2.  But  we  do  not  successfully
"  show  "  to  men  their  transgressions  unless  they  are  induced  to  abandon  their  sin  and
accept  God's  method  of  deliverance.  We  seek  to  taJce  men  alive  out  of  the  snare  of  the
devil  (see  2  Tim.  IL  24 — 26,  Revised  Version).  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  convict  a  man
of  sin,  and  yet  fail  to  save  him,  thus  increasing  his  condemnation.

III.  Its  encoubagements.  1.  Frequent  successes.  We  learn  from  Jer.  xxvi.  17 — 19
that  Micah's  message  on  this  occasion  led  to  the  conversion  of  Hezekiah,  or  to  the
reawakening  of  his  zeal  as  a  reformer.  The  Christian  minister's  song  of  victory  is
often  heard  (2  Cor.  ii.  14).  2.  Constant  Divine  approval.  Sometimes  a  sense  of  failure
causes  a  feeling  of  isolation  and  of  heart-sickness,  such  as  Jeremiah  often  felt.  But
even  then  we  can  fall  back  on  the  sense  of  the  abiding  presence  of  God  (John  xvi.  32),
and  of  his  approving  smile  (Isa.  xlix.  4,  5). — E.  S.  P.

Vers.  9 — 11. — Spurious  faith.  The  prophet  at  once  vindicates  the  claim  he  has  just
made  (ver.  8).    We  have  here —

I.  An  utspabino  bxposukb  of  bins  in  high  quarters.  All  classes  are  involved,
and  to  each  class  the  most  scandalous  characteristic  offences  are  imputed.    1.  OivH


OH.  m.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  46

ruler$.  They  are  open  to  bribes,  in  direct  violation  of  Exod.  xxiii.  8,  uid  therefore
pervert  judgment.  These  sophists  on  the  judgment-seat  make  "  the  worse  appear
the  better  reason ; "  and  at  length  reach  such  a  stage  of  iniquity  that  they  "  abhor
judgment,"  and  "call  evil  good,"  etc.  (isa.  v.  20;  of.  2  Pet.  ii.  14).  lu  the  striking
figure  of  Isaiah  (lis.  14),  "  truth  is  fallen  in  the  street,  and  equity  cannot  enter."
Their  crimes  are  set  out  in  detail  in  vers.  1 — 4.  Meanwhile  they  are  building  fine
mansions  or  laying  out  estates,  but  at  the  price  of  blood,  like  Ahab  (1  Kings  ziz.)  or
Jehoiakim  (Jer.  zxii.  13 — 19) ;  or  they  are  wronging  the  poor,  though  the  consequences
may  be  fatal ;  as  in  modern  society  some  of  the  "  heads  thereof"  connive  at  social
systems  in  government  or  in  business,  by  which  the  poor  are  defrauded  of  their  claim  to
a  livelihood.  "The  bread  of  the  needy  is  their  life;  he  that  defraudeth  him  thereof  is
a  man  of  blood.  He  that  taketh  away  his  neighbour's  living  slayeth  him  :  and  he
that  defraudeth  the  labourer  of  his  hire  is  a  bloodshedder "  (Ecclus.  xxxv.  21,  22).
2.  Ecclesiastical  leaders.  The  priests'  duty  was  to  teach  the  Law  (Lev.  z.  11 ;  Deut.
zvii.  11 ;  zxxiii.  10),  but  they  too  needed  douceurs,  or  fees  or  bribes.  They  prpbably
misinterpreted  the  Law  from  the  same  motive  as  did  Eli's  sons  (1  Sam.  ii.  12 — 17).
"So  Arian  bishops,  themselves  hirelings,  by  false  expositions  of  Scripture  countenanced
Arian  emperors  in  tlieir  persecution  of  the  faithful"  (Puaey).  So,  too,  persecuting
priests  and  prelates  in  more  recent  days.  3.  Prophets.  These  religious  teachers  were
raised  up  to  promote  a  reformation  ;  but  they  too  had  been  dragged  down  to  the  level
of  other  teachers.  Divine  prophecy  had  been  corrupted  into  divination,  as  in  the  case
of  Balaam,  and  covetousness  was  universal  (ver.  6 ;  and  cf.  Ezek.  ziiL  1 — 6).  An
instructive  parallel  may  be  found  in  the  case  of  the  regular  clergy  of  the  mediteval
Church,  who  were  gradually  degraded  to  the  low  moral  level  of  the  secular  clergy.  We
are  reminded  of  the  odiousness  of  a  mercenary  ministry.  Thus  all  classes  were  com-
bined in  a  conspiracy  of  unrighteousness  (as  in  Ezek.  xxii.  23 — 31),  and  the  love  of
money  was  the  root  of  all  this  evil.

IL  An  indignant  protest  aoainst  unwaebantbd  faith  in  God.  They  flatter
themselves:  1.  That  they  may  lean  upon  the  Lord.  Deaf  to  all  past  teachings,
blind  to  the  danger  signals  which  history  has  erected,  they  insult  God  by  leaning  upon
him,  and  expecting  him  to  support  their  vile  souls  and  pampered  bodies  (cf.  Deut^
xxix.  19,  20).  They  farther  take  for  granted:  2.  That  the  Lord  is  among  them.
Though  invisible  to  sense,  and  sending  repeated  protests,  they  assume  his  favourable
presence.  They  trust  in  lying  words,  saying,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord  are  these,"  as
though  the  temple  of  the  Lord  and  the  Lord  of  the  temple  were  identical.  In  a  church
at  Innsbruck,  on  the  tabernacle  containing  the  consecrated  wafer  are  the  words,  "Ecce
tabemaculum  Dei."  If  this  daring  perversion  of  Scripture  had  proclaimed  a  truth,
what  a  false  confidence  for  an  unworthy  communicant ;  as  though  "  Corpus  Christi "
and  "  Christ  in  you  "  were  the  same  1  "There  standeth  One  among  you  whom  ye  know
not "  may  be  true,  but  in  a  new  sense ;  if  not  to  sanctify,  to  condemn.  3.  That  no
evU  will  befall  them.  As  though  God's  protests  and  a  guilty  conscience  were  not  in
themselves  evils  and  the  forecast  shadows  of  coming  doom.  So  deceitful  and  desperately
wicked  is  the  heart  of  man.  These  truths  may  be  applied  to  many  "  nominal  Christians."
(1)  Ambitious  monarchs  or  statesmen,  "building  up"  their  country  by  huge  standing
armies,  or  navies,  or  palaces,  at  the  cost  of  grinding  taxation,  leading  to  semi-starvation
and  loathsome  disease  as  among  the  Italian  peasantry,  or  of  tyrannical  extortions  from
Egyptian  felaheen,  or  of  a  merciless  conscription  as  in  Germany,  driving  some  of  her
best  sons  from  her  shores.  (2)  Landlords  amassing  fortunes  from  rack-renting  the
fever-slums  of  London,  or  confiscating  the  fruits  of  the  tenants'  industry  in  Ireland.
(3)  Drink-sellers  fattening  on  the  pauperism  of  their  wretched  customers,  or  carrying
liquid  poisons  to  tribes  just  emerging  from  barbarism.  (4)  Hireling  preachers  or
priests,  prophesying  smooth  things  to  unrighteous  aristocrats  or  plutocrats,  or  lulling
guilty  consciences  by  the  opiate  of  the  sacrament.  Such  men  of  expediency  crucified
even  the  Son  of  God  that  Zion  might  be  "  built  up  "  (John  xi.  48 ;  see  Jer.  v.  30,  31).
To  that  final  question  an  answer  is  found  in  ver.  12. — E.  S.  P.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Civil  rulers.  "  And  I  said.  Hear,  I  pray  you,  0  heads  of  Jacob,  and
ye  princes  of  the  house  of  Israel ;  Is  it  not  for  you  to  know  judgment  ?  Who  hate  the
good,  and  love  the  evil :  who  pluck  off  their  skin  from  off  them,  and  their  flesh  from


46  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [CH.  iii.  1—1?.

off  their  bones,"  etc.  The  punishment  threatened  in  this  chapter  is  against  the
authorities  of  Israel,  against  the  princes  who  turn  right  into  wrong  and  slay  the
people,  against  false  prophets  who  lead  the  people  astray  and  confirm  them  in  their
sin,  and  against  the  priests  in  connection  with  both  princes  and  prophets.  The  passage
before  us  is  directed  to  the  princes  and  the  rulers.  These  are  represented  as  radically
corrupt,  hating  good  and  loving  evil,  and  cruelly  oppressive:  "Who  pluck  off  their
skin  from  off  them,  and  their  flesh  from  off  their  bones."  And  more  than  this,  "  they
eat  the  flesh  of  my  people,  and  flay  their  skin  from  off  them."  They  are  represented
not  only  as  slaying  the  people,  robbing  them  of  the  means  of  existence,  but  devouring
them,  treating  thein  like  cattle,  which  are  first  killed  and  then  boiled  in  the  pot  for
food.  All  this,  of  course,  is  strong  figure  used  to  make  a  strong  impression.  We  have
two  thiusfs  worthy  of  notice  concerning  civil  rulers.

I.  What  civil  bulbks  ouoht  always  to  be.  They  ought  always  to  "  know
judgment,"  that  is,  always  practically  to  know  the  right.  The  ruler  who  has  not  a
practical  knowledge  and  love  of  the  right  is  out  of  his  place ;  he  is  a  usurper.  There
is  such  a  thing  as  right  iu  the  universe.  What  is  the  standard  of  right  ?  Not  public
sentiment,  not  human  law,  but  the  Divine  will.  Qod's  lieing  is  the  foundation  of
right;  God's  will  is  the  standard  of  right ;  God's  Christ  is  the  completest  revelation  ui
that  standard.  The  man  who  is  not  Christly  in  character  is  more  or  less  despicable
everywhere,  but  nowhere  so  much  as  on  a  throne.  Are  we  not  commanded  to  honour
the  king?  Yes,  but  the  command  implies  that  the  king  is  honourworthy.  Season,
conscience,  and  the  Bible  call  upon  us  to  loathe  and  despise  moral  corruption  on  a
throne.

"  He,  a  Ung,
A  true  right  king,  that  dare  do  anght  save  wiODg,
Fears  nothing  mortal  bat  to  be  unjust ;
Who  is  not  blown  up  with  the  flattering  pnffi
Of  spongy  sycophauts ;  who  stands  nnmoved
Despite  the  jostling  of  opinion."

(Marston.)

IL  What  civil  edlebs  often  abe.  What  were  these  rulers?  1,  They  toew
morally  corrupt.  These  rulers  were  of  those  who  "  hate  the  good  and  love  the  evil."
They  were  in  heart  radically  wrong,  comipt  to  the  very  core,  hating  good.  2.  They  wert
toiyuMy  cruel.  I'hey  treat>  d  the  people  as  the  butchers  and  the  cooks  treat  beasts — kill
them,  boil  them  for  their  own  use.  How  often,  even  in  the  history  of  England,  have  rulers
treated  the  people  as  mere  cattle  for  food  I  3.  They  were  divinely  abandoned.  "  Then
shall  they  cry  unto  the  Lord,  but  he  will  not  hear  them:  he  will  even  hide  his  face
from  them  ai  that  time."  The  Monarch  of  the  universe  is  no  "  respecter  of  persong."
Princes  are  no  more  in  his  eyes  than  paupers;  and  he  will  treat  both  according  to
their  character,  their  responsibility,  and  their  merits.  He  has  often  roused  nations  to
send  their  rulers  howling  into  infamy  and  ruin.  After  all,  the  existence  of  corrupt  kings
is  to  be  asciibed  to  the  ignorance,  the  cowardice,  and  servility  of  the  people.  Let  the
peoples  of  the  earth  advance  in  intelligence,  moral  discernment,  and  indepenaency,
and  such  rulers  will  disap|jear.  Corrupt  rulers  are  like  glowworms,  that  in  the  night
seem  brilliant,  but  in  the  day  contemptible  grubs.  Weak,  ignorant,  and  tyrannic
kings  appear  glorious  in  the  night  of  popular  ignorance,  but  abhorrent  aa  the  day  ot
mental  intelligence  advances. — D.  T.

Vers.  5 — 7. — False  prophets.  "  Thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  prophets  that
make  my  people  err,  that  hite  with  their  teeth,  and  cry,  Peace ;  and  he  that  putteth
not  into  their  mouths,  they  even  prepare  war  against  hlni.  Therefore  night  shall  be
unto  you,  that  ye  shall  not  have  a  vision,"  etc.  The  following  is  the  version  of
Delitzsch  :  "  'i  bus  saith  Jehovah  concerning  the  prophets  who  lead  my  people  astray,
who  bite  with  their  teeth  and  preach  peace.  And  whoever  should  put  nothing  into
their  mouths,  against  him  they  sanctify  war.  Therefore  night  to  you  because  of  the
vision,  and  darkness  to  you  because  ol  the  soothsaying ;  and  the  sun  will  set  over  the
prophets,  and  the  day  blacken  itself  over  them.  And  the  seers  will  be  ashamed  and
the  soothsayers  blush,  and  all  cover  their  head,  because  there  is  no  answer  of  Chid."


CH.  ni.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  47

"Here  he  attacks  the  false  prophets,  as  before  he  had  attacked  the  'princes.'  'That
make  my  people  err ' — knowingly  mislead  my  people,  by  not  denouncing  their  sins  as
incurring  judgments.  '  That  bite  with  their  teeth,  and  cry.  Peace ; '  i.e.  who,  so  long
as  they  are  supplied  with  food,  promise  peace  and  prosperity  in  their  prophecies.
'And  he  that  putteth  not  into  their  mouths,  they  even  prepare  war  against  him.'
Whenever  they  are  not  supplied  with  food,  they  foretell  war  and  calamity  :  they
sanctify  war,  i.e.  proclaim  it  as  a  holy  judgment  of  God,  because  they  are  not  fed.
'  Therefore  night  shall  be  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  not  have  a  vision  ;  and  it  shall  be
dark. '  Calamities  press  on  you  so  overwhelmingly  as  to  compel  you  to  cease  pretending
to  divine  (Zech.  xiii.  4).  Darkness  is  often  the  image  of  calamity  (Isa.  viil.  23;
Amos  V.  18  ;  viii.  9) .  '  Then  shall  the  seers  be  ashamed,  and  the  diviners  confounded  :
yea,  they  shall  all  cover  their  lips. '  The  Orientals  prided  themselves  on  the  moustache
and  beard.  To  cover  the  upper  lip,  therefore,  was  a  token  of  shame,  mourning,  and
sorrow  (Lev.  xiii.  45  ;  Ezek.  xxiv.  17).  '  Cover  not  thy  lips,'  i.e.  assume  not  the  usual
token  of  one  mourning  (Ezek.  xxiv.  32).  They  shall  be  so  ashamed  of  themselves  as
not  to  dare  to  open  their  mouths,  or  boast  of  the  name  of  prophet.  '  For  there  is  no
answer  of  God.'  They  shall  no  more  profess  to  have  responses  from  God,  being  struck
dumb  with  calamities  "  (Fausset).  False  prophets  are  here  brought  under  our  attention
again,  and  three  things  are  suggested  concerning  them.

I.  Thbt  ABE  DECEIVING.  God  says,  they  "make  my  people  err."  Preachers  often
make  their  hearers  err.  1.  In.  theology.  They  propound  ideas,  crude  and  ill  digested,
concerning  God,  Christ,  moral  conditions  and  relations,  utterly  inconsistent  with  truth.
3.  In  worship.  The  forms  they  propose  to  use  in  worship,  the  rules  they  enjoin  for  it,
are  often  such  as  to  give  the  people  wrong  ideas  as  to  what  worship  really  is.  3.  In
morality.  Their  standard  of  duty  is  often  wrong  ;  hence  wars  are  sanctioned,  priestly
exactions  and  assumptions  encouraged  .and  maintained.  Ah  me!  how  the  preachers
make  men  err  on  these,  great  subjects  I

II.  They  ake  avaricious.  They  "  bite  with  their  teeth,  and  cry,  Peace."  Greed
governs  them  in  all  their  ministries.  They  are  ever  hungering  after  gain ;  pelf  with
them  is  a  passion.  Their  eyes  are  ever  on  pew-rents,  offerings,  tithes,  etc.  If  their
greed  is  offended,  they  "  prepare  war  against "  the  offender  ;  they  raise  an  opposition
strong  and  deadly  against  him.     They  are  "  greedy  of  filthy  lucre."

III.  Thet  are  confounded.  Confounded  in  darkness.  "  Mght  shall  be  unto  you,
that  ye  shall  not  have  a  vision;  and  it  shall  be  dark  unto  you,  that  ye  shall  not
divine;  and  the  sun  shall  go  down  over  the  prophets,  and  the  day  shall  be  dark  over
them."  They  were  blind  leaders  of  the  blind,  and  they  themselves  fall  into  the  ditch.
Confounded  in  shame.  "  Then  shall  the  seers  be  ashamed,  and  the  diviners  be  con-
founded." Jehovah  ignores  them.  "There  is  no  answer  of  God."  "Those,"  says
Matthew  Henry,  "who  deceive  others  are  but  preparing  confusion  for  their  own
faces.— D.  T.

Vers.  8— 13.— T/ie  true  prophet.  "But  truly  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,  and  of  judgment,  and  of  might,  to  declare  unto  Jacob  his  transgression,  and  to
Israel  bis  sin.  Hear  this,  I  pray  you,"  etc.  It  is  supposed  that  this  chapter  belongs
to  the  reign  of  Hezekiah;  if  so,  the  mournful  state  of  matters  which  it  depicts
belongs  to  the  time  preceding  the  reformation.  These  words  lead  us  to  consider  the
true  prophet.

I.  The  work  of  a  tbub  pbophet.  "  To  declare  unto  Jacob  his  transgression,  and
to  Israel  his  sin."  It  is  a  characteristic  of  all  true  prophets,  that  they  have  a  keen
moral  sense  to  discern  wi-ong,  to  loath  it,  and  to  burn  at  it.  No  man  is  a  true  prophet
who  is  not  roused  to  thunder  by  the  wrong.  It  has  been  charged  against  the  preachens
of  England  that  it  is  not  wrong  that  rouses  them,  but  little  dogmas  that  agree  not
with  their  theology,  sects  that  unite  not  with  their  Church,  policies  that  interfere  with
their  income  and  position.  We  fear  this  is  too  true.  The  crimes  of  the  people  of
England  are  not  denounced  by  the  pulpit  as  they  should  be— the  vice  in  high
places,  the  injustices  perpetrated  under  the  name  and  sanction  of  law,  the  cupidity
of  traders,  the  swindlings  of  joint  stock  company  men,  by  which  they  become
millionaires  and  win  a  seat  in  the  Parliament  of  the  nation.  These  things  are  not
held  up  as  they  should  be  for  public  execration,  in  the  broad  sunlight  of  eternal  truth.


48  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  [ot.  m.  1—12.

Where  have  we.  men  now  to  "  declare  unto  Jacob  his  transgresaion,  and  unto  Israel  his
sin"?  1.  This  ii  a  painful  work.  It  will  incur  the  disfavour  of  some,  and  rouse  the
antagonism  of  the  rfelinquonts.  Still,  it  mnst  be  done — done  as  John  the  Baptist  did
it,  who  denounced  his  countrynaen  as  a  "generation  of  vipers;  "  done  as  Christ  did  it,
who  levelled  his  terrible  "woes"  at  the  heals  of  the  great  criminals  of  his  age.
2.  Tliii  is  an  urgent  work.  No  work  is  moro  needed  in  England  to-day.  To  expose
wrong  goes  a  great  way  towards  its  extinction.  Honeyed  words  in  the  pulpit  we  have
enough,  tawdry  disquisitions,  and  sensational  inanities.  God  multiply  men  of  the
stamp  of  John  the  Baptist  and  of  the  Apostle  Peter,  who  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost
charged  home  the  terrible  crime  of  the  crucifixion  to  the  men  he  addressed !

II.  The  power  op  a  true  prophet.  "  Truly  I  am  full  of  power  by  the  Spirit  of  the
Lord,  and  of  judgment,  and  of  might."  There  is  no  egotism  in  this.  A  powerful  man
knows  his  power,  and  will  ascribe  it  to  the  right  Source — the  "  Spirit  of  the  Lord."
Micah's  power  was  moral ;  it  was  the  might  of  conscience,  moral  conviction,  of  invincible
sympathy  with  eternal  right  and  truth.  This  is  a  very  different  power  to  that  of  mere
intellept,  imagination,  or  what  is  called  genius.  It  is  higher,  more  creditable,  more
influential,  more  God-like.  What  does  the  man  who  has  it  care  for  the  smiles  or  frowns
of  his  audiences?  He  sets  his  face  like  a  flint.  The  praises  of  his  fellow-men  affect
him  no  more  than  the  twitterings  of  a  sparrow  would  an  eagle;  their  frowns,  no  more
than  the  yelpings  of  a  cur  affect  the  monarch  of  the  forest.

III.  The  fidelitt  of  a  true  prophet.  This  is  seen  here  in  three  things.  1.  In  the
dass  he  denounces.  "  Hear  this,  I  pray  you,  ye  heads  of  the  house  of  Jacob,  and  princes
of  the  house  of  Israel."  He  struck  at  the  higher  classes  of  life.  "  Heads  of  the  house  of
Jacob,  and  princes  of  the  house  of  Israel."  Ah  me  I  how  little  we  pulpiteering  cowards
here  in  England  address  ourselves  to  the  crimes  of  the  upper  classes  I  The  low,  the
helpless,  the  destitute,  we  are  always  lecturing.  Do  your  ecclesiastical  lords  lecture
royalty,  think  you?  I  read  their  fulsome  flatteries  often,  but  their  denunciations
never.  The  prophet's  fidelity  is  seen  :  2.  In  the  charges  he  makes.  "  They  build  up
Zion  with  blood,  and  Jerusalem  with  iniquity."  (1)  He  charges  them  with  extortionate
cruelty.  "  The  civic  rulers  only  are  addressed  in  ver.  9,  viz.  those  who  were  charged
with  the  administration  of  justice  and  of  the  affairs  of  the  state,  but  who  did  the  very
oppodte — who  abhorred  justice  and  made  the  straight  crooked  because  they  passed
sentence  for  bribes.  They  thereby  build  Zion  with  blood,  etc.,  t.e.  obtain  the  means
of  erecting  splendid  buildings  by  cruel  extortions,  partly  also  by  actual  judicial  murder,
as  Ahab,  and  arter  him  Jehoiakim,  had  done  "  (Delitzsch).  Biulding  up  Jerusalem  by
blood  is  something  like  building  up  churches  by  beer.  It  is  not  uncommon  now  for
large  brewers,  from  the  enormous  profits  of  their  pernicious  craft,  to  build  up  mag-
nificent temples  for  God.  What  an  outrage  on  decency  1  What  an  insult  to  omniscient
Purity  I  (2)  He  charges  them  with  base  mercenariness.  "  The  heads  thereof  judge  for
reward,  and  the  priests  thereof  teach  for  hire,  and  the  prophets  thereof  divine  for  money."
He  saw  mercenariness  on  the  bench,  inspiring  the  judge ;  mercenariness  at  the  altar,
inspiring  the  piiests ;  mercenariness  in  the  pulpit,  inspiring  the  preachers.  Money  was
the  motive  power  of  all.  With  all  this  mercenariness,  still  they  "  leaned  upon  the
Lord,"  that  is,  professed  to  worship  the  one  true  and  living  God,  and  ignorantly  and
presumptuously  concluded  that  he  would  be  ever  amongst  them,  and  that  consequently
no  great  evil  would  overtake  them.  The  prophet's  faithfulness  is  seen ;  3.  In  the  doom
he  proclaims.  "  Therefore  shall  Zion  for  your  sake  be  ploughed  as  a  field,  and  Jerusalem
shall  become  heaps,  and  the  mountain  of  the  house  as  the  high  places  of  the  forest."
The  prophecy  was  never  literally  fulfilled  till  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the
Eomans,  when  the  ground  on  which  the  city  stood  was  ploughed  up,  in  token  of  its
utter  demolition,  and  no  city  was  to  be  built  there  without  the  emperor's  leave.  "It
is,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  the  wickedness  of  those  who  preside  in  them  that  brings  the
ruin.  It  is  for  your  sake  that  Zion  shall  be  ploughed  as  a  field ;  you  pretend  to  build
up  Zion,  but,  doing  it  by  blood  and  iniquity,  you  pull  it  down.  The  sin  of  priests
and  princes  is  often  the  ruin  of  states  and  Churches.  Ddinmt  rege»,plectuntur  Achivi;
the  kings  act  foolishly,  and  the  people  suffer  by  it."

GoKOLuaioN.    Such  ia  the  true  prophet. — D.  T.


CH.  IT.  1 — 13.]


THE  BOOK  OP  MICA.H.


49


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB   IV.


Van.  1 — 5.— S  4.  The  prophet  ntddetUy
announeei  the  future  glory  of  the  temple
mountain  and  the  ideal  happineti  of  the
people.

Ver.  1. — Bnt.  There  ii  no  advenatiTe
particle  here;  the  vei»e  is  merely  con-
nected with  what  precedes  without  any
expressed  contrast.  What  is  implied  ii
that  it  was  impossible  that  the  temple,  to
which  God's  high  promises  attached,  should
lie  waste  for  ever.  The  passage,  vers.  1 — S,
occurs  in  Isa.  ii.  2 — 1.  The  question  as  to
which  prophecy  is  the  earlier  cannot  be
settled.  Possibly  both  prophets  borrowed
the  language  of  some  earlier  work,  bm
Isaiah  is  thought  to  have  done  on  other
occasions,  e.g.  Isa.  xT.  and  xvi.,  the  com-
munity of  ideas  leading  them  to  the  same
source  of  testimony.  In  the  last  days ;
Uterally,  at  the  end  of  the  day$;  Cheyne,
"in  the  days  to  come."  It  is  the  usual
phrase  to  designate  the  time  of  Messiah,
unto  which  the  prophet's  thoughts  are
directed,  and  for  which  all  preceding  events
•nd  periods  are  a  preparation  (Jer.  xxiii.
20;  Hos.  iii.  5;  comp.  1  Cor.  x.  II;  1
Tim.  iv.  1).  Septuagint,  fcr*  ivxirotv  rHv
illifp&v,  "at  the  last  d^ys."  The  phrase
may  often  suitably  be  rendered,  "  in  latter
days,"  as  spoken  not  absolutely,  but  rela-
tively to  preceding  times.  The  mountain  of
the  house  of  the  Lord.  Mount  Moriah,  the
ruin  of  which  was  foretold  (oh.  iii.  12).
But  the  term  here  seems  to  include  Jeru-
salem itself.  Shall  be  established,  firmly
•nd  permanently  (as  1  Rings  ii.  45),  no
longer  subjeot  to  ruin  and  deyastation.  In
the  top  of  the  mountaini;  better,  on  the
head  of  the  mountaint.  The  idea  is  that
the  temple  mountain  shall  be  raised  above,
and  stand  forth  prominently  from  the  lower
hills  that  surround  it  and  form  its  basis
(comp.  Ezek.  xL  2;  Zeoh.  xiv.  10;  Eev.
xxi.  10).  The  prophet  speaks  as  if  he  con-
templated a  physical  change,  expressing
thereby  with  singular  force  tbe  notion  that
the  worship  of  the  true  God  (of  which  the
temple  was  the  symbol)  shall  be  promulgated
among  all  nations  of  the  world ;  that  from
the  old  Jewish  centre  of  religion  a  new  order
of  things  shall  arise,  not  transitory,  nor  local,
bnt  extending  to  all  time  and  pervading  the
utmost  parts  of  the  earth.  And  people
(peoples)  shall  flow  unto  it.  The  prophet
beholds  the  nations  of  the  world  coming  up
in  formal  procession  to  join  in  the  service
of  the  temple.  Thus  u  •dombrated  the
moAM.


comprehension  of  all  nations  in  the  Catliolio
Ohurch.  Isaiah  says  "all  natioas "  in
the  parallel  pass.igo  (comp.  Zoph.  ii.  11
and  Zcch.  viii.  22,  and  notes  there).

Ver.  2, — The  prophet  furtlier  explains  his
last  statement.  The  new  revelation  shall
be  BO  conspicuous  and  so  attractive  that
all  men  shall  hear,  and  desire  to  become
partakers  of  it.  Hany  nations.  In  con-
trast to  the  one  nation  from  whom  the  Law
emanated.  They  shall  exhort  one  another
to  resort  to  the  great  religious  metropolis,
t  e.  to  the  true  religion.  Of  his  ways.  His
pious  in  the  moral  government  of  the  world,
and  the  way  in  which  he  would  have  men
walk  in  order  to  please  him.  For  the  law
(torah);  teaching,  direction;  not  the  Mosaic
Law,  but  a  rule  of  life  (Prov.  vi.  23).  This
is  the  reason  given  by  the  prophet  for  the
eagerness  of  the  nations  to  resort  to  Jeru-
salem. They  would  seek  instruction  at  tlie
hand  of  those  authorized  to  give  it  (see
note  on  oh.  iii.  11).  The  word  of  the  Lord.
The  revelation  of  Jehovah,  the  gospeL
From  Jerusalem.  It  is  obvious  that  in  a
defined  sense  the  gospel  sprang  from
Jerusalem,  the  place  where  Christ  exercised
bis  ministry,  died,  rose,  ascended;  where
the  apostles  received  their  commission  and
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (Luke  xxiv.  47;
Acts  i.  8) ;  tlie  gospel  being  not  set  up  in
opposition  to  the  Law,  but  being  its  fulfil'
ment  and  development.

Ver.  3. — The  efiect  of  this  reception  of
true  religion  shall  be  universal  peace.  He
shall  judge  among  many  people ;  or  better,
betweeti  many  people*.  The  Lord  shall  be
the  Arbiter  to  whom  all  disputes  shall  be
referred,  as  in  the  next  clause.  When  his
reign  is  acknowledged  and  his  Law  obeyed,
all  war  and  all  causes  of  war  shall  cease.
The  gospel  is  a  gospel  of  peace  and  love,
and  when  "  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  are
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  his
Christ "  (Bev.  xi.  15),  peace  and  love  shall
everywhere  abound.  (For  the  phrase  in  the
text, comp.  Judg.  xi.27:  1  Sam.  xxiv.  12, 15.)
Kebnke  strong  nations  afar  oS.  The  word
rendered  "rebuke"  means  here  "decide
concerning,"  "act  as  umpire  for."  The
arbitration  of  the  sword  shall  no  more  be
resorted  to.  The  words  "afar  off"  are
omitted  in  the  similar  passage  of  Isaiah.
Beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares;  t'.e.
they  shall  practise  the  arts  of  peace  instead
of  war.  Literally,  the  short  broad  sword  of
the  Israelites  might  readily  be  converted
into  a  share,  and  the  spear  forged  into  •
prnning-hook  (comp.  Uos.  ii  18;  Zech.
ix.  10).  Martial  has  u>  epigram  entitled,
"  FaU  ex  ense  "  (xiv.  84)—


60


THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.


[oh.  !▼.  1— lai


"  Fox  me  oerta  duob  pladdw  onrraTlt  In
ngoa:
Agriooln  nnno  sum,  militia  ante  tai."

The  leveise  process  is  seen  in  Joel  iiL  10,
irhere  plouglishaiea  are  beaten  into  swords.
Thus  Virgil, '  Oeorg.,'  i.  508—

"Et  ourvn  rigidnm   faloes  oonflantnr  in
ensem."

(Comp.  OTid,  'Fast.,'  i.  699,  etc.)

Ver.  4. — This  verse  is  omitted  in  Isaiah.
They  shall  sit  ererj  man  under  his  Tine.
This  image  of  plenty  and  security  is  derived
from  the  account  of  the  material  prosperity
of  Israel  in  the  days  of  Solomon  (1  Kings
It.  25),  in  accordance  with  the  Mosaic
promise  (Lev.  zxvi.  4,  etc.).  It  passed  into
a  proverb  expressive  of  peace  and  happiness
(oomp.  Zech.  iii  10 ;  1  Maco.  xiv.  12).  The
moutii  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  The  great
promise  is  thus  confirmed  (Isa.  IviiL  14).
The  LXX.  usually  renders  this  expression  in
Jeremiah  and  the  minor  prophets  by  fUpios
vayroKpiiTupt  elsewhere  Dy  Kipios  aaPoM,
and  Kipios  Swd/ifav.  It  means, "  the  Lord  of
Uie  powers  of  heaven  and  earth,"  the  idea
being  originally  that  Ood  was  the  Leader  of
the  armies  of  Israel.

Ver.  5. — This  verse  gives  the  reason  why
Israel  is  thus  strong  and  safe.  In  the
parallel  passage  in  Isaiah  (iL  5)  it  is  con-
verted into  an  injunction  to  the  house  of
Jacob.  All  people  ^111  walk;  rather,  all
natimt  walk.  Every  one  in  the  name  of
his  god.  "  To  walk  "  is  generally  used  of
moral  and  religious  habits  (e.g.  2  Chron.
xvii  4 ;  Fs.  Uxxix.  81 ;  Ezek.  v.  6,  etc.) ;
so  here  the  meaning  is  that  all  other
nations  adhere  to  their  false  gods,  and
frame  their  life  and  conduct  relying  on  the
power  and  protection  of  these  inanities,  and,
by  implication,  shall  find  their  hope  de-
ceived. And  we  will  walk  in  the  name  of
the  Lord  our  Ood.  This  is  the  secret  of
Israel's  strength.  The  heathen  can  never
prevail  against  the  true  believers  who  put
their  whole  trust  in  the  Lord,  and  live  in
union  with  him.  By  saying  we,  the  prophet
identifies  himself  with  the  faithful  people.
For  ever  and  ever.  The  Cliuich  shall  never
faiL  Heathen  powers  last  for  a  time ;  the
kingdom  of  Messiali  is  everlasting.

Vers.  6,  7. — §  6.  In  tA{(  prmnised  re$tora-
Hon  all  Israd  U  included,  if  they  ehooie  to
accept  the  offer.

Ver.  6. — In  that  day.  The  Messianic  age
of  ver.  1.  Her  that  hiUteth ;  Scptuagint,  r^y
<rvvrmiiiiJ.fvriv,  "  her  that  is  bruised ; "  Vul-
gate, daudicantem.  Under  the  image  of  a
flock  footsore  and  dispersed,  the  prophet
signifles  the  depressed  condition  of  the
exiled  Hebrews  (eomp.  oh.  ii.   12;  Zeph.


iii  19).  It  is  the  sick  and  afflicied  here  wlw
are  to  be  gathered  together,  the  remnant
that  is  (ver.  7),  wherever  found,  which
turns  to  the  Lord  in  repentance  and  humilify.
Ver.  7. — ^I  will  nu^e  her  that  halted  •
remnant.  The  "  remnant "  is  "  the  election,"
that  portion  of  Israel  which  accepts  the
offered  redemption  (Bom.  ix.  27;  xi.  5);  and
God  declares  that  he  will  treat  this  section,
now  miserable  and  depressed,  as  sharers  in
the  Messianio  promises  (see  note  on  Zeph.
iii.  19).  As  commonly,  the  restoration  from
captivity  and  the  privileges  of  Messiah's
kingdom  are  combined  in  one  foreshortened
view.  But  this  "remnant"  shall  be  made
into  a  strong  nation,  which  no  power  shall
overthrow  (Isa.  xi.  14;  Ix.  22).  The  Lord
shall  reign  over  them.  Not  through  an
earthly  representative,  but  by  himself  (comp.
Isa.  xxiv.  23 :  lil  7 ;  Chad.  21 ;  Zech.  xiv.  9>
In  Mount  S^on,  This  prophecy  does  not
necessarily  point  to  any  literal  earthly  ful-
filment, but  rather  to  the  establishment  of
Christ's  spiritual  kingdom,  and  the  revela-
tion of  that  new  Jerusalem  which  St.  John
saw  "descending  out  of  heaven  from  Ood"
(Bev.  xxL  10).

Vera.  '8 — 10. — {  6.  After  a  certain  period
of  calamity  and  captivity  the  kingdom  of
David  <Aa2Z  he  revived.

Ver.  8.— And  thou,  0  tower  of  the  flpok
(migdal-edar).  There  was  a  village  with  a
tower  so  called  nestr  Bethlehem  (Gen.  xxxr.
21),  and  it  is  thought  that  Micah  refers  to
it  as  the  home  of  David  and  as  destined  to
be  the  birthplace  of  Messiah.  But  the  con-
text compels  us  to  consider  the  expression
as  a  periphrasis  for  Jerusalem,  which  the
prophet  here  addresses,  declaring  that  the
royal  power  shall  be  restored  to  her.  It  is
evidently  the  same  place  aa  the  strong  hold
(opAel,  "  the  hill ")  of  the  daughter  of  Zion.
The  name  "  Ophel "  is  affixed  to  the  southern
spur  of  Moiiah,  opposite  to  the  Mount  Zion,
from  which  it  was  separated  by  the  Tyro-
poeou  Valley.  It  was  fortified  by  Jotham
(2  Chron.  xxvii.  3)  and  Mnnaaaeh  (2  Chron.
xxxiii.  11),  and  on  it  were  the  king's  houses
i.e.  the  old  palace  of  David,  and  "  the  tower
that  lieth  out,"  or  the  upper  tower  (see  Neh.
iii.  26,  27).  This  is  probably  the  "flock-
tower"  mentioned  in  the  text  (comp.  Isa.
xxxii.  14,  where  Ophel  and  the  watch-tower
are  named  together) ;  and  it  is  so  called  as
having  been  originally  a  place  of  refuge  for
flocks,orof  observation  for  shepherds.  Micah
uses  the  two  expref^sions  to  represent  the
power  and  dominion  of  Jenisalem.  The  pro-
priety of  the  use  of  the  term  "  flock-tower"
is  seen  when  we  remember  that  David  was
a  shepherd  before  he  was  king,  and  tlMi.t  the
Israelites  are  the  sheep  of  the  Lord's  pasture.
The  reference  to  a  flock  in  the  preceding


OH.  rv.  1—13.]


THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.


51


vereeB  may  also  have  inflnenoed  the  prophet's
thought.  Owing  to  a  slight  variation  in  the
reading,  the  LXX.  renders  Ophel  by  aixiui^-nh
"  dark ;  "  bo  Jerome,  "  nebulosa ;  "  Aquila,
VKoT^S-qs :  Bymmachus,  air6Kpv<t>os,  These
translators  would  refer  the  term  to  the  ruinous
condition  of  the  tower.  The  first  dominion
shall  come,  i.e.  the  former,  original  empire,
such  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  David  and
Solomon,  and  which  had  been  lost  in  later
times.  The  LXX.  adds,  ^k  BaPuKSyos :  and
hence  the  Greek  expositors  explain  the
passage  as  referring  to  the  siege  of  Jerusalem
by  the  Chaldeans.  The  kingdom  shall  come
to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem.  The  verb
"shall  come"  is  better  taken  with  "the
first  dominion,"  and  this  clause  in  apposi-
tion to  the  former,  "the  kingdom  of"  or
"  the  reign  over  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem."
SoTereignty  over  Jerusalem,  or,  as  others
take  it,  that  appertains  to  Jerusalem,  repre-
sents rule  over  the  whole  country.  In  Messiah
the  glory  and  power  are  restored  to  the
throne  of  David  (Luke  i.  32,  33).

Ver.  9. — Before  this  glorious  revival  the
prophet  foresees  calamity  and  exile  in  the
nearer  future ;  yet  he  bids  the  people  not  to
despair.  Why  dost  thou  cry  out  aloud?
The  prophet  hears  the  cry  of  Zion,  and  asks
the  cause.  Septuagint,  'Ivarl  iyvms  Kcued;
"  Why  knowest  thou  evils  ?  "  from  a  variation
in  reading.  Is  there  no  king  in  thee  T  Hast
thou  lost  thy  king  ?  Is  this  the  reason  of  thy
sorrow  ?  The  allusion  is  to  the  captivity  of
Jehoiaehin  and  Zedekiah  (2  Kings  xxiv.,
ZXT.).  The  loss  of  the  king,  the  representa-
tive of  the  help  and  favour  of  God,  was  a
token  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  Divine  pro-
tection (comp.  Lam.  iv.  20 ;  Hos.  xiii.  10).
Thy  counsellor.  A  synonym  for  "king."
Oheyne  notes  that  the  root  of  melech  ("king")
in  Aramaic  means  "to  counsel."  In  Isa.
ix.  6  Messiah  is  called  "  Counsellor."  The
Septuagint,  treating  the  word  as  a  collective,
renders,  ^  iSouXij  trov, "  thy  counsel."  Fangs,
•to.  •  The  comparison  of  sorrow  of  heart  to
the  anguish  of  labour  pains  is  very  common
(oomp.  Isa.  xiii.  8;  Jer.  vi  21;  1.  43;  Hob.
xiii.  13).

Ver.  10. — Be  in  pain.  The  anguish  is
not  to  be  resisted,  but  shall  end,  like  birth-
pains,  in  deliverance.  Septuagint,  'aSive
Kol  avSpl^ov  Koi  ^yyt(e,  "Be  in  pain,  and
do  braTely,  and  draw  near,"  which  is  like
^neas's  encouragement  to  his  friends
(Virgil,  'Mneid,'  i.  207)—

"Durate,  et  Tosmet  rebus  serrate  secundis."'

For  now  shalt  thou  go  forth.  The  prophet
leaves  his  metaphor,  and  announces  that.
the  people  shall  "go  forth"  into  captivity.
He  says  "  now,"  as  having  the  scene  before
his  eyes.  They  must  leave  their  city,  live
shelterless  in  the  open  conntry,  be  carried


to  a  distant  land,  even  to  Babylon.  Shalt
dwell  in  the  field ;  i.e.  while  they  are  making
their  way  to  the  place  of  their  captivity.
Thou  Shalt  go  even  to  Babylon.  This  is
simple  prophecy,  and  could  have  been
known  to  Micah  only  by  inspiration.  In
his  day  Assyria  was  the  enemy  whom  Israel
had  to  dread  (as  oh.  v.  5,  6),  Babylon
being  at  this  time  in  the  position  of  a
conquered  country,  and  not  becoming
again  powerful  and  independent  for  another
century.  So  Isaiah  prophesied  of  the  cap-
tivity to  Babylon  (xxxix.  3 — 8),  if  modern
critics  have  not  shaken  our  faith  in  the
genuineness  of  that  chapter.  Micah  does
not  define  the  time  of  the  Captivity,  or  the
agents ;  he  notes  merely  the  place  whither
the  Jews  were  at  last  to  be  deported.
Even  in  this  case  "  Babylon "  may  have
its  typical  import,  and  be  taken  to  represent
the  great  world-power  arrayed  against  the
chosen  race;  and  the  prophecy  may  look
forward  to  other  fulfilments  in  succeeding
ages.  Some  commentators  think  that  Baby-
lon is  here  nientioned  as  the  most  distant
country  known,  or  as  a  portion  of  the
Assyrian  empire.  Others  suppose  that
Sargon  transported  some  Israelitish  captives
to  Babylon  to  replace  the  rebellious  Baby-
lonians whom  he  exiled  to  Palestine('Kecords
of  the  Past,'  vii.  29 ;  2  Kings  xvii.  24 ;  comp.
2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11),  and  that  thus  Micah
was  naturally  led  to  represent  the  Judseans
as  following  their  brethren.  Whichever
explanation  we  take,  there  is  no  reason  to
consider  that  the  reference  to  Babylon  is  the
interpolation  of  a  late  editor  of  the  prophetic
writings.  There  shalt  thon  he  delivered.
In  Babylon  deliverance  shall  arise.  This
prophecy  was  first  literally  fulfilled  in  the
return  from  captivity  under  Cyrus;  it  is
farther  fulfilled,  under  Christ,  in  the  rescue
of  the  true  Israelites  from  the  bondage  of
sin  and  the  world.

Vers.  11— 13.— §  7.  Besoued  from  Baby-
lon, Zixm  overcomet  all  enemie$  in  the  ttrength
of  God.

Ver.  11. — Now  also;  and  note.  A  new
scene  is  presented  in  contrast  to  the  view
in  vers.  1 — 4.  JUany  nations  are  gathered
against  thee.  Primarily  the  Assyrians  are
meant  (Isa.  xxziii.  3),  whose  armies  were
composed  of  various  nationalities  (Isa.
xxii.  6;  see  below,  oh.  v.  5).  Pusey
thinks  that  the  reference  is  rather  to  the
attacks  of  petty  enemies,  e.g.  in  Maccabean
times,  and  in  the  Samaritans'  opposition  to
the  rebuilding  of  the  temple.  Cheyne  would
place  vers.  5—10  in  a  parenthesis,  and  con-
nect the  present  with  the  ideal  description
in  vers.  1 — 4.  Let  her  he  defiled;  t.«.  pro-
faned, despoiled  of  her  boasted  holinees  and
inviolability.      LXX.,   itixapoiiuta,    "we


62


THE   BOOK   OJf  MIUAH.


[cH.  rr.  1 — 18.


will  rejoice."  The  Vulgate,  laptdetur,  pointB
to  her  pnnisliinent  e/t  an  adoltereBS,  which
does  not  Buit  the  context.  Let  onr  eye  look
upon  Zion.  The  heathen  anticipate  with
maliciona  pleasure  the  eight  of  the  humilia-
tion of  Jerusalem  (comp.  Obad.  12,  13).

Ver.  12. — But  the  enemies  who  came  to
exult  over  Zion  do  not  know  God's  design
while  blindly  working  it  out.  God's  people
are  not  to  be  destroyed,  but  their  adver-
saries. They  know  not  the  thoughts  of  the
Lord.  The  heathen,  who  were  the  instru-
ments of  God's  wrath  against  his  people,
knew  nothing  of  his  purpose  in  thus  afflict-
ing them,  nor  perceived  that  they  themselves
were  drawn  together  for  punishment.  He
shall  gather  (hath  gathered)  them  as  the
sheaves  into  the  floor.  Their  blindness  is
proved  by  their  not  perooiviug  till  too  late
that  G«d  has  brought  them  together  before
Jerusalem,  as  sheaves  are  brought  into  the
thrashing-tloor,  in  order  to  he  broken  up  and
destroyed  (comp.  Isa.  xxL  10 ;  Jer.  li.  23).
The  metaphor  is  carried  on  in  the  next
verse.  Various  are  the  explanations  of  the
prophet's  reference  in  this  prophecy.  Many
commentators  see  in  it  a  reference  to  the
destruction  of  the  army  of  Sennacherib
(2  Kings  xix.  85) ;  others  discern  a  defeat
of  the  Scythians  after  the  return  from  cap-
tivity ;  others,  again,  place  it  in  the  times  of
the  Maccabees ;  and  others  interpret  it  of  the
defeat  of  tlie  mystical  adversaries  of  God's
Church  adumbrated  in  Ezek.  xxxviii. ;  Zeoh.
xii. ;  and  Bev.  xx.  But  the  prophet  has
not  one  definite  event  in  view,  but  looks
forward  to  the  general  conflict  between  the
powers  of  the  world  and  the  Church,  of
which  the  historical  events  and  material
enemies  were  the  types.    Certain  historical


circumstances  may  exactly  anit  the  predio-
tion,  but  they  do  not  exhaust  it.  And  indeed
we  do  wrong  to  seek  for  minute  and  definite
fulfilment  of  particular  predictions.  Such
ntterances  are  often  conditional  and  are
modified  by  subsequent  circumstances.  The
prophets  are  concerned  with  great  moral
troths  and  the  righteous  government  of  the
World,  and  are  not  always  to  be  interpreted
with  literal  exactness.

Ver.  13. — Arise.  Shake  off  thy  sorrow
and  fear  and  despair.  And  thresh.  Tread
thine  enemies  underfoot,  now  that  they  are
gathered  in  the  fioor,  as  the  oxen  tread
out  the  corn  (Isa.  xli.  15,  etc. ;  Jer.  li.  33.)
Thine  horn.  The  horn  i»  an  emblem  of
power  and  victory,  as  appertaining  to  the
wild  ox,  the  most  powerful  animal  in
Canaan  (Deut.  xxxiii.  17 ;  1  Kings  xxii.  11.)
The  metaphor  of  threshing  is  dropped  for
the  moment,  bat  resumed  in  the  next  clause.
Hoofs.  In  allusion  to  the  mode  of  threshing
mentioned  above  (Dent.  xxv.  4 ;  1  Cor,  ix.  9).
People ;  peoples.  Israel  shall  crush  all  the
nations  that  rise  up  against  her.  I  {Ghd)
will  consecrate.  So  the  Masoretic  text ;  but
the  second  person,  which  the  ancient  ver-
sions give,  is  preferable.  Septuagint,
ovoS^o-Eis,  "  thou  shalt  dedicate ; "  Vulgate,
interfieies.  Then,  Zion,  shalt  devote  their
gain  unto  the  Lord.  'This  consecration,  or
devotion,  to  the  Lord  in  the  case  of  living
things  involved  death,  the  restitution  to
the  Lord  of  the  life  which  he  had  given
(see  Lev.  xxvii.  21,  28,  29 ;  Zeeh.  xiv.  21).
Thus  the  spiritual  Israel,  purified  by  suffer-
ing, and  redeemed,  shall  consecrate  to  the
Lord  the  power  of  the  world ;  and  all  the
wealth  and  might  of  earth  shall  be  inb-
servient  to  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  of  God,


HOMILETICS.

Ver».  1 — 8. — The  Messiah's  spiritual  kingdom.  These  verses  call  us  away  from  the
contemplation  of  sin  and  its  effects  as  set  forth  in  the  previous  chapters,  and  bid  us
turn  our  thoughts  to  ike  golden  age  that  rose  before  the  prophet's  vision,  and  animated
and  cheered  his  heart  in  the  dark  days  in  which  his  lot  was  cast.  We  live  in  happier
times.  Much  that  was  to  him  only  distant  expectation  has  become  fully  realized  by
us.  "  Blessed  are  our  eyes,"  etc.  (Matt.  xiii.  16,  17).  Still,  favoured  as  we  are,  the
kingdom  of  Christ  has  not,  even  in  our  own  day,  attained  unto  the  highest  perfection.
The  noontide  splendour  of  his  rule  has  not  yet  been  reached.  The  cross  has  brought
the  crown,  and  the  Lord  Christ  now  reigneth  as  King  in  Zion  ;  but  "  we  see  not  yet  all
things  put  under  him."  There  are  still  many  difficulties  and  discouragements,  and
there  is  much  to  sicken  and  sadden  the  hearts  of  all  to  whom  his  Name  is  precious,  and
his  truth  and  kingdom  dear.  And  amidst  all  this  we  do  well,  like  this  seer,  to  look
on  to  the  ultimate  complete  triumph  which  the  Christ  shall  assuredly  win,  and  by
this  bright  vision  to  gain  the  renewal  of  heart  and  hope.     We  have  indicated  here —

I.  Gkbtain  ohabaotkbistios  or  the  Messiah's  kinodom.  1.  Its  spirituality.  We
shall  assuredly  lose  sight  of  the  beauty  of  these  prophetic  descriptions  if  we  give  to
*hem  a  literal  and  material  significance.  This,  indeed,  is  what  the  Jews  themselves
did,  and  hence  the  true  Mesriah  was  by  them  "  despised  and  rejected."    "  Ai  upon  the


0H.IT.1— U.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  S8

figure  of  David  the  prophetic  figure  of  the  Messiah  is  developed,  so  upon  the  figure  of
Jenualem  is  the  prophetic  figure  of  the  holy  community  of  the  future"  (Lange).
Connecting  ver.  1  with  the  last  verse  of  the  previous  chapter,  we  are  reminded  that
whilst  the  material  kingdom  was  marked  to  fall,  and  should,  in  due  course  and  as  the
result  of  national  giult,  decay  and  pass  away,  yet  this  mournful  apostasy  of  the  chosen
race  should  be  rendered  in  the  Divine  wisdom -"the  riches  of  the  world"  (Bom.  xi.
11,  12).  The  old  economy  should  eventually  disappear,  but  the  new  dispensation
should  follow.  The  long-promised  Messiah  should  appear  and  establish  a  tpiritual
kingdom,  the  subjects  of  which  should  be  renewed  and  sanctified  men;  to  which
kingdom  higher  privileges  and  honours  should  be  attached  than  Judaism  had  ever
presented,  and  the  influence  of  which  should  extend  to  the  wide  world.  2.  Its  pun
and  righteotu  principles  of  government.  "  For  the  Law  shall  go  forth  of  Zion,"  etc.
(ver.  2).  These  have  been  framed  with  a  due  regard  to  the  interests  of  all  the  subjects ;
they  are  not  only  designed  to  regulate  the  outward  conduct  and  actions  of  men,  but
they  go  deeper  and  affect  the  heart  and  the  secret  springs  of  action.  The  great  law  of
the  kingdom  is  love — love  to  God  and  to  man.  "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  Law  "
(Bom.  xiii.  10).  3.  Its  comprehensiveness.  "Peoples  shall  flow  unto  it"  (ver.  1);
"  Asd  many  nations  shall  come  "  (ver.  2).  Judaism  was  marked  by  its  ezclasiveness.
Its  privileges  were  confined  to  a  particular  nationality.  But  lol  it  is  here  declared
that  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah  should  be  world-embracing.  It  shall  become  indeed
"  a  great  nation,"  for  "  unto  it "  all  peoples  and  tribes  "  shaU  flow."  The  King  whom
Jehovah  has  "  set  upon  his  holy  hill  of  Zion,"  and  who  shall  "  reign  in  righteousness,"
shall  sway  his  sceptre  at  length  over  a  ransomed,  regenerated,  happy  world.  4.  Its
perpetuity.  "  It  shall  be  abidingly  established  "  (ver.  1).  "  The  Lord  shall  reign  over
them  in  Mount  Zion  from  henceforth,  even  for  ever  "  (ver.  7).  The  kingdoms  of  this
world  are  uneuduring.  "  They  all  shall  perish."  They  rise,  progress,  attain  unto  their
zenith,  and  then  decline  and  pass  away.  Egypt  and  Tyre,  Assyria  and  Babylon,
Greece  and  Bome,  powers  that  once  dominated  the  world,  their  glory  is  laid  in  the
dust,  their  pomp  has  passed  away  like  a  dream,  their  works  survive  only  in  chambers
of  antiquity,  and  their  deeds  have  only  a  record  in  historical  lore.  So  perishes  the
glory  of  this  world  I  But  this  spiritual  kingdom  of  the  Lord  Christ  lives  and  shall
never  fail.  Its  throne  shall  never  be  shakea,  its  riches  shall  never  be  impoverished,
its  glory  shall  never  be  dimmed.  "  Thy  kingdom  is  an  everlasting  kingdom,"  etc.
(Ps.  cxlv.  13).  6.  And  hence,  its  pre-eminence.  "  It  shall  be  exalted  above  the
hills"  (ver.  1).  It  shall  attain  unto  heights  such  as  no  worldly  power  has  ever  reached,
and  its  King  shall  enjoy  distinction  and  honour  such  as  earthly  monarchs  have  never
known.  "He  shall  be  exalted  and  extolled,  and  be  very  high"  (Isa.  lii.  13);  "And
he  shall  bear  the  glory  "  (Zeoh.  vi.  13).

n.  Ths  influenoe  of  the  Messiah's  bule.  It  is  here  predicted  that  this  should
be  of  the  most  healthy  and  beneficent  nature.  Under  his  sway :  1.  Enthusiasm
should  he  enkindled.  "  Come,  and  let  us  go  up,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  Men  drawn  to  him  in  the
spirit  of  whole-souled  devotion  should  seek  to  lead  others  to  participate  with  them  in
the  enjoyment  of  the  blessings  he  imparts.  "The  love  of  Christ"  has  "constrained"
men  to  the  consecration  of  all  their  energies  to  his  service.  So  Paul  (Acts  xi.  23,  24).
Xavier  said,  "  You  say  they  will  kill  me  by  poison.  It  is  an  honour  unto  which  such
a  poor  sinner  as  I  dare  not  aspire ;  but  I  am  ready  to  die  ten  thousand  deaths  for  the
salvation  of  a  single  soul."  In  our  own  day  we  have  seen  men  thus  impelled  to  go  forth
to  distant  and  uncivilized  tribes ;  and  when  they  have  been  stricken  down  by  fever  ending
in  death,  lol  others  have  been  found  ready  to  be  •? baptized  for  the  dead."  2.  Know-
ledge should  he  diffused.  "  And  he  will  teach  us,"  etc.  (ver.  2).  The  true  Messiah  is
also  "  the  true  Light,"  "  the  Light  of  men,"  "  the  Light  of  the  world."  He  came  to  rule,
but  his  rule  shoidd  be  an  enlightened  one.  Where  his  influence  touches  there  is  light.
He  dissipates  the  darkness  of  error,  superstition,  idolatry ;  and  his  enlightening  power
shall  extend  until  "the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  shall  cover  the  earth"  (Isa.  xL  9).
3.  Obedience  should  he  rendered.  "And  we  will  walk  La  his  paths"  (ver.  2).  The
connection  between  this  and  the  preceding  sentence  is  very  intimate,  iul  true  know-
ledge is  designed  to  affect  the  conduct  and  life.  Knowing  and  doing  are  clotely
related  (John  xiii.  17).  How  purifying  and  elevating  Christ's  moral  influence  upon
the  world  hag  proved  I    Wherever  the  influence  of  hu  truth  is  felt,  there,  as  sure  aa


64  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  iv.  1— 1&

day  Buoceeds  night,  a  higher  morality  becomes  developed.  4.  Peac«  should  be  eitah-
lUhed.  (Ver.  3.)  The  Messiah  is  "  the  Prince  of  Peace  "  (Isa.  ix.  6).  "  Glory  to  Ood
in  the  highest,"  etc.  (Luke  ii.  14),  was  the  song  of  angels  as  they  welcomed  his  advent.
Strange,  then,  that  men  should  ascribe  to  his  religion  the  prevalence  in  the  world  of
war  and  conflict.  His  religion  has  often  been  made  the  pretext  for  entering  into  deadly
strife ;  but  underlying  this  there  has  been  some  ambitious  design  which  has  been  the
real  though  concealed  cause.  The  growing  disposition  amongst  the  nations  to  seek
peaceful  solutions  of  existing  difficulties,  and  not  to  draw  the  sword  until  these  have
been  exhausted,  is  tin  effect  of  the  influence  of  the  principles  of  Christ  upon  society  at
large.  The  universal  dissemination  of  his  truth  shall  be  followed  by  the  complete
fulfilment  of  this  glowing  prediction  (ver.  3).  6.  Secv/rity  should  he  realized.  (Ver.  4.)
In  the  Assyrian  monuments  representations  are  given  of  men  in  a  reclining  posture,
with  the  vines  in  rich  profusion  over  their  heads,  suggestive  of  quiet  and  rest  and
freedom  from  everything  calculated  to  disturb  and  alarm.  And  this  is  the  idea
expressed  here.  Fear  had  taken  possession  of  the  hearts  of  those  whom  the  prophet  was
addressing.  They  thought  with  sadness  and  dismay  of  the  awaiting  judgments  to
follow  national  sin.  The  enemy  had  come  well-nigh  to  the  gates;  but  lot  the  seer
cheers  them  by  the  prospect  of  happier  days  which  should  at  length  dawn  upon  them.
As  it  had  been  with  the  nation  in  the  peaceful  days  of  Solomon,  so  he  declared  it
fihoidd  be  in  a  spiritual  sense  under  the  rule  of  the  Messiah.  "  Such  is  that  most  quiet
fearlessness  which  the  law  of  Christ  bringeth  as  being  the  law  of  charity,  peace,  and
concord,"  6.  Sestoration  should  6e  effected.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  Into  the  enjoyment  of  tbsea
high  blessings  even  they  should  be  brought  who  had  erred  from  Grod's  ways,  who  had
"halted"  in  his  service,  and  had  divided  their  allegiance  between  him  and  Baal.  They
must,  in  consequence  of  their  sin,  be  "driven  out"  and  "afflicted"  and  "cast  off;"
yet  in  their  exile  he  would  watch  over  them,  seeking  them  in  his  deep  compassion,
"devising  means  that  his  banished  be  not  expelled  from  him"  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14),  and
in  his  own  time  and  way  these  should  be  brought  in  with  "the  fulness  of  the
Gentiles,"  to  form  "a  strong  nation"  over  whom  he  would  reign  for  ever  and  evar
(vers.  6,  7).

III.  The  casETAiNTY  or  the  beauzation  of  all  thus  exfbessbd.  The  sew
throughout  uses  the  language  of  holy  confidence.  And  he  was  warranted^  this ;  for :
1.  Such  is  the  Divine  purpose.  The  issue  is  divinely  guaranteed.  God  has  promised
the  kingdom  to  his  Son.  2.  This  Divine  purpose  has  been  repeatedly  expressed.  "  For
the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it "  (ver.  4).  3.  That  which  Ood  has  purposed  and
declared,  his  power  can  and  will  fulfil.  Despite  the  humble  circumstances  and  con-
ditions through  which  the  chosen  of  Heaven  would  have  to  pass,  "  the  kingdom  should
come  to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem  " — "  the  first  or  former  dominion ; "  i.e.  the  rich
spiritual  honour  which  had  been  promised  to  David's  line  should  be  bestowed  (ver,  8),
for  such  was  the  Divine  will  and  which  the  Divine  power  would  assuredly  accomplish.
Our  hope  for  a  bright  future  rests  upon  the  same  foundation.  And  aa  God  requires  ua
to  put  him  in  remembrance  of  his  Word,  we  will  say,  "  For  Zion's  sake,"  etc.  ^a,  htii.
l)j  and  will  cry  in  the  words  of  our  own  Milton,  "Come  forth  out  of  thy  royal
chamber,  0  Prince  of  all  the  kings  of  the  earth  1  Put  on  the  visible  robes  of  thy
imperial  majesty;  take  up  that  unlimited  sceptre  which  thy  Almighty  Father  hath
bequeathed  thee ;  for  now  the  Toice  of  thy  bride  calls  thee,  and  all  creatures  sigh  to  b«
renewed,"

Ver.  2. — Enthusiasm  in  religion.  I.  The  bpibit  of  enthcsiabm  m  relation  to
RELIGION  IS  EMINENTLY  DESIRABLE.  It  is  SO :  1.  As  indicating  the  possession  of  loving
devotion  to  Ood.  2.  As  prompting  to  endeavour  with  a  view  to  the  spiritual  wdl-being
of  others.  (Ver.  2,  "  Come,  and  let  us  go  up,"  etc. ;  John  i.  41,  42,  45,  46 ;  iv,  28,  29.)
3.  As  being  contagious.  For,  all  aglow  themselves,  they  will  be  the  neans  of  inspiring
Others  with  the  same  fervour.

II.  This  spirit,  unless  under  wise  contbol,  may  pbovb  injueious.  It  may  seem
a  very  simple  matter  to  invite  others  to  God,  to  say  to  them,  "  Come,  let  us  go  up,"
etc.;  but  it  is  possible,  by  undue  familiarity  of  approach,  or  by  extravagance  it
language,  to  alienate  those  it  is  desired  to  win.

UI.  This  spirit  is  in  safe  keepino  if  its  fosbesbor  cultivates  thb  dibposi-


OH.  IV.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF   MIOAH.  66

TI0N8  HEBE  EXPRESSED  (ver.  2),  viz, ;  1.  Of  seeking  to  understand  God's  truth  mart
dearly.  "And  he  will  teach  ua  of  his  ways."  The  consciousness  of  his  imperfect
attainments  will  keep  him  humble,  and  preserve  him  from  mere  dogmatism  and  self-
conceit.  2.  0/  endeavouring  to  te  obedient  in  heart  and  life  to  God's  imll.  "  And  we
will  walk  in  his  paths."  His  realization  of  the  importance  of  ethical  practical  life  will
preserve  him  from  either  thinking  or  advocating  the  false  notion  that  jnety  consists  in
profuse  verbal  declarations  and  mere  outward  professions.

Ver.  2. — Higher  spiritual  life.  "  Let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord."  We
are  too  prone  to  be  content  with  living  at  a  very  low  level  of  spiritual  attainment.
We  need  to  hear  and  heed  the  voice  of  God's  own  Spirit  addressing  us  through  our
own  consciences,  and  through  all  the  holy  influences  encompassing  us,  and  bidding  ua
leave  the  ordinary  plain  on  which  we  have  been  content  to  dwell,  and  to  ascend  the
mount  of  the  Lord,  and  thus  to  rise  to  the  nobler  heights  of  spiritual  privilege  and
goodness.     "  Let  iis  go  up,"  etc.

L  What  ib  this  higher  spikitual  life?  It  is  a  life  of  obedience  to  God  and
of  faith  in  him.  It  is  a  life  of  holy  and  hallowed  fellowship  with  the  invisible.  It  is
a  life  sustiiined  and  strengthened  by  hidden  Divine  springs.  It  is  not  perfect  life,  but
life  characterized  by  constant  endeavour  after  the  perfect.  It  is  a  life  characterized  by
the  patient  endurance  of  trial,  the  successful  resistance  of  temptation,  and  the  cheerful
performance  of  duty.  It  is  a  life  animated  by  hopes  entering  "  within  the  veil,"  and
in  which  is  increasingly  realized  union  with  the  spiritual  world.

II.  How  MAT  IT  BE  BEACHED  ?  1.  The  ministration  of  the  truth  is  designed  to  this
end.  The  advancement  of  the  good  in  Divine  knowledge  and  in  the  varied  graces  of
the  Christian  character  is  one  aim  of  the  Ohristiau  ministry  (Eph.  v.  11 — 13).  2.  The
commonest  duties  of  our  daily  life  may  be  so  discharged  as  to  be  made  to  contribute
to  our  spiritual  elevation.  The  aim  should  be  to  make  every  duty  subservient  to  the
great  end  of  our  spiritual  advancement.  3.  The  sorrowful  expei  iences  of  our  life  are
all  designed  to  secure  to  us  "  more  life  and  fuller."  These  constitute  the  threshings
of  the  spiritual  man  by  means  of  which  God  would  separate  his  servants  from  evil,
and  enable  them  to  enter  into  the  higher  joys  of  his  kingdom.  4.  And  this  soul-
elevation  is  to  be  secured  not  only  by  receiving,  but  also  by  imparting,  holy  influences.
We  rise  ourselves  as  we  invite  others  to  rise ;  as  we  speak  to  them  the  encouraging
word,  and  hold  out  to  them  the  helping  hand.  Ruskin  reminds  us  that  the  name
which  of  all  others  is  most  expressive  of  the  being  of  God  is  that  of  "  the  Helpful  One,"
or,  in  our  softer  Saxon,  "the  Holy  One."  And  we  may  each  know  what  one  has
beautifully  called  the  holiness  of  helpfulness  (Dr.  Robert  CoUyer's  '  The  Life  that  now
is,'  pp.  63,  64).

III.  What  advantages  will  acobtte  from  its  attainment?  1.  There  will  be
greater  enjoyment  in  connection  with  religious  privileges  than  can  otherwise  be
experienced.  2.  Tranquillity  will  possess  the  heart  amidst  the  disappointments,  changes,
and  bereavements  of  life.  3.  A  clearer  apprehension  of  the  truth  of  God  will  he
gained.  (Ver.  2.)  4.  More  effective  service  to  God  in  the  world  will  be  rendered.
Certain  saints  of  God  belonging  to  the  past  are  sometimes  set  forth  as  having  been
specially  eminent,  and  as  though  the  same  altitmle  could  not  be  reached  nowadays ;
whereas  we  are  to  be  "  followers  "  of  such  (Heb.  vi.  12),  and  the  "  helps  "  they  used  are
as  available  to  us.     Use  them,  and  say —

"  Go  up,  go  up,  my  heart  1

Be  not  a  trifler  here ;
Ascend  above  these  clouds,

Dwell  in  a  higlier  sphere.
Let  not  thy  love  go  out

To  things  so  soiled  and  dim ;
Go  up  to  heaven,  and  God

Take  up  thy  love  to  him."

Ver.  2.— God  our  Teacher.    «  And  he  will  teach  ns  of  his  ways."    How  ?
L  Bt  wobkino  in  CUB  hearts  the  spibit  of  true  humility.    There  must  be
humility  in  order  that  we  may  apprehend  spiritual  things     We  must  become  "  ai


6ft  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  [oh.  rr.  1—13

little  children  "  wonld  we  enter  the  kingdom  of  truth.  And  this  dispoaition  is  fitting ;
for  what.after  all,  are  we  but  children  in  relation  to  such  knowledge?  " Emhryos  we
are  all."  Too  many,  forgetting  this,  and  cherisliing  the  opposite  spirit,  misapprehend
or  pervert  the  meaning  of  God's  truth.  Pride  of  intellect  is  cherished,  and,  strong  and
dogmatic  in  their  adherence  to  false  intellectual  conceptions,  they  miss  the  highest  truth.
"  The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment,  and  the  meek  will  he  teach  his  way."  "  As
low  trees  and  shrubs  are  free  from  many  violent  gusts  and  blasts  of  wind  which  shake
and  rend  the  taller  trees,  so  humble  souls  are  free  from  those  gusts  and  blasts  of  error
that  rend  and  tear  proud  lofty  souls."  "  The  high  tide  quickly  ebbs."  "  The  valleys
laugh  with  fatness  when  the  hills  are  bare."  "  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,"  etc.  (Matt.
xi.  25,  26).

II.  BT   OONBTBAIinNa  us  TO   CHEBISH   THE   SPIRIT  OF   HBA^TT    OBEDIBNOB.       By  the

gentle  constraints  of  Divine  love  the  will  is  brought  into  harmony  with  the  higher
and  perfect  will  of  God ;  and  to  the  man  thus  obedient  there  is  unfolded  the  glorioui
treasures  of  Divine  wisdom  and  knowledge.  "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them
that  fear  him,  and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant "  (Ps.  iiv.  14) ;  "  Then  shall  we
know,  if  we  follow  on,"  etc.  (Hos.  vi.  3).

III.  Bt  impaktinq  UNTO  US  SPIRITUAL  DisoEBNUENT.  The  heart  being  rendered
humble  and  obedient,  light  springs  up  within ;  a  spiritual  insight  is  imparted ;  the
unction  of  the  Holy  One  rests  upon  the  man ;  higher  perceptions  are  his ;  he  appre-
hends and  understands  truths  which  formerly  were  unperceived  or  distorted  by  him.
"  Pure  in  heart,"  he  "  sees  God ;  "  spiritually  minded,  he  discovers  spiritual  things.
God's  ways  stand  revealed  to  him,  and  God's  Word  is  no  longer  a  dead  letter,  but  is
instinct  with  life  and  power  to  his  soul.  Then,  with  an  earnest  desire  to  enter  into  the
full  significance  of  spiritual  realities,  and  with  a  deep  consciousness  of  our  own  weak-
ness and  need  of  guidance,  we  do  well  to  cry,  "  Lead  us  in  thy  truth  and  teach  us  ; "
and  to  rejoice  in  the  encouraging  assurance,  "  And  he  will  teach  us  of  his  ways."

Ver.  2. — Obedience  to  the  Divine  vnll.  "  And  we  will  walk  in  his  paths."  The
idea  is — living  obediently  to  the  will  of  God.     Observe —

I.  God  has  bevealed  his  will  unto  man.  "The  Law  has  gone  forth,"  etc,
(ver.  3).  The  revelation  of  what  God  requires  of  his  creatures  has  been  given  (1)  in
the  commandments  unfolded  to  Moses  on  Sinai ;  (2)  in  the  full  and  perfect  exposition
of  those  commandments  given  in  the  teaching  of  Christ ;  (3)  in  the  complete  transcript
of  them  presented  in  the  Divine  Teacher's  spotless  character  and  life.

II.  To   OBEY     THAT    WILL     INDICATES     THE     1>0SSESSI0N     OF     TRUE     PIETY.      Sincere

piety  does  not  consist  in  outward  observances,  although  these  have  so  high  a  value
that  we  are  not  to  "  forsake  the  assembling  of  ourselves  together "  for  Christian
fellowship  and  teaching ;  nor  does  it  consist  in  Church  association,  although  there  are
many  advantages  resulting  from  Christians  banding  themselves  together  that  thus
they  may  be  helpful  to  each  other  in  the  spiiitual  life,  and  by  combined  action  the
more  effectually  do  God's  work ;  nor  does  it  consist  in  the  repetition  of  a  Creed,
however  admirably  conceived  and  expressed,  and  however  desirable  it  may  be  for  us  to
be  well  grounded  in  the  foundation-doctrines  of  our  holy  religion ;  but  it  consists  in
obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  and  in  seeking,  like  the  great  Exemplar,  to  act  in
harmony  with  God's  holy  Law.

"  Nor  name,  nor  form,  nor  ritual.
But  aimp\y  following  thee."

III.  1h  THIB  obedience  LIBS  THE  TRUEST  WELL-BEINU   BOTH  OF  THE  INDIVIDUAL  AND

or  THE  BACK.  Walking  in  these  paths,  it  is  found  that  they  are  "right  paths,"  that
they  yield  "peace"  and  "pleasantness;"  "mercy  and  truth"  also  abound  to  the
obedient,  whilst  the  wide  adoption  of  this  course  by  the  children  of  men  is  pointed  to
as  the  token  of  the  coming  of  "thfl  latter-day  glory."  "  A  world-wide  Christ-likeness
is  the  great  necessity.  If,  in  imitation  of  him,  there  were  truth  on  every  tongue  and
kindness  in  every  heart,  gentleness  in  every  spirit  and  obedience  to  God  in  every  will,
purity  in  every  life  and  blamelessness  in  every  character,  the  bloom  and  blessedness  of
Eden  would  be  seen  to-morrow."  Too  many,  alas  I  still  resolve  that  "  they  will  walk
tvery  one  in  tha  name  of  his  god "  (ver.  5) ;  but  our  hope  for  humanity  Ilea  in  the


oh.it.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  Of  MIOAH.  57

growing  number  whose  feet  are  being  tnmed  into  "  the  ways  of  righteousness,"  and
who  are  impelled  to  lay,  "  And  we  wU)  walk  in  his  paths."  "  We  will  walk  in  the
Name  of  the  Lord  our  God  for  ever  and  ever  "  (ver.  6).

Vers.  9 — 13 ;  ch.  v.  1. — Ha-oagh  trial  to  triumph.  There  is  a  very  natural  connection
between  these  and  the  previous  verses.  The  seer  has  presented  a  glowing  picture  of
the  ultimate  triumphs  of  the  Messiah's  kingdom.  In  choicest  language  he  has  unfolded
the  nature  of  the  Messiah's  rule,  and  the  beneficent  effects  to  be  secured  thereby.  And
now  he  reminds  us  that  this  victory  should  be  won  by  suffering — ^that  God's  order  is
through  trial  to  triumph.    Notice —

I.  The  exfebienoe  of  bobbow  ab  pbepabatobt  to  jot;  or  oontliot  as  fbe-
PABATOBT  TO  vioTOBT.  (YetB.  9 — 13 ;  ch.  V.  1.)  Whatever  view  may  be  taken  as  to
the  true  application  of  these  verses,  it  is  very  clear  that  they  refer  to  deep  sorrow,
through  which  the  nation  must  pass  before  the  manifestation  of  the  true  spiritual
King  whose  coming  is  so  clearly  indicated  in  the  chapter  following.  Captivity  must
be  experienced ;  conflict  must  be  engaged  in  with  "  many  nations ; '  loss  of  rulers  and
leaders  must  be  sustained ;  war  and  siege  must-be  felt.  Yet  all  these  should  prove  but
preparatory  to  the  experience  of  joy  and  victory ;  they  should  be  but  as  the  pangs
preceding  birth ;  out  of  and  following  these  throes  there  should  come  the  establishment
of  a  kingdom  which  should  never  be  moved,  and  which  their  material  kingdom,  now
being  so  shaken,  even  in  its  most  prosperous  and  peaceful  days  only  faintly  symbolized.
And  this  is  ever  the  Divine  order  of  procedure.  It  is  the  aU-wise  appointment  of  God
that  his  servants  should  pass  through  trial  and  be  made  perfect  through  suffering.  He
takes  the  seed  and  plants  it  in  rough  soil,  and  as  the  result  he  causes  to  arise  beauteous
flowers.  The  tear  often  precedes  the  bmile.  The  thick  cloud  gathers  over  our  heads,
and  lol  afterwards  the  triumphant  arch  spans  the  sky,  teUlng  of  the  Divine  faithful-
ness and  love.  We  must  suffer  would  we  ultimately  reign ;  we  must  bear  the  cross
would  we  wear  the  crown.  God's  servants  are  tddiers,  and  the  soldier  must  "  endure
hardness  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  3),  and  engage  in  sharp  conflict  ere  he  reaps  the  warrior's  reward.
His  followers  are  trees  of  righteousnesi,  and  God  prunes  his  trees  that  "  they  may  bring
forth  much  fruit "  (John  iv.  2).

IL    STIUnLATINa   thoughts  AUIDBT  THESE  DABKEB  EXFEBtEKOES  OF   LIFE.      Several

such  thoughts  are  suggested  here.  \.  Thereat"  a  needs  he"  for  these  sorrows.  (Ver.  10.)
It  is  here  declared  that  there  was  a  necessity  for  the  sorrows  here  predicted.  The
trials  are  referred  to  as  experiences  that  must  ie,  and  that  could  not  be  avoided.  The
travail  must  be  endured,  the  captivity  must  be  experienced,  the  discipline  must  be
passed  through.  The  nation  had.  woefully  traDsgressed,  and  only  thus  could  it  be
purged  and  purified.  As  the  crushing  of  the  seed  results  in  a  more  abundant  increase,
so  the  oppression  of  God's  servants  should  result  in  the  upspringing  of  "  the  peaceable
fruits  of  righteousness."  "  Of  sorrow,  sanctity  is  bom."  Here  is  one  solution  of  "  the
mystery  of  suffering."  It  is  designed  to  work  purification ;  it  is  a  healthful  discipline.
It  is  not  that  our  Father-God  is  wanting  in  sympathy  that  we  have  to  pass  through
adverse  scenes,  but  because  his  sympathy  is  so  large  and  so  perfect  that  it  extends  to
the  whole  of  our  being.  When  he  says,  "  Be  in  pain,"  etc.  (ver.  10),  it  is  not  that  he
does  not  feel  with  us,  but  rather  because  his  sympathy  is  so  large  that  he  deigns  to
lift  us  up  to  a  higher  level,  and  to  lead  us  to  attain  unto  a  purer  and  more  perfect
character  and  life;  and  hence,, whilst  "he  will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench
the  smoking  flax,"  he  will  also  "  send  forth  judgment  unto  victory  "  (Isa.  xlii.  2,  3).
2.  There  is  an  overruling  Providence.  (Vers.  11, 12.)  In  these  verses  the  heathen
nations  are  represented  as  encouraging  each  other  to  make  a  decisive  onslaught  upon
the  favoured  people,  and  as  speaking  as  though  their  plans  could  very  easily  he
executed,  the  overthrow  of  Judah  be  effected,  and  they  gaze  with  satisfaction  upon  the
downfall  and  desolation  (ver.  11).  But  there  was  a  higher  than  any  mere  human
power  swaying  the  destinies  of  the  peoples  of  the  earth.  The  Lord  God  omnipotent
was  reigning.  He  had  his  purposes  and  plans  of  which  the  nations  took  no  account,
but  which  nevertheless  were  to  be  developed.  And  in  the  unfolding  of  these  all  the
dark  designs  of  the  evil  would  be  overruled,  and  whilst  the  nation  of  his  choice  should
thus  be  tried  as  by  fire,  and  so  have  its  dross  consumed,  they  who,  prompted  by  their
own  mercenary  and  ambitious  ends,  assaulted  it,  should  be  brought  to  utter  confusion


58  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  [oh.  nr.  1—13.

and  shame  (ver.  13).  The  world  still  abounds  in  evil-doers  who  are  pursuing  their  own
ends,  and  that  they  may  gain  these  are  ever  planning  and  contriving  harm;  but  it
may  well  comfort  and  strengthen  our  hearts,  amidst  the  anxiety  and  distress  such
occasion,  that  there  is  still  an  overruling  Providence  guiding  human  affairs,  and  that
under  God's  all-wise  and  loving  direction  good  only  shall  eventually  come  to  the  good,
whilst  the  counsel  of  the  wicked  shall  perish,  and  the  arm  of  their  power  be  broken.
3.  Thtre  is  the  Divine  abiding  presence.  This  is  implied  in  ver.  9.  The  prophet,
abounding  in  deepest  sympathy  with  his  people  in  their  calamities,  would,  neverthe-
less, have  them  feel  that  they  were  not  left  utterly  destitute ;  that,  though  earthly
rulers  had  failed  them,  there  was  One  who  ever  abides,  and  who,  if  they  but  trusted
him,  would  bear  them  safely  through  all.  He  who  had  been  the  King  and  Guide  of
their  nation  before  earthly  monarch  had  ever  been  appointed  over  it  (1  Sam.  xii.  12)
would  not  forsake  them  now  that  human  supports  had  given  way,  but  would  make
their  present  sorrows  to  end  in  higher  joy  than  they  had  formerly  experienced  (Hos.
xiii.  9,  14),  Nor  need  we  fear  in  the  time  of  trouble,  so  long  as  it  remaineth  that
"the  Lord  of  hosts  is  with  us,"  etc.  (Ps.  xlvi.  7).  4.  There  is  ultimate  deliverance.
(Ver.  10.)  The  Lord  would  assuredly  "  turn  again  the  captivity  of  Zion  "  (Ps.  cxxvi.
1 — 6).  Through  fire  and  through  water  they  should  be  brought  out  into  a  wealthy  place
(Ps.  cxvi.  12).  Weeping  might  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  should  come  in  the
morning  (Ps.  xxx.  5).  And  so  with  bis  servants  in  every  age.  The  way  he  would
have  us  take,  despite  all  its  difficulties  and  discouragements,  shall  bring  ui  at  length
to  the  palace  and  to  our  crown.


HOMILIES  BY  VAEI0U8  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — A  new  Mount  Zion.  The  threat  of  ch.  iii.  12  has  been  fulfilled.  Mount
Zion,  the  glory  of  the  nation  on  aocouut  of  its  situation,  its  buildings,  its  history,  and
its  religious  associations  (Ps.  xlviii. ;  cxxii.,  etc.),  has  become  as  a  forest,  or  as  desolate
heaps  of  ruins.  But  while  the  prophet  gazes  through  the  tears  which  patriotism  and
piety  bring  to  his  eyes,  as  in  some  dissolving  view  a  new  vision  unfolds  itself  before
him.  Instead  of  a  ploughed  field  and  a  ruinous  mound,  he  sees  an  exceeding  high
mountain,  a  glorious  city,  and  countless  multitudes  fiocking  towards  it.  It  ii  the  new
Mount  Zion.

I.  Its  blkvation.  There  were  other  hills  or  mountains  that  already  were  or  soon  would
be  of  note  among  men,  such  as  the  "  high  places  "  of  a  corrupt  worship  in  Jud^a  and
Samaria,  the  huge  artificial  hill  of  Babylon  sacred  to  Belus,  the  acropolis  of  Athens,
the  seven  hills  of  Rome.  But  this  Mount  Zicin  was  founded  on  the  summits  of  the
world's  loftiest  heights,  and  towered  above  them  all.  Thus  the  mountain  is  seen  to  be
spiritual  and  the  elevation  figurative.  It  is  a  vision  of  "  the  latter  days,"  of  the  days
of  the  Messiah,  when  the  new  kingdom  of  God  is  set  up.  Because  it  is  "  the  mountain
of  the  house  of  the  Lord"  it  is  thus  exalted.  Illustrate  from  Ezekiel's  vision  of  the
"  very  high  mountain  "  (xl.  2),  and  the  sublime  conclusion  of  it,  "  Jehovah-Shammah  "
(xlviii.  35 ;  and  cf.  1  Tim.  iii.  15).  "  This  mountain  of  the  Church  of  Christ  transcends
all  laws,  schools,  doctrines,  religions,  synagogues,  and  philosophies,  which  seemed  to  rise
among  men  like  mountain-tops  "  (Corn.  \  Lapide,  in  Pusey).    It  is  "  a  city  set  on  a  hill."

II.  Its  congregation.  The  prophet  sees  a  stream  of  worshippers  a?cending  that
hill;  not  an  unfamiliar  sight  in  the  old  days  of  the  literal  Zion.  But  much  earnestness
is  needed  to  scale  this  lofty  mountain.  And  it  is  a  miracle  of  grace  that  not  only  the
chosen  people  of  God,  but  "  tlie  peoples  "  of  the  world  lying  in  wickedness,  should  be
attracted  by  a  Church  so  lofty  and  so  pure.  For,  as  the  prophet  watches,  he  sees
strange  companies  gathering,  of  varied  colours,  costumes,  and  languages — negroes  from
Ethiopia,  Chinese  from  the  land  of  Sinini,  and  pale-faced  strangers  from  the  western
isles  M  Europe.  Contrast  the  mountain-like  tower  of  Babel,  man's  scheme  of  unity,
issuing  in  dispersion,  and  this  Mount  Zion,  God's  way  of  union,  attracting  a  congregation
from  all  kindreds  and  peoples  and  tongues  (Isa.  Iv.  8,  9).  The  prophet  hears  their
language  as  they  encourage  one  another, "  Come  ye,"  etc.  They  thus  confess :  1.  Their
ignorance.  "  He  shall  teach  us  of  his  ways  " — a  comprehensive  term  (Ps.  xxv.  4,  8,  9).
2.   Their  dissatisfaction.    Their  old  paths  had  been  "broad;"  "destruction  and  misery*


OH.  17. 1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  68

had  been  in  tLem.  Henceforth  they  desire  to  walk  in  other  "  paths,"  in  God's  way  of
holiness.  3.  Their  eonfidence ;  that  the  God  of  Jacob  alone  was  both  able  and  willing
to  supply  their  need.  The  prophet  foresaw  what  Christ  still  more  clearly  predictel
(Matt.  viii.  11, 12),  and  what  we  are  seeing  in  these  days  of  missionary  enterprise.

III.  Its  emanations.  As  light  and  heat  stream  from  the  sun,  and  fragrance  from
the  flowers,  so  from  this  new  Mount  Zion,  this  city  of  God,  there  stream  forth  the
Yery  blessings  which  the  nations  need — truth,  light,  life.  It  is  a  Divine  power  that  first
draws  this  congregation  towards  the  Church  of  Christ  (John  vL  44,  45).  And  the
blessings  they  need  and  receive  are  summed  up  in  two  terms.  1.  "The  Law."  They
receive  it  as  a  rule  of  life,  as  an  ideal  of  dally  conduct.  It  goes  forth  as  a  stream  of
blessing  which  can  turn  the  wastes  of  heathen  life  into  a  paradise.  But  more  than  law
is  needed:  2.  "  Ute  Word  of  the  Lord."  This  is  a  more  comprehensive  term.  It  includes
the  revelation  of  his  will,  his  mercy  and  grace,  "  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel."
This  goes  forth  with  all  the  attractiveness  of  a  message  of  mercy  (Liike  xxiv.  47,  etc.),
but  also  with  all  the  authority  of  a  law  (Acts  xvii.  30 ;  1  John  iii.  23).  The  preaching
of  the  cross  proves  itself  the  power  of  God.  This  word  of  the  Lord  has  free  course
and  is  glorified.  No  wonder  that  such  blessings  follow  as  are  described  in  the  following
verses. — E.  S.  P.

Vers.  8,  4. — "  The  peaceable  fruit  of  righteoumest."  The  wonders  of  Micah's  vision
(vers.  1  and  2)  are  not  yet  at  an  end.  He  sees  a  succession  of  the  most  improbable
and  incredible  events,  as  the  nations  return  from  their  pilgrimage  to  the  new  Mount
Zion  to  their  distant  capitals  and  homesteads.  With  those  distant  and  "  strong "
heathen  nations  there  are  associations  of  horror  and  dread  in  the  minds  of  the  Hebrews,
especially  of  the  godly  among  them.  Illustrate  this  from  what  we  know  through
Hebrew  prophets  and  historians  of  the  Gentile  nations  near  and  afar  off;  e.g.  border  wars
and  frequent  invasions  of  the  Philistines  (2  Chron.  xxi.  16, 17),  Edomites,  Ammonites,
Moabites,  and  others  (Ps.  Izzziii. ;  and  cf.  the  impressive  messages  of  judgment  in
Amos  i.  and  ii.).  Egypt,  at  one  time  their  oppressor  or  invader  (2  Chron.  xii.),  later  on
their  untrustworthy  ally,  always  the  home  of  degrading  idolatries  (Isa.  six. ;  xxx.  1—7).
Assyria,  the  seat  of  a  relentless  despotism,  the  captors  of  their  northern  brethren,
casting  its  war-cloud  over  Hezekiah's  kingdom  (Nah.  iii.).  Beyond  these  were  the  moun-
taineers of  Media,  the  barbarous  tribes  of  the  far  north,  "  Mesheoh  and  Tubal,"  and  the
sons  of  Greece  in  the  distant  west.  The  gloomy  vision  of  Ezekiel  (xxxii.)  graphically
describes  how  the  sword  and  bloodshed  are  bound  up  with  the  histories  of  these  and
other  nations.  All  these  are  seen  welcoming  a  new  King,  who  "shall  reign  in
righteousness,"  new  legislation  and  new  customs.  The  strangest  of  all  these  new
customs  is  that  "  the  peoples  that  delight  in  war "  are  seen  changing  their  weapons
into  instruments  of  peace,  and  enjoying  a  tranquillity  equal  to  that  of  the  palmy  days
of  Solomon.  The  mystery  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  word  of  the  Lord  had
gone  forth  from  Jerusalem.     We  learn —

I.  The  gospel  of  God  pbepabes  foe  the  beion  of  God.  1.  It  reveals  Ooc^s  love.
It  thus  comes  as  a  revelation,  startling,  almost  incredible  to  heathens,  in  whose  minds
lust  not  love,  hatred  not  mercy,  are  bound  up  with  their  thoughts  of  God.  That
central  verse  of  the  New  Testament  (John  iii.  16),  a  "miniature  Bible,"  as  Martin
Luther  called  it,  applied  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  has  broken  many  a  rocky  heathen  heart,
and  opened  the  way  for  the  blessings  that  God's  love  has  prepared  for  sinful  souls  (1  John
iv.  19).  2.  It  inspires  men's  hope.  Those  who  were  once  living  "  having  no  hope,  and
without  God  in  the  world,"  find  that  all  things  are  become  new.  All  the  most  bright
and  buoyant  emotions,  love,  hope,  joy,  are  called  forth  by  the  gospel  of  God.  The
brightest  visions  of  a  golden  age  in  the  future  which  heathen  poets  have  sung  about
are  seen  to  be  possible  under  the  reign  of  a  righteous  and  merciful  God.  They  are
"  saved  by  hope."  3.  It  awakens  men's  consciences.  An  educational  process  ensues.
The  doniiant  conscience  is  awakened ;  the  blind  conscience  sees  the  light  of  truth ;  the
blunt  conscience  is  made  sensitive  and  tender.  Thus  gradually  things  which  were
tolerated  in  the  individual  or  the  community  are  branded  as  unchristian,  or  even
infamous.  Illustrate  from  1  Cor.  v.  and  vi.  In  those  whose  spiritual  education  is
most  advanced,  every  thought  is  brought  "  into  captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ."
Thus  gradually  the  average  standard  of  morality  is  raised  first  in  the  Church  and  then


60  THE   iiUOK.  OJf   MlUAH.  [oB.  it.  1— IS,

in  the  nation,  and  the  gospel  of  God  Is  seen  to  have  prepared  the  way  for  the  reign
ofGbd.

II.  Thb  bbion  or  God  will  bb  a  beign  of  peace.  War  is  a  terrible  defiance  of
God  and  of  his  authority,  and  yet  it  is  one  of  the  most  popular  forms  of  wickedness.
The  press,  the  clubs,  "  the  forces,"  often  make  it  hard  even  for  a  government  calling
itself  Christian  to  resist  the  gusts  of  popular  passion  which  sweep  nations  into  war.
Even  as  late  as  1882  we  were  told  that  on  board  the  ironclads  off  Alexandria  the
countenances  of  the  ofiBcers  fell  as  the  sight  of  a  flag  of  truce  made  it  possible  that
after  all  their  new  guns  might  not  be  tested  by  a  bombardment.  Yet  even  this
unclean  spirit  will  be  exorcised  by  the  power  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  which  has  already
been  at  work  in  many  ways ;  e.g,  "  the  truce  of  Ood  "  in  the  Middle  Ages,  providing
for  the  suspension  of  hostilities  during  Advent,  Lent,  and  other  seasons ;  the  sparing
of  the  lives  of  prisoners ;  the  care  and  kindness  shown  towards  the  wounded ;  the
power  of  the  public  opinion,  even  of  a  minority,  to  restrain  governments  from  hastily
rushing  into  war ;  the  introduction  of  arbitration,  in  which  the  British  Government  set
so  honourable  an  example  at  Geneva  in  1872.  In  such  cases  it  may  be  said  that  God,
through  the  judgments  of  upright  men,  is  called  to  "  judge  between  many  peoples,"  and
"  reprove"  even  strong  nations  when  they  wronged  their  neighbours.  Thus  gradually
war  will  be  banished,  even  as  duelling  and  other  abominations  have  been.  "  Fraternity  '
will  be  one  of  the  watchwords  of  the  future,  and  war  will  be  regarded  as  fratricide.
Lucian  says  of  Christians,  "  Their  first  Lawgiver  persuaded  them  that  they  are
all  brethren."  Christianity  is  working  towards  the  restoration  of  that  ideal.  Then
Solomon's  days  shall  be  reproduced  in  more  than  their  ancient  glory.  New  princes  of
Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer  gifts  at  the  court  of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  whose  subjects
shall  "  dwell  safely,  and  be  quiet  from  fear  of  evil."  The  glorious  visions  of  Ps.  Ixxii. ;
Isa.  Ix.,  etc.,  shall  be  fulfilled,  "  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  spoken  it."

Learn:  1.  That  the  only  hope  of  true  national  righteousness  is  in  the  reign  of  Christ.
2.  That  the  Christiaa  who  witnesses  for  unpopular  truths  is  the  noblest  among
patriots.  3.  That  the  sanctification  of  individual  souls  through  the  power  of  the
gospel  is  the  surest  method  of  securing  the  ultimate  and  universal  reign  of  Christ  on
earth.— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  6,  7. — The  restoration  of  Israel.  It  is  the  Gentile  nations  for  whom  the
blessings  of  "  the  last  days  "  have  just  been  predicted  (vers.  2 — 4).  The  new  Mount
Zion  of  the  Messiah's  days  will  have  a  magnetic  power  on  "  the  Bast  and  the -West"
(Matt.  viii.  11 ;  John  xii.  32).  But  Israel,  through  whom  these  blessings  reach  the
nations,  shall  not  be  excluded  from  a  share  In  them.  Tet  the  form  of  the  prediction
reminds  us  of  the  abject  condition  of  God's  ancient  people  and  of  the  gradual  extension
of  the  glories  of  Messiah's  reign  over  them.

I.  Their  abject  condition.  They  are  described  as:  1.  Editing.  This  was  the
result  of  internal  infirmity  or  of  injury  from  without,  or  of  both.  The  Jewish  people  at
the  advent  were  suffering  both  from  ecclesiastical  and  moral  corruptions,  which  made
them  figuratively  like  the  folk  at  Bethesda,  "  halt,  withered,  impotent."  2.  "  Driven
out."  Multitudes  had  been  driven  out  of  their  heritage  in  Palestine  by  the  decrees  of
conquerors  or  the  oppressions  of  foreign  tyrants.  Centuries  before,  Jeremiah  had
declared,  "Israel  is  a  scattered  sheep ;  the  lions  have  driven  him  away:  first  the  King
of  Assyria  hath  devoured  him ;  and  last  this  Nebuchadrezzar  King  of  Babylon  hath
broken  his  bones "  (1.  17).  In  subsequent  centuries  similar  captivities  or  oppressions
were  endured  at  the  hands  of  the  Ptolemies,  the  Seleucidffi,  the  Idumeans,  and  the
Bomans.  Those  who  remained  were  as  strangers  in  their  own  fatherland.  And  soon
a  far  more  fearful  catastrophe  scattered  them  from  one  end  of  the  heavens  to  the  other^
after  the  destruction  of  their  city  by  the  Romans.

"But  we  must  wander  witheringly
In  other  lands  to  die ;
And  where  our  fathers'  ashes  be

Our  own  must  never  lie :
Our  temple  hath  not  left  a  stone,
And  Mockery  sits  on  Salem's  throne."

(Byrcn.)


CH.  IT.  1— 13.J  THIS  BOOK.  OJT  MiCAH.  «1

3.  "  Stricken  of  Ood,  and  afflicted."  Unfaithful  "  shepherds  "  among  their  own  rulers
(Bzek.  xxxiv.  1 — 6)  or  heathen  conquerors  were  the  scourges ;  but  "  shall  there  be  evil
in  a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it  ?  "  Devout  men  recognized  this,  and  uttered
such  penitential  wails  as  we  find  in  Ps.  xliv.,  Ixxiv. ;  Lam.  i.,  ii.,  etc.

fi.  Their  restoration.  The  establishment  of  the  new  kingdom  of  God — Christ's
kingdom — on  Mount  Zion  was  itself  a  pledge  of  the  restoration  of  the  Jews  and  of
their  participation  in  its  blesdngs.  For  it  could  not  be  that  Christ  should  reign  over
the  Gentile  nations  and  leave  "  his  own  people "  (John  i.  11)  to  perish  finally  in
unbelief.  This  would  be  opposed  both  to  the  ancient  promises  of  God  (Isa.  xlv.  17 ;  lix.
20,  21,  etc.)  as  well  as  to  the  predictions  and  the  heart  of  Christ  (Matt,  xxiii.  37—59).
Yet  there  are  stages  in  this  process  of  restoration.  1.  The  halting  ones  are  restored,
htt  they  are  only  a  remnant.  (Cf.  ch.  v.  3,  7,  8.)  The  immediate  efiect  of  the  estab-
lishment of  Christ's  kingdom  was  seen  in  a  great  religious  revival  among  the  Jews
from  Pentecost  onwards.  But  all  the  converts  were  but  a  remnant  of  the  nation  which,
because  of  its  unbelief,  was  "  broken  off"  (Eom.  xi.  1 — 5, 17 — 20).  Yet  in  the  fact  of
the  salvation  of  the  few  the  Apostle  Paul  sees  the  pledge  of  the  final  salvation  of  the
many.  2.  The  banished  ones  shall  he  made  a  strong  nation.  Trace  St.  Paul's  inspired
argument  in  Bom.  xi.  till  he  arrives  at  the  sublime  conclusion  in  vers.  32 — 36.  The
nation's  restoration  to  God  will  be  accompanied  by  a  restoration  to  their  own  land
(Zech.  xii.  10 — ^14 ;  xiv.  8 — 11,  etc.).  3.  "  I%e  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  Mount
Zion."  We  look  for  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  their  Saviour  and  to  their  land  as
one  of  the  marvellous  evidences  of  the  truth  of  the  prophetic  word  which  God  is
reserving  for  the  scepticism  of  these  latter  days.  We  need  not  anticipate  a  literal  and
local  throne  of  Christ  at  Jerusaleila.  But  the  Lord  Christ,  being  enthroned  in  the
hearts  of  his  long  faithless  yet  much  beloved  people,  will  as  truly  "  reign  over  them
in  Mount  Zion"  as  though  they  had  his  glorified  humanity  always  manifested  in
their  midst.  And  then  his  reign  shall  be  "  from  henceforth,  oven  for  ever."  "  I  the
Lord  will  hasten  it  in  his  time."

"  O  come,  O  oome,  Emmanuel,
And  ransom  captive  Israel,
That  mourns  in  lonely  exile  hen
Until  the  Son  of  God  appear.
Bejoice,  rejoice :  Emmanuel
Shall  come  to  thee,  O  Israel  t"

B.  B.  P.

Vers.  9, 10. — Discipline  and  deliverance,  A  glorious  future  has  been  held  np  to  the
view  of  the  Jewish  nation  (vers.  6 — 8).  It  is  like  the  ideals  of  peace  and  blessedness
presented  to  all  in  the  Word  of  God ;  like  the  visions  of  the  heavenly  glory  set  before
even  the  most  ungodly.  Such  promises  are  attractive;  even  the  godless  Jews  in
•Micah's  time  would  exult  in  the  thought  of  "  the  former  dominion,"  the  days  of  David
and  Solomon  returning  to  Zion.  But  the  vision  again  changes.  Cries  of  pain  and
distress  are  heard.  There  passes  before  the  prophet's  mind  a  view  of  the  discipline
and  chastisement  which  must  fall  on  the  disobedient  nation  before  the  promised
blessings  can  be  enjoyed.

I,  The  salutary  disciplhtb.  In  brief,  vivid  words  a  succession  of  calamities  is
sketched.  1.  Their  monarchy  is  overthrown.  "Is  there  no  king  in  thee?"  Jehoahaz,
Jehoiakim,  Jehoiachin,  and  Zedekiah  in  succession  were  dethroned  by  foreign  con-
querors, and  carried  into  exile.  Many  national  promises  and  blessings  were  bound  up
with  the  name  and  family  of  David  (2  Sam.  vii.),  so  that  the  loss  of  their  king  was  no
ordinary  loss.  He  was  their  chief  stay  and  "counsellor"  (cf.  Isa.  ix.  6),  "the  breath
of  their  nostrils  "  (Lara.  iv.  20).  No  wonder  their  consternation  and  distress  :  "  pangs,"
etc.  (cf.  Ps.  Ixxxix.  38 — 51).  Thus  one  step  in  Divine  discipline  then  and  now  may
be  the  striking  down  to  the  ground  of  the  chief  objects  of  our  confidence,  the  earthly
props  which  we  seek  to  substitute  for  God.  2.  They  are  humiliated  ie/ore  their  foes.
They  "  go  forth  out  of  the  city ; "  some  in  a  vain  attempt  to  escape,  like  Zedekiah  and
his  troops  (2  Kings  xxv.  4—6) ;  others  as  prisoners  of  war  from  a  city  which  has
capitulated  and  is  being  sacked  by  its  conquerors.  Illustrate  from  Lam.  v.  1 — 16.
They  are  driven  forth  into  "  the  field ; "  without  shelter  even  from  the  elements  unless


n  THB   BOOK   OJf   MIOAH.  [oh.  it.  1—13.

in  tents  (contrast  their  former  "  ease  in  Zion,"  Amos  vi.  1 — 7,  etc.) ;  without  the  pro-
teetien  of  the  old  towers  and  bulwarks  in  which  they  had  prided  themselves  (Ps.  xlviii.
12, 13) ;  without  weapons  or  leaders,  and  thus  exposed  to  any  indignities  that  ^ese
conquerors  choose  to  inflict  upon  them.  Thus  may  it  be  with  those  whose  way  God
"tumeth  upside  down,"  stripping  them  of  all  their  old  sources  of  security — money,
position,  friends ;  turning  them  out  of  the  "  nest "  in  which  they  expected  peacefully
to  spend  the  remainder  of  their  days.  Illustrate  from  contrasts  in  Job  xxix.  and  xxx.
3.  Tkey  are  carried  captive  "  even  to  Babylon."  Babel  in  early  days  had  been  a  symbol
of  a  godless  world-power.  It  does  not  rise  again  on  the  Hebrew  horizon  till  the  days
of  Isaiah  and  Micah.  Making  friendly  overtures  to  Hezekiah,  it  is  presented  to  his
view,  by  his  faithful  seer,  as  a  distant,  mysterious,  but  formidable  foe  of  the  future —
ignotum  pro  mirifico  (Isa.  xxxix.).  As  the  ten  tribes  had  been  carried  captive  to
Halah  and  Habor  and  adjacent  districts,  so  should  Judah  be  taken  "  even  to  Babylon."
Thus  is  it  in  God's  discipline  with  his  prodigals  now.  They  may  find  themselves  in
"  a  far  country,"  brought  down  to  the  lowest  depth  of  humiliation,  shut  out  from  all
earthly  help,  shut  up  to  God.  And  even  now,  in  the  midst  of  the  pleasures  of  sin,
prophetic  voices  within  may  warn  them  :  "  Thou  shalt  go  forth  .  .  .  thou  shalt  go  even
to  ——."  The  dreadful  possibilities  of  judgment,  whether  in  this  world  or  another,
may  at  times  mar  their  peace.  For,  unlike  the  servants  of  God,  they  dare  not  say,
"  Tilings  to  come  .  .  .  are  ours."  4.  In  the  house  of  bondage  pangs  of  sorroto  must  hi
tome.  "  Seventy  years ! " — ^a  long  lifetime  of  captivity.  "  Tribulation  ten  days  1 "  a
time  of  discipline  indefinite  to  us,  though  fixed  by  the  counsel  of  God.  Those  pangs
will  be  "  resistless,  remediless,  doubling  the  whole  frame,  redoubled  till  the  end  for
which  God  sends  them  is  accomplished,  and  then  ceasing  in  joy  "  (Pusey).  For  the
very  term  "  daughter  of  Zion  "  suggests  hope.  It  is  a  term  of  friendliness,  like  "  Father
of  spirits  "  (Heb.  xiL  9),  which  reminds  us  of  the  essential  relations  between  us  and  our
God,  and  gives  us  a  pledge  that  in  wrath  he  will  remember  mercy  (cf.  Isa.  Ivii.  16).

II.  "  The  end  of  the  Lord."  Then  and  there  the  end  for  which  the  trials  are
sent  will  be  reached,  and  deliverance  will  come.  As  with  their  king  Manasseh,  so
shall  it  be  with  the  nation.  In  their  affliction  they  will  seek  the  Lord  (Jer.  xxix.
10 — 13).  1.  They  shall  he  delivered.  Set  free  from  the  burden  of  their  sins,  a  burden
too  grievous  to  be  borne ;  purged  from  idolatry ;  blessed  with  a  revival  of  religion,  as
shown  by  a  renewed  regard  to  God's  Law  through  the  gracious  work  of  his  own  "  free
Spirit"  (Ezek.  xxxvi.  16 — ^27).  2.  They  shM  he  redeemed  from  the  hand  of  their
enemies.  God  will  visit  them  as  their  Qod,  their  Einsman-Bedeemer,  who  has  not
forgotten  or  forsaken  them  (Jer.  xxx.  8 — 11).  By  the  manifestation  of  his  righteous
grace  and  irresistible  power  they  shall  be  "redeemed  without  money"  (Isa.  lii.  3),
restored  to  their  land  and  to  the  enjoyment  of  ancient  privileges.  Such  is  "  the  end  of
the  Lord"  in  the  discipline  of  life.  The  revelation  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God  in  the
Person  of  Christ  and  in  his  sacrificial  death  for  the  redemption  of  sinners  assures  us
that  he  chastens  "  for  our  profit,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness."  But  it  is
only  by  sitting  at  his  feet  and  learning  of  him,  and  thus  being  "  exercised  "  by  our
trials,  that  we  can  hope  to  win  from  them  "the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteoasness"
(Heb.  xii.  9— 11).— B.  S.  P.

Vers.  1 — 1. — The  gospd  age.  "  But  in  the  last  days  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  the
mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains,"
etc.  "The  last  days"  is  an  expression  frequently  used  in  the  Old  Testament.  It
points  to  the  future,  beginning  with  the  Christian  dispensation  and  running  on  to  its
close.  It  means  the  times  of  the  Messiah.  The  patriarchal  times  had  passed  away,  the
Mosaic  epoch  was  on  the  wane,  and  would  soon  vanish.  The  times  of  the  Messiah,  or
"  the  last  days,"  would  succeed,  and  run  on  to  the  end  of  time.  This  prophecy,  with
scarcely  any  variation,  is  found  in  Ibh,  ii.  Whether  Isaiah  borrowed  it  from  Micah,
or  Micah  from  Isaiah,  or  both  from  some  older  prophecy,  does  not  appear.  One  thing
seems  certain,  that  the  prophecy  has  never  yet  been  fulfilled  in  the  history  of  the
world,  and  that  its  accomplishment  must  be  in  some  distant  period — "  the  last  days."
It  enables  us  to  make  certain  remarks  concerning  the  true  religion  of  the  gospel  age.

L  The  true  bbligion  of  the  gospel  age  will  bboomb  a  qbeat  foweb.  "  The
mountain  of  the  house  of  the  Lord."    Referring  particularly  to  the  temple  that  was


OH.rT.  1— 13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  63

built  on  Monnt  Moriah,  and  called  the  moantain  of  the  Lord's  house.  The  temple  was
the  greatest  thing  in  the  religion  of  the  Jews ;  it  was  the  "  mountain  "  in  their
scenery.  The  true  religion  is  to  become  a  mountain.  The  little  stone  will  become  a
mountain,  and  fill  the  whole  earth.  In  truth,  the  true  religion,  where  it  exists,  is  the
biggest  thing.  In  the  individual  soul  it  is  the  largest  thing.  It  is  the  dominant
power,  it  is  the  mountain  in  the  scenery  of  a  good  man's  experience.  Let  all  men
possess  it,  and  then  it  will  be  to  the  whole  world  what  it  is  to  the  individual.  In
Booth,  true  religion  is  either  everything  or  nothing ;  supremacy  is  its  essence — the
supreme  thought,  the  supreme  love,  the  supreme  aim.  Two  things  are  here  stated
about  this  mountain.  1.  It  ii  to  become  estccblished.  How  is  it  to  be  established?  By
civil  authority,  legislative  enactments  ?  Our  foolish  forerathers  have  thought  so,  and
many  of  the  dolts  of  this  generation  think  so  too.  But  this  to  the  last  point  is
unphilosophic  and  absurd.  The  weakness  of  religion  in  Christendom  to-day  may  be
ascribed  to  the  futile  attempts  of  unwise  and  ambitious  men  to  establish  it  by  law.
Tou  may  as  well  endeavour  to  govern  the  planetary  universe  by  the  ten  command-
ments as  to  establish  religion  by  civil  laws.  2.  It  is  to  become  conspicuma.  "  In  the
top  of  the  mountains."  It  will  be  seen  from  afar — the  most  elevated  power  of  the
world.  It  will  be  the  chief  thing  in  the  markets,  professions,  and  governments  of
the  world,  high  up  on  the  top  of  all.

n.  The  tbue  religion  ot  the  (jospeIi  aoe  will  beoome  ukivebsallt  attbac-
TiVE.  "  And  people  shall  flow  unto  it."  "  This  is  a  figurative  expression,  denoting
that  they  shall  be  converted  to  the  true  religion.  It  indicates  that  they  shall  come  in
multitudes,  like  the  flowing  of  a  mighty  river.  The  idea  of  the  flowing  of  the  nation
is  of  the  movement  of  many  people  towards  an  object  like  a  broad  stream  on  the  tides
of  the  ocean,  and  is  one  that  is  very  grand  and  sublime  "  (Barnes).  In  this  period  the
social  element  will  be  brought  into  full  play  in  connection  with  true  religion.  Men  will
stimulate  each  other  to  inquire  after  truth.  "  Come,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain
of  the  Lord."  1.  They  will  study  its  laws  in  order  to  obey  them.  "  He  will  teach  us  of
his  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  his  paths."  In  those  good  times  that  are  coming,  men
vill  study  God's  ways,  and  not  man's  theories,  and  study  these  ways,  not  as  a  matter
of  intellectual  speculation,  but  in  order  to  obey  them,  to  walk  in  his  ways.  Religion
in  those  days  will  be  practical ;  it  will  be  the  law  of  every  one's  life,  the  great  regulative
force  of  society.  2.  They  will  study  its  laws  at  the  fountain-head.  "  For  the  Law
shall  go  forth  of  Zion,  and  the  Word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  Jerusalem  was  the
fonntain-head  of  Christianity.  Christ  commanded  his  disciples  to  tarry  at  Jerusalem
until  they  should  be  endued  vrith  power  from  on  high.  There  also  he  commanded
that  the  first  sermon  should  be  preached,  a  sermon  concerning  repentance  and  remis-
sion of  sins ;  and  there  Peter  opened  his  commission  in  his  wonderful  Pentecostal
discourse.  In  those  days  men  will  go  for  religious  instruction,  not  to  patristic,
puritanic,  Anglican,  or  any  other  theological  school,  "but  to  the  fountain-head,  to
Jerusalem,  where  it  is  fresh  and  pure,  most  potent  in  spiritual  stimulation  and  sugges-
tion. Men  in  these  days  have,, gone  far  away  from  the  theology  of  Jerusalem.  In
that  theology  there  are  none  of  those  miserable  dogmas  that  are  now  preached,  but
/acts  concerning  a  Person,  and  that  Person  none  other  than  the  Son  of  man  and  the
Son  of  Ood.

III.  The  true  bblioion  or  the  gobfbl  aoe  will  become  powerful  to  tbbminatb
ALL  WARS.  1.  Eere  is  the  destruction  of  war.  "  Beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares,
and  their  spears  into  pruning-hooks."  The  arts  of  war  destroyed,  in  their  stead  will
flourish  the  arts  of  peace.  The  sword  and  spear,  what  ilia  of  immeasurable  enormity
they  have  inflicted  upon  the  race !  Implements  of  hell,  instruments  by  which  all  the
infernal  passions  of  the  human  heart  have  been  excited  and  gratified.  War  is  anti-
christ. 2.  Here  is  the  establishment  of  peace.  "  Shall  sit  every  man  under  his  vine
and  under  his  fig  tree."  The  words,  "  sit  under  his  vine,"  are  taken  from  1  Kings  iv.
26,  etc.  Most  incredible  must  this  prediction  have  been  to  the  men  of  Micah's  time ;  but
it  will  be  accomplished,  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  spoken  it.  If  he  has
spoken  it  and  it  does  not  come  to  pass,  it  must  be  for  one  of  three  reasons :  (1)  Insin-
cerity; which  cannot  be  entertained,  (2)  Change  of  purpose;  which  is  equally
inadmissible.  (3)  Unexpected  difSculties-  which  is  an  absurdity  when  applied  tr
Omniscience. — D.  T.


64  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH,  [oh.  it.  1—13,

Ver.  6. — Man's  religious  nature.  "  For  all  people  will  walk  every  one  in  the  name
of  his  god,  and  we  will  walk  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  our  God  for  ever  and  ever."  It
is  trite  to  say,  what  has  been  said  a  thousand  times,  that  man  has  a  religious  nature.
Albeit  the  practical  recoguition  of  the  fact  is  of  immense  importance ;  without  it,  more
than  half  the  history  of  the  world  would  be  inexplicable,  all  methods  for  its  true
improvement  would  be  futile,  and  man  would  pass  through  this  world  to  another
without  a  God  or  any  hope  for  a  future.  This  verse  suggests  the  wrong  and  the  right
development  of  this  nature.

I.  The  weonq  dbvblopmknt.  What  is  that  ?  Idolatry.  "  All  people  will  walk
every  one  in  the  name  of  his  god."  Polytheism  proper  is,  and  generally  has  been,  the
•most  popular  religion  in  the  world.  Men  have  gods  which  they  have  made,  palpable
objects  which  they  fashioned  after  an  ideal,  and  the  ideal  not  unfrequently  of  the  most
base  and  loathsome  kind.  And  they  walk  after  these  gods.  The  mariners  in  Jonah's
vessel,  when  the  storm  came  on,  cried  every  man  unto  his  god.  Whence  the  cause
of  polytheism?  The  one  great  cause,  which  comprehends  all  others,  is  depravity.
Depravity :  1.  Involves  moral  corruption.  What  are  heathen  gods,  as  a  rule,  but  the
deification  of  the  lower  passions  and  vices  of  mankind?  2.  Involves  cartudity.
Depraved  men  are  so  carnal  that  they  have  no  idea  of  real  things  which  have  not  size
and  form  and  tangible  properties.  Hence  they  want  a  god  they  can  see  and  handle
and  touch.  3.  Involves  thoughtUsskess.  Polytheism  cannot  stand  reasoning.  It  is
supported  by  the  thoughtless  millions  through  the  craft  and  sophistry  of  the  priests.
Every  true  thought  will  shatter  a  heathen  deity,

IL  The  bight  developmbkt.  What  is  that  ?  Practical  monotheism.  "  We  will
walk  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  our  God  for  ever  and  ever."  1.  This  is  rational.  The  one
God  is  the  sum  total  of  all  moral  properties,  the  Proprietor  of  all  resources,  and  the
Bestower  of  all  the  existences  and  all  the  blessings  therewith.  What  can  be  more
rational  than  to  walk  in  his  way  ?  In  truth,  it  is  the  only  true  rational  way  in  life.
2.  This  is  obligatory.  No  man  is  bound  to  walk  in  the  name  of  an  idol ;  nay,  he  is
commanded  not  to  do  so.  But  every  man  is  bound  to  walk  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord —
bound  on  the  ground  of  his  supreme  excellence,  his  relations  to  man,  and  the  obliga-
tion springing  therefrom.  3.  This  is  Messed.  To  walk  in  his  Name  is  to  walk
through  Bunny  fields  abounding  with  all  beauty  and  fruitfulness. — D.  T.

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  moral  monarchy  of  Christ  in  the  world.  "  In  that  day,  saith  the
Lord,  will  I  assemble  her  that  halteth,  and  I  will  gather  her  that  is  driven  out,  and
her  that  I  have  afBicted  ;  and  I  will  make  her  that  halted  a  remnant,  and  her  that
was  cast  far  off  a  strong  nation  :  and  the  Lord  shall  reign  over  them  in  Moimt  Zion
from  henceforth,  even  for  ever.  And  thou,  0  tower  of  the  flock,  the  strong  hold  of
the  daughter  of  Zion,  unto  thee  shall  it  come,  even  the  first  dopiinion ;  the  kingdom
shall  come  to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem."  Whether  the  subject  of  these  verses  is  the
restoration  of  the  Jews  after  the  Babylonish  captivity  or  the  gathering  of  men  by
Christ  into  a  grand  spiritual  commimity,  is  a  question  on  which  there  has  been
considerable  discussion  among  biblical  scholars,  and  therefore  should  preclude  any-
thing like  dogmatism  on  either  side.  I  am  disposed,  however,  to  entertun  the  latter
idea,  because  it  seems  most  in  accordance  with  the  previous  verses,  in  which  there  is
an  imdoubted  reference  to  the  gospel  age,  and  because  it  gives  the  passage  a  wide
practical  application.  Delitzsch  says,  " '  In  that  day '  points  back  to  the  end  of  the
days.  At  the  time  when  many  nations  shall  go  on  pilgrimage  to  the  highly  exalted
mountain  of  the  Lord,  and  therefore  Zion-Jerusalem  will  not  only  be  restored  but
greatly  glorified,  the  Lord  will  assemble  that  which  limps  and  is  scattered  abroad."
We  shall  take  the  words,  then,  as  illustrating  certain  facts  connected  with  the  moral
monarchy  of  Ohrist  in  the  world.

I.     It   EHBBiLOES    AMOKOST   ITS  BUBJEOTS    THE   UOST   WBETOHED  AND   BOATTEBED   OF

HEK.  "  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  will  I  assemble  [gather]  her  that  halteth  [that
which  limpeth],  and  I  will  gather  her  that  is  driven  out  [that  which  was  thrust  out],
and  her  that  [which']  I  have  afflicted  ;  and  I  will  make  her  that  [that  which]  halted
[limps]  a  remnant,  and  her  that  [that  which]  was  cast  far  off  a  strong  nation :  and  the
Lord  shall  reigu  over  them  in  Mount  Zion  from  henceforth,  even  for  ever."  Christ
was  seat  to  the  loit  iheep  of  the  house  of  Israel  (Matt.  x.  fi),  and  his  i&vitatioD  wai


«H.iT.  1— 13.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  «6

to  all  that  are  "  weary  "  and  "  heavy  laden."  The  Church  of  Christ  from  the  begin-
ning has  comprised  those  who  were  the  most  afflicted,  the  most  scattered,  and  the
most  distressed  of  mankind.  It  has  been  and  is  the  grand  asylum  for  the  tried  and
the  sorrowful  and  those  who  are  counted  "  the  offscouring  of  all  things  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  13).
1.  Chritfs  moral  monarchy  knows  nothing  of  favouritism.  It  does  not  treat  men
according  to  their  physical  condition,  social  status,  or  temporal  circumstances.  It  has
respect  to  souls.  It  is  as  inuch  interested  in  the  soul  of  the  pauper  as  in  that  of  the
prince,  the  soul  of  the  slave  as  in  that  of  the  sovereiga.  Human  monarchies  have
ever  been  taken  up  with  man  in  his  material  relations.  The  more  wealthy  and
influential  a  man  is,  the  more  favours  will  worldly  kings  bestow ;  the  indigent  and  the
homeless  are  only  regarded  as  beasts  of  burden.  Hot  so  with  Christ  as  the  Monarch.
Every  soul  to  him  is  a  matter  of  profound  practical  interest.  2.  Chrisfs  moral  monarchy
is  remedial  in  its  design.  It  brings  all  the  miserable  together  in  order  to  rid  them  of
their  sorrows.  By  working  into  human  souls  right  principles  of  action  and  expelling
wrong  ones,  it  indirectly,  though  most  efficiently,  heals  all  the  temporary  woes  of
mankind.  "  Seek  first  the  things  from  above,  and  all  others  shall  be  added  unto  you."
"  Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things,  having  the  promise  of  the  life  which  now  ii^
as  well  as  of  that  which  is  to  come."

II.  It  establishes  itself  as  the  anASDiAN  of  mbs  fob  kvkb.  "  And  thou,  O
tower  of  the  flock,  the  strong  hold  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,"  etc.  The  address  to  the
"  tower  of  the  flock "  shows  that,  as  the  most  wretched  and  scattered  of  men  will  be
brought  into  a  great  community,  so  shall  the  reign  of  the  daughter  of  Zion  be  restored,
t.e.  the  Jews  be  converted  and  brought  in  with  the  Gentiles.  The  watch-tower  spoken
of  by  Isaiah  (xxxii.  14)  is  most  likely  the  tower  here  referred  to  by  Micah.  "  Flock-tow«r  "
is  a  good  expression,  inasmuch  as  it  indicates  the  watchfulness  of  Christ  as  a  moral
Shepherd,  the  great  Shepherd  of  souls.  It  is  said  here  that  "  the  kingdom  shall  come
to  the  daughter  of  Jerusalem."  It  did  so  come ;  it  began  with  the  Jews.  "  He  came  to
his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not."  Although  on  his  last  visit  to  Jerusalem  the
common  people  did  receive  him  as  their  King :  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David  I "
What  a  Guardian,  what  a  "  Bishop  of  souls,"  is  Christ !  1.  Ee  knows  all  his  sheep.
Each  of  the  millions  is  known  to  him— his  idiosyncrasies,  imperfections,  necessities,
«tc.  2.  He  has  ample  provision  for  all  his  sheep.  His  provisions  are  adapted  to  all,  and
are  inexhaustible.     3.  Ee  has  power  to  protect  aU  his  sheep.

OoNCLUSiON.  Thank  God  this  moral  monarchy  of  Christ  is  established  on  our  earth  1
The  kingdom  of  God  is  come  unto  us.  Thousands  of  all  grades  and  classes  have
entered  into  it,  and  they  have  found  it  to  be  "  righteousness,  peace,  "and  joy  in  the
Holy  Ghost."  Would  that  it  were  universal  1  It  will  be  so  one  day.  It  is  not  to
yet,  because,  being  moral,  men  have  the  power  of  resisting  it. — D.  T.

Vers.  9 — ^13. — The  moral  regeneration  of  the  world.  "  Now  why  dost  thou  cry  out
aloud  ?  is  there  no  king  in  thee  ?  is  thy  counsellor  perished  ?  for  pangs  have  taken  thee
as  a  woman  in  travail.  Be  in  pain,  and  labour  to  bring  forth,  0  daughter  of  Zion,"  etc.
The  prophet  here,  without  doubt,  refers  to  the  carrying  away  of  the  Jews  to  Babylon.
He  refers  to  the  consternation  in  which  the  Jews  would  be  placed  on  the  approach  of
the  Chaldean  army.  The  questions  relative  to  a  "  king  "  and  a  "  counsellor  "  (ver.  9)
are,  it  is  thought,  put  forth  in  bitter  irony,  in  order  to  provoke  an  answer.  "  Is  there
no  king  in  thee?  is  thy  counsellor  perished  ?"  The  answer,  perhaps,  would  be,  "Yes,
we  have  a  king,  and  we  have  counsellors,  but  they  are  utterly  worthless ;  they  have
power  neither  to  protect  us  from  the  terrible  calamities  nor  to  invent  means  for  our
escape."  The  metaphor  of  the  parturient  woman  seems  intended  to  shadow  forth  the
agony  of  their  consternation  at  the  idea  of  going  forth  from  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  being
located  in  the  open  country,  and  afterwarus  conveyed  to  Babylon.  After  this  comes
the  promise  of  emancipation.  "  There  the  Lord  shall  redeem  thee  from  the  hand  of
thine  enemies."  Their  restoration  is  metaphorically  represented  by  a  travailing  woman.
Whilst  it  is  unfair  to  attach  to  Scripture  a  wrong  interpretation,  it  is  perfectly  fair  to
use  its  passages  as  symbols  of  truths  applicable  to  man  in  all  ages  and  all  lands.  These
words  may  serve  to  illustrate,  therefore,  some  points  in  relation  to  the  moral  regenera-
tion of  the  world,

I.  The  state  of  haxeins  bequibes  it.  "  Is  there  no  king  in  thee  ?  is  thy  counselloi
moAR.  *


66  THE   BOOK   OP  MICAH.  [oh.  ry.  1— la

perished?"  It  was  more  serious  for  the  Jewish  people  to  be  deprived  of  a  king  than
for  any  other  people,  for  their  king  was  theocratic ;  he  was  supposed  to  be  the  voice  and
vicegerent  of  God.  The  prophet  means  to  say  that  when  the  Chaldeans  would  come
and  carry  them  away,  they  wouW  have  no  king  and  no  counsellors.  Now,  men  in  an
unregenerate  state:  1.  Have  no  king.  A  political  ruler  is  to  man,  as  a  spiritual
energy,  only  a  king  in  name.  He  does  not  command  the  moral  affections,  rule  the
conscience,  or  legislate  for  the  inner  and  primal  springs  of  all  activity.  Such  a  king  is
the  deep  want  of  man ;  he  wants  some  one  to  he  enthroned  on  his  heart,  to  whom  his
conscience  can  render  homage.  No  man  in  an  unregenerate  state  has  such  a  king ;  he
has  gods  many  and  lords  many,  of  a  sort,  but  none  to- rule  him,  and  to  bring  all  the
powers  of  his  soul  into  one  harmonious  channel  of  obedience.  2.  Have  no  counselor.
Society  abounds  with  counsellors  who  proffer  their  advice ;  but  some  of  them  are
wicked,  most  of  them  worthless,  few,  if  any,  satisfactory,  that  is,  to  conscience.  What
the  soul  wants  is  not  the  mere  book  counsellor — though  it  be  the  Bible  itself — ^but
the  spiWt  of  that  book,  the  spirit  of  reverence,  love,  Christ-like  trust.  Such  a  spirit,
when  it  comes  to  us,  will  guide  us  into  all  truth ;  it  is  the  "  unction  from  the  Holy  One."
3.  Have  no  ease.  "  Pangs  have  taken  thee  as  a  woman  in  travail."  The  unregenerate
soul  is  always  liable  to  constematioff,  remorse;  it  often  writhes  in  agony.  "There  is
no  peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked."  Now,  moral  regeneration  brings  the  man  a
true  King,  a  true  Counsellor,  a  true  Peace — a  peace  "  that  passeth  all  understanding,"

II.  It  is  opposed  by  formidable  antagonists.  "Many  nations  are  gathered
against  thee."  The  nations  here  referred  to  are  those  that  composed  the  anqjr  of
Nebuchadnezzar,  or  those  that  joined  it  in  the  attack  against  the  Jews.  What
formidable  opponents  there  are  to  the  conversion  of  man !  1.  2%e  depraved  dements  of
the  soul.  Unbelief,  selfishness,  carnality,  etc.  These  are  Canaanites  that  battle  mightily
against  the  moral  Joshua.  2.  The  corrupt  influence  of  society.  How  much,  in  this
country  and  this  age  especially,  is  there  struggling  against  man's  regeneration — custom,
fashion,  amusements,  pleasures  I  And  then,  too,  acting  through  all  these  forces  within
and  without,  there  are  the  principalities  and  powers  of  darkness ;  so  that  it  comes  to
pass  that  it  is  no  very  easy  thing  to  effect  the  regeneration  of  men ;  there  are  nations
of  moral  forces  battling  against  it.

III.  It  is  guaranteed  by  the  word  of  Almighty  God.  "  They  know  not  the
thoughts  of  the  Lord,"  etc.  The  enemies  of  the  Jews  were  utterly  ignorant  of  God's
purpose  to  deliver  his  people  from  Babylonish  captivity.  "  They  had  not  the  most
distant  idea  that  the  object  of  Jehovah,  in  permitting  his  people  to  be  so  treated,  w»s
to  recover  them  from  idolatry,  and  thus  prepare  them  for  a  triumphant  restoration.
The  metaphor  taken  from  the  process  of  threshing  out  grain  is  frequently  used  by  the
prophets  to  denote  the  complete  destruction  of  a  people."  1.  Man  in  ignorance  fights
against  Ood's  purpose.  The  Chaldeans  and  all  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  did  so  now.
Men  are  always  doing  this.  "  Had  they  known  it,  they  would  not  have  crucified  the
Lord  of  glory."  2.  Man,  in  fighting  against  Oodfs  purpose,  brings  ruin  on  himself.
It  is  here  predicted  that  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  should  be  as  "  sheaves,"  and  that  the
Jews  themselves  should  be  strengthened.  "  I  will  make  thine  horn  iron,  and  I  will
make  thy  hoofs  brass."  "  When  God,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  has  conquering  work  for
his  people  to  do,  he  will  furnish  them  with  strength  and  ability  for  it — will  make  the
horn  iron  and  the  hoofs  brass ;  and  when  he  does  so,  they  must  exert  the  power  he
gives  them,  and  execute  the  commission :  even  the  daughter  of  Zion  may  arise  and
thresh."  The  nations  thought  to  ruin  Christianity  in  its  infancy,  but  it  was  victorious
over  them.  Those  who  persisted  in  their  enmity  were  broken  to  pieces  (Matt.  xxi.  44),
particularly  the  Jewish  nation ;  but  multitudes  by  Divine  grace  were  joined  to  the
Church,  and  they  and  their  substance  were  consecrated  to  the  Lord  Jeaui^  the  Lord  of
the  whole  earth.— D.  T.


OH.  T.  1 — 16,]


THE  BOOK  OF   MIOAH.


67


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  V.
Vew.  1 — 4.— §  8.   After  Zim't  degrada-
tion Messiah  shall  be  bom,  and  $haU  bring
the  world  into  luhjection.

Ver.  1. — This  verse  is  joined  to  the  pre-
ceding chapter  in  the  Hebrew.  Jerusalem
is  addressed,  as  in  oh.  it.  9,  11,  not  the
invading  army.  The  prophet  returns  to
the  view  of  the  misery  and  humiliation  ex-
pressed in  that  passage.  Qather  thyself  in
troops;  or,  then  ehalt  gather  thyself,  eto.
Jerusalem  mnst  collect  its  armies  to  defend
itself  from  the  enemy.  0  daughter  of  troops.
Jerusalem  is  thus  named  from  the  number
of  soldiers  collected  within  her  walls,  from
whence  marauding  expeditions  were  wont
to  set  forth.  Pusey  considers  that  she  is  so
called  trom  the  acts  of  violence,  robbery,  and
bloodshed  which  are  done  within  her  (ch.
IL  8 ;  iii.  2,  etc. ;  Jer.  vii.  11).  Keil  thinks
the  prophet  represents  the  people  crowding
together  in  fear.  It  is  more  natural  to  refer
the  expression  to  the  abnormal  assemblage
of  soldiers  and  fugitives  within  the  walls  of
a  bet-ieged  city.  Septuagint,  'E/tippaxSriffe-
rai  evydrjip  iiupfwynf,  "  The  daugiiter  shall
be  wholly  hemmed  in  ; "  Vulgate,  Va*tdberi»,
Jilia  latroni:  He  hath  laid  siege.  The
enemy  is  spoken  of  by  an  abrupt  change  of
person  (coiup.  Isa.  i,  29).  Against  ns.
The  prophet  identifies  himself  with  the
besieged  people.  They  shall  smite  the
judge  of  Israel,  etc.  "  The  judge  "  repre-
sents the  supreme  authority,  whether  king
or  other  governor  (Amos  ii.  3);  but  he  is
called  here  "judge,"  that  the  sacred  name
of  king  may  not  be  spoken  of  as  dis-
honoured. To  smite  upon  the  cheek  is  the
grossest  insult  (oomp.  1  Kings  xxii.  24 ;  Job
xvi.  10 ;  Luke  xxii.  61).  Wlien  Zion  is  thus
besieged,  and  its  rulers  suffer  the  utmost
contumely,  its  condition  must  look  hopeless.
Such  a  state  of  things  was  realized  in  the
treatment  of  Zedekiah  (2  Kings  xxv.),  and
in  many  subsequent  sieges  of  Jerusalem.
But  the  underlying  idea  is  that  Israel  shall
suffer  dire  distress  at  the  hands  of  her
enemies  until  Messiah  comes,  and  she
herself  turns  to  the  Lord.  The  LXX.
translates  ehophet,  "judge,"  by  <l>v\ds,
"tribe';,"  but  the  other  Greek  translators
give  Kpniiv,

Yer.  2. — At  the  time  of  Zion's  deepest
distress,  and  when  her  earthly  king  is
suffering  the  grossest  degradution,  reduced
as  it  were  to  the  shepherd-house  at  Bethle-
hem, a  Deliverer  shall  arise  thence  who
shall  do  wonderful  things.  This  passage
was  quoted  by  the  Sanhedrin  to  answer


Herod's  question  where  the  Clirist  was  to
be  born  (Matt.  ii.  5,  6 ;  comp.  John  vii.  42).
But  thou,  Bethlehem  Bphratah.  Ephratah
(Ephrathah,  or  Ephriith),  "  fruitfulness,"  is
another  name  for  Bethlehem,  "  House  of
bread"  (Gen.  xxxr.  19;  1  Sam.  xvii.  12;
Butb  i.  2);  from  its  position  it  is  also
called  Bethlehem  Judah  (Judg.  xvii.  7),
being  situated  in  the  tribal  lot  of  Judah,
about  five  miles  south  of  Jerusalem,  and
thus  distinguished  from  a  town  of  the  same
name  in  Zebulun  (Josh,  xix.  15).  Septuagint,
Kal  irb,  BtiSXec/i,  oIkos  'E<ppa6d  [tov  'E<tipa8i,
Alex.],  "And  thou,  Betlilehem,  house  of
Ephrathah."  Tli  e  rest  of  the  clause  is  best
translated,  too  Utile  to  be  among  the  thou-
sands of  Judah.  Each  tribe  was  divided
into  "  thousands,"  which  would  be  equiva-
lent to  clans,  with  its  own  head.  Probably
the  reckoning  was  made  of  fighting  men
(see  note  on  Zech.  ix.  7 ;  and  comp.  Numb.
1  16;  X.  4;  Josh.  xxii.  21,  30;  1  Sam.  x.
19).  Bethlehem,  called  in  the  text  Bethle-
hem Ephratiih  for  solemnity's  sake,  was
a  small  place  (kc^/iti,  John  vii  42),  of  such
slight  importance  as  not  to  be  named  among
the  possessions  of  Judah  in  Josh,  xv.,  or  in
the  catalogue  of  Neh.  xi.  25,  etc.  Yet  out  of
thee  shall  he  (one)  come  forth  unto  me
that  is  to  be  Buler  in  IsraeL  In  spite  of  its
insignificance,  this  birthplace  of  David  shall
be  the  birthplace  of  Messiah,  "  Shall  come
forth"  is  spoken  sometimes  of  birth  and
descent,  as  in  Gen.  xvii.  6  and  xxxv,  11 ;  at
other  times  it  contains  merely  the  notion  ot
proceeding  from,  as  in  Jer.  xxx.  21,  In  the
present  case  both  ideas  are  suitable.  Unto
me  (Jehovah  is  speaking).  To  my  praise
and  glory,  to  do  my  will.  Micah  by  these
words  would  recall  the  announcement  con-
cerning David  made  to  Samuel,  "I  have
provided  me  a  king  "  (1  Sam.  xvL  1),  and
thus  show  the  typical  relation  of  David  to
the  Messiah  (Keil).  Whose  goings  forth  have
been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting.  The  mean-
ing of  the  word  rendered  "goings  forth"
(motsaoth)  is  somewhat  doubtful.  Septua-
gint, ^{oSoi :  Vulgate,  egressus.  The  Fathers
see  in  it  a  declaration  of  the  eternal  genera-
tion of  the  S'  in  :  he  who  was  bom  in  time
at  Bethlehem  hath  an  eternal  existence.  In
this  case  the  plural  form  of  tlie  word  is
a  plural'  of  majesty,  or  an  abstract  expres-
sion (oomp.  Ps.  exiv.  2,  "  dominions ; "  Isa.
liv.  2,  "  habitations  ").  To  Christians,  who
believe  in  tlie  mystery  of  the  Holy  Trinity,
the  plural  would  express  the  continual
generation  Oi  the  Son  from  the  Father  from
everlasting  and  to  everlasting,  never  beginr
ning  and  never  ending ;  as  the  Council  of
Lateran  says, "  Without  beginning,  ever  and


68


THE  BOOK  OF  MICAa


[on.  T.  1—16.


-withont  end,  the  Father  liegetting,  the  Son
being  born  (natceta),  and  the  Holy  Ohost
proceeding."  Manv  commentators  take  the
"  goings  forth  "  to  be  the  ancient  promises,
the  revelations  of  the  Angel  of  the  covenant
to  the  patriarchs,  the  various  preparations
made  iu  type  and  biutory  for  tlie  appear-
ance of  the  great  Son  of  David  in  due  time ;
but  this  is  a  forced  interpretation  of  the
word.  Granted  that  Micah's  contemporaries
understood  the  prophecy  to  state  merely
that  a  Savionr  should  arise  from  the  lineage
of  David  who  traced  his  descent  from  hoar
antiquity,  and  might  be  said  to  have  lived  in
the  days  of  old,  this  fact  (if  it  be  a  fact)  does
not  preclude  ns,  with  our  more  perfect  know-
ledge, from  seeing  a  deeper  meaning  in  the
inspired  utterance,  an  adumbration  of  the
nature  of  that  Prince  whom  Isaiah  calls
"  Everlasting"  (ch.  ix.  6),  the  Word  who
*'  was  in  the  beginning  with  God  "  (John  i.  1,
2).  We  may  note  certain  contrasts  in  these
two  first  verses.  Zion,  "the  daughter  of
troops,"  ia  contrasted  with  the  mean  and
insignificant  Bethlehem ;  yet  the  former
shall  be  shamefully  handled,  the  latter
highly  honoured';  that  one's  king  shall  be
dethroned  and  disgroced,  this  one's  Buler  is
from  everlasting  and  to  everlasting.

Yer.  3. — ^Therefore ;  i.e.  because  Gtod  hath
designed  to  punish  before  delivering,  and
this  deliverance  is  to  arise  from  the  little
Bethlehem,  not  from  Jerusalem.  This  pre-
supposes that  the  house  of  David  will  have
lost  the  throne  and  have  been  reduced  to  a
low  condition.  Will  ha  gat  them  np.
Jehovah  will  give  np  the  people  to  its
enemies  ;  this  is  the  way  in  which  the  house
of  David  shall  come  to  low  estate.  She
which  travaileth  hath  brought  forth.  Many
commentators  have  taken  the  travailing
woman  to  be  the  afSicted  community  of
Israel,  or  Zion ;  but  we  may  not  altogether
reject  the  old  interpretation  which  regards
tills  as  a  prophecy  of  the  birth  of  Christ
from  the  Virgin,  in  accordance  with  the
received  Messianic  exposition  of  Isaiah's
great  prediction,  "  BehoM,  the  virgin  shall
conceive  "  (Isa.  vii.  14).  Such  an  announce-
ment comes  in  naturally  after  the  announce-
ment of  the  Buler  coming  forth  from
Bethlehem.  Israel  shall  be  oppressed  until
the  time  ordained  when  "she  who  is  to
bear  "  shall  bring  forth.  Then  (rather,  and,
i.e.  until)  the  remnant  of  his  brethren  shall
return  unto  (with)  the  ohildren  of  Israel.
The  remnant  of  his  brethren  are  the  rescued
of  the  Judwans,  who  are  the  brethren  of
Messiah  aooording  to  the  flesh ;  these  in  a
literal  sense  shall  return  from  exile  together
with  the  others,  and  in  a  spiritual  sense
•hall  be  converted  and  be  joined  with  the
true  Israelites,  the  true  seed  of  Abraham,

Vat.    i,— He  ihaU   itaad.     The  Bnler,


Messiah,  shall  stand  as  a  good  ihepheid,
guiding  and  ordering  his  flock,  watchful
and  ready  to  aid  and  defend  (comp.  Ezek.
xxziv.  23 ;  John  x.  11).  Septuagint,(rT^(reTai
Kal  6if/erat,  "shall  stand  and  see."  Peed;
t'.e.  his  flook.  Septuagint,  woi/iareT  rh  irol/iytor
avTov.  In  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  with
which  he  is  invested  and  which  he  displays
in  the  care  of  his  people.  In  the  majesty
of  the  Name  of  the  Lord  his  Ood.  Messiah
shall  rule  in  all  the  power  and  glory  with
which  Qod  hath  revealed  himself  on  earth
(comp.  Isa.  ix.  6 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  18 ;  John  i.
14).  They  shall  abide;  Septuagint,  imip-
|ouir(,  ''they  shall  be."  The  children  of
Israel  shall  sit,  dwell,  in  rest  and  peace  in
their  own  land  (ch.  iv.  4 ;  Lev.  xxvi.  S,  6 ;
Joel  lit  20 ;  Amos  ix.  14, 15).  The  Vulgate,
from  a  different  pointing  of  the  Hebrew,
lenders,  converlentar.  With  this  the  Chaldee
and  Syriac  agree.  But  this  idea  is  already
expressed  in  ver.  3.  Now  shall  he  be  great.
When  the  prophecy  is  fulfilled  and  Messiah
is  feeding  his  flock,  his  dominion  shall  ex-
tend unto  the  ends  of  the  earth  (comp.
Mai.  i.  11, 14 ;  Ps.  ii.  8 ;  Ixxii.  8 ;  Luke  i.  32).

Vera.  5,  6.—$  9.  Under  Mestiah'e  ruU
eliatt  he  peace.  Cheyne  considers  these
verses  to  have  been  inserted  by  an  after-
thought, either  to  explain  the  "many
nations"  and  "many  peoples"  of  oh.  iv.  II,
13,  or  to  rectify  the  omission  of  the  period
of  foreign  rule.  This  may  be  reasonably
allowed ;  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  ex-
planation of  the  paragraph,  which  is  merely
a  further  description  of  Messiah's  kingdom.

Ver.  5. — ^And  this  Man  shall  be  the  Peace ;
and  he  thaU  he  Peace;  Vulgate,  et  erit  iiU
Pax.  This  same  Buler  will  not  only  bring
peace,  and  be  the  Author  of  peace,  but  be
himself  Peace ;  as  Isaiah  (ix.  5)  calls  him
"  Prince  of  Peace,"  and  St.  Paul  (Eph.  ii  14)
"our  Peace."  Peace  personified  (comp.
Zech.  ix.  9).  It  is  best  to  put  a  full  stop
here,  and  remove  the  colon  at  "land"
in  the  next  clause.  There  may  be  an
allusion  to  Solomon,  the  peaceful  king,  who
erected  the  temple  and  whose  reign  exhibited
the  ideal  of  happy  times.  Septuagint,  koI
Iffrai  aii^  eipijnr,  "and  to  her  shall  be
peace."  When  the  Assyrian  shall  ooma.
The  prophet,  in  this  and  the  following
verses,  shows  what  is  that  peace  which
Messiah  shall  bring.  Asshur  is  named  aa
the  type  of  Israel's  deadliest  foe,  and  as  that
which  even  then  was  threatening  the  king-
dom: witness  Sennacherib's  invasion  in
Hezekiah'a  time,  when  the  angel  of  the
Lord  smote  the  alien  army  with  sadden
doHtruotion  (2  Kings  xix.).  The  prophecy
looks  forward  to  a  far-distant  future,  whea


CH.  ▼.  1 — ^15.]


THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.


6«


the  world-power  is  arrayed  against  God'i
people;  the  details  (as  often  in  such  pro-
phecies) do  not  exactly  suit  the  actual
facts  in  contemporary  history.  Then  shall
we  raise  against  him  seven  shepherds.
We,  the  Israel  of  God,  shall  be  enabled  to
repel  the  enemy.  "  Shepherds,"  i.e.  princes,
and  those  in  abundance.  "Seven"  is  the
perfect  number,  representing  completeness
and  rest.  And  eight  principal  men;  or,
prinees  among  men,  appointed  by  the  Buler
as  his  subordinates  and  representatives.
These  are  said  to  be  "eisht,"  to  imply  their
great  number:  there  should  be  a  super-
abundance of  able  leaders.  (On  a  similar
use  of  numbers,  see  note  on  Amos  i.  3.)  The
LXX.  renders,  okt^  S'fiyfMra  di/dpc^irwi/,
"eight  attacks  of  men,"  reading  differently.
Ver.  6. — They  shaU  waste.  The  word
rendered  "  waste  "  (raah)  is  capable  of  two
interpretations  according  as  it  is  derived.  It
may  mean  "  to  break  "  or  "  to  feed ; "  and  in
the  latter  sense  may  signify  either  "  to  eat
up"  or  "to  be  shepherd  over,"  as  the
Beptuagint,  irot/uwovirt.  The  addition,  with
the  sword,  however,  limits  the  explanation,
whichever  verb  we  refer  it  to.  These
leaders  shall  not  only  defend  their  own  land
against  the  enemy,  but  shall  carry  the  war
into  the  hostile  territory,  conquer  it,  and
mle  with  rigour  (for  the  phrase,  comp.
Pb.  ii.  9 ;  Eev.  ii.  27 ;  xii.  5).  True  religion
has  always  a  war  to  wage  with  error  and
worldlinesB,  but  shall  conquer  in  the  power
of  Christ.  The  land  of  Himrod.  This  is
taken  by  some  commentators  to  mean  Baby-
lon, the  other  great  enemy  of  the  Church
of  God.  But  Babylon  is  nowhere  in  Scrip-
ture called  "  the  land  of  Nimrod,"  though
Nimrod  is  connected  with  Babel  in  Gen.  x.
10 ;  and  the  term  is  better  explained  here
as  a  synonym  of  Assyria,  used  to  recall  the
"rebel"  (so  Nimrod  is  interpreted)  who
founded  the  first  empire  (Gen.  x.  8—12),
and  gives  the  character  to  the  kingdom  of
this  world.  In  the  entrances  thereof;
literally,  in  the  gatet  thereof;  i.e.  iu  the
cities  and  fortresses,  corresponding  to  the
"palaces"  of  ver.  5  (comp.  Isa.  iii.  26;  xiii,
2;  Nah.  iii.  13).  Septuaglnt,  4v  rf  riippq)
ouTTji,  "with  her  trench ; "  Vulgate,  in  lanaeia
^ut,  which,  if  tbe  Hebrew  be  taken  as  Jerome
reads  it,  will  be  in  close  parallelism  with  the
words  in  the  preceding  clause,  "with  the
■word."  Thus  (and)  he  shall  deliver  us.
Israel  has  to  undergo  much  tribulation  and
many  struggles,  but  Messiah  shall  save  her.

Vers.  7— 9.— S  10.  The  people  under
JIe$iiah'$  ruU  have  a  miuion  to  execute!
they  are  to  be  not  only  eonquerore,  but
tattoure  aho.

Ver.  7. — First,  Israel  in  God's  hands  shall
b*  an  instrument  of  life  and  health  to  the


nations.  The  remnant  of  Jacob.  The  faithful.
Messianic  Israel,  as  ch.  iv.  7;  Isa.  x.  21.
Uany  people;  rather,  many  people*  (ch.  iv.
11, 13) ;  so  in  ver.  8.  The  LXX.  inserts,  4w
Tois  iSviaiv,  "among  the  nations,"  as  in  ver.  8.
As  a  dew  f^om  the  Lord.  Converted  Israel
shall  act  as  Messiah  himself  in  refreshing
and  stimulating  the  nations.  Receiving
grace  from  him,  she  sliall  diffuse  it  to
others.  (For  the  metaphor  of  dew  thus  used,
comp.  Deut.  xxiii.  2 ;  Hos.  xiv.  6.)  It  is
especially  appropriate  in  a  country  where
from  May  to  October  the  life  of  herbage
depends  chiefly  on  the  copious  dews  (comp.
Gen.  xxvii.  28;  Deut  xxxiii.  13,  28;  Hag.
i.  10).  As  the  showers  upon  the  grass.
The  dew  is  called  "  showers  "  as  appearing
to  descend  in  a  multitude  of  drops.  That
tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for
the  sons  of  men.  This  refers  to  the  dew,
which  is  wholly  the  ^ift  of  God,  and  is  not
artificially  supplied  by  man's  labour,  as
Egypt  is  "watered  by  the  foot"  (Deut.  xi.
10).  So  grace  is  God's  free,  unmerited
'  gift,  and  wUl  come  upon  the  nations  in  his
good  time  and  way.  The  LXX.  has  here
a  curious  rendering,  Kal  &>s  ipves  M
iypmrriy,  iirus  fii)  rvyaxff  /iiiSels,  uriH
iiroSTn  ly  vlots  avBpdimii/,  which  Jerome
explains  of  the  obdurate  Gentiles  who  con-
tinue in  unbelief,  "  as  iambs  upon  the  grass,
that  none  may  assemble  nor  withstand
among  the  sons  of  men."

Ver.  8. — Secondly,  Israel  shall  be  a
terrible  power  among  the  nations,  and  in-
vincible in  strength.  "Nova  theocratica
agit  Buav.ter  et  fortiter"  (Knabenbauer).
As  a  lion.  The  Lamb  of  God  is  also  the
Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  (Bev.  v.  5;
Numb,  xxiii.  24),  and  he  "  is  set  for  the  fall
and  rising  again  of  many"  (Luke  ii.  34).
In  his  irresistible  strength  Israel  shall  over-  '
come  all  enemies.  So  Judas  Maccabssus  is
compared  to  a  lion  (1  Mace.  iii.  4).

Ver.  9. — The  prophet's  exulting  prayer
for  the  success  of  his  people.  Th^e  hand
shall  be,  etc. ;  rather,  Ut  thine  hand  he  lifted
up;  and  so  in  the  next  clause,  "let  thine
enemies  be  cut  off."  The  phrase,  "  high  be
thy  band  upon,  or  over,"  recalls  the  expres-
sion in  Exod.  xiv.  8,  "  The  children  of  Israel
went  out  with  an  high  hand  "  (comp.  Numb.
xxxiii.  3 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  11 ;  and  our  idiom,  "  to
get  the  upper  hand").  (For  the  promise
contained  in  the  prayer,  see  Isa.  Ix.  12.)

Vers.  10—15. — §  11.  Meisiah  thaU  destroy
all  the  imtrwnent*  of  war,  and  put  doan  aS
idolatry,  havittg  taught  hit  people  to  rely
upon  him  alone.

Ver.  10.— In  that  day.  When  Messiah's
kingdom  is  established.  Micah  depicts  the
interior  perfection  of  the  Church,  as  he  had
before  explained   it*  lelation  to  external


70


THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.


[oL  ▼.  1 — 15.


natiooe.  Horses  ,  ,  ,  thariots.  The  things
inost  used  in  attack  and  defence,  and  for-
bidden by  Odd  as  betraying  distrust  in  his
providence  (oomp.  Deut.  xTii.  16;  Issi.  ii.  7;
Zeoh.  ix.  10).  In  the  reign  of  th(!  Trince  of
Peace  all  war  shall  cease  (Isa.  is.  4  — 1>).

Ver.  11. — Cities.  Abodes  of  luxury  and
pride.  From  Messiah's  kingdom  all  pomp
and  vain-glory  shtill  be  shut  out.  Strong
holds.  Such  defences  shall  not  be  needed
noi'  allowed  (oomp.  Isa.  ii.  IS;  Zech.  ii.
4,5).

Ver.  12. — Witchcrafts.  Magic  and  sorcery,
which  were  much  practised  in  Syria  and
Palestine,  as  in  Cbaldea,  the  literature  of
which  country  coneists  in  great  part  of
■pells  and  charms.  It  is  to  the  belief  in  the
efficac!y  of  such  incantations  that  we  owe  the
episode  of  Balak  and  Balaam  (Numb.  xxii.
^-xxiv.),  and  the  enactments  in  the  Law ;
«.g.  Dent,  xviii.  10,  etc.  (comp.  Isa.  ii.  6;
xlvii.  12).  Septuagint,  -ra  ipifiuuti  aov,
"  thy  poisons ; "  Vulgate,  malefieia.  Sooth-
sayers; properly,  eloud-divineri,  or  starm-
maltert;  either  persons  who  professed  to
divine  by  means  of  the  shape  and  colour
of  clouds,  or,  as  the  old  Scandinavian
witches,  charlatans  who  assumed  the  power
of  causing  and  directing  storms.  Oheyne
compares  the  common  name  of  sorcerers
among  savages,  "  rain-makera."

Ver.  lit. — Graven  images,  of  stone  or
metal  (Lev.  xxvi.  1).  Standing  images;
Septuagint,  rhs  oTuXis  aov, "  thy  columns ; "
Vulgate,  ^aluat  tua$.  These  are  stone
images  or  pillars  dedicated  to  blse  gods


(1  Kings  xiv.  23).  A  pillar  to  mark  a  place
consecrated  to  the  worship  of  the  Lord  was
allowed  (see  Gen.  xxviii.  18 ;  xxxi.  13,  45 ;
Isa.  xix.  17).  It  was  when  this  custom
degenerated  into  idolatry  that  it  was  sternly
denounced  (Deut.  xvi.  22 ;  xxvii.  15,  etc.).

Ver.  14. — Thy  groves  {Asherim);  Exod.
xxxiv.  13;  Deut.  vii.  5,  etc.  Asherah
was  a  Canaanitish  goddess,  whose  worship
was  celebrated  with  licentious  rites.  She
corresponds  to  the  Ashtoreth  of  the  Phosni-
ciaus  and  Ishtar  of  the  Assyrians,  and  seems
to  have  been  adored  as  the  goddess  of  the
productive  power  of  nature.  Her  symbol
was  a  tree  or  a  wooden  post.  So  (and)
will  I  destroy  thy  cities;  ie.  those  cities
which  have  been  the  centres  of  idolatry,  or
are  especially  connected  with  such  worship
(comp.  Amos  v.  5).  The  word  rendered
"  cities "  has  by  some  been  translated,  and
by  others  has  been  so  altered  as  to  be
translated,  "  adversaries ; "  but  there  is  no
variety  in  the  reading,  or  in  the  rendering
of  the  ancient  versions  (except  the  Tar-
gum);  and,  explained  as  above,  it  is  no
mere  repetition  of  the  thought  in  ver.  11.

Ver.  !■'>. — The  time  of  Messiah  is  the  era
when  judgment  shall  fall  on  the  obdnrate
heathen.  Such  as  they  have  not  heard;
rather,  which  have  not  hearkened,  which  are
disobedient.  Septnagiiit,  "Because  they
hearkened  not"  (oomp.  Isa.  Ixvi.  15 — 18;
Joel  iii.  9,  etc.;  Zeph.  iii.  8;  Hag.  ii.  22;
2  Thess.  i.  7—10).  It  is  implied  that
some  of  the  heathen  will  hearken  to  the
revelation  of  Jehovah  by  the  Messiah.


H0MILETI08.

Ver.  2. — Bethlehem  Ephratah,  I.  The  kamb  of  the  place  ib  vest  snooEBTiyB.
Bethlehem ;  i.e.  "  House  of  bread."  Ephratah ;  i.e.  "  Fruit/tdnesa."  Both  thus
signified  plenty,  abundance,  fertility.  They  were  most  appropriate  as  designating  the
spot,  for  fertility  baa  been  and  is  still  characteristic  of  that  locality.  "It  is  now  a
large  village,  beautifully  situated  on  the  brow  of  a  high  hill,  which  commands  an
extensive  view  of  the  surrounding  mountainous  country,  and  rises  in  parterres  of
vineyards,  almond  groves,  and  fig  plantations,  watered  by  gentle  rivulets  that
murmur  through  the  terraces  ;  and  is  diversified  by  towers  and  wine-presses  "  (Kitto's
•  CyclopsBdia,'  art.  "  Bethlehem,"  vol.  i.  p.  326 ;  see  also  Porter's  '  Handbook,'  p.  206).
The  place  in  its  rich  fruitfulness  was  symbolical  of  that  spiritual  abundance  which
should  be  secured  to  the  world  by  him  who  is  "  the  Bread  of  life  "  (John  vi.  33 — 85),
•nd  the  seed-corn  to  fall  iuto  the  ground  and  die,  and  thus  to  bring  forth  much  fruit
(John  xii.  24).

II,  The  lowliness  op  the  place  is  also  bugqestive.  Prom  Numb.  i.  5 — 16  and
X.  4  we  learn  that  each  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  had  its  thousands  of  fighting  men,  each
thousand  having  its  appointed  leader;  whilst  from  the  Book  uf  Joshua  we  gather  that
this  appointment  was  continued  after  the  settlement  of  Canaan  (xxii.  21,  30).  So
InsigniBcant,  however,  was  Bethlehem  that  it  could  mike  but  a  small  contribution
towards  this  arrangement,  and  hence  was  "  least  among  the  thousands  of  Judah."
TTet  upon  this  lowly  place  honour  was  to  be  ct'nferred  in  the  birth  there  of  the  world's
Eedeemer.  The  small  was  to  become  great,  and  the  mean  exalted.  Around  its
plkins  the  glory  of  the  Lord  should  shine,  and  the  songs  of  angels  should  resound,


CH  V.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  71

chanting  the  natal-song,  •'  Glory  to  Q-od  in  the  highest,"  etc.  (Luke  ii.  14).  And  if  a
humble  village  through  its  connection  with  the  Christ  of  God  became  thus  exalted,
much  more  surely  shall  human  hearts  and  lives.  Associated  with  him,  they  who,
judged  by  the  world's  standards,  are  accounted  mean  and  despicable,  secure  to  them-
selves present  dignity  and  eternal  honour.

III.  TniS  PBOPHEOT   UBSPBCTINO   THE  MeSSIAH's   LOWLY  BIRTHPLACE  LIVED    IN   THE

MEMORIES  AKD  HEARTS  OF  God's  ANCIENT  PEOPLE.  Two  Striking  Confirmations  of
this  are  given  in  the  Gospels.  1.  In  connection  with  the  visit  of  the  Magians  to
Jerusalem.  Herod  in  his  alarm  gathered  the  Jewish  Sanhedrin  together,  and
imperiously  demanded  information  from  the  priests  and  scribes  as  to  where,  in
accordance  with  Jewish  traditions,  the  Messiah  was  to  be  bom.  And  their  reply
(Matt.  ii.  6,  6)  indicates  that  they  had  in  their  memory  this  prophecy  by  Micah;
whilst  the  readiness  with  which  they  replied  to  the  inquiry  of  Herod  manifests  how
clearly  this  prophecy  had  become  impressed  upon  the  Jewish  mind.  2.  In  connection
■with  Christ's  appearance  in  Jerusalem  at  "the  Feast  of  Tabernacles."  His  hearers,
moved  by  his  marvellous  teaching,  began  to  acknowledge  him  as  the  Messiah,  when  lo  I
the  Pharisees  cried,  "  Shall  Christ  came  out  of  Galilee  ?  Hath  not  the  Scripture  said
that  Christ  cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  out  of  Bethlehem,  where  David  was  ?  "
{John  vii.  42).  It  is  evident  that  these  Pharisees  knew  all,  about  this  ancient  prediction,
and  that  they  expected  the  Messiah,  in  accordance  with  it,  to  appear  in  Bethlehem.
Note—

rV.  The  bemarkablk  fulfilurnt,  in  the  order  of  Pbotidenok,  of  this
NATIONAL  EXPECTATION.  The  decree  went  forth  from  Ceesar  Augustus  that  all  tha
Boman  world  should  be  enrolled  (Luke  ii.  1).  The  emperor,  in  issuing  the  decree,
thought  only  of  his  imperial  authority  and  the  glory  of  the  empire;  but  God  was
working  through  all,  and  making  the  earthly  kingdom  to  serve  the  heavenly,  and
bringing  about  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophecy  that  in  Bethlehem  the  Christ  should
appear.  So,  earthly  princes  and  potentates,  statesmen  and  diplomatists,  are  ever  at
work,  thinking  only  of  the  interests  of  their  own  nations ;  but  above  all  is  the  God  of
nations,  the  supreme  Baler,  sitting  on  the  throne  of  his  majesty  in  perfect  repose,  and
overruling  all  to  the  aocomplishraent  of  bis  purposes  of  love  and  mercy  towards  the
whole  race  (Prov.  xxi.  1 ;  xvi.  33).

Ver.  2. — TTie  natwre  of  the  Messiah's  rule.  "  That  is  to  he  Ruler  in  Israel"  In  the
first  verse  Micah  had  spoken  of  the  failure  of  earthly  rulers.  "The  judge  of  Israel
should  be  smitten  with  a  rod  upon  the  cheek."  The  rulers  who  had  so  lamentably
failed  in  their  administration  should  come  to  nought,  but  there  should  rise  up  in  the
time  appointed  "  a  King  to  reign  in  righteousness,"  and  who  should  establish  a  king-
dom which  should  never  be  "  moved."  Unfortunately,  however,  in  the  Jewish  mind,
the  nature  of  this  kingdom  took  a  visible  shape ;  and  they  anticipated  that  the  Messiah
should  establish  a  kingdom  which  should  be  marked  by  regal  splendour  and  worldly
power.  Hence,  when  he  appeared,  the  appeal  was  made  to  him  to  free  them  from
paying  tribute  to  Cassar  (Matt.  xxii.  17 — 22) ;  to  sit  in  judgment,  and  to  settle  dis-
putes (Luke  xii.  13 ;  John  viii.  2 — 11) ;  and  they  sought  to  take  him  by  force,  and  to
compel  him  to  set  up  his  throne  (John  vi.  15).  And  it  is  easy  to  understand  how  that,
cherishing  these  mistaken  notions,  the  Christ  of  God  became  an  enigma  to  them ;  and
that,  disappointed  in  the  course  he  pursued,  they  turned  aside  from  him,  cherished
hostility  towards  him,  and  even  cried,  "Away  with  him!  crucify  him!"^  But,  for  all
this,  in  the  spiritual  sense  predicted  by  Micah  and  others,  he  was  the  true  King  of
Israel,  and  his  claim  can  be  fully  vindicated.  He  was  "  Ruler  in  Israel "  in  a  far  higher
and  nobler  sense  than  David  and  his  successors  had  ever  been  the  sovereigns  of  the
people.  The  functious  which  Jesus  declined  to  fulfil  were,  after  all,  the  lesser  and
inferior  functions  of  the  King  of  Israel.  The  higher  functions  were  those  which  the
Lord  God  himself  had  fulfilled  in  relation  to  the  Jewish  nation,  and  before  that  nation
in  the  pride  of  its  heart  had  demanded  an  earthly  ruler.  God  had  been  their  King.
David  and  his  successors  were  but  Jehovah's  deputies,  and  were  appointed  by  him
to  discharge  the  lesser  and  secondary  functions;  but  there  were  higher  functions,
which  Jehorah  alone  had  fulfilled.  It  was  he  who  by  his  appointment  and  power
had  separated  that  people  from  among  the  nations,  and  it  was  he  who  of  his  infinite


72  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  t.  1— 1&

wisdom  framed  tbose  Divine  laws  by  which  the  people  thus  separated  were  to  be
guverned,  and  in  obedience  to  which  they  were  to  find  happiness  and  security.  And
Christ  Jesus  became  in  the  highest  sense  "  the  Buler  in  Israel,"  in  that  be  came  to
gather  a  people  to  his  praise  out  of  the  wreck  and  ruin  sin  had  wrought  among  the
nations,  and  to  give  them  that  Christian  law  of  rectitude  and  righteousness,  of  mercy
and  love,  the  embodiment  and  perfecting  of  all  previous  revelations,  and  in  following
which  there  should  be  experienced  the  truest  peace  and  the  most  abiding  joy.  He
came  to  set  up  on  earth  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  and  to  establish  Rmongst  men  a
Divine  and  heavenly  rule.  His  is  not  a  kingdom  of  the  senses,  but  of  the  spirit;  it
consists  not  in  "meat  and  drink,"  but  in  "righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy
Ghost "  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  He  is  "  the  Ruler,"  and  the  principles  of  his  rule  are  such  as,
finding  a  lodgment  in  the  heart  and  drawing  the  soul  to  him  in  loving  loyalty  and
devotion,  remlers  it  true  and  good,  holy  and  happy.  And  all  that  is  needed  in  order
to  render  the  world  sin  has  blighted  bright  and  blessed,  is  that  his  rulership  be
universally  acknowledged  and  his  reign  be  established  in  every  human  souL

"  Hark  the  glad  sound,  the  Saviour  comes.
The  Saviour  promised  long ;
Let  every  heart  prepare  a  throne.
And  ever;  voice  a  song."

Ver.  2  (last  clause). — The  eternal  "goings  forth"  of  the  Christ  of  Ood.  "When  he
Bays  his  beginnings  are  from  the  beginning,  from  the  days  of  antiquity,  he  shows  his
pre-existent  nature,  as  when  be  says  he  will  go  forth  as  Ruler  to  feed  his  people  Israel
he  shows  his  temporal  birth  "  (Chrysostom).  "  Going  forth  is  here  opposed  to  going
forth — a  going  forth  out  of  Bethlehem  to  a  going  forth  from  eteruity ;  a  going  forth
which  then  was  still  to  come,  to  a  going  forth  which  had  been  long  ago,  from  the  days
of  eternity.  The  word  expresses  pre-existence,  an  eternal  existence  backwards  as  well
as  forwards,  the  incommunicable  attribute  of  God"  (Pusey,  in  loe.).  The  expression
here  naturally  leads  us  to  think  of  the  words  with  which  St.  John  commences  his
Gospel  (L  1).  We  can  offer  no  explanation  as  to  bow  this  could  be.  We  fully
acknowledge  the  difficulty,  and  whieh  lies  within  the  Bivine  nature  itself.  We  bow
before  the  mystery.  "  God  is  great,  and  we  know  him  not."  Reason  is  baffled  when
it  inquires  concerning  the  Divine  Personality;  but  where  reason  cannot  penetrate,
faith  can  reverentially  and  tranquilly  rest.  And  certainly  the  Prophet  Micah  here,  and
the  Evangelist  John  in  the  prologue  to  his  Gospel,  claimed  no  more  for  the  Messiah  than
the  Christ  claimed  for  himself  (comp.  John  vi.  62 ;  viii.  68 ;  xviL  5,  24 ;  Rev.  i.  8).
This  eternal  Son  of  God  is  presented  to  us  here  in  his  Divine  manifestations;  for  the
seer  spekkg  of  "  his  goings  forth."

I.  Tbaoe  these  "  Gomas  forth."  We  may  do  so :  1.  In  creation.  In  view  of  hia
oneness  with  God,  this  is  declared  to  have  been  his  work  (John  i.  3 ;  Col.  i.  16, 17).
2.  In  providence.  In  reading  the  Old  Testament  in  its  allusions  to  the  Divine  care
exercised  over  eminent  saints  of  God,  we  find  a  Divine  exalted  Personage  occasionally
referred  to  as  manifesting  himself  to  such — to  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii.) ;  to  Jacob  (Gen.
xxxii.  24, 30)  to  the  Israelites  through  Moses  (Exod.  xxiii.  20, 21) ;  to  Joshua  (Josh.  v.
13 — 15).  There  are  insuperable  difficulties  if  we  simply  regard  these  as  angelic  minis-
tries expressive  of  the  Divine  care  over  the  good  as  the  G«d  of  providence.  It  would
not  have  been  said  in  reference  to  any  angel, "  Provoke  him  not,  for  he  will  not  pardon
your  transgressions;"  nor  would  any  mere  angelic  intelligence  have  accepted  the
adoration  of  Joshua,  but  would  have  said,  "  &ee  thou  do  it  not :  for  I  am  thy  fellow-
servant,"  etc.  (Rev.  xxii.  9).  The  most  reasonable  conclusion  is  that  these  were  the
•'  goings  forth  "  in  providence  of  the  pre-existent  Son  of  God.  3.  In  grace.  (1)  In
the  counsels  of  the  Godhead.  Man  by  transgression  mournfully  departed  from  his  God.
He  lost  the  Divine  favour  and  the  light  of  the  Divine  countenance.  And  when  his
condition  became  helpless  and  hopeless,  lo  I  Divine  Interpositions  with  a  view  to  his
salvation.  And  it  was  in  the  depths  of  the  compassion  of  the  eternal  Son  of  God  that
the  stream  of  Divine  mercy  took  its  rise,  and  which  shall  flow  on  to  bless  the. whole
world ;  and  from  him,  "  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,"  has  emanated  the  cheering  ray  of
hope  to  ruined  man.  Nor,  in  speaking  thus  of  the  love  of  the  eternal  Son,  do  we  slight
the  love  of  the  eternal  Father.    Observe,  in  this  verse  God,  speaking  of  his  Son,  sayi,


OH.  T.  1—16.]  THIS  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  78

"  He  shall  come  forth  wito  me"  meaning  Buiely  that  Christ,  in  his  incarnation,  with  all
that  was  thus  involved  of  mercy  and  grace,  would,  in  rescuing  anci  restoring  man,  fulfil
the  Divine  purpose  and  accomplish  the  Divine  will.  The  Divine  Father  is  no  wrathful
Being,  needing  to  be  appeased  by  the  sacrifice  of  his  Son.  1'he  Father  "  so  loved  the
world,  that  he  gave,"  etc.  (John  iiL  16).  The  eternal  Spiiit,  too,  strives  and  pleads
with  men.  There  never  has  been  schism  in  the  etenuil  counsels.  The  mercy  that
saves  us  had  its  origin  in  the  free  and  unbought  love  of  the  Oodhead.  (2)  In  the  life
and  work  of  the  incarnate  Christ.  The  life  of  Jesus  is  the  most  wonderful  ever  lived
in  the  flesh.  The  lives  of  patriarchs,  prophets,  and -righteous  men  through  all  ages
pale  in  the  presence  of  this  life.  "  Grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus  Christ."  "  His
goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting ; "  but  none  of  his  manifestations
has  ever  equalled  that  which  took  place  when  he  clothed  himself  in  the  veil  of  our
mortal  flesh,  and  enabled  man,  through  his  perfect  character  and  self-sacrificing  work,  to
behold  expressed  in  their  very  midst  the  glory  of  the  Lord.

II.  Connect  these  "  Qomas  tobth  "  with  what  was  pbedioted  hebb  RKSPEcriNa
THE  advent  of  Chbibt.  As  We  behold  him  in  his  eternal  existence  and  glory.
Creator  of  all  things,  the  Giver  of  life,  the  Imparter  of  light,  manifesting  himself  in  all
the  departments  of  the  Divine  operation ;  and  then  think  of  him  as  condescending
to  the  limitations  and  conditions  of  our  humanity,  humbling  himself  to  "  the  poor
manger  "  at  Bethlehem,  and  "  the  bitter  cross  "  at  Calvary,  we  are  filled  with  wonder ;
yet  love  also  inflames  and  inspires  our  souls.  With  profoundest  gratitude  and  holiest
joy  we  raise  our  carols.  As  we  think  of  him  as  "  the  Ancient  of  days  "  and  also  the
Babe  of  Bethlehem,  our  hearts  are  drawn  to  him,  and  we  are  impelled  to  adopt  as  our
own  the  strain  of  Micah's  great  contemporary  Isaiah,  and  to  sing  exultantly,  "  For
unto  uB  a  Child  is  bom,"  etc.  (Is*,  ix.  6).

Ver.  3. — Bttccesa  ;  but  in  OocPe  own  time.  There  is  a  certain  degree  of  ambiguity
about  these  words,  yet  amidst  this  we  find  certain  practical  teachings  very  clearly
enunciated.

I.  We  ABE  beminded  of  DEI.ATB  IS  THE  DiTiNB  woBKiNa.  Seven  hundred
yedrs  must  elapse  ere  the  predictions  respecting  the  advent  of  the  Bedeemer  should  be
fulfilled  and  "  the  time  "  come.  God's  purposes  in  grace,  as  well  as  in  nature  and
providence,  are  developed  gradually.  He  makes  demands  upon  human  patience,
bidding  vis  wait.    He  often,  by  slow  processes,  brings  to  pass  that  which  he  has

'  planned.     "  Best  in  the  Lord,"  etc.  (Ps.  xxxvii.  7).

II.  We  ABE  REMINDED  OF  THE  wiTHDBAWAL  OF  FRiviLxaK.  "Therefore  will  he
give  them  up  imtil,"  etc.  The  favoured  people  had  slighted  the  privileges  which  God
had  so  richly  bestowed  upon  them.  He  had  not  dealt  bo  graciously  with  any  other
nation,  but  the  blessings  granted  they  had  failed  to  improve,  and  hence  these  were  now
to  be  withdrawn.  God  had  delivered  them  from  their  foes,  but  now  they  were  to  go
into  the  land  of  captivity.  The  precious  symbols  of  his  near  presence  with  them  were
no  longer  to  be  seen.  The  voice  of  prophecy,  too,  should  soon  become  silent.  Throi^h
sad  and  solemn  losses  they  were  to  be  led  to  look  with  ardent  hope  to  the  coming  of
"  the  Consolation  of  Israel."

III.  We   ABE     BEMINDED     HEBB     OF     ULTIUATE     OLOBIOUB    INOBEASE.      "  Then     the

remnant  of  his  brethren  shall  return  unto  the  children  of  Israel."  Some  limit  these
words  to  the  conversion  of-  the  Jews,  and  understand  by  "  the  children  of  Israel "  the
true  spiritual  Israelites  like  Simeon  and  Anna,  who  waited  for  the  advent  of  a  spiritual
Bedeemer,  and  regard  the  words  as  intimating  that  to  these  in  Messianic  times  there
should  be  gathered  "  the  remnant  of  Chiist's  brethren,"  i.«.  the  more  spiritually  minded
amongst  his  own  nation  who  should  be  constrained  to  welcome  him  to  their  hearts,
and  to  consecrate  themselves  to  his  service.  According  to  this  interpretation  the
prophecy  received  its  partial  fulfilment  in  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  in  apostolio
times,  and  shall  yet  1m  more  completely  fulfilled  when  the  Jewish  nation  shall  be
brought  in,  and  when  "  all  Israel  shall  be  saved."  Others,  however,  give  the  words
•  yet  wider  meaning,  and  understand  by  "  brethren  "  all  who  "  hear  the  Word  of  Gh)d
and  keep  it,"  and  who  are  obedient  to  the  will  of  Christ's  Father  and  theirs,  whether
they  be  Jews  or  Gentiles ;  and  see  in  these  words  a  pre-intimation  in  prophetic  times
of  the  ooming  of  that  happy  era  when  "  the  Buler  in  Israel "  shall  sway  his  sceptre


74  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  t.  1—15,

over  a  ransomed  and  redeemed  world.  And  to  that  bright  day  of  God  we  look  on  with
longing  hearts.  Dawn  upon  our  darkened  world  it  surely  mil.  Gk>d  has  not  totally
"  given  up "  and  abandoned  our  sin-stricken  and  sin-stained  world.  Even  his  with-
drawals are  with  a  view  to  the  spiritual  good  of  his  children,  and  are  followed,  when
the  discipline  is  accomplished,  by  brighter  and  more  glorious  manifestations  of  his  love
and  grace.  "  At  the  Name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue  shall
confess  him  Lord."  His  hingdoiki  shall  come,  and  his  "  will  be  done  on  earth,  even  as
it  is  done  in  heaven."

Ver.  4. — The  ministering  Chriet.  The  whole  of  this  chapter  is  more  or  less  occupied
with  graphic  descriptions  of  the  Christ  of  God  drawn  ages  before  he  appeared,  and
setting  forth  his  nature,  his  work,  and  his  influence  upon  the  world  aud  the  race.  A
little  child  has  been  called  "  an  unsolved  problem."  We  dare  not  be  so  bold  as  to
attempt  to  forecast  the  future  of  any  child.  This,  however,  is  done  here  respecting
the  "  Babe  of  Bethlehem."  Distinct  Divine  pre-intimations  were  given  concerning  the
destiny  of  this  mighty  Child,  and  to  which  he  has  proved  himself  gloriously  true.
Here  he  is  presented  to  us  as  the  ministering  Christ.     We  have  predicted  here —

L  The  holt  ministebinq  life  of  the  Chbist  of  God.  "  And  he  shall  stand  and
feed,"  etc.  (ver.  4).  It  was  thus  declared  that  the  very  coming  of  Christ  would  be
a  descent  with  a  view  to  helpfulness.  In  his  advent  the  lofty  would  descend  to  the
low,  the  strong  to  the  feeble,  for  the  express  purpose  of  ministering  unto  them  in
order  that  he  might  lift  up  the  fallen  and  restore  the  erring,  and  strengthen  the  weak
by  his  own  great  might  and  love.  This  ministering  character  of  the  life  of  the  Christ
who  was  to  appear  was  set  forth  by  this  and  other  Hebrew  seers  under  the  figure  of
a  shepherd  tending  his  flock.  This  was  natural  in  view  of  the  national  history.  The
Jewish  people  gloried  in  David  as  one  raised  from  the  sheepfold  to  the  throne,  and
rejoiced  in  him  as  their  shepherd-king.  Hence  with  appropriateness  the  prophets
referred  to  "  great  David's  greater  Son  "  under  this  simple  yet  beautiful  emblem.  The
allusions,  too,  were  in  harmony  with  the  destined  birthplace  of  the  Messiah — a  locality
so  thoroughly  pastoral  in  its  character,  and  upon  the  plains  of  which  district  the
Eastern  shepherds  kept  constant  watch.  The  emblem  is  admirably  suggestive  of  the
character  and  work  of  the  Messiah,  setting  forth :  1.  His  gentleness;  the  weak,  the  tired,
the  tempted,  the  erring,  being  tended  by  him  with  patient  love  (Isa.  xl.  11).  2.  His
watdifidnesi.  " He  shall  stand"  etc.  (ver.  4)  ;  the  posture  indicating  alertness,  readi-
ness to  protect  and  defend,  3.  His  succours.  He  should  "  feed  "  the  flock,  supplying
abundantly  the  spiritual  wants  of  his  people,  and  fully  satisfying  the  longings  and
aspirations  of  their  hearts.  The  records  of  the  evangelists  indicate  how  truly
"  ministering  "  in  character  the  life  of  Christ  was,  and  how  that  the  most  trusty
shepherd  watching  over  the  flock  committed  to  his  charge  but  faintly  images  his
wondrous  care  (Matt.  xx.  28).  His  followers  are  to  emulate  his  example,  and  to  live
ministering  lives  (Matt.  xx.  26,  27).  He,  as  "  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  pursued  his
course  of  holy  service  "  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  in  the  majesty  of  the  Name  of  the
Lord  his  God."     And  this  Divine  influence  is  available  to  all  his  servants.

II.   The   PR08PEEITY  OF    AI.L   WHO    AVAIL  THEMSELVES  OF    HIS   HINISTEBIKOB   AND

WHO  COMMIT  THEMSELVES  TNTo  HIS  OABE.  "And  they  shall  abide."  1.  The
thought  of  rest  is  suggested.  "  And  they  shall  abide ;"  literally,  •'  sit."  The  idea  is  the
same  as  in  Ps.  xxiii.  2,  "  He  maketh  me  to  lie  down,"  etc.  Delightful  repose — ^rest  for
the  weary.  The  pastures  of  sin  are  dry  and  parched,  and  its  waters  are  troubled,  and
man  seeks  in  vain  therein  freedom  from  unrest ;  but  when  the  heart  reposes  in  Christ,
then  it  knows  what  it  is  to  lie  down  on  the  pastures  of  tender  grass,  and  by  the  wateri
of  quietness.  2.  The  thought  of  security  is  also  suggested.  They  shall  sit  without
fear  of  harm  overtaking  them,  because  he  "  stands,"  their  Guardian  against  all  intrusion
and  invasion,  ready  as  their  champion  to  defend  them  from  all  peril,  and  to  maintain
their  cause.  So  shall  they  dwell  at  rest  and  in  security,  and  true  prosperity  be  theirs
perpetually.  "  And  they  shall  abide."
in.  The  honoub  with  which  the  ministering  Chbibt,  bt  season  of  his

CONDBSCENDINa    AND  GBACIOUB   BEKVICB,    SHALL   BE   OBOWNBD.      "  Por  DOW  shall  he  bc

great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."    "  For  now."    The  far-distant  future  was  prefcnt  to
the  prophet's  gue  as  he  uttered  these  words,  a&d  he  referred  to  it  as  though  it  had


OT.Y.1— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  7S

already  come.  His  faith  had  peered  beyond  the  centuries  intervening  before  the
advent  of  the  Messiah,  and  had  rendered  that  event  very  real  to  him;  and  now  he
took  by  faith  a  yet  wider  range  of  vision,  and  looked  on  to  the  ages  following  the
advent,  and  saw  the  ever-growing,  ever-widening  influence  and  honour  the  Christ
should  enjoy,  and  even  beheld  this  as  extending  to  earth's  remotest  bounds.  Long
and  weary  ages  had  passed  since  the  prophet  of  God  uttered  this  prediction ;  and  we
to-day,  in  the  partial  fulQlment  of  his  words,  have  every  ground  of  encouragement  to
look  on  to  their  complete  accomplishment.  What  name  is  so  powerful  to  inspire
within  men  the  holiest  emotions,  and  to  move  them  to  devoted  consecration,  as  that
of  Jesus  Christ  ?  He  is  indeed  "  great "  in  the  marvellous  influence  he  exerts  upon
human  hearts  and  lives ;  and  despite  all  the  discouragements  which  meet  us  in
Christian  service,  we  find  this  Influence  widening,  and  behold  cheering  signs  of  the
coming  of  that  bright  day  in  which  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  his  salvation,
and  the  assurance  of  the  angel  Gabriel  to  Mary  be  fully  realized  (Luke  i.  32,  33).  Let
us  make  room  for  One  who  comes  with  such  eager  gladness  to  bind  up  the  world's
wounds,  and  to  pour  into  them  the  balm  of  his  healing  love.  Let  us  yield  to  his  holy
and  heavenly  ministerings,  and  oast  ourselves  upon  his  loving,  gentle  care.  True
happiness  and  peace  shall  then  be  ours.  The  path  of  usefulness  shall  open  out  before
us  here,  and  in  the  day  of  his  complete  triumph  we  shall  be  sharers  with  him  in  his
Yictory,  and  when  his  glory  shall  be  revealed  we  also  shall  be  glad  with  exceeding  joy
(1  Pet.  iv.  13).

Vers.  6,  6. — "  The  Prince  of  Peace."  Solomon  as  well  as  David  was  a  type  of
Christ ;  and  just  as  Micah,  when  he  said  (ver.  4),  "  He  shall  stand  and  feed,"  etc.,
probably  thought  of  the  shepherd-youth,  raised  to  the  throne  of  Israel,  as  typical  of
Israel's  spiritual  King,  who  would  eventually  appear  and  bring  heavenly  strength  and
succour  to  a  needy  world,  so  when  he  added  respecting  the  Messiah,  "  And  this  Man
shall  he  the  Peace"  he  thought  of  the  peaceful  rule  of  Solomon,  and  saw  in  this  a
symbol  of  that  spiritual  tranquillity  which  the  Christ,  the  greater  than  Solomon,
should,  through  his  appearing,  bring  to  human  hiarts,  and  ultimately  to  the  world  at
large.  And  the  same  characteristic  of  the  Messiah  was  present  to  the  mind  of  Isaiah,
and  found  expression  in  one  of  the  titles  employed  by  him  in  that  remarkable  cluster
of  designations  (see  Isa.  ix.  6),  so  rich  in  spiritual  significance — "  The  Prince  of  Peaces
The  text  applies  to—

I.  Thb  DI8TBA0TION8  WHICH  ABisE  TO  US  IN  CUB  PERSONAL  OFB.  1.  In  our  Sinful-
ness we  find  peace  in  Christ.  Sin  is  attended  by  distraction.  It  separates  from  God,
the  true  Source  of  rest.  It  creates  inward  disquiet ;  for  whilst  when  we  do  right  con-
Bcience  approTes,  "  in  whisper  gentle  and  secret,  like  the  murmur  of  a  brook  beneath
the  foliage,"  yet  when  we  do  wrong  its  accusations  prey  upon  the  spirit  as  with  a  fever's
strength.  And  there  is  no  deliverance  from  all  this  disquietude  but  in  Christ  (Matt.
xi.  28;  Bom.  v.  1).  2.  In  our  sorrowfidness  we  find  peace  in  Christ.  He  traverses
the  stormy  seas  of  sorrow,  and  these  adverse  waves  obey  his  voice.  Amidst  all  the
strifes  and  struggles  of  our  life  occasioned  by  our  darker  experiences  he  can  give  our
spirits  rest.  Though  in  the  world  we  must  have  tribulation,  yet  in  him  we  have  peace.
3.  In  our  intellectiml  questionings  and  doubtings  we  find  peace  in  Christ.  The  spirit
of  inquiry  is  rife  in  this  age.  Increased  light  is  being  shed  upon  various  questions,  and
may  necessitate  the  laying  aside  oropinions  and  forms  of  thought  long  cherished.  But,
amidst  this  shaking  and  uprooting,  the  historical  Christ  remains,  and  his  words,  so
charmingly  simple  and  clear,  so  confident  and  reassuring,  abide  for  ever.  And  reposing
with  childlike  trust  in  him  and  in  his  utterances,  in  which  he  has  revealed  to  us  the
true  way  of  life  here,  and  has  assured  us  of  a  blessed  immortality  with  him  hereafter,
all  mental  unrest  ceases,  and  our  minds  stayed  thus  shall  ever  be  kept  at  perfect  rest.
"  And  this  Man  shall  be  the  Peace."

II,  The  DirFEBENcES  which  prevail  between  Christian  communities.  1.  From
within.  There  will  be  such  differences.  Truth  is  many-sided,  and  our  mental  con-
stitution varies.  But  amidst  these  diversities  there  is  a  centre  of  unity — Christ  himself.
Sharing  his  spirit,  and  being  under  the  inspiration  of  his  love,  men  become  united  in
heart,  and,  despite  their  differences,  are  made  one  through  the  possession  of  a  common
Ufa  and  love.    This  is  the  true  unity,  the  being  one  in  life,  and  therefore  ir  spirit,  aim,


7«  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [ot.t.1— 18,

endeavonr,  aad  in  sympathy  with  our  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  and  with  his  Christ,
who  came  to  save  his  people  from  all  selfishness  and  sin,  and  to  establish  a  universal
brotherhood  amongst  men.  It  was  for  this  that  the  great  Intercessor  prayed  in  his
memorable  high-priestly  prayer  (John  xvii.  21).  2.  From  mthout.  Vers.  5  and  6
clearly  refer  to  assaults  from  without.  Whether  we  take  the  reference  to  Assyria
metaphorically  or  literally,  the  allusion  must  be  to  external  attacks.  And  God  in
Christ  is  the  Befuge  and  Strength  of  his  Church,  and  amidst  these  will  keep  her  in
perfect  peace  whilst  she  rests  in  him  (Ps.  xlvi.).

III.  The  oonfliotb  between  nations.  It  is  mournful  to  reflect  upon  the  method
adopted,  even  by  civilized  and  enlightened  nations,  in  order  to  settle  the  disputes  which
arise  between  them.  The  appeal  is  made  to  the  arbitrament  of  the  sword.  The  heart
sickens  at  the  very  thought  of  the  battle-field,  with  all  the  suffering  and  desolation
connected  with  it,  and  yearns  with  ardent  desire  for  the  coming  of  that  bright  day  of
God  in  which  such  strife  shall  cease.  And  our  assurance  of  its  coming  rests  upon
Christ.  Peace  is  a  distinguishing  characteristic  of  his  holy  gospel,  which  shall  at
length  universally  be  accepted  (Jas.  iii.  17 ;  Gal.  v.  22),  and  the  acceptance  of  which
shall  be  followed  by  peoples  dwelling  in  amity  and  concord  (Isa.  xi.  6 — ^9 ;  ch.  iv.  3).
Christ's  disciples  should  be  eminently  distinguished  by  this  spirit  of  peace.  No  con-
tentious jarring  spirit,  out  of  tune,  and  hence  marring  the  harmony  of  the  concert,
should  be  found  amongst  them,  but  all  their  voices  should  be  in  agreement,  thug  pro-
ducing the  sweetest  music  (Fs.  cxxxiii.).

Vers.  7 — 15.-2^  ^vritual  influence  of  good  men  sjfmbolized.  By  "  the  remnant  of
Jacob  "  is  intended  the  good  who  were  to  lie  found  in  the  land  of  Judah ;  for  in  the
most  corrupt  times  God  has  ever  had  a  people  to  show  forth  his  praise.  The  expression
may  be  taken  as  descriptive  of  good,  holy,  spiritual  men ;  and  it  is  here  declared  that
these  shall  exert  among  the  nations  a  gracious  influence.     Notice —

I.  The  bpibitual  influence  of  good  men  is  hebe  set  fobth  bt  usAKsor  stkbou.
1.  This  is  likened  to  the  influence  of  the  dew  and  the  rain  (ver.  7).  The  symbol  is
suggestive  of  the  preservative  influence  of  the  good.  We  know  what  a  wasteful,
scorching  drought  means  to  the  natural  world.  Hills  and  dales,  fields  and  downs,  are
arrayed  in  robes  of  sorrow.  Branches  that  were  covered  with  leaves  have  become
"withered  sprays."  Meadows  that  were  clothed  with  grass  have  become  converted
into  "  short,  unmowed  hay."  Flocks  once  skipping  about  are  pining  through  hunger
and  thirst.  .  Earth's  fruits  are  become  "  abortive,"  and  her  clods  "  stark  and  dry."
Clouds  of  dust  sweep  over  her  plains,  and  from  her  banks  the  river  seems  to  shrink.
And  thus  desolate  spiritually  had  the  world  been  but  for  the  influence  of  good  men.
Between  the  time  of  "the  early  and  latter  rains"  vegetable  life  in  Palestine  was
entirely  dependent  upon  the  dew.  It  was  this  which  kept  vegetation  from  becoming
dry  and  withered,  and  preserved  the  land  from  drought  and  desolation.  And  even  so
the  influence  of  good  men  in  the  world  is  preservative.  Bad  as  the  world  is  to-day
morally  and  spiritually,  it  is  not  so  bad  as  it  would  have  been  save  for  the  influence
exerted  by  those  who  are  under  the  motive  force  of  pure  and  holy  principles.  This
preservative  influence  of  the  good  is  silent,  quiet,  noiseless  in  its  operation.  How
gentle  is  the  dew,  and  how  copious  when  all  is  calm  and  tranquil  I  And  how  gently  the
rain  falls  from  heaven  in  the  refreshing  shower,  penetrating  deeply  into  the  thirsty  land  I
There  is  suggested  quiet  power,  yet  very  effectual  withal.  So  is  it  with  the  influence
of  the  good.  In  the  olden  time  here  referred  to,  when  princes  and  nobles,  priests  and
prophets,  had  corrupted  their  way,  a  remnant  was  to  be  found  among  the  people,
unknown  ones  for  the  most  part,  but  who  nevertheless  by  their  holy  virtues  and
heavenly  graces  kept  piety  alive,  and  whose  influence  upon  society  was  as  that  of  the
dew  upon  the  parched,  needy  ground.  So  shall  it  ever  be  that  our  God  shall  not  be
left  without  faithful  witnesses  to  honour  and  glorify  his  great  Name.  2.  The  other
symbol  employed  here  is  that  of  the  lion  (vers.  8,  9).  This  suggests  the  thought  of
courage,  boldness,  fearlessness,  together  with  destructive  strength  and  might.  "  Tho
remnant  of  Jacob  "  are  ever  such  as  dare  to  do  right,  who  resolutely  follow  their  con-
victions, who  possess  a  strong  sense  of  justice  and  rectitude,  and  who  act  upon  this
•t  all  risks  and  costs.  They  "  trust  in  God  and  do  the  right."  They  are  unyielding
where  true  principle  is  at  stake.     "  The  wicked  fleeth,"  etc,  (Prev.  xxviiL  1).     And


CKT.l— 16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  77

ultimately  the  rictory  is  with  8uch.    The  unprincipled  shall  be  subdued  and  go  down
before  them,  as  surely  as  sheep  yield  before  the  beasts  of  the  forest.

II.  This  uokai.  and  bfiritual  influence  or  good  hen  thus  bst  vobth  m
DIVINELY  DEBivED.  It  cometh  "from  the  Lord  "  (ver.  7).  He  alone  can  impart  to  us
the  quiet,  refreshing,  reinvigorating  power  typified  by  the  dew  and  the  showers ;  and
be  alone  can  make  us  yaliant  in  the  maintenance  and  defence  of  truth  and  righteous-
ness. We  need  hence  to  be  found  constantly  looking  unto  him,  that,  divinely
strengthened  and  sustained,  it  may  be  manifest  that  we  belong  to  "the  remnant"
through  whom  it  is  his  purpose  to  fertilize  and  bless  the  world.

III.  In  obdeb  to  this  beneficent  influence  being  exerted  thebe  uust  be
PUEiTY  or  HEABT  AND  8EPABATI0N  FROU  EVIL.  (Vcrs.  10 — ^14.)  God's  ancient  people
were  placed  in  the  most  favourable  circumstances  for  being  the  medium  of  good  to
other  nations  and  tribes;  but,  forgetful  of  their  "high  calling,"  they  yielded  to  the
contaminating  influences  of  the  world  around,  and  even  exceerled  the  heathen  nations
in  the  practice  of  sin,  and  hence  their  honour  was  laid  in  the  dust,  and  they  were
threatened  with  national  decay.  And  for  the  comfort  of  "  the  remnant "  the  assurance
was  given  that  there  should  be  brought  about  the  purification  of  the  Church  (vers.
10 — ^14).  True  spiritual  influence  is  ever  the  outcome  of  true  spiritual  excellence.
Would  we  be  influential  for  good,  we  must  "follow  after  holiness."  We  must  ba
watchful  over  our  lips  that  we  offend  not  with  our  tongues.     All  self-seeking,  strifes,

-  jealousies,  must  be  put  away  from  us.     "  Let  every  one  that  nameth,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  ii.
19).     Then  "  God  will  bless  us,"  and  through  us  others  (Ps.  Ixvii.).

IV.  This  spiritual  influence  shall  ultimately  pbbvail.  (Ver.  15.).  Whilst
evil  sometimes  appears  victorious,  the  cause  of  truth  and  righteousness  shall  finally
triumph.  This  chapter,  which  begins  with  declaring  the  coming  of  "  the  Babe  of
Bethlehem,"  ends  with  a  solemn  declaration  of  the  final  discomfiture  of  all  who  oppo.se
the  sway  of  this  "  Buler  in  Israel "  (ver.  15).  Array  not  yourselves  "  against  the  Lord
and  his  Anointed."    His  foes  shall  become  hit  footstool.    "  Kiss  the  Son  "  (Ps.  ii.  12).

HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHOBS.

Ver.  2. — A.  new  David:  the  lowliness  tnd  majesty  of  the  Messiah.  Thoughts
respecting  the  lowliness  of  the  Messiah  cluster  around  the  reference  to  his  birthplace.
Bethlehem  was  so  small  and  unimportant  that  it  was  "  little  to  be  among  the  thousands
of  Israel."  It  was  like  one  of  our  hamlets,  not  even  attaining  to  the  dignity  of  a
parish.  From  this  village  there  went  forth  a  youth  unknown  to  fame,  and  almost
unnoticed  among  his  own  kindred  (1  Sam.  xvi.  11 ;  Ps.  Ixiviii.  70,  71).  Even  after
the  establishment  of  David  on  the  throne,  his  birthplace  was  allowed  to  remain  in  its
former  insignificance ;  or,  if  honoured  for  a  time,  sank  into  obscurity  again  (as  Micah
testifies),  just  as  the  royal  family  of  David  itself  sank  into  such  a  low  estate  that
it  could  be  compared  to  the  stump  of  a  tree  cut  down  and  giving  little  promise  of  a
renewed  vigorous  vitality  (Isa.  xi.  1).  This  lowly  condition  of  both  the  home  and  the
house  of  David  corresponds  to  the  debased  condition  of  the  Jewish  Church  at  the  time
of  the  advent.  It  was  "  despised,"  "  hated,"  "  afiflicted  "  (Isa.  Ix.  14,  15).  In  that  hamlet
Jesus,  the  Christ,  was  born.  Now  note  the  contrasts  that  have  followed.  1.  Beth-
lehem has  become  one  of  the  most  notable  places  in  the  world — a  theme  for  poets,
a  subject  for  artists,  a  goal  for  pilgrims.  Its  names  have  received  a  new  and  higher
significance.  Bethlehem  has  become  a  "  house  of  bread  "  for  a  dying  world ;  Ephratah
has  been  "fruitful"  in  the  richest  blessings  for  the  human  race.  2.  The  family
of  David  is  now,  through  Jesus  Christ,  the  most  exalted  family  of  the  earth.  Con-
trast the  Ptolemies,  Cassars,  and  other  royal  names.  3.  The  Jewish  Church  sprang
to  a  new  life.  It  has  taken  a  place  of  supreme  influence  among  the  nations,  not
simply  through  Christ  himself,  but  through  the  works  and  writings  of  his  apostles  and
evangelists.  Great  as  these  blessings  are  already,  we  shall  see  greater  things  than
these.  "  The  kingdom  "  shall  be  restored,  "  yea,  the  former  dominion  shall  come "
(ch.  iv.  8).  For  ages  there  had  be^Ti  "no  king"  (ch.  iv.  9),  at  the  best  only  a
temporary  "judge"  (ver.  1).  Israel  still  held  as  its  ideal  king  David  the  great.  Its
ideal  should  be  more  than  realized.    A  new  David  shall  come  forth  "  unto  me,"  and  in


78  THE  BOOK    OF  MICAH.  [oh.t.  1— 15.

Ood's  Name  and  strength  shall  rule  (ver.  4).  Victory  is  promised  under  figures  luggested
by  existing  foes  (vers.  6 — 9).  In  tnose  spiritual  triumphs  of  Jesus  Christ  we  shall  see
the  fulfilment  of  the  predictions  of  his  everlasting  dominion.  And  in  these  victories  of
grace  bis  nation  will  take  a  share,  and  will  be  still  further  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  God
and  man  (Isa.  Ix.,  Izyi.,  etc.).  The  prediction  of  a  Ruler  so  mighty,  yet  of  such  lowly
origin,  prepares  for  the  description  of  a  still  greater  glory.  And  the  fact  of  the  power
and  influence  in  the  world  of  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem  prepares  us  to  receive,  nay,  more,
requires  us  to  believe  in,  his  Divine  dignity.  The  "  coming  forth  "  from  Bethlehem  can
only  be  explained  by  previous  "  goings  forth."  These  words  declare :  (1)  The  pre-
existence  ot  the  Messiah  (John  viii.  68).  (2)  His  previous  manifestations  and  opera-
tions— in  creation  (John  i.  3),  providence  (Col.  i.  17;  Heb.  i.  3),  and  as  the  Divine
Angel  of  Jehovah  (Gen.  xviii.,  etc.).  (3)  Eternal  existence.  Becau.se  thou  art  "  from
everlasting,"  therefore  "  thou  art  God  "  (Ps.  xc.  2  j  John  i.  1).  Notljing  but  the  truth
of  the  Deity  of  Christ  can  explain  the  predictions  of  him  or  unlock  the  mysteries  of  his
character  and  his  life.  The  more  lowly  his  origin  and  all  the  facts  of  his  earthly  life,
the  more  inexplicable  his  present  majesty,  unless  we  acknowledge  him  as  personally
Divine.— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  7 — 9. —  The  gentleness  and  terribleness  of  the  people  of  Ood.  "  The  remnant  of
Jacob"  is  the  faithful  few  who  remain  loyal  to  God's  truth  and  the  duty  of  the  d»y,
whether  in  the  times  of  Elijah  Q.  Kings  xix.  18),  Hzziah  (Isa.  i.  9),  or  Christ  (Rom.
xi.  5).  The  people  of  God,  the  Church  of  Christ  dispersed  among  the  "  peoples  "  of  the
eartli,  have  a  twofold  aspect — gentloMSS  and  terribleness.  This  twofold  aspect  is  seen
in  God  (Exod.  xzxiv.  6, 7 ;  Ps.  xviii.  25,  26  ;  Isa.  viii.  13,  14),  in  Christ  (Isa.  xxviiL
16  ;  Matt.  xxi.  42 — 44 ;  Luke  iL  34),  who  is  both  a  "  Lamb "  aud  a  "  Lion ;  "  and
therefore  in  his  people  who  are  called  into  fellowship  with  himself.     They  are —

I.  Gentle  to  bless.  Notice  the  figures.  1.  "  A  dew  from  tht  Lord"  The  dew  is
of  heavenly  origin,  and  comes  fresh  from  the  hand  of  God  (Job  xxxviii.  28;  cf.  John
i.  13 ;  iii.  3,  "  from  above  "),  reflecting  God's  light,  transparent  and  glistering  (cf.  Matt,
V.  16 ;  2  Cor.  i.  12-;  Phil.  ii.  15, 16),  evanescent  and  apparently  one  of  the  frailest  of
nature's  forces,  yet  powerful  to  quicken  and  sustain  life  that  would  otherwise  perish
(cf.  1  Cor.  i.  26—28 ;  iv.  15 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  12  ;  Jas.  v.  19,  20).  Such  spiritual  qualifica-
tions in  individuals  made  the  Church  of  Christ  a  life-giving  power.  Issuing  from
Juda;a,  Christ's  disciples  were  as  dew  to  the  parched  and  perishing  Roman  world,  both
by  their  teaching  (Dent,  xxxii.  2)  and  still  more  by  the  testimony  of  the  wondrous
beauty  of  their  lives  (Ps.  cxxxiii.  3).  Therefore  they  were  scattered  abroad — John
to  Asia,  Thomas  to  India,  Paul  to  Rome,  etc. — that  the  life-giving  dew  might  be  con-
veyed to  the  distant  "  peoples  "  of  the  earth.  2.  "  The  showers  upon  the  grass."  Christ
"  shall  come  down  like  rain,"  etc.  (Ps.  Ixxii.  6),  not  only  by  his  individual  blessings,
but  through  his  people.  Like  the  rain,  they  "  tarried  not  for  man."  Once  the  vision
was  seen  and  the  appeal  heard  before  the  mission  was  commenced  (Acts  xvi.  9) ;  yet
even  then,  as  elsewliere,  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in  the  disciples  as  well  as  the
Master,  "I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  me  not"  (Isa.  Ixv.  1).  Nor  did  they
depend  upon  or  "wait  for  the  sons  of  men"  (1  Cor.  iii.  6 — 7).  By  both  proclaiming
and  living  God's  Word  they  became  identified  with  the  promise,  and  sharers  in  the
blessing  of  the  old  Messianic  predictions  (Gen.  xxii.  18 ;  Isa.  Iv.  10,  11).

II.  Tbreiblb  to  vanquish  or  destroy.  Courage  and  fearlessness  are  implied,  such
as  were  promised  (Luke  xxi.  15)  and  enjoyed  (Acts  iv.  13 — 21 ;  -v.  29-:— 42,  etc.).  But
the  lion  is  not  always  on  the  defensive.  The  Church  of  Christ,  with  its  new  doctrines,
maxims,  morals,  and  threats  of  a  wrath  to  come,  was  terrible  to  the  pagan  world  of  the
first  century,  with  its  foul  gods,  its  godless  creeds,  its  nameless  immoralities,  its
revolting  cruelties  and  crimes.  The  contrast  of  the  "dew"  and  the  "lion"  may  be
marked  even  in  the  apostles'  teaching  both  to  heathen  and  to  professing  Christians
(Actsxvii.  24—31;  xxiv.  24,  25;  2  Cor.  v.  11,  20;  xiii.  1—11;  2  Thess.  i.  6—10).
Its  one  object  was  to  vanquish  souls  by  destroying  sin  and  bringing  them  into
captivity  to  Christ.  It  trod  down  its  foes  and  "  went  forth  conquering  and  to
conquer "  (cf.  Acts  xxi.  20 ;  Rom.  xv.  19 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  14),  till,  less  than  two  hundred
years  later,  TertuUian  could  speak  of  the  Christians  thus :  "  We  are  but  of  yesterday,
•nd  we  have  filled  every  place  among  you — cities,  islands,  fortresses,  towns,  market-


in.T.1— IS.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIGAH.  79

places,  the  very  camp,  tribes,  companies,  palace,  senate,  forum ;  we  have  left  nothing
to  you  but  the  temples  of  your  gods  "  ('  Apology,'  c.  38).  In  a  similar  way  the  Church
of  the  Reformation  was  terrible  to  the  corruptions  of  the  papacy,  which  it  sought  tu
"  tear  in  pieces"  with  weapons  not  carnal,  but  spiritual.  And  to-day  the  true  Church
of  Christ,  with  its  lofty  standards  and  ideals,  is  hateful  to  the  world  with  its  maxims
of  expediency  and  fraud,  its  sins  and  shams ;  and  to  many  also  who  would  claim  the
sacred  name  of  Christian.  Such  foes  of  Christ  and  his  people  must  submit  (Isa.  Iz.  14)
or  perish  (Isa.  Ix.  12).  The  Church  of  God  will  at  last  be  terrible  in  the  day  of  the
destruction  of  those  who  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  and  who  will  be  driven  away
in  their  wickedness.  "  The  saints  shall  judge  the  world  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  3 ;  Jude  14, 15 ;
Rev.  xix.  11—15) ;  "  Let  thine  hand  be  lifted  up,"  etc.  (ver.  9).— E,  8.  P.

Ver.  2. — The  promise  of  Messiah.  "But  thou,  Bethlehem  Ephratah,  though  thou
be  little  among  the  thousands  of  Judah,  yet  out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto
me  that  is  to  be  Buler  in  Israel ;  whose  goings  forth  liave  been  from  of  old,  from  ever-
lasting." This  is  one  of  the  most  definite  of  the  Messianic  prophecies.  In  the  previous
verse  Micah  foretells  a  period  of  deep  degradation.  The  people  of  God  would  troop
together  before  the  invader,  as  sheep  huddle  together  before  a  snowstorm.  All
resistance  would  prove  vain.  The  judge  would  be  smitten  on  the  cheek,  i.e.  righteous
rule  and  self-rule  would  perish.  But  when  things  were  at  their  worst  a  new  Baler
would  arise.  He  would  come,  not  from  the  city  of  Jerusalem,  but  from  the  village  of
Bethlehem,  so  small  a  place  that  it  was  never  reckoned  amongst  "  the  thousands  "
(the  chief  divisions  of  the  tribe)  of  Judah.  Yet  he  who  came  from  that  obscure  birth-
place would  be  "  he  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting."  This
prophecy  was  universally  regarded  as  applicable  to  the  Messiah.  It  was  quoted  by
the  scribes  in  their  reply  to  Herod  (Matt.  ii.  6);  and  at  a  later  period,  when  it  was
popularly  supposed  that  Jesus  was  of  Nazareth,  it  was  used  as  an  argument  against
those  who  believed  him  to  be  the  Christ  (John  vii.  42,  etc.).

L  Whence  came  the  promised  King  ?  1.  In  his  origin  he  is  Divine,  "  His  goings
forth,"  etc.  The  prophet  and  the  New  Testamentconcur  in  asserting  the  pre-existence
and  Divinity  of  our  Lord.  Jehovah,  speaking  through  the  prophet,  says,  "  he  shall
come  forth  unto  me,"  i.e.  as  a  son  is  born  to  his  father;  and  the  disciples  heard  a  voice
from  heaven,  saying,  "This  is  my  beloved  Son,"  etc.  Micah  says,  "  Hb  goings  forth
have  been  from  of  old ; "  and  in  harmony  with  this  John  declares,  "  In  the  beginning
was  the  Word,"  etc.  Divinity  was  a  necessity  to  the  Redeemer-King.  He  could  not
save  humanity  if  he  was  simply  part  of  it.  He  could  not  suffer  as  the  spotless  Lamb
of  God  if  it  was  true  of  him  as  of  us,  "Behold,  I  was  shapen  in  iniquity,"  etc.  In
order  to  assume  a  true  humanity  he  was  "  born  of  a  woman ;  "  but  the  active  cause  of
his  earthly  being  was  not  in  man,  but  in  God.  Hence  Gabriel  said,  "  That  holy  thing
that  shall  be  born  of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Highest."  "  The  Word  was
made  ffesh,"  etc.  Signs  of  his  Divine  origin  may  be  seen  in  the  accompaniments  of
his  birth — the  angels'  song ;  the  effect  of  the  emperor's  edict  in  bringing  Joseph  and
Mary  to  Betlilehera;  the  star  seen  in  the  east;  the  Scripture  evidence  (Matt.  ii.  6)
unwittingly  adduced  by  the  scribes ;  the  general  expectation  which  presaged  the  advent,
as  the  fragrance  of  the  spice  islands  foretells  to  the  sailor  that  they  are  near.  The
Babe  of  Bethlehem  was  the  Son  ol  God.  2.  In  his  birth  he  was  human.  In  spite  of  ita
association  with  David  and  with  Ruth,  Bethlehem  never  became  great.  From  the
first  God  chose  "  things  despised."  To  a  people  like  the  Jews,  to  whom  names  were
never  without  significance,  these  in  the  text  would  be  suggestive.  Bethlehem,  the
"  House  of  bread,"  was  the  birthplace  of  him  wlio  spoke  of  bimsi-If  as  "  the  Bread  of
life"  (John  vi.).  Ephratah,  the  old  and  still  the  poetic  name  of  the  village,  signifying
"the  Prnit-field,"  was  connected  with  him  who  was  the  Seed-corn  of  the  world's  life
(John  xii.  24).  Had  he  been  born  in  Jerusalem,  an  earthly  policy  might  have  sought
to  use  him ;  but  being  bom  in  Bethlehem,  only  loyal  hearts  welcomed  him  ;  so  that
the  cradle,  like  the  cross,  tested  men.  Further,  had  Jerusalem  been  his  birthplace,
it  might  have  been  considered  the  world-centre  of  his  kingdom,  which  we  know  is
"  not  of  this  world."

II.  What  is  the  natubk  of  his  eule  ?  1.  ffe  reigns  by  lawful  right.  If  he  is
"from  everlasting,"  we  should  approach  him  with  reverence.    Insistence  on  Christ'*


80  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  [oh.  T.  1— 1&

humanity  has  been  of  advantage  in  making  him  less  a  theological  abstraction,  and  mora
manifestly  our  Brother;  but  there  is  some  danger  of  our  forgetting  his  royal  dignity.
The  familiar  expressions,  "dear  Jesus,"  "  my  Jesus,"  etc.,  are  too  lightly  used  of  our  Lord.
Nor  are  we  justified  in  speaking  of  him  as  one  superior  to  other  teachers  merely  in  his
moral  excellence  and  mental  power.  Ours  should  be  the  reverence  of  Thomas,  who
exclaimed,  "My  Lord  and  my  Q-odl  "  2.  He  reigns  hy  the  power  of  love.  Because  he
will  only  rule  thus  he  lost,  and  is  losing,  an  earthly  kingdom.  If  he  appeared  in  the
glory  of  his  power,  defiance  would  break  down,  hesitation  would  cease.  Yet  he  is
satisfied  that  instead  of  this  men  should  be  stirred  by  an  exhortation  the  effect  of  which
may  soon  pass.  Why  ?  Because  he  only  cares  for  willing  service ;  he  would  not  weaken
moral  responsibility,  and  would  only  have  that  sway  which  is  deepest  and  widest,
because  truest.  His  is  not  the  power  of  a  tyrant  who  is  repressing  by  force  the  aspira-
tions of  his  people,  but  the  influence  of  a  father  who  bids  his  child  do  something  which
he  is  free  to  leave  undone,  though  he  is  confident  the  child,  for  love's  sake,  will  do  more
than  he  says.  3.  He  reigns  for  the  welfare  of  his  people.  Note  the  association  of
"  feed"  and  "rule"  in  Scripture.  David  had  training  for  the  exercise  of  royal  power,
and  at  the  same  time  saw  a  type  of  it,  in  his  care  for  the  sheep  at  Bethlehem.  Show
how  Christ  used  the  figure  of  the  shepherd  to  denote  his  work  and  sacrifice.  Contrast
his  reign  and  its  issues  with  that  of  many  an  earthly  monarch.

III.  Who  abb  the  subjects  op  hib  swat?  Not  always  those  whom  we  should
expect.  Not  the  scribes,  with  their  knowledge  and  preparation  and  responsibility  as
religious  leaders.  Not  the  Jewish  people,  who  did  not  find  their  expectations  fulfilled
in  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem,  the  Lad  of  Narareth,  the  Prophet  of  Oalilee.  "He  came
unto  his  own,  and  his  own  received  him  not."  Who  are  the  "  Israel "  now — ^heirs  of
the  promises  ?  The  men  who  have  come  from  a  far  country  like  the  Magians,  because
they  seek  holiness  and  truth;  the  women  like  Mary,  whose  hearts  are  bif  with
hope  of  "  sweeter  manners,  purer  laws ; "  the  children  who  pray  with  all  their  hearts,
"  Thy  kingdom  come ;  "  the  busy  men  like  Joseph,  who  are  struggling  with  temptation,
and  wanting  help  and  hope  outside  themselves ;  the  sinful  and  outcasts,  who  find  rest
at  Jesus'  feet,  etc.  These  are  the  heirs  of  Jacob,  who  at  Bethel  gained  his  name
"  Israel ; ''  for  they  see  in  Christ  the  ladder  that  reaches  heaven,  though  its  foot  rests
on  earth ;  they  pledge  themselves  to  serve  him,  and  in  agonizing  prayer  say,  "  I  will
not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me."

Conclusion.  May  we  have  given  to  us  of  GK)d  some  thought  which  shall  be  to
us  what  the  star  in  the  Bast  was  to  the  Wise  Men,  that  we  may  say,  "  Where  is  he
who  is  bom  to  be  King  ?  for  we  have  seen  his  star  .  .  .  and  have  come  to  worship
him"!— A.  R.

Ver.  1. — The  Church  of  Ood,  "  Now  gather  thyself  in  troops,  0  daughter  of  troops :
he  hath  laid  siege  against  us:  they  shall  smite  the  judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod  upon  the
cheek."  The  prophet,  as  if  fearful  that  his  previous  promises  would  be  somewhat  too
reassuring,  so  that  the  people  would  lose  the  due  impression  of  the  perils  to  which  they
would  be  exposed,  here  reminds  them  of  the  calamities  which  would  befall  them  before
the  promiSFd  prosperity  would  be  realized.  "  0  daughter  of  troops  I  "  Jerusalem  was
BO  called  on  account  of  the  numerous  troops  that  it  possessed.  "  He  hath  laid  siewe
against  us."  That  is,  the  enemy  hath — the  invading  army.  "He  shall  smite  the
judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod  upon  the  cheek."  Zedekiah,  the  judge  or  king  of  Israel
(Amos  ii.  3),  was  so  insulted  by  the  Chaldeans  as  if  he  had  been  smitten  on  the  cheeks.
To  smite  on  the  cheek  was  esteemed  by  the  Orientals  the  greatest  affront.  This
insult,  we  know,  was  offered  by  the  nation  to  him  who  is  the  "  Prince  of  the  kings  of
the  earth."  "  I  gave  my  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheek  to  them  that  plucked  out
the  hair.  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting  "  (Isa.  L  6).  It  is  perfectly
lejjitimate  to  take  these  words  as  a  syioabolical  portrait  of  the  Church  of  Glod.  Look
at  it —

I.  As  MILITANT  m  ITB  OHAKAOTBB.  Jerusalem  is  addressed  as  "daughter  of
troops."  As  Jerusalem  was  a  military  city,  containing  a  great  body  of  soldiers  within
her  walls,  so  is  the  Church  on  earth  ;  it  is  militaiy.  The  life  of  all  true  men  here  is
a  battle ;  all  are  soldiers,  bound  to  be  valiant  for  the  truth.  They  aro  commanded
to  fight  the  good  fight,  to  war  the  good  warfare.    They  are  to  "  wrestle  not  against


OS.  T.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  81

flesh  ard  blood,  but  against  principalities  and  powers,  and  spiritual  wickednesses  In
high  places."  The  warfare  is  spiritual,  righteous,  indispmscMe,  personal.  No  one
can  fight  the  battle  by  proxy.

IL  Ab  perilous  in  its  position.  "He  hath  laid  siege  against  us."  The
dangerous  condition  of  Jerusalem,  when  the  Chaldean  army  surroimded  its  walls  in
order  to  force  an  entrance,  is  only  a  faint  shadow  of  the  perilous  position  of  the  Church
of  God.  It  is  besieged  by  mighty  hosts  of  errors  and  evil  passions,  and  mighty  lusts
that  "  war  against  the  soul."  Hosts  of  enemies  are  encamped  round  every  human
souL  The  siege  is  planned  with  strategic  skill  and  with  malignant  determination.
How  it  becomes  every  spirit  to  be  on  its  watch-tower,  fully  armed  for  the  fight  of
defence  1    "  Wherefore  take  unto  you  the  whole  armour  of  God,"  etc.  (Eph.  vi.  13).

IIL  As  INSULTED  BT  ITS  ENEMIES.  "  They  shall  smite  the  judge  of  Israel  with  a
rod  upon  the  cheek."  Were  the  enemies  of  Christianity  ever  more  insolent  than  in
this  age  ?  And  their  insolence,  we  regret  to  state,  has  been  encouraged  by  the  brain-
less utterances  and  doings  of  religious  fanatics.  The  argumentative  opponents  of
conventional  evangelicism  seem  to  me  more  insulting  in  their  spirit  and  behaviour  than
ever.

rV.  As  SUMMONED  TO  ACTION.  "  Now  gather  thyself  in  troops."  The  men  of
Jerusalem  are  here  commanded  by  Heaven  to  marshal  their  troops  and  to  prepare  for
battle,  since  the  enemies  are  outside  their  walls.  Far  more  nrgent  Is  the  duty  of  the
Church  to  collect,  arrange,  and  concentrate  all  its  forces  against  the  mighty  hosts  that
encompass  it.  "  Let  us  not  sleep  as  do  others; "  "  let  ns  quit  ourselves  like  men,"  ato.
"  Gather  thyself  in  troops."

"Sounds  the  trumpet  from  afar  I
Soldiers  of  the  holy  war,
Biae  I  for  you  yonr  Captain  waiti ;
Bise  I  the  foe  is  at  the  gates.

"  Arm  I  the  conflict  has  begun ;
Fight  I  the  battle  must  be  won ;
Lift  the  banner  to  the  sky,
Wave  its  blazing  folds  on  high.*

D.T.

Ter.  2. — Christ.  "  But  thou,  Bethlehem  Ephratah,  though  then  be  little  among
the  thousands  of  Judah,  yet  out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto  me  that  is  to  be  Buler
in  Israel ;  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  everlasting."  For  the  sake
of  continuity  we  here  transfer  thoughts  on  this  passage  which  have  appeared  before .
Our  subject  is  Christ,  and  the  text  leads  us  to  consider —

I.  His  BiBTH  AS  THE  SoN  OF  MAN.  Two  remarks  are  suggested  here.  1.  He  wat
horn  in  obscurity.  "  But  thou,  Bethlehem,"  etc.  Bethlehem  Ephratah,  where  Jacob
says, "  Rachel  ^ed  by  me  in  the  land  of  Canaan  in  the  way,  when  yet  there  was  but  a
little  way  to  come  into  Ephratb :  .  .  .  the  same  is  Bethlehem"  (Gen.  xlviii.  7),  or
Bethlehem- Judah,  so  called  to  distinguish  it  from  Bethlehem  in  Zebulon.  It  is  a  few
miles  south-west  of  Jerusalem.  Bethlehem  means  "  the  House  of  bread ; "  Ephrath
means  "  Fruitful ; "  both  names  referring  to  the  fertility  of  the  region.  "  Though  thou
be  little  among" — though  thou  be  scarcely  large  enough  to  be  reckoned  among,  etc.  It
was  insiginificant  in  size  and  population,  so  that  in  Josh.  xv.  21  it  is  not  enumerated
among  the  cities  of  Judah;  nor  in  the  list  in  Neh.  xi.  2S.  Under  Behoboam  it  became
a  city  (2  Chron.  xi.  6).  "  He  built  even  Bethlehem."  The  scribes'  quotation  of  Micah,
in  answer  to  Herod's  inquiry  prompted  by  the  Wise  Men  of  the  East,  who  asked,
"  Where  is  he  that  is  born  King  of  the  Jews  ?  "  (Matt.  ii.  6),  seems  to  contradict  Micah,
"  thou  art  not  the  least,"  but  the  contradiction  is  only  seeming.  What  is  meant  in
Matthew  is  that  though  "thou  art  least  in  worldly  importance,  thou  art  morally
greatest,  inasmuch  as  thou  art  the  burthplace  of  the  Messiah."  Why  was  this  Illus-
trious One  thus  born  in  such  obscurity?  He  had  what  no  other  man  ever  had— the
power  of  selecting  his  own  parentage  and  birthplace.  He  might  have  been  born  of
royalty  and  nursed  in  a  palace,  No  doubt  there  was  the  highest  reason  for  this.  It
was  a  protest  to  the  ages  against  the  popular  and  influential  opinion  that  human  dignity
eonsists  in  birth  and  ancestral  distinctions.    2.  He  was  lorn  according  to  Divine  plan.


82  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  T.  1— 1&

"  Out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto  me,"  Unto  whom  ?  Jehovah.  The/aet  of  his
birth,  the  scene  of  his  birth,  the  object  of  his  birth,  were  all  according  to  a  Divine  plan.
"  He  shall  be  called  Great,  and  .  .  .  the  Son  of  the  Highest."  "  Behold  my  Servant,
whom  I  uphold,  mine  Elect,  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth."  "  He  shall  come  forth
unto  me"  (1)  according  to  my  will;  (2)  to  do  my  will.  3.  He  was  lorn  to  an  empire,
"  To  be  Ruler  in  Israel."  He  is  the  Prince  of  Peace,  on  whose  shoulder  the  govern-
ment is  laid.  He  is  a  Ruler.  Not  a  temporal  ruler ;  temporal  rule  is  but  a  shadow.
He  is  to  rule  thought,  intelligence,  soul.  He  is  the  greatest  king  who  governs  mind ;
and  no  one  has  obtained  such  a  government  over  mind  as  he  who,  eighteen  centuries
ago,  "came forth  out  of  Bethlehem  Ephratah."  His  kingdom  is  increasing  every  day.
"  Gird  thy  sword  upon  thy  thigh,  0  most  mighty,"  etc.  Speed  the  time  when  the
"  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord  and  uf  his  Christ,"  etc.
II.  His  HiBTOBT  AS  THE  SoN  OF  GoD.  "Whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,
from  everlasting,"  or,  as  Delitzsch  says, "  whose  goings  forth  are  from  olden  time,  from
the  days  of  eternity."  Micah  does  not  announce  here  the  eternal  generation  of  the  Son
from  the  Father,  or  of  the  Logos  from  God,  the  generatio  Filii  aterna,  as  the  earlier
orthodox  commentators  suppose.  Eternal  generation,  huiuanly  speaking,  is  a  theological
fiction,  a  philosophical  absurdity.  He  who  was  before  all  time.  "I  was  set  up  from
everlasting ; "  "  In  the  beginning  was  the  Word ; "  "  He  was  fore-ordained  before  the
foundation  of  the  world,  but  was  manifested  in  these  last  times  •"  "  Glorify  thou  me
with  thine  own  self,  with  the  glory  which  I  had  with  thee ; "  "  Whose  goings  forth
have  been  of  oW,  from  everlasting."  "Goings  forth  I"  What  for?  To  furnish
immensity  with  innumerable  worlds,  and  to  people  them  with  sentient  and  intelligent
beings,  to  participate  in  the  infinite  bountihood  of  God.  As  the  Son  of  God,  he  never
has  had  a  beginning  and  has  always  been  active.  "  The  Father  worketh  hitherto,  and
I  work,"  His  activity  explains  the  origin  and  phenomena  of  the  universe.  **  By  him
were  all  things  created."

"  Oh,  who  can  strive
To  comprehend  the  vast,  the  awful  troth
Of  the  eternity  that  hath  gone  by.
And  not  recoil  frem  the  dismaying  sense
Of  human  impotence  ?    The  life  of  man
Is  summed  in  birthdays  and  in  sepulchres;
But  the  eternal  God  bath  no  beginning ;
Ufi  hath  no  end.    Time  bad  been  with  him
For  everlasting,  ere  the  Dcsdal  world
Rose  from  the  gulf  in  loveliness.     Like  hi
It  knew  no  source ;  like  him  'twas  uncreated
What  is  it,  then?  The  past  eternity  1"

D.  T.

Vers.  8,  4. — Christ  as  the  great  Shepherd  of  mankind,  "  Therefore  will  he  give
them  up,  until  the  time  that  she  which  travaileth  hath  brought  forth:  then  the
remnant  of  his  brethren  shall  return  unto  the  children  of  Israel.  And  he  shall  stand
and  feed  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  in  the  majesty  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord  his  God  ;
and  they  shall  abide :  for  now  shall  he  be  great  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  "  There-
fore will  he  give  them  up,  until  the  time  when  a  travailing  woman  hath  brought  forth :
and  the  remnant  of  his  brethren  will  return,  together  with  the  sons  of  Israel.  And  he
will  stand  and  feed  in  the  strength  of  Jehovah,  in  the  majesty  of  the  Name  of  Jehovah
his  God ;  and  they  will  dwell :  for  now  will  he  be  great  to  the  ends  of  the  earth "
(Delitzsch).  The  following  quotation  from  Delitzsch  on  this  passage  we  think  the
best  commentary  :  "  Therefore  (Jdkhen),  »'.«.  because  the  great  Divine  Ruler  of  Israel
from  whom  alone  its  redemption  can  proceed,  will  spring  from  the  little  Bethlehem)
and  therefore  from  the  degraded  family  of  David  (Caspari).  This  is  the  correct  expla^
nation ;  for  the  reason  why  Israel  is  to  he  given  up  to  the  power  of  the  nations  of  the
world,  and  not  to  be  rescued  earlier,  does  not  lie  in  the  appearance  of  the  Messiah  as
such,  but  in  his  springing  from  little  Bethlehem.  The  birth  of  the  Messiah  in
Bethlehem,  and  not  in  Jerusalem,  the  city  of  David,  presupposes  that  the  family  of
David,  out  of  which  it  is  to  spring,  will  have  lost  the  throne  and  have  fallen  into  poverty.


OH.  T.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  88

This  could  only  arise  from  the  giving  up  of  Israel  iuto  the  power  of  its  enemies.
Micah  had  already  stated  clearly  enough,  in  what  precedes,  that  this  fate  would  fall
upon  the  nation  and  the  royal  house  of  David,  on  account  of  its  apostasy  from  the
Lord ;  so  that  he  could  overlook  this  here,  and  give  prominence  to  the  other  side  alone,
viz.  to  the  fact  that  according  to  the  counsel  of  Qod  the  future  Deliverer  and  Buler  of
Israel  would  also  resemble  his  royal  ancestor  David  in  the  fact  that  he  was  not  to
spring  from  Zion,  the  royal  city  built  on  high,  but  from  the  insignificant  country  town
of  Bethlehem,  and  that  for  this  very  reason  Israel  was  to  remain  so  long  under  the
power  of  the  nations  of  the  world."  These  words  may  be  regarded  as  presenting  to  na
Christ  as  the  great  Shepherd  of  mankind  ;  and  looking  at  them  in  this  light  the  following
points  come  up  to  notice.

I.  HiB  iNTEODUOTioN  TO  THE  woBLD  AS  A  Shbphbbd.  "  Therefore  will  he  give
them  up  [that  is,  leave  them  to  suffer  their  calamities],  until  the  time  that  she  which
travaileth  hath  brought  forth."  Christ  came  into  the  world  through  sufferings  that
may  be  fairly  represented  as  parturient.  The  whole  Jewish  nation  groaned  and
travailed  together  until  he  came ;  and  although  the  throes  of  his  mother  are  perhaps
specially  referred  to  here,  the  Hebrew  people  through  all  preceding  times  had  struggled
in  agony  in  order  to  give  birth  to  the  Messiah.  Herein  is  a  mystery — the  world's
Deliverer  came  into  the  world  through  suffering.  And  does  not  all  the  good  we  have
come  out  of  anguish  ?  Every  true  enjoyment,  like  every  birth,  implies  previous  pain.
"  Through  much  tribulation  "  we  enter  into  kingdoms.  "  Our  light  afQictions,  which
are  but  for  a  moment,"  etc.

II.  His  qualification  fob  bis  wobk  as  a  Shepeebd.  "He  shall  stand  and  feed  in
the  strength  of  the  Lord,  in  the  majesty  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord  his  Qod."  Observe :
1.  His  attitude.  "  He  shall  stand."  The  word  "  stand "  here  may  mean  one  of  two
things — either  a  commanding  position,  by  which  he  can  observe  and  direct  aU,  or
ttabUity,  indicating  his  endurance  and  unswerving  perseverance.  He  is  settled  and
fixed  in  his  work  as  a  Shepherd.  Both  these  ideas  are  true.  It  is  true  that  Christ,  as
a  Shepherd,  has  a  commanding  view  of  all,  and  a  controlling  power  over  all ;  and  it  is
also  true  that  he  stands  immovable  as  a  Shepherd.  "  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be  dis-
couraged, until  he  hath  set  judgment  in  the  earth  "  (Isa.  xlii.  4).  2.  His  Divinity.  "  In
the  strength  of  the  Lord,  in  the  majesty  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord  his  God."  He  is
endowed  with  the  strength  of  Omnipotence,  he  is  invested  with  the  majesty  of  God
himself.  He  is  "  Almighty  to  ssfire,"  he  is  the  "  Image  of  the  invisible  God."  Here
is  a  competent  Shepherd  1

III.  His  BKNEFiCENoe  IB  his  wobk  as  a  Sh&fhebd.  He  "shall  feed  in  the
strength  of  the  Lord."  The  word  "  feed  "  means  both  "  feed  "  and  "  rule ; "  indeed,  feed
implies  rule,  for  human  souls  can  scarcely  be  nourished  without  a  wise  and  merciful
control.  "  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a  shepherd :  he  shall  gather  the  lambs  with  his
arm,  and  carry  them  in  his  bosom,  and  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young "
(Isa.  xl.  11) ;  "  They  shall  not  hunger  nor  thirst,  neither  shall  the  heat  or  the  sun
smite  them ;  for  he  that  hath  mercy  on  them  shall  lead  them,  even  by  the  springs
of  water  shall  he  guide  them  "  (Isa.  xlix.  10).

IV.  Thb  extension  of  his  fame  on  thb.kabth  as  a  Shephebd.  "For  now
shall  he  be  great  nnto  the  ends  of  the  earth."  His  authority  on  the  earth  as  a
spiritual  Shepherd  is  limited  to-day,  but  is  wider  than  it  has  been ;  and  it  will  widen
and  widen  until  it  fills  the  earth.  His  Name  will  one  day  be  above  every  name  on
the  earth.  AU  other  names  will  be  esteemed  as  mean  and  contemptible  unless  they
reflect  his.

Conclusion.    "  All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray,"  etc.    But  a  Shepherd  from
heaven  has  come  to  seek  and  restore  us.    Would  that  all  heard  and  responded  to  his
▼oice  I     "  Come  unto  me,  all  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden."
"  Good  Shepherd,  hasten  thou  that  glorions  day.
When  we  shall  all  in  the  one  fold  abide  with  thee  for  ayel  **

D.T.

Yers.  6,  t.—An  invasion.  "  And  this  Man  shall  be  the  Peace,  when  the  Assyriaa
shall  come  into  our  land :  and  when  he  shall  tread  in  our  palaces,  then  shall  we  raise
against  him  seven  shepherds,  and  eight  principal  men.     And  they  shall  waste  the  land


84  THE   BOOK   OF  MICAII.  l<iii.  v.  1—15

of  Assyria  with  the  sword,  and  the  land  of  Nimrod  in  the  entrances  thereof:  thus  shall
he  deliver  us  from  the  Assyrian,  when  he  cometh  into  our  land,  and  when  he
treadeth  within  our  borders."  "  And  this  same  shall  be  the  peace  when  the  Assyrian
shall  invade  our  land,  and  tread  our  palaces,  we  will  raise'  against  him  seven  shepherds,
and  eight  anointed  men.  And  they  shall  afSict  the  land  of  Assyria  with  the  sword,
and  the  land  of  Nimrod  at  the  entrances  thereof;  and  there  shall  be  deliverance  from
the  Assyrian,  when  he  shall  invade  our  land,  and  when  he  shall  tread  our  borders  "
(Henderson).  Assyria  is  here  made  the  representative  of  all  the  foeg  of  Israel  in  all
ages,  who  shall  see  the  destruction  of  aU  its  enemies  at  the  Messiah's  appearance.
"  Seven  shepherdt  and  eight  principal  men."  Seven  expresses  perfection ;  seven  and
eight  are  an  idiom  for  a  full  and  sufficient  number.  "  And  they  (that  is,  these  seven
and  eight  shepherds)  "  shall  waste  the  land  of  Assyria  with  the  sword,  and  the  land  of
Nimrod  in  the  entrances  thereof."  The  land  of  Nimrod  means  Babylon,  including
Assyria,  to  which  it  extended  its  borders.  "  Thus  shall  he  deliver  us  from  the  Assyrian,
when  he  cometh  into  our  land."  As  the  Assyrians  invade  our  borders,  so  shall  their
own  borders  and  entrances  be  invaded.  "  Ee."  Who  ?  The  Messiah,  mentioned  in
the  fifth  verse,  "  This  Man  shall  be  the  Peace."    We  have  here  two  things.

I.  A  TEBBIBLB  INVASION.  The  Assyrian,  which,  as  we  have  said,  may  be  regarded
as  the  representative  of  all  the  enemies  of  Israel,  enters  the  Holy  Land,  takes
Jerusalem,  and  treads  in  the  "  palaces  "  of  the  chosen  people.  A  faint  picture  is  the
Assyrian  of  the  hellish  invader  of  human  souls.  He  breaks  his  way  through  all
bulwarks,  enters  the  sacred  territory,  and  treads  even  in  the  palaces  of  the  intellect  and
heart.  Satan  is  a  strong  man  armed,  that  enters  the  human  soul  and  "keepeth  his
palace."    Moral  invasion  is  the  worst  of  all  invasions.

II.  A  TRIUMPHANT  DBFENDBB.  There  are  "seven  shepherds,  and  eight  principal
men  "  who  now  hurled  back  the  Assyrian  invader,  entered  his  own  territory,  and  carried
war  into  the  midst.  Who  is  the  Deliverer?  "This  Man  shall  be  the  Peace."  The
Man  mentioned  in  the  preceding  verses,  "  whose  goings  forth  have  been  of  old,  from
everlasting."  He  did  it.  1.  Ee  did  it  mceessfuUy.  "  Thus  shall  he  deliver  us  fi-om  the
Assyrian."  "  When  a  strong  man  armed  keepeth  his  palace,  his  goods  are  in  peace :  but
when  a  stronger  than  he  shall  come  upon  him,  and  overcome  him,  he  taketh  from  him
all  his  armour  wherein  he  trusted,  and  divideth  his  spoils."  Christ  will  one  day  ruin
this  moral  Assyrian;  as  "lightning  falleth  from  heaven  he  shall  fall."  He  will  hurl
him  from  the  habitation  of  men.  2.  Christ,  in  doing  this,  uses  human  instrumentality.
"  Seven  shepherds,  and  eight  principal  men."  Christ  destroys  the  works  of  the  devil  by
the  instrumentality  of  men.  (1)  The  instrumentality  that  he  employs  may  seem  to  us
very  feeble.  "  Seven  shepherds,  and  eight  principal  men,"  against  imnumbered  hosts  of
the  enemies.  "He  chooseth  the  foolish  thinss  of  the  world  to  confound  the  wise,"  etc.
(1  Cor.  i.  27).  (2)  Though  the  instrumentality  may  seem  feeble,  it  was  suificient.
The  work  wag  done.  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the
Lord  "  (Zeoh.  ir.  6).— D.  T.

Vers.  7 — 9. — Ood's people,  their  tender  and  terrible  aspect  in  the  world.  "And  the
remnant  of  Jacob  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  many  people  as  a  dew  from  the  Lord,  as  the
showers  upon  the  grass,  that  tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for  the  sons  of  men."
Two  things  are  here  predicted  concerning  the  Jews  after  their  restoration  from  Babylon.
1.  Their  influence  upon  the  nations  would  be  as  refreshing  dew.  "Their  signal
victories  against  such  formidable  armies,  attracting  attention  to  him  whom  they
worshipped,  and  to  whom  they  ascribed  their  success.  During  the  existence  of  the
new  Jewish  state,  the  members  of  the  theocracy  had  much  intercourse  with  foreigners,
multitudes  of  whom  became  proselytes  to  the  faith  of  Jehovah,  and  were  thus  prepared
to  receive  the  gospel  when  preached  by  the  apostles"  (Henderson).  2.  Their  power
on  the  nations  would  be  as  terrible  as  the  lion's  on  the  herds  qf  the  flock.  It  will  not,
I  think,  be  unfair  to  use  the  passage  to  illustrate  the  twofold  aspect  of  the  people  of
Gdd  in  this  world — the  tender  and  terrible,  the  restorative  and  the  destructive.  Like
Israel  of  old,  godly  men  in  every  age  have  only  been  a  remnant,  a  very  small  minority
of  the  generation  in  which  they  lived.  It  will  not  always  be  so.  Speed  the  day  when
they  shall  become,  not  merely  the  majority,  but  the  whole.     Notice —

I.  The  tendeb  aspect  of  God's  pbofle  in  the  world.    They  are  spoken  of  her*


OH.  T.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICaH.  85

as  "  dew."  Silent  in  its  fall,  ieauH/ul  in  its  appearance,  re/reihing  in  its  influence.
Thiee  things  are  suggested  concerning  this  "  dew."  1.  It  U  Divine.  It  is  "  from  the
Lord."  All  that  is  quickening  and  refreshing  in  the  thoughts,  spirits,  character  of
good  men  on  this  earth  descends  from  heaven.  "  Every  good  and  perfect  gift  oometh
down  from  the  Father  of  lights,"  etc.  (Jas.  i.  17).  2.  It  is  copious.  "As  the  showers
upon  the  grass."  There  have  been  seasons  when  those  spiritual  influences  have
descended  on  men  with  plenitude  and  power,  such  as  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost.  Would
it  were  so  now  I  The  moral  heavens  seem,  alasl  closed,  and  only  a  few  droj^s  fall  here
and  there.  3.  It  is  undeserved  of  men.  "  That  tarrieth  not  for  man,  nor  waiteth  for
the  sons  of  men."  Man  has  something  to  do  in  bringing  down  those  moral  showers.
Though  he  is  powerless  to  unseal  the  natural  clouds  and  bring  down  the  rain,  these
moral  showers  do  not  descend  altogether  independent  of  his  efforts.  Good  men  in  this
world  are  to  their  generation  what  the  gentle  dew  and  the  fertilizing  shower  are  to
the  thirsty  earth.  Their  speech  distils  as  dew  and  their  influence  descends  on  the
souls  of  men  like  rain  upon  the  new-muwn  grass.

n.  The  tebbible  aspect  of  God'b  fbofle  in  thx  wobld.  The  same  men  as  are
represented  under  the  metaphor  of  dew  are  here  spoken  of  as  a  "  lion."  Bold,  terrible,
and  destructive.  Elijah  was  a  lion  in  his  age,  so  was  John  the  Baptist,  so  was  Luther,
so  was  Latimer,  etc.  Indeed,  every  good  man  has  these  two  aspects,  the  tender  and
the  terrible — gentle,  sympathetic,  succouring  towards  the  weak  in  goodness,  but  strong
in  indignation  towards  wrong  wherever  found.  Christ,  the  great  Model,  who  did  not
"  cause  his  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  street,"  hurled  his  fulminations  on  the  ears  of
hypocrites.  In  truth,  love — which  is  the  essence  of  all  goodness — ^is  constantly  taking
these  two  forms.  The  same  love  which  whispers  in  the  softest  tones  of  pity,  often
comes  out  in  the  fiercest  thunder  and  lightning :  no  wrath  is  so  terrible  as  the  wrath
of  love.  Every  good  man  is  like  the  pillar  that  guided  the  ehildren  of  Israel  through
the  wilderness ;  it  gleamed  a  guiding  light  to  the  Hebrews  through  the  sea,  but  threw
a  shadow  of  confounding  darkness  to  the  Egyptians  who  assayed  to  follow.

CoHOLUBiON.  This  subject  suggests :  1.  A  picture  of  the  wiregenerate  world.  There
are  some  germs  of  goodness  in  its  soil  that  require  the  fertilizing  influence  of  Heaven
to  quicken  and  develop ;  and  there  are  some  things  in  it  so  pernicious  and  baneful  that
it  requires  all  the  courage,  force,  and  passion  of  moral  lions  to  destroy.  2.  A  picture
of  the  completeness  of  moral  character.  A  complete  character  is  not  all  "  dew  "  or  all
"  lion,"  but  both  combined.— D.  T.

Vers.  10 — 15. — OocP$  depriving  dispensation  towards  men,  "  And  it  shall  come  to
pass  in  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will  cut  off  thy  horses  out  of  the  midst  of  thee,
and  I  will  destroy  thy  chariots :  and  I  will  cut  off  the  cities  of  thy  land,  and  throw
down  all  thy  strong  holds."  "  The  prophet  now  returns  to  times  near  his  own,  and
predicts  the  beneficial  moral  changes  that  were  to  be  effected  in  the  condition  of  his
countrymen  by  the  Babylonish  conquest  and  captivity.  They  had,  contrary  to  the
express  command  of  the  Lord  (Deut.  xvii.  16),  kept  up  a  formidable  body  of  cavalry
and  war-chariots,  trusted  in  their  fortified  cities,  encouraged  sorcery,  and  indulged  in
abominable  idolatry.  These  were  all  to  be  removed  when  the  Jewish  st-ate  was  broken
up;  and  after  God  had  employed  the  heathen  in  punishing  his  apostate  people,  they  in
their  turn  should  be  punished  for  their  obstinate  adherence  to  idol-worship,  notwith-
standing the  testimony  borne  against  their  conduct  by  the  Jews  who  lived  among
them."  The  grand  subject  of  these  words  is  Ood's  depriving  dispensation  towards
men.  Here  the  Almighty  is  represented  as  taking  away  from  Israel  many  things  they
greatly  valued — "horses,  chariots,  cities,  soothsayers,  witchcrafts,  graven  imt^es,
groves,"  etc.  God's  providence  deprives  as  well  as  bestows.  "  The  Lord  gave,  the
Lord  hath  taken  away."  He  is  constantly  taking  away  from  men.  In  relation  to  his
depriving  dispensations  I  offer  two  remarks.

L  Thkt  abb  vbbt  painful.  The  things  here  referred  to  were  the  dearest  things
to  the  hearts  of  Israel.  They  loved  them,  they  trusted  in  them,  and  they  would  feel
life  to  be  perilous,  if  not  intolerable,  without  them ;  yet  they  were  to  be  taken  away.
The  things  he  takes  away  are  of  two  classes.  1.  The  temporally  valuable.  Here
chariots  and  horses  and  cities  are  taken  away.  These  are  valuable.  Whatever  is
dearest  to  the  heart — ^property,  friends,  health,  fame — ^is  the  most  painful  to  lose.  And


86


THE  BOOK  Of  MIGAH.


[oh.  vl  1 — 16.


is  not  the  Almighty  conitsntly,  In  his  providence,  taking  these  things  from  men  ?  He
takes  from  the  rich  man  bis  property,  the  strong  maa  his  health,  the  amhitious  man
his  power,  the  social  man  his  dearest  friends.  And  such  depriTations  are  the  constant
sources  of  human  sorrow  and  anguish.  All  temporal  good  must  go — chariots,  horses,
cities,  etc.  The  other  class  of  things  he  takes  away  are :  2.  Tiie  morally  vile.  Here
are  "  witchcrafts,  soothsayers,  graven  images,"  etc.  Wliatever  man  indulges  in  that  is
wrong — ^false  worship,  all  the  sorceries  of  intellectual  or  physical  pleasure — must  go,
the  sooner  the  better.  It  is  well  when  all  that  is  morally  wrong  is  taken  from  us
in  this  world.

n.  Thet  ars  vebt  usefol.  It  is  often  well  to  be  stripped  of  temporary  good ;  it
is  always  necessary  to  be  stripped  of  the  morally  wrong.  All  is  done  in  mercy  for  the
soul.  Otoi  takes  away  temporal  property  from  a  man  in  order  that  he  may  get
spiritual  wealth;  and  often  does  a  man's  secular  fall  lead  to  his  spiritual  life.  He
takes  away  physical  health  from  a  man  in  order  that  he  may  get  spiritual ;  and  often
do  the  diseases  of  the  body  lead  to  the  cure  of  the  soul.  Did  we  understand  things
thoroughly,  see  them  as  we  shall  when  we  have  done  with  this  mundane  system,  we
■hould  often  acknowledge  more  mercy  in  God's  depriving  than  in  his  bestowing
providences.  Ever  should  we  remember  that  the  great  end  of  all  his  dealings  with  us
is  our  spiritual  advancement  in  intelligence,  holiness,  power,  and  blessedness.  "  Lo,
all  these  things  worketh  Cbd  with  man,  that  he  may  bring  him  back  from  the  ^t  in
order  to  enlighten  him  with  the  light  of  the  living  "  (Job  xzxiii.  30).

CoiroLiTBioN.  Though  I  know  not  the  future — and  no  one  does — ^I  know  that  sev«r«
dejaiving  providences  are  ahead,  but  that  mercy  underlies  the  whol*.

"And  so  beside  the  silent  sea
I  wait  the  muffled  oar ;
No  harm  from  him  can  come  to  m*
On  ocean  or  on  shore.

"I  know  not  where  his  islands  lifl
Thbii  fronded  palms  in  air;
I  oidy  know  I  cannot  drift
Beyond  his  love  and  care.

I*  And  thon,  O  Lord,  by  whom  are  ie«a
Thy  creatures  as  they  be,
Vorgive  me  if  too  close  I  lean
lly  human  heart  on  thee."

(J.  G.  Whittl*.)


D.T.


BXPosrrioN.


OHAPTEB  VL

Ver.  1— oh.  vii.  20.— Part  III.  In  this
address,  which  is  later  than  the  preceding
parts,  the  prophet  sets  forth  the  way  of
salvation :  PmnsmiEKT  is  thb  Gonbeqcbnob
ov  Sm;  Bkpbntanoe  is  the  only  Gbound
FOB  Honi  or  Fabtioifatino  tK  thb  Oovb-

MANT  MeBOIES.

Vers.  1—5. — S  !•  0»«P*  oontroveny  with
hit  pet^for  Heir  ingratitude.

Ver.  1. — ^Eear  ye  now.  The  whole  nation
is  addressed  and  bidden  to  give  heed  to
God's  pleading.  Arise,  contend  thon.  These
are  God's  words  to  Hicah,  bidding  him  put
himself  in  his  people's  place,  and  plead  aa


advocate  before  the  great  Inaalmate  trIbnnaL
Before  the  mountains ;  i.e.  in  the  presenea
of  the  everlasting  hills,  which  have  as  it
were  witnessed  God's  gracious  dealings  with
his  people  from  old  time  and  IsraePs  long
ingratitiide  (oomp.  oh.  i.  2).

Ver.  2. — Hear  ye,  0  mountains.  Insensate
nature  is  called  upon  as  a  witness.  (For
similar  appeals,  oomp.  Deut.  iv.  26 ;  xzzii.  1 ;
Isa.  i.  2;  Jer.  xzii.  29.)  The  Lord's  oon-
troversy.  So  God  calk  his  pleading  with
his  people  to  show  them  their  sin  and
thankless  unbelief;  as  he  says  in  Isa.  i.  18,
"dome,  and  let  us  reason  together"  (oomp.
Hos.  iv.  1 ;  xu.  2).  Ye  strong  (endurt'of)
foundations  of  the  earth.  The  mountaioa
are  called  everlasting  (Gen.  xlix.  26 ;  Deut,
xxxiii.  IS),  as  being  firm,  onchangeable,  and
as  compared  with  man's  life  and  itiagt.


OH.  n.  1 — 16.]


TUK   bUUK  Ui'   MiCAH.


«7


which  are  bnt  tranBitory.  The  LXX.  offers
an  interpretation  as  weU  aa  a  translation,  Ai
ipipaY/ft  0eii4\ta  ttjs  T^t, ''  Ye  valleys,  the
foundations  of  the  earth."  With  his  people.
It  is  because  Israel  is  God's  people  that  her
sin  is  BO  heinous,  and  that  God  condescends
to  plead  with  her.  He  would  thus  touch
her  conscience  by  recalling  his  benefits.  So
in  the  following  reraes.

Ver.  3. — 0  my  people.  The  controveray
talses  the  form  of  a  loving  expostulation ;
and  thns  in  his  wonderful  condescension
Jehovah  opens  the  suit.  What  have  I  done
onto  thee}  What  has  occasioned  thy  fall
from  me?  Hast  thou  aught  to  accuse  me
of,  that  thou  art  wearied  of  me?  Have  my
requirements  been  too  hard,  or  have  I  not
kept  my  promises  to  thee  (comp.  Isa.  xliii.  23,
etc.;  Jer.  ii.  5)?  Testify.  A  judicial  term ;
make  a  formal  defence  or  reply  to  judicial
interrogatories;  depose  (Numb.  xxxv.  30)
(Pnsey).

Ver.  4. — God  answers  his  own  question
by  recounting  some  of  his  chief  mercies  to
IsraeL  He  has  not  burdened  the  people,
but  loaded  them  with  benefita.  I  brought
thee  up,  etc.  The  Exodus  was  the  most
wonderful  instance  of  God's  intervention;
and  to  it  the  prophets  often  refer  (comp.  Isa.
Ixiii  11,  etc. ;  Jer.  ii.  6 ;  Amos  ii.  10).  Out
of  the  house  of  servants ;  of  bondage,  quoting
the  language  of  the  Pentateuch,  to  show  the
greatness  of  the  benefit  (Exod.  xiii.  3,  14 ;
Deut.  viii.  14,  etc.).  I  sent  before  thee.  Aa
leaders  of  the  Lord's  fiock  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  20).
Uoses,  the  inspired  leader,  teacher,  and  law-
giver. Aaron,  the  priest,  the  director  of
Divine  worship.  ]IIiriam,the  prophetess,  who
led  the  praises  of  the  people  at  their  great  de-
liverance (Exod.  XV.  20),  and  who  probably
waa  charged  with  aome  special  mission  to
the  women  of  larael  (aee  Numb.  xii.  1, 2).

Ver.  5. — The  Lord  reminda  the  people  of
Another  great  benefit  subsequent  lo  the
Exodus,  viz.  the  defeat  of  the  designs  of
Balak,  and  the  sorceries  of  Balaam.  Con-
sulted, United  with  the  elders  of  Midian
in  a  plot  againat  thee  (aee  Numb,  xxii.,  etc.).
Answered  him.  There  ought  to  be  a  stop
here.  The  answer  of  Balaam  was  the
blessing  which  he  was  constrained  to  give,
instead  of  the  cxirse  which  he  was  hired
to  pronounce  (comp.  Josh.  xxiv.  10).  From
Shittim  unto  OilgaL  This  is  a  fresh  con-
sideration.referring  to  mercies  under  Joshua,
And  may  be  made  plainer  by  inserting  "  re-
member "  (which  has,  perhaps,  dropped  out
of  the  text),  as  in  the  Revised  Version.
Shittim  was  the  Israelites'  last  station  before
crossing  the  Jordan,  and  Gilgal  the  first  in
the  land  of  Canaan ;  and  so  God  bids  them
remember  all  that  happened  to  them  be-
tween those  places — their  sin  in  Shittim  and
the  mercy  then  shown  them  (Numb,  xxv.).


the  mira<!ulous  passage  of  the  Jordan,  th*
renewal  of  the  covenant  at  Gilgal  (joih.
V.  9).  Shittim;  the  acacia  meadow  (^Abel-
Shittim),  hod.  Qhor-et-Seiidban,  was  at  the
south-eastern  corner  of  the  Oiccar,  or  Plain
of  Jordan,  some  seven  miles  from  the  Dead
Sea.  Gilgal  (see  note  on  Amos  iv.  4).  That
ye  may  know  the  righteousness  (righteoui
acts)  of  the  Lord.  AH  these  instances  o{
God's  interposition  prove  how  faithful  he  ia
to  his  promises,  how  he  cares  for  his  elect,
what  are  his  gracious  counsels  towards  them
(see  the  same  expression,  Judg.  t.  11 ;
1  Sam.  xii.  7).

Vers.  6^.— §  2.  The  people,  awakened  ta
it»  ingratitude  and  need  of  atonement,  ouikt
how  to  pleaae  God,  and  ie  referred  for
answer  to  the  moral  requiremsnta  of  tk»  Law.

Ver.  6. — It  ia  greatly  doubted  who  ia  the
speaker  here.  Bishop  Butler,  in  his  sermon
"  Upon  the  Character  of  Balaam,"  adopts  the
view  that  Balak  is  the  speaker  of  vers,  6  and
7,  and  B.ilaam  answers  in  ver.  8.  Knaben-
bauer  considers  Micah  himself  as  the  inter-
locutor, speaking  in  the  character  of  the
people;  which  makes  the  apparent  change
of  persons  in  ver.  8  very  awkward.  Most
commentators,  ancient  and  modem,  take  the
questions  in  vers.  6  and  7  to  be  asked  by
the  people  personified,  though  they  are  not
agreed  as  to  the  spirit  from  which  they  pro-
ceed, some  thinking  that  they  are  uttered  in
self-righteousness,  as  if  the  speakers  had
done  all  that  and  more  than  could  be  re-
quired of  them ;  others  regarding  the  in-
quiries as  representing  a  certain  acknow-
ledgment of  sin  and  a  desire  for  means  of
propitiation,  though  there  ia  exhibited  a
want  of  appreciation  of  the  nature  of  God
and  of  the  service  which  alone  is  acceptable
to  him.  The  latter  view  ia  most  reasonable,
and  in  accordance  with  Micah's  manner.
Wherewith ;  i.e.  with  what  offering  ?  The
prophet  represents  the  congregation  as  asking
him  to  tell  them  how  to  propitiate  tlie
offended  Lord,  and  obtain  Ma  favour.  Come
before;  go  to  meet,  appear  in  the  presence
of  the  Lord.  Septuagint,  KartAdPa,  "attain
to."  Bow  myself  before  the  high  God;
literally,  God  of  the  height,  who  has  his
throne  on  high  (Isa.  xxxiii.  5 ;  Ivii.  15)  ;
Vulgate,  e:aTvaho  genu  Deo  exceleo  ;  Septua-
gint, avTtKii^ofiai  ©eoC  fiov  inpiffrov,  "  shall  I
lay  hold  of  my  God  most  high."  Calves  of
a  year  old.  Such  were  deemed  the  choicest
victima  (comp.  Exod.  xii.  5;  Lev.  ix.  2,  3).

Ver.  7. — Thousands  of  rams,  as  though
the  quantity  enhanced  the  value,  and  tended
to  dispose  the  Lord  to  regard  the  offerer's
thousandfold  sinfulness  with  greater  favour.
Ten  thousands  of  rivers  (torrents,  as  in  Job
XX.  17)  of  oil.  Oil  was  used  in  the  daUr
meal  oll'eiing,  and  in  that  which  aocom-


THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.


[oh,  VI.  1 — la


panted  every  bnrnt  offering  (see  Exod.  zxiz.
40 ;  Lev.  Tii.  10—12 ;  Numb.  xv.  4,  etc.).
The  Vulgate  has  a  different  reading,  In
multi$  mMUbni  hiroomm  pingitium;  so  the
Septuagint,  iy  uvpidai  x'f^P'"'  ^J^pvSiv,
Alex.]  ■itt6vti>v,  "  with  ten  thousands  of  fat
goats;"  so  also  the  Syriao.  The  alteration  has
been  introduced  probably  with  some  idea  of
making  the  parallelism  more  exact.  Shall  I
give  my  firstborn  t  Mieah  exactly  represents
the  people's  feeling ;  they  would  do  anything
but  what  God  required;  they  would  make
the  costliest  saonfice,  even,  in  their  ex-
aggerated devotion,  holding  themselves
retwy  to  make  a  forbidden  offering;  but
they  would  not  attend  to  the  moral  requiie-
ments  of  the  Law.  It  is  probably  by  a  mere
hyperbole  that  the  question  in  the  text  is
asked.  The  piaotice  of  human  sacrifice  was
founded  on  the  notiou  that  mau  ought  to
offer  to  God  his  dearest  and  costliest,  and
that  the  acceptability  of  nn  offering  was
proportioned  to  its  preciousness.  The
Hebrews  had  learned  the  custom  from  their
neighbours,  e  g.  the  F 1 1  oenicians  and  Moabites
(comp.  2  Kings  iii.  27),  and  had  for  centuries
offered  their  children  to  Moloch,  in  defiance
of  the  stem  prohibitions  of  Moses  aad  their
prophets  (Lev.  xviii.  21 ;  2  Kings  xvi.  3 ;
Isa.  Ivii.  5).  They  might  have  learned,
from  many  facts  and  inferences,  that  man's
self-surrender  was  not  to  be  realized  by  this
ritual ;  the  sanctity  of  human  life  (Gen,
ix.  6),  the  substitution  of  the  ram  for  Isaac
(Gen,  xxii.  13),  the  redemption  of  the  first-
bom  (Exod.  xiii.  13),  all  made  for  this
truth.  But  the  heathen  idea  retained  its
hold  among  them,  so  that  the  inquiry  above
is  in  strict  keeping  with  the  circumstances.
The  fruit  of  my  body;  i.e.  the  rest  of  my
children  (Deut.  xxviii.  4).

Ver.  8, — The  prophet  answers  in  his  own
person  the  questions  in  vers.  6  and  7,  by
showing  the  worthlessness  of  outward
observances  when  the  moral  precepts  are
not  observed.  He  hath  showed  thee;
literally,  one  has  told  thee,  or,  it  has  been
told  thee,  i.e.  by  Moses  and  in  the  Law
(Deut.  X.  12,  etc.).  Septuagint,  Ei  i.vnyy4\ri
aoi;  "  Hath  it  not  been  told  thee  ?"  What
doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee  ?  The  propheti
often  enfnrce  the  truth  that  the  principles
of  righteous  conduct  are  required  from  men,
and  not  mere  formal  worship.  This  might
well  be  a  comfort  to  the  Israelites  when
they  henrd  that  they  were  doomed  to  be
east  out  of  their  country,  and  that  the
temple  was  to  be  destroyed,  and  that  the
ritual  on  which  they  laid  such  stress  would
for  a  time  become  impracticable.  So  the
inculcation  of  moral  virtues  is  often  con-
nected with  the  prediction  of  woe  or
captivity.  (For  the  prophetic  view  of  the
paramount  importance  of  righteousness,  see


1  Sam.  XV.  22 ;  Ps.  xl.  6,  etc. ;  1.  8,  etc, ;
Isa.  L  11—17;  Jer.  vi  20;  Hob,  vL  fl,
etc, ;  see  on  Zech,  vii  7.)  To  do  jnstly.
To  act  equitably,  to  hurt  nobody  by  word
or  deed,  which  was  the  exact  contrary
of  the  conduct  previously  mentioned
(oh.  ii.  1,  2,  8;  iii,  2,  etc.).  To  love
mercy.  To  be  guided  in  conduct  to  others
by  loving-kindness.  These  two  rules  con-
tain the  whole  duty  to  the  neighbour.
Compare  Christ's  description  of  genuine
religioa  (Matt,  xxiii.  23).  To  walk  humbly
with  thy  God.  This  precept  comprises
man's  duty  to  Qoi,  humility  and  obedience.
"  To  walk "  is  an  expression  implying  "  to
live  and  act,"  as  the  patriarchs  are  said  to
have  "walked  with  God,"  denoting  that
they  lived  as  consciously  under  his  eye  and
referred  all  their  actions  to  him.  Humility
is  greatly  enforced  in  the  Scriptures  (see  e.g.
Isa,  ii.  11,  etc.).  Septuagint,  '^toi/iov  ehai
Tov  •jrope6€ff6at  /jLerit  Kupiov,  *'  to  be  ready  to
walk  with  the  Lord ;  Vulgate,  Solieitum
ambulare  cum  Deo ;  Syriac,  "  Be  prepared  to
follow  thy  God."  But  our  version  is  doubt
less  correct.

Vers.  9 — 12. — §  3.  Becatue  Israel  aat  very
far  from  acting  in  this  spirit,  Ood  steml]/
rebukes  her  for  prevailing  sine.

Ver.  9. — The  Lord's  voice  (Isa.  xxx.  31;
Joel  ii.  11;  Amos  i.  2).  These  are  no
longer  the  words  of  the  prophet,  but  those
of  God  himself,  and  not  spoken  in  secret,
but  unto  the  city,  that  all  may  hear  the
sentence  who  dwell  in  Jerusalem.  The
man  of  wisdom  shall  see  thy  Name ;  i'.e.  he
who  is  wise  regards  thy  Name  and  obeyi
thee,  does  not  simply  hear,  but  profits  by
what  he  hears.  The  reading  is  uncertain.
Others  render,  "  Blessed  is  he  who  sees  thy
Name ; "  but  the  construction  is  against
this.  Others,  "  Thy  Name  looketh  to
wisdom"  (or  prosperity),  has  the  true
wisdom  of  life  in  sight.  The  versions  read
"fear"  for  "see."  Thus  the  LXX.,  StSirei
ipo$ovfievous  rh  ''Ovofia  avrov,  **  Shall  save
those  that  fear  his  Name ;  "  Vulgate,  Salus
erit  timentibus  Notnen  tuum ;  Syriac,  "  He
imparts  instruction  to  those  that  fear  his
Name;"  Ghaldee,  "The  teachers  fear  his
Name."  This  reading  depends  upon  a
change  of  vowel-pointing.  Orelli  renders,
"  Happy  is  he  who  fears  thy  Name."  The
Authorized  translation,  which  seems  on  the
whole  to  be  well  established,  takes  the
abstract  noun  "wisdom"  as  equivalent  to
"  the  wise,"  or  "  the  man  of  wisdom."  For
similar  expressions,  Henderson  refers  to
Ps.  oix.  4;  Prov.  xiii.  6;  xix.  15.  The
prophet  parenthetically  announces  that,
however  tlie  bulk  of  the  people  might
receive  the  message,  the  truly  wise  would
listen  and  profit  by  it.    Hear  ye  the  tod


OH.  VI.  1 — 16.]


THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.


89


Observe  the  rod  of  God's  angei,  the  threat-
ened judgments  (so  lea.  Ix.  4  [3,  Hebrew] ;
X.  5,  24).  The  power  of  Assyria  is  meant.
The  LXX.  renders  differently,  'Axoue  ipv\-li,
"Hear,  O  tribe j"  so  the  Vulgate,  Audite,
tribus.  And  who  hath  appointed  it.  Mark
who  it  is  who  hath  ordained  this  chastise-
ment It  is  from  the  Lord's  hand.  Sep-
tuagint,  Ti's  Koff^efiirei  irdKiv ;  "Who  will
adorn  the  city?"  with  some  reference,
perhaps,  to  Jer.  zxxi.  4,  "  Again  shalt  thou
be  adorned  with  thy  tabrets ; "  Vulgate,
M  quis  approbdbit  illud  t  This  implies  that
few  indeed  will  profit  by  the  warning.

Ver.  10. — Tlie  reproof  is  given  in  the
form  of  questions,  in  order  to  rouse  the
sleeping  conscience  of  the  people.  Are
there  yet  the  treasures  of  wickedness  in  the
house  of  the  wicked  t  Do  the  wicked  still
continue  to  bring  into  their  houses  treasures
obtained  by  wrong  ?  The  old  versions  com-
pare this  ill-gotten  wealth  to  a  fire  which
■hall  consume  the  homes  of  its  possessors.
Septuagint,  Mj)  irSp  Koi  oIkos  av6iiov  Briirav
pi^av  BTjffavpohs  iiv6fiovs ;  "  Is  there  fire
and  the  house  of  the  wicked  treasuring  up
wicked  treasures?"  Vulgate,  Adhue  ignii
in  domo  impii  the$auri  iniquitatii  1  So  the
Syiiao;  the  Chaldee  keeps  to  the  Masoretio
raiding.  The  scant  measure ;  literally,  the
ephah  of  leanness.  The  ephah  was  about
three  pecks.  According  to  Josephus  ('  Ant.,'
XV.  9.  2),  it  contained  one  Attic  medimnus,
which  would  be  nearly  a  bushel  and  a
half.  Fraudulent  weights  and  measures
are  often  denounced  (Lev.  xix.  35,  etc.;
Deut.  XXV.  14,  etc.;  Prov.  xx.  10,  23;
Amos  viii.  5).  Vulgate,  Mensura  minor  irse
pUna,  where  the  Hebrew  has,  that  is  abomi-
nable. Such  frauds  are  hateful  to  God,  and
are  marked  with  his  wrath.

Ver.  11. — Shall  I  count  them  pure?
literally,  Shall  I  he  pure  ?  The  clause  is
(rtisoure.  The  Authorized  Version  regards
the  speaker  as  the  same  as  in  ver.  10,  and
translates  with  some  violence  to  the  text.
It  may  be  that  the  prophet  speaks  as  the
representative  of  the  awakened  transgressor,
"  Can  I  be  guiltless  with  such  deceit  about
me  ?  "  But  the  sudi  len  change  of  personiii-
cation  and  of  state  of  feeling  is  very  harsh.
Hence  some  follow  Jerome  in  regarding  God
as  the  speaker,  and  rendering,  "Shall  1
justify  the  wicked  balance?"  ottiers,  the
Septuagint,  Syriac,  and  Ohaldee,  Ei  Sikui-
uO^ffiTai  iv  ivy^i  &voii.os ;  "  Shall  the  wicked
be  justified  by  the  balance?"  Cheyne  is
inclined  to  read  the  verb  in  the  second
person,  "  Canst  thou  (O  Jerusalem)  be
pure  ?  "  since  in  the  next  verse  the  prophet
proceeds,  "the  rich  men  thereof"  (i.e.  of
Jerusalem).  If  we  retain  the  present
reading,  "Can  I  be  innocent?"  we  must
consider  the  question  as  put,  for  effect's


sake,  in  the  month  of  one  of  the  rich
oppressors.  Jerome's  translation  is  oontraiy
to  the  use  of  the  verb,  which  is  always
intransitive  in  kaL

Ver.  12.— The  rich  men  thereof ;  i.e.  of  the
city  mentioned  in  ver.  9.  They  have  just
been  charged  with  injustice  and  fraud,  now
they  are  denounced  for  practising  every  kind
of  violence.  And  not  only  the  rich,  but  all
the  inhabitants  fall  under  censure  for  lying
and  deceit.  Their  tongue  is  deoeitfal;
literally,  deceit;  they  cannot  open  their
mouth  without  spe^ng  dangerous  and
destructive  lies.

Vers.  13— 16.— §  4.  For  M  thi$  God
threatens  pumUihment.

Ver.  13. — Will  I  make  thee  sick  in  smiting
thee ;  literally,  have  made  the  mniting  thee
lick  ;  Le.  incurable,  as  Nah.  iii.  19,  or,  "  have
made  the  blows  mortal  that  are  given  thee."
The  perfect  is  used  to  express  the  certainty
of  the  future.  The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate
read,  "I  have  begun  [or,  will  begin]  to
■mite  thee."

Ver.  14. — Thou  shalt  eat,  etc.  The  punish-
ment answers  to  the  sin  (which  proves  that
it  comes  from  God),  and  recalls  the  threats
of  the  Law  (Lev.  xxvi.  25,  etc. ;  Deut.  xxviii.
29,  etc. ;  comp.  Hos.  iv.  10 ;  Hag.  i.  6).  Thy
casting  down  shall  be  in  the  midst  of  thee ;
I.e.  thy  humiliation,  thy  decay  and  downfall,
shall  occur  in  the  very  centre  of  thy  wealth
and  strength,  where  thou  hast  laid  up  thy
treasure  and  practised  thy  wickedness.  But
the  meaning  of  the  Hebrew  is  very  uncer-
tain, and  the  text  may  be  corrupt  The
LXX.  had  a  different  reading,  (rvirKOTiatt
4v  (rot,  "  darkness  ahall  be  in  thee."  The
Syriac  and  Chaldee  interpret  the  word
rendered  "casting  down"  (nt»',  which  is  found
nowhere  else)  of  some  disease  like  dysentery.
It  is  most  suitable  to  understand  this  clause
as  connected  with  the  preceding  threat  of
hunger,  and  to  take  the  unusual  word  in
the  sense  of  "  emptiness."  Thus,  "  Thy
emptiness  (of  stomach)  shall  remain  in
thee."  Jeremiah  (Iii.  6)  speaks  of  the
famine  in  the  city  at  the  time  of  it*
siege.  Thou  shalt  take  hold;  rather,  thoa
shalt  remove  {thy  goods).  This  is  the
second  chastisement.  They  sliould  try  to
take  their  goods  and  families  out  of  the
reach  of  the  enemy,  but  should  not  be  able
to  save  them.  The  LXX.  interprets  the  verb
of  escaping  by  flight.  That  which  thou
deliverest.  If  by  cbauce  anything  is  carried
away,  it  shall  fall  into  the  hands  of  the
enemy  (comp.  2  Kings  xxv.  4,  5;  Jer.  liL
7,8).  .

Ver.  15. — Here  is  another  judgment  in
accordance  with  the  threatenings  of  the  Law
(Deut.  xxviii.  33,  38,  etc. ;  comp.  Amos  v.
11 ;  Zeph.  i.  13 ;  Hag.  i;  6).    Bhalt  not  reap,


90


THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.


[oh.  VI.  1 — 16


The  effect  may  be  owing  to  the  Judicial
sterility  of  tlie  soil,  but  more  likely  to  the
incureionB  of  tlie  enemy.  Troohon  quotes
Virgil, 'Eel.,' i.  70—

"  Impius  hsBo  tarn  oulta  novalia  miles  habe-

bit?
Barbaras  has  segeteg?  en,  quo  diseordia

oives
Froduzit   miseios  I    hit  no*  oonseTimua

agros  I "

Tread  th«  olives.  Olives  were  usually
pressed  or  crushed  in  a  mill,  in  order  to
extract  the  oil;  the  process  of  treading  was
probably  adopted  by  the  poor.  Gethsemane
took  its  name  from  the  oil- presses  there.
The  oil  was  applied  to  the  person  for  com-
fort, luxury,  and  ceremony,  and  was  almost
indispensable  in  a  hot  country.  Sweet  wine.
Thou  shalt  tread  the  new  wine  of  the  vintage,
but  shalt  have  to  leave  it  for  the  enemy
(comp.  Amos  v.  11).  The  Septuagint  has
here  an  interpolation,  Kal  afavitrB'lia-erai
yS/itiia  \aoS  /low,  "  And  the  ordinances  of  my
people  shall  vanish  away,"  which  has
arisen  partly  from  a  confusion  between
Omri,  the  proper  name  in  the  next  verse,
and  ammi,  "  my  people."

Ver.  16. — The  threatening  is  closed  by
repeating  its  cause :  the  punishment  is  the
just  reward  of  ungodly  conduct.  The  first
part  of  the  verse  corresponds  to  vers.  10 — 12,
the  second  part  to  vers.  13 — 15,  The  statutes
of  OmrL  The  statutes  are  the  rules  of
worship  prescribed  by  him  of  whom  it  is
(aid  (1  Kings  xvi.  25)  that  he  "  wrought
evil  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  did  worse
than  all  that  were  before  him."  No  special
"  statutes  "  of  his  are  anywhere  mentioned ;


but  he  is  named  here  as  the  founder  of  thai
evil  dynasty  which  gave  Ahab  to  Israel,  and
the  murderess  Athaliah  (who  ii  called  in
2  Kings  viii.  26,  "  the  daughter  of  Omri ")
to  Jndah.  The  people  keep  his  statutes  in-
stead of  the  Lord's  ^ev.  xx.  22).  The  works
of  the  house  of  Ahab  are  their  crimes  and
gins,  especially  the  idolatrous  practices  ob-
served by  that  family,  such  as  the  worship
of  Baal,  which  became  the  national  religion
(1  Kings  zvl.  31,  etc.).  Such  apostasy  had
a  disastrous  effect  upon  the  neighbouring
kingdom  of  Judah  (2  Kings  viiL  18).  Walk
in  their  counsels.  Take  your  tone  and  policy
from  them.  That  I  should  make  thee.  "  The
punishment  was  as  certainly  connected  with
the  sin,  in  the  purpose  of  God,  as  if  its
infliction  had  been  the  end  at  which  they
aimed"  (Henderson).  The  prophet  here
threatens  a  threefold  penalty,  as  he  had
mentioned  a  threefold  guiltiness.  A  desola-
tion; dcpavia/iiv  (Septuagint);  perditionem
(Vulgate).  According  to  Keil,  "an  object
of  honor,"  as  Deut.  xxviii.  37;  Jer.  xxv.
9.  Micah  addresses  Jerusalem  itself  in  the
first  clause,  its  inhabitants  in  the  second,
and  the  whole  nation  in  the  last.  An
hissing;  i.e.  an  object  of  derision,  as  Jer.
xix.  8;  xxv.  18,  etc.  Therefore  (and)  ye
shall  bear  the  reproach  of  my  people.  Ye
shall  have  to  hear  yourselves  reproached  at
the  mouth  of  the  heathen,  in  that,  though
ye  were  the  Lord's  peculiar  people,  ye
were  cabt  out  and  given  into  the  hands
of  your  enemies.  The  Septuagint,  from  a
different  reading,  renders,  Kal  avelSri  KaM
Xiirfiecrde,  "Ye  shall  receive  the  reproaches
of  nations,"  which  is  like  Ezek.  xxxiv.  29;
xxxvi.  6,  15.


HOMILBTIOS.

Ver*.  1 — 5.— The  memories  of  the  way.  Truly  affecting  are  those  portlona  of
Scripture  in  which  God  is  represented  as  expostulating  and  pleading  with  erring  men
(Hos.  vi.  4 ;  li.  8 ;  Isa.  i.  16—20 ;  Jer.  ii.  1 — 14).  The  opening  verses  of  this  chapter
are  of  the  same  character.  God  testifies,  and  in  so  doing  calls  upon  the  mountains
and  hills  and  strong  foundations  of  the  earth  which  have  stood  from  age  to  age  to
bear  him  witness  and  confirm  his  testimony  (ver.  2).  "0  my  people,"  he  cries,
"  what  have  I  done  unto  thee,"  etc.  ?  What  sadness,  what  piercing  grief,  what  ineffable
sorrow,  is  implied  in  these  words  1  Truly  God  grieves  over  sinning  men.  He  is  not
impassive,  but  is  infinitely  sensible  to  the  sins  and  sorrows  of  men,  and  every  trans-
gression strikes  a  pang  into  the  heart  of  the  Divine  Father.  Surely  this  sorrow  of
Divine  love  over  the  evils  inflicted  by  man  upon  himself  through  sin  should  lead  us
back  to  God  in  humility,  in  penitence,  and  in  submission  to  his  authority  and  will.
How  remarkable  is  the  faculty  of  memory,  strengthening  the  affections,  aiding  progress,
increasing  enjoyment,  and  alleviating  sorrow  1  Well  may  the  poet  sing  of  "  the  morn-
ing star  of  memory."  The  prophet  desired  his  people  to  review  the  past  of  their
cationsl  history,  that  by  these  "memories  of  the  way"  they  might  he  impelled  to
"return  unto  the  Lord."    Concerning  these  memories,  note —

I.  Thkq  bemakkable  variety.  There  were  memories  of :  1.  Wondrous  deliver-
ancet.    From  Egyptian  bondage  (ver.  3) ;  from  the  curse  pronounced  by  Balaam  (veiv


OH.  VI.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  Ul

4).  2.  Heavenly  guidance.  "  I  sent  before  thee  Moses  "  (ver.  4) — the  distinguished
leader  and  lawgiver.  3.  Soared  fellowship.  "  Aaron "  (ver.  4)— their  high  priest
and  intercessor,  who  led  them  in  thought  into  "  the  holiest  of  all."  4.  Orateful
adoration.  "  Miriam "  (ver.  4),  with  timbrel  and  dance  inspiring  them  to  celebrate
in  rapturous  praise  Gods  redeeming  mercy.  5.  Continuous  interposition.  "From
Shittia  unto  Gilgal"  (ver.  5),  i.e.  from  the  desert  unto  the  promised  land;  by  miracle,
lype,  prophecy,  and  promise,  they  were  continually  experiencing  Divine  help  and
encouragement.  So  with  ns ;  mercies  temporal  and  spiritual  have  been  bestowed  upon
us  in  infinite  variety ;  whilst  in  number  they  have  been  more  than  could  be  counted.

II, .  Theib  intended  influence.  These  remembrances  and  memories  of  God's
great  goodness  are  designed  to  lead  men  to  "  know  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord"  (ver.
5),  and  to  give  him  the  unswerving  confidence  of  their  hearts.  Through  all  his  deal-
ings with  the  children  of  men  he  has  been  calling  them  to  repentance,  faith,  newness
of  life,  the  putting  away  of  cherished  sin,  the  detaching  themselves  from  ungodly
associations,  the  breaking  away  from  habits  of  evil,  the  experience  of  the  most  satisfy-
ing good,  and  to  the  purest  and  noblest  service.

III.  Theib  emphatic  testimony.  The  Most  High,  in  deigning  to  expostulate  with
erring  men,  makes  his  appeal  to  these  (ver.  3).  He  asks,  "  0  my  people,  what  have  I
done  unto  thee  ?  "  And  must  not  this  be  our  answer,  "  Nothing  but  good ;  good,  only
good"  ?  "  Wherein  have  I  wearied  thee?  "  he  asks.  And  must  we  not  reply,  "  Thy
commandments  are  not  grievous ;  yet  surely  we  have  wearied  thee  by  the  way  in
which  we  have  slighted  and  neglected  them,  and  have  failed  to  yield  to  them  the  true
obedience  of  our  hearts  and  lives  ?  "  "  Testify  against  me,"  says  God.  "  Nay,  we  can
only  testify  against  ourselves.  '  To  thee,  0  Lord,  belongeth  mercy,  but  unto  us  shame
and  confusion  of  face ' "  (Dan.  ix.  7).  "  I  beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies
of  Gk)d,"  etc.  (Eom.  xii.  1).  Then  all  must  be  well  with  us  here,  and  at  last  we  shall
enter  the  land  of  light  and  rest  and  fulness  of  joy,  where,  with  memory  never  failing,  and
with  gratitude  rising  ever  higher,  we  shall  reflect  upon  the  entire  course  along  which
we  have  been  guided  and  upheld  by  him  whose  mercy  and  love  endure  for  evermore.

Vers.  6 — 8. — Man's  spiritual  need,  and  its  supply.  These  verses  form  one  of  the  most
striking  passages  in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures.  Let  any  one  inquire  as  to  the
nature  of  true  religion,  and  he  may  find  the  exposition  of  it  expressed  here  with
marvellous  vigour  and  terseness  of  speech,  and  with  a  completeness  leaving  nothing  to
be  supplied.  The  false  conception  respecting  true  religion  as  consisting  in  that  which
is  external  is  swept  clean  away  as  with  a  besom,  and  the  loftiest  view  concerning  it  la
set  before  us  in  diction  so  simple  that  it  cannot  be  misunderstood  and  in  tone  so
earnest  that  it  cannot  fail  to  come  home  to  the  conscience  and  the  heart.

I.  Thbke  underlies  these  wobds  the  thouoht  op  man's  deep  need  of  God.
To  "  come  before  the  Lord '"  and  to  "  bow  before  the  most  high  God  "  is  a  necessity  of
humanity.  Uncentred  from  God,  the  children  of  men  are  ever  craving  after  some
unattained  good,  and  which  alone  consists  in  the  Divine  favour  and  blessing.  They
turn  to  objects  that  are  unworthy  and  that  can  never  meet  the  wants  of  their  higher
nature.  They  seek  satisfaction  in  that  which  is  material,  in  cherishing  attachment  to
the  outward,  the  fleeting,  the  unreal ;  even  as  these  people  of  Judah  turned  to  luxury,
ease,  and  self-indulgence;  and  the  result  is  and  ever  must  be  miserable  disappoint-
ment. Or  they  turn  to  objects  such  as  are  really  worthy — wealth,  scholarship,  oratory,
political  and  civic  honours;  but  anticipating  getting  more  out  of  these  than  they  had
any  right  to  expect,  there  is  failure  and  consequent  disquietude.  "He  hath  showed
thee,  0  man,  what  is  good."  God  has  declared  that  true  heart-rest  can  alone  be  found
in  himself.  "Thou  hast  formed  us  for  thyself,  and  our  heart  is  disquieted  till  it
restcth  in  thee  "  (Augustine).     Consider—

II.  The  impossibility  of  finding  the  satisfaction  of  this  deep  need  of  thk
BOUL  IN  A  Mbbely  FORMAL  AND  EXTERNAL  SERVICE.  It  is  a  grf  at  thing  whcn  a  true
reformer  succeeds  in  making  an  im  pression.  When  evils  have  become  deep-rooted,  when
meE  have  become  accustomed  to  perverted  ways,  there  is  an  indifference  and  callous-
ness about  them  which  it  is  difficult  indeed  to  overcome.  And  the  distinction  of  this
Hebrew  seer  is  seen  in  the  success  he  achieved  where  so  many  have  signally  failed.
By  the  force  of  his  own  personal  character,  combined  with  the  simplicity  and  vividness,


92  THE   BOOK   OF   MIOAH.  [ch.  vi.  1—16,

the  mingled  scTerity,  tendemess,  and  the  intense  earnestness  of  his  language,  he
succeeded  in  rousing  many  to  a  sense  of  their  sinfulness,  and  in  awakening  within
them  desires  and  aspirations  after  a  truer  life,  and  impelling  them  to  cry,  "  Wherewith
shall  I  come,"  etc.  ?  (ver.  6).  But  mark  what  followed.  Micah  prophesied  in  the  reign  of
Hezekiah,  and  the  history  shows  that  the  people  rested  in  outward  reformation  and
external  forms.  They  cried, "  Shall  I  come  hefore  him  with  burnt  offerings  . .  .  rivers  of
oil  ?  "  (vers.  6, 7) ;  i.e.  shall  I  bring  the  costliest  and  choicest  sacrifices^  and  cause  the  oil
which  accompanies  the  oflferings  to  flow  plenteously  ?  "  Shall  I "  (following  the  practice
of  the  heathen)  "  give  my  firstborn,"  etc.  ?  (ver.  7).  And  they  acted  in  the  spirit  of
these  inquiries.  The  interest  in  the  temple  and  its  services  became  revived,  the  Law
was  read,  the  sacrifices  renewed,  the  fasts  and  feasts  once  more  observed,  and  the
threatened  judgments  were  delayed.  But  all  this  was  only  temporary,  there  was  out-
ward reformation,  but  unaccompanied  by  inward  renewal ;  the  observance  of  external
forms  and  the  resting  in  these  instead  of  in  God ;  so  that  the  spiritual  unrest  continued,
and  the  process  of  national  decay  went  on,  whilst  the  voice  of  God  was  heard  uttering
the  strongest  denunciations,  saying,  "  To  what  purpose,"  etc.  ?  (Isa.  i.  11 — 15).'  Beware
of  cherishing  a  merely  formal  piety,  of  honouring  God  with  your  lips  whilst  your  hearts
are  far  from  him,  of  resting  in  outward  reformation  and  external  worship  (Ps.  li.  16,  17  ;
John  iv.  23,  24).

m.  This  need  of  tbb  heart  is  hex  ik  the  possession  of  binoebe  and
OBNuiNB  piETT.  Such  piety  is  described  (ver.  8)  as  consisting  in  doing  justly,  loving
mercy,  and  walking  humbly  with  God.  It  is  spiritual  in  its  nature,  and  has  its  seat
in  the  heart.  Possessing  a  heart  renewed,  trustful,  and  obedient  to  the  Divine  will,
God  will  dwell  with  us,  will  be  our  chief  joy,  and  in  all  places  and  at  all  seasons  will
manifest  himself  to  us.  So  shall  we  at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances  find
tranquillity  and  peace.     So  shall  we  sing —

"  Without  thee  life  end  time  are  sadnesi,
No  fragrance  breathes  around ;
But  with  tliee  even  grief  is  gladneM,
The  heart  its  home  hath  found."

Ver.  8. — The  Divine  response  to  the  cry  of  humanity.  "  He  hath  showed  thee,
0  man,  what  is  good."  "Who  will  show  us  any  good?"  (Ps.  iv.  6)  is  the  cry  of
humanity,  and  has  been  its  reiterated  inquiry  all  through  the  ages  of  the  world's
history.  And  not  only  has  man  ceaselessly  raised  the  question,  but  he  has  sought  its
solution,  and  has  thus  fallen  into  errors,  which  are  corrected  by  the  response  God  has
given  to  this  aspiration  of  the  human  spirit.  We  turn,  in  our  darkness,  to  his  unerring
Word,  and  we  find  light  shed  upon  this  otherwise  dark  problem.

L  It  cobbeots   the  notion  that   "good"   is  to  be   sought  and   found  in

MATBBIAli   THINGS    BY   SHOWING   THAT   IT   IS   TO  BE    OBTAINED     ALONE  BY   THE   SPIEIT

BESTING  IN  God.

II.  It  cobbeots   the   notion  that   "good"   mat  be   obtained   by  extebnal

OBSERVANCES  AND  SACRIFICES,  BY  SHOWING  THAT  IT  DEPENDS  UPON  THE  STATE  OF
THE   HEART,   AND   LIBS   IN   OBEDIENCE    AND   SELF-SURKBNDBB   TO   THE   DiVINE   WILL.

III.  It   cobbeots   the   notion    that   "good"    is   the    monopoly   OF   ANT   CLASS  OB

NATION,  BT  APPEALING  TO  MAN  AS  HAN.  "  He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man,  what  is
good."

Ver.  8. — True  piety :  iti  dear  delineation,  "And  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of
thee,"  etc.?

I.  To  "  DO  jusTLT."  He  requires  that  rectitude  and  uprightness  should  characterize
us  in  all  our  relationships.  We  are  not  to  oppress  or  defraud.  We  are  not  to  seek  to
damage  the  reputation  of  another,  or  by  word  or  deed  to  endeavour  to  lessen  the  good
opinion  which  has  been  formed  respecting  him.  The  golden  rule  is  to  be  acted  upon,
and  we  "  do  unto  others  as  we  woukl  that  they  should  do  unto  ub."

IL  To  "  LOVE  MEBOT."  There  are  two  ideas  here — that  of  forgiveness,  and  that  of
compassioD.  Mercy  is  forgiveness  towards  the  erring  and  benevolence  towards  the
tried  ;  over  both  the  sinful  and  the  suffering  she  spreads  her  wing.  This  quality  ii
truly  royal  in  its  character.    "Sweet  mercy  is  nobility's  true  badge."    It  is  indeed


OB,  TL 1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  93

Qod-Uke  and  Divine,  and  cannot  be  exercised  without  securing  to  us  real  happiness.
"  It  is  twice  blessed,"  etc.  It  is  well  for  men  to  be  upright  towards  their  fellow-men,
to  "  do  justly ; "  but  let  this  be  joined  to  "  loving  mercy,"  we  seeking  thus  to  smooth
each  other's  path  through  life.  We  respect  the  man  whose  conduct  is  regulated  in
accordance  with  strict  justice ;  but  we  can  love  the  man  who  rises  higher  than  this,
and  who,  whilst  doing  that  which  is  just,  is  also  large-hearted  and  generous.

ni.  To  "  WALK  HUMBLY  WITH  THY  GoD."  To  Walk  with  God  is  to  make  it  our
fixed  purpose  and  determination  to  live  to  him  ;  to  devote  ourselves  to  his  service.  To
walk  with  Qod  is  to  acknowledge  him  as  our  Sovereign  and  our  Father ;  to  set  him
ever  before  us ;  to  live  a  life  of  hallowed  communion  with  him  ;  to  make  his  glory
the  great  object  and  end  of  life;  to  seek  to  do  only  those  things  which  are  weU-
pleasing  in  his  sight.  To  walk  with  God  is  to  have  our  mind  and  will  brought  into
subjection  to  his ;  to  strive  to  do  all  he  would  have  us  do  and  to  be  all  he  would  have
us  be;  to  endeavour  more  and  more  to  resemble  him, and  to  have  taken  from  us  what-
ever in  us  is  contrary  unto  him.  To  walk  with  God  is  to  love  him ;  to  rejoice  in  his
presence ;  to  feel  ourselves  attracted  towards  him ;  to  value  nothing  more  than  his  favour ;
to  deprecate  nothing  more  than  his  displeasure.  To  walk  with  God  is  to  have  him
dwelling  continually  in  our  hearts ;  ever  to  seek  his  approval ;  ever  to  make  it  the  great
business  of  life  to  glorify  and  to  honour  him.  And  in  all  this  true  humility  is  to  mark
us  as  we  think  of  his  greatness  and  our  own  littleness  and  unworthiness.  True  piety
thus  covers  the  whole  range  of  human  duty ;  it  embraces  our  duty  towards  God  and
towards  our  fellow-men.  The  fulfilment  of  this  is  "required"  of  us,  and  in  such
obedience  lies  the  evidence  tliat  we  are  the  possessors  of  sincere  and  vital  godliness.

Ver.  8. — True  piety :  its  exalted  character.  "  And  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of
thee,"  etc.  ?  The  standard  God  has  set  up  for  human  conduct  is  very  high.  His  law
covers  the  whole  range  of  man's  relationships,  and  demands  lofty  attainments.     Note —

L  Piety  as  defined  in  the  text  is  very  exalted  in  its  natueb.  See
this  :  1.  In  its  eminently  practical  character.  It  is  to  enter  into  all  the  concerns  of
our  daily  life.  It  does  not  ignore  the  emotional  in  man,  but  it  insists  upon  holy  feeling
being  transmuted  into  holy  service  to  God  and  to  man.  2.  In  its  heing  synonymous
with  morality.  The  distinction  often  drawn  between  "  a  religious  man  "  and  "  a  moral
man"  has  no  recognition  here.  God's  Law  has  two  tables — the  one  having  reference
to  our  obligations  to  God,  anri  the  other  to  our  duties  to  man ;  and,  correctly  speaking,
the  term  "  morality  "  can  only  be  applied  to  those  who  are  endeavouring  to  heed  both
these  requirements,  and  he  has  no  claim  to  it  who  regards  only  one  of  these  tables,
and  that  the  lesser,  and  who  virtually  excludes  God  from  his  own  Law.  And  the
converse  is  also  true.  As  there  can  be  no  true  morality  apart  from  piety,  so  also  there
can  be  no  true  piety  apart  from  morality ;  in  other  words,  that  these  cannot  practically
be  separated.  Profession  and  life  must  go  together,  and  be  in  harmony ;  it  is  the
union  of  religion  and  morality  that  constitutes  the  life  of  true  and  vital  godliness.

II.  The  contemplation  or  this  exalted  nature  of  true  piety  is  calculated

TO  BXEBT   A   DBPEESBIN&   INFLUBNOK  UPON   OUB   HEARTS.      When    We   reflect  UpOn  the

Divine  requirement  in  the  light  of  our  own  actions  and  conduct,  we  feel  how  infinitely
and  painfully  short  we  have  fallen  below  what  we  ought  to  have  been.  The  standard
set  up  is  so  lofty  that  we  fear  we  shall  never  reach  it.  "  It  is  high,  we  cannot  attain
unto  it,"  we  cry,  and  almost  feel  despairing  and  hopeless.

III.  But  withal  theke  abb  glorious  bncoukagembnts.  1.  The  Divine
purpose.  What  encouragement  lies  in  the  thought  that  he  who  has  revealed  this
perfect  Law  for  human  conduct,  and  who  has  the  hearts  of  all  men  at  his  own  disposal,
will  not  rest  until  by  the  power  of  his  grace  and  Spirit  he  has  so  touched  and  elevated
the  life  of  man  as  that  the  ideal  shall  become  actual,  and  the  race  be  delivered,  fully
and  for  ever,  from  guilt  and  sin.  2.  The  obedience  of  Christ.  In  accordance  with
this  Divine  purpose,  God  gave  his  own  Son,  and  the  Christ  appeared  amongst  men.
Think  of  the  life  he  lived,  and  how  complete  a  transcript  of  the  Divine  Law  it  was  I
And  whilst  he  exemplified  that  Law  in  his  life,  in  his  voluntary  surrender  to  the
stroke  of  death  as  a  sacrifice  for  human  guilt  he  put  lasting  honour  upon  it.  By  that
memorable  death  he  declared  silently  the  purity  of  the  Divine  Law,  and  attested  the
righteousness  of  the  penalty  attached  to  its  violation.     It  has  been  truly  said  that


U  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  [oh.  in.  1—16.

"  man  convinced  of  sin  is  ready  to  eaciifice  what  is  dearest  to  him  rather  than  give
up  his  own  will  and  give  himself  to  God  "  (W.  Robertson  Smith).  It  is  easier  to  oflfer
"  to  come  before  him  with  burnt  offerings,  with  calves  of  a  year  old,"  than  to  lay  our
proud  wills  at  his  feet  and  to  yield  to  him  our  hearts.  But  as  we  contemplate  the
obedience  of  Christ  and  his  yielding  himself  up  for  us,  and  see  in  him  expressed  the
great  Father's  love,  that  which  was  difficult  becomes  light — we  own  ourselves  subdued,
we  view  sin  now  in  the  light  of  the  cross,  and  see  its  loathsomeness,  and  desire  to  be
more  entirely  delivered  from  its  practice,  whilst  as  we  contemplate  God's  Law,  under
the  influence  of  the  feelings  and  emotions  thus  excited  within  us,  we  are  impelled  to
cry  in  all  the  fulness  of  a  consecrated  heart,  "  I  delight  in  the  Law  of  God  after  the
inward  man  1 "  (Bom.  vii.  22)  ;  "  O  how  I  love  thy  Law  I  "  (Ps.  cxix.  97).

Vers.  9,  13 — 15. — Divine  chastisanent.  1,  A  solemn  declabation  of  ooMiNa
CHASTISEMENT.  (Vers.  13 — 15.)  The  form  this  chastisement  would  assume  is  suggestive
of  the  thought  of  utter  disappointment.  Their  gain  should  be  turned  into  loss ;  their
expectations  should  be  completely  frustrated ;  all  that  they  hoped  to  realize  as  the
result  of  their  deceptions  and  extortions  should  fail  them,  even  as  the  brook  fails
the  parched  traveller  when  coming  to  it  to  slake  his  burning  thirst,  lo  I  he  fiads  it
dried  up.  They  should  be  made  desolate  because  of  their  sins  (ver.  13).  Surrounded
for  a  time,  and  through  their  ill-gotten  gains,  with  all  material  comforts,  they  should
no  more  be  satisfied  by  these  tban  he  can  be  upon  whom  disease  has  fastened  its
deadly  grasp  (ver.  13).  Nor  should  these  material  comforts  abide.  Internal  conflicts
and  foreign  invasion  should  result  in  their  impoverishment.  The  toil  of  the  sowing  had
been  theirs,  but  they  should  not  experience  "  the  joy  of  harvest ;  "  they  had  trodden
the  olives  and  had  pressed  the  grapes,  but  they  should  not  rejoice  in  the  oil  that  makes
the  face  to  shine,  x>r  the  wine  that  makes  glad  the  heart  of  man  (vers.  14,  15).  They
had  broken  God's  Law,  and  the  judgment  threatened  in  that  Law  they  must  now  inevit-
ably experience  (Lev.  xxvi.  16 ;  Deut.  xxviii.  30,  38).

II,  This  ohastisemekt  appointed  by  God.  (Ver.  9.)  "The Lord's  voice orietb unto
the  city,"  bidding  men  hear  him  who  had  "  appointed  the  judgment  (ver.  9).  "  /will
make  thee  sick,"  etc.  (ver.  13).  Their  sin  was  allowed  to  work  out  its  evil  consequences
upon  them,  that  they  might  be  led  to  see  how  evil  a  thing  it  was.  God  turns  events
into  teachers,  and  sorrows  into  discipline.  He  allows  the  reeds  upon  which  men  were
leaning  to  break,  and  the  earthly  pleasures  upon  which  their  hearts  were  set  to  yield  only
the  bitterness  of  gall  and  wormwood,  that  thus  they  may  be  led  to  look  to  him,  the
unfailing  Spring.  It  is  not  by  chance  that  trials  meet  the  children  of  men  in  the  path-
way of  life.  It  is  theDivine  arrangement  that  men  should  be  thus  met,  if  perchance  they
may  he  impelled  to  turn  away  from  an  unsatisfying  world,  and  be  led  to  seek  in  him  their
chief  good.  Sometimes  we  are  so  wayward  that  we  will  not  pause  in  our  wandering
until  God  reveals  the  peril  that  is  in  our  path.  The  prodigal  had  to  feel  shame  and
hunger  before  "  he  came  to  himself."  So  we  need  at  times  to  be  startled  and  chastened
into  obedience.  Even  God's  chastisemeuts  are  love.  "Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he
ohasteneth,"  etc.  (Heb.  xii.  6 — 8);  "As  many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and  chasten"  (Rev.
iii.  19).

III.  The  wisdom  op  recognizing  God  in  these  advbbsb  expeeiencbs  of  life.
"  And  the  men  of  wisdom,"  etc.  (ver.  9).  We  show  the  possession  by  us  of  this  wisdom
when  we  (1)  accept  our  life-sorrows  as  coming  to  us  with  this  wise  and  loving  intent ;

(2)  when  we  calmly  and  trustingly  bow  to  the  Divine  will  in  the  seasons  of  grief;

(3)  When  we  cherish  solicitude  that  the  gracious  ends  designed  may  be  fulfilled  in  us ;
and  (4)  when,  our  bonds  *'  loosed,"  and  the  sorrow  overpast,  the  grateful  acknowledge
ment,  springing  from  our  inmost  souls,  breaks  forth  from  our  lips,  "  It  is  good  for
me  that  I  have  been  afflicted  "  (Ps.  cxix.  71) ;  "  Before  I  was  afflicted  1  went  astray,^
etc.  (Pi.  cxix.  67).

Vers.  10 — 12. — "  Weighed  in  the  laJances,  and  found  wanting.''  Having  expounded
the  nature  of  true  piety,  the  prophet  proceeds  in  these  verses  to  apply  the  principles
thus  enunciated  to  the  case  of  his  peoj'le,  endeavouring  by  means  of  searching  inquiries
to  bring  home  to  their  hearts  a  sense  of  their  guilt  and  depravity.

I.    Wk  have  HBKE  an  illustrative   example  of  human  conduct  when  TKSTin  BV


OH.  VI.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  85

TBB  DiYiNB  BEQuiBEMENTS  BETKO  FouKD  WANTiNa.  Notice  in  this  case :  1.  DUhonestff
in  trade  as  opposed  to  "  doing  justly,"  Bectiiude  in  all  the  transactions  of  life  was
repeatedly  insisted  upon  in  the  Law  of  God  as  given  by  Moses  (Lev.  xix.  86,  36 ;  Deut.
zxv.  14,  15).  Disregard  of  this  requirement  was  an  indictment  constantly  brought
against  the  Jewish  people  by  their  faithful  seers  (Amoi  viii.  4 — 6 ;  Ezek.  xlv.  9, 10 ;
Eos.  xii.  7,  8).  To  be  engaged  in  trade  has  been  regarded  by  some  as  a  badge  of  social
inferiority.  No  right-minded  man  could  speak  or  even  think  thus.  All  honest  trades
are  honourable.  None  need  be  ashamed  of  tht;ir  callings  because  these  belong  to  the
shop  and  the  mart.  The  dishonour  lies  in  fraud,  tiickery,  deceit,  and  sharp  practice  ;  but
let  all  these  be  eschewed,  and  the  principles  of  uprightness  and  honour  prevail,  and  the
humblest  trade,  conducted  on  these  lines,  is  thereby  ennobled.  "  Royalty  in  her  robes
of  state  is  not  so  majestic  as  Commerce  clothed  in  spotless  integrity  and  commanding
unlimited  confidence.  Yictory,  raising  her  trophies  from  the  spoils  of  a  conquered
army,  is  not  so  glorious  as  Commerce,  patiently  and  perseveringly,  slowly  but  surely,
gaining  its  end  by  scorning  and  disdaining  the  arts  which  promise  a  speedy  bat
treacherous  elevation  "  (Dr.  Eobert  Halley).  2.  Oppression  and  violetice  as  opposed  to
"  loving  mercy  "  (ver.  12).  Men,  making  haste  to  be  rich,  fall  into  many  hurttul  snares
(1  Tim.  vi.  9),  and  one  of  these  is  that  of  oppressing  those  less  favoured  than  them-
selves. They  become  hard,  and  are  led  to  take  undue  advantage  of  those  who  are
needy  and  who  can  in  any  way  be  made  tributary  to  theii'  interests.  Provision  against
this  was  made  in  the  Law  of  Moses  (Deut.  xxiv.  10 — 22).  This  provision  of  that  Divine
law,  which  so  marvellously  met  every  circumstance  and  condition  of  life,  the  prophet
charged  his  people  with  disregarding.  "  The  rich  men  thereof  are  full  of  violence "
(ver.  12 ;  Isa.  i.  23 ;  v.  7 ;  Amos  v.  11 ;  Mai.  iii.  5).  The  love  of  mercy  was  sacrificed
to  the  love  of  gain.  Man,  consumed  by  liist  of  wealth,  used  his  feUow-men  as  mere
■tepping-stones,  trampling  them  beneath  his  feet.  3.  Degeneration  in  speech  as
altogether  incompatible  with  "  tualhing  humbly  with  God."  (Ver.  12.)  Very  glorious J»
the  power  of  utterance,  the  ability  to  give  audible  expression,  with  clearness  and
perspicuity,  to  the  thoughts  which  may  be  filling  our  minds  and  stirring  our  very  souls.

"  And  when  she  spake
Sweet  words,  like  dropping  honey,  she  did  shed:
And  'twixt  the  pearls  and  rubies  softly  brake
A  silver  sound  that  heavenly  musio  seemed  to  make."

(Spenser's '  Faery  Qneene.*)

Speech  li  a  very  sore  index  to  character.  "  Out  of  thine  own  mouth  will  I  judge  thee  "
(Luke  xix.  22).  "  A  bell  may  have  a  crack,  and  you  may  not  see  it,  but  take  the
clapper  and  strike  it,  and  youll  soon  perceive  that  it  is  flawed."  Degradation  is
stamped,  not  only  upon  the  physical  form  of  savage  tribes,  but  also  upon  the  very
language  they  employ.    When,  as  the  result  of  a  long  course  of  transgression  or  of

grolonged  banishment  from  civiUzation,  noble  thoughts  and  high  spiritual  conceptions
ave  dropped  away  from  them,  there  has  attended  this  the  loss  even  of  the  very  words
by  which  these  thoughts  and  conceptions  are  expressed,  so  that  the  language  of  such
people  has  become  woefully  impoverished.  Clearly,  then,  would  we  have  our  speech
right,  we  must  get  our  hearts  right.  "  The  weights  and  wheels  are  in  the  heart,  and  the
clock  strikes  according  to  their  motion.  Truth  in  the  inward  parts  is  the  certain  cure
for  all  evil  in  the  tongue."  The  prevailing  degeneracy  over  which  this  seer  so  deeply-
mourned  is  indicated  in  his  words, "  The  inhabitants  thereof  have  spoken  lies,  and  their
tongue  is  deceitful  in  their  mouth  "  (ver.  12).  And,  this  being  the  case,  they  were
utterly  unfitted  for  complying  with  the  requirement  that  they  should  walk  humbly
"with  their  God;"  for  only  "the  pure  in  heart"  can  have  fellowship  with  him.
"  Weighed"  thus  "  in  the  balances  "  of  the  requirements  of  God's  pure  Law,  they  were
*  found  wanting."
XL  Although  diffbbdio  in  deobek,  yet  rr  is  tbxjb  uuivEBSAiiLT  that  hhican

CONDUCT,  PBOVED    THUS,  WILL   NOT   STAND   THE    TEST.      God's   LaW  iS  "  holy,  jUSt,  and

true,"  and  man  is  by  nature  and  practice  so  sinful  that,  judged  by  that  high  standard,
"every  mouth   must  be  stopped,   and  the  whole   world  appear  guilty  before  God

(Rom.  iii.  19).  ^  _

IIL  The  ognsoiouskbss  of  this  should  lead  us  to  welcome  the  Oheist  of  God,


96  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  vi.  1— Id

WHOSE  ADVENT  THIS  PROPHET  PEEDIOTED,  AND  TO  EBJOIOE  IN  HIS  WOBK  ON  OUB  BEHALF.

We  cannot  meet  God  on  the  ground  of  obedience  to  his  pure  Law.  If  we  take  that  stand,
then  he  righteously  and  imperatively  requires  that  the  whole  Law  be  kept ;  and  this  ii
impossible  to  ua,  since  even  if  we  were  capable  of  perfect  obedience  in  the  future,  this
would  not  atone  for  the  failures  of  the  past.  The  true  meeting-place  ia  not  Sinai,
but  Calvary  (2  Tim.  i.  9 ;  Eom.  iii.  20—26).

Ter.  16. — The  influence  of  wil  men.  These  are  the  last  recorded  words  of  Micah
declarative  of  coming  judgment;  and  they  are  deeply  impressive  as  setting  forth  the
influence  exerted  by  evil  men.

L  Its  perpetuitt.  "  For  the  statutes  of  Omri  are  kept,  and  all  the  works  of  the
house  of  Ahab,  and  ye  walk  in  their  counsels  "  (ver.  16).  God  had  separated  this
people  from  among  the  nations,  and  had  specially  favoured  them  with  a  revelation  of
his  will.  He  had  given  unto  them  his  pure  Law.  Their  fathers  had  gathered  in  the
olden  time  at  Sinai,  that

"  Separate  from  the  world,  their  breast
Might  duly  take  and  strongly  keep
The  print  of  hoaven  to  be  ezprest
Ere  long  on  Zion's  steep."

(Keble.)

Ood  had  conferred  signal  honour  upon  them  in  constituting  them  the  depositaries  of
his  truth,  and  his  witnesses  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth.  They  were  bound  by  the  most
sacred  obligations,  the  most  solemn  vows  repeatedly  renewed,  and  by  pains  and  penalties
too,  "  to  keep  his  statues  "  and  "  to  obey  his  commandments."  But  they  lamentably
failed  to  fulfil  their  high  mission,  and  the  failure  is  in  no  small  degree  traced  in  these
records  to  the  influence  of  their  kings.  Jeroboam,  Omri,  and  Ahab  stand  out  con-
spicuously in  the  history  of  the  kingdom  of  Israel  as  having  sinned  and  caused  Israel
to  sin,  and  the  evil  influence  thus  exerted  spread  to  the  kingdom  of  Judah,  and
descended  from  generation  to  generation.  One  hundred  and  seventy  years  had  passed
since  the  death  of  Ahab,  nearly  tv/o  hundred  since  the  death  of  Omri,  and  about  two
hundred  and  thirty  since  the  death  of  Jeroboam ;  yet  their  pernicious  influence  was
still  felt,  and  the  people  were  keeping  their  statutes  instead  of  God's,  and  walking  in
their  ways  instead  of  in  "  the  way  of  holiness."  It  is  clear,  then,  that,  whilst  we  may
by  a  true  life  be  helpers,  even  to  those  who  come  after  us,  in  all  that  is  good,  we  may
also,  by  the  perversion  of  this  power,  prove  hinderers  to  them,  and  keep  them  back
from  the  highest  bliss.  Evil  deeds  as  well  as  good  actions  have  the  stamp  of  per-
manence upon  them,  "  Being  dead,"  men  "  yet  speak  "  for  ill  as  for  good.  You  cannot
limit  the  influence  of  wrong-doing  to  the  men  who  commit  it.  Generations  yet  unborn
will  experience  the  dire  effects  of  the  sins  men  are  committing  now.  "  For  the  statutes
of  Omri  "(ver.  16).

II.  Its  perniciousness.  "  That  I  should  make  thee,"  etc.  (ver.  16).  The  injurious
effects  thus  wrought  in  a  nation  are  here  specially  set  forth.  1.  It  leads  on  to  national
decay.  "  That  I  should  make  thee  a  desolation  "  (ver.  16).  2.  It  excites  the  contempt
of  the  adversaries.  "  And  the  inhabitants  thereof  an  hissing  "  (ver.  16).  3.  It  lays
spiritual  honour  in  the  very  dust,  and  causes  the  foes  of  (Sjd  and  of  his  truth  to
blaspheme.  "Therefore  ye  shall  bear  the  reproach  of  my  people"  (ver.  16;  Ezek.
xxxvi.  20 ;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  4 ;  xUv.  13—16).


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  protest  and  a  retrospect.  The  serious  state  of  the  case  between
Jehovah  and  his  people  is  shown  by  this  appeal  to  the  hills  and  mountains.  Aa  though
among  all  the  nations  none  could  be  found  impartial  enough  to  be  umpires,  or  even
witnesses,  inanimate  nature  must  supply  its  testimony.  (Illustrate  from  Job  xii.
7,  8 ;  Isa.  i.  2,  3 ;  Luke  xix.  40 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  16.)  The  mountains  have  stability ;  not
so  the  favoured  nation.  They  have  survived  many  generations  of  God's  ungrateful
beneficiaries,  and  have  been  witnesses  of  the  blessings  those  thankless  ones  have


JH.  TL 1— 16.j  THK  BOOK.  OF  MICAH.  n

receiired.  The  cliffs  of  Horeb  have  echoed  back  the  precepts  and  promises  of  Jehovah,
and  the  gentler  tones  of  his  "  still  small  voice,"  but  his  people  hare  remained  deaf  to
his  appeals.    Hence —

I.  A  FBOTEST.  Before  Jehovah  passes  judgment  he  permits  himself  to  be  regarded
as  the  defendant  if  his  people  can  venture  to  bring  any  charge  against  him.  He  Isnows
that  nothing  but  unrighteous  treatment  on  his  part  could  justity  them  in  departing
from  him.  Hence  the  appeal  in  Jer.  ii.  5,  and  the  similar  remonstrances  of  Christ  in
John  viii.  46  and  x.  32.  Nothing  but  intolerable  grievances  can  justify  a  national
revolt  or  a  desertion  of  the  paternal  home.  Had  Grod  "  wearied  "  Israel  by  unreason-
able treatment?  The  whole  history  of  the  nation  refutes  the  suggested  libel.  Or  can
we  make  any  such  charges  against  God  ?  What  can  they  be  ?  1.  Undue  severity  $
Can  "my people"  (what  a  sermon  in  that  mere  term!)  say  so  (Job  xi.  6;  Ps.  ciii.  10;
Dan.  ii.  7)  ?  2.  A  harsh  and  trying,  temper  f  The  very  opposite  is  the  spirit  of  "  the
Father  of  mercies "  (Ps.  cxlv.  8,  9).  3.  Unreasonable  exactions  of  service  f  No ;  he
can  make  the  appeal,  "  I  hare  not  caused  thee  to  serve  with  an  offering,  nor  wearied
thee  with  incense  "  (Isa.  xliii.  23).  His  "  yoke  is  easy ; "  "  His  commandments  are  not
grievous."  4.  Negligence  in  his  training  o/usf  Far  from  it ;  he  can  declare,  "  What
could  have  been  done  more?"  etc.  (Isa.  v.  1 — 4).  Forbearance,  loving-kindness,  and
thoughtful  consideratioQ  have  marked  God's  conduct  throughout.  The  case  against
God  utterly  breaks  down.  Instead  of  desiring  to  remonstrate,  or  even  "  reason  with
God,"  as  at  one  time  Job  did,  every  reasonable  soul,  hearing;  God's  words  and  catching
some  vision  of  his  glory,  must  acknowledge,  as  that  patriarch  did,  "  I  abhor  myself,
and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes"  (cf.  Job  xiii.  3;  ilii.  5,  6).  The  way  is  cleared.  O
God,  thou  art  justified  when  thou  speakest,  and  clear  wh»n  thou  art  judged.  And
now  God's  messenger  may  take  up  his  parable,  like  Samuel  (1  Sam.  xii.  7),  and  God
himself  may  make  the  appeal  in  vers.  4,  5.

II.  A  BETBOSF£OT.  Jehovah  selects  specimens  of  his  gracious  dealings  with  them
from  their  early  history.  He  reminds  them  of:  1.  A  grand  redemption.  (Ver.  4.)  We,
too,  as  a  nation  can  speak  of  great  deliverances  from  political  and  ecclesiastical  bondage.
See  T.  H.  Gill's  hymn—

«  Lift  thy  song  among  the  nations,
England  of  the  Lord  beloved,"  eto.

And  for  each  of  us  has  been  provided  a  redemption  from  a  worse  than  Egyptian
bondage,  through  '•Christ  our  Passover,  sacrificed  for  us."  2.  Illustrious  leaders.
Moses,  their  inspired  lawgiver  and  the  friend  of  God  (Numb.  xii.  8) ;  Aaron,  their  high
priest  and  intercessor ;  Miriam,  a  singer,  poet,  prophetess.  What  memories  of  "  the  loving-
kindnesses  of  the  Lord "  these  names  would  recall — the  Paschal  night,  the  morning
of  final  deliverance  and  song  of  triumph  by  the  Red  Sea,  the  manna,  the  plague  stayed,
etc.  t  We,  too,  can  look  back  on  our  illustrious  leaders  in  English  history.  And  in
common  with  the  whole  of  Christendom, "  all  things  are  yours,  whether  Paul  or  Apollos,
or  Cephas  " — the  apostles,  the  martyrs,  the  preachers,  the  poets  of  the  past — "  aU  are
yours"  by  right,  if  not  by  actual  enjoymeot.  3.  Foes  frustrated.  (Ver.  6.)  "Re-
member now  " — a  word  of  tender  appeal,  as  though  God  would  say, "  Oh,  do  remember."
Balak  was  a  representative  foe,  striving  against  Israel,  first  by  policy  HJIumb.  xxii.),
then  by  villainy  (Numb,  xxv.),  and  finally  by  violence  (Numb.,  xxxi.).  Again  the
parallel  may  be  traced  in  national  and  individual  history.  4.  Curses  turned  into
blessings.  (Deut.  xxiii.  5.)  So  has  it  been  with  many  of  the  tria;ls  of  the  past.
"  Bememher  from  Shittim  unto  Gilgal "  (cf.  Numb.  xxv.  1  and  Josh.  iv.  19).  What  a
contrast  1  Sins  forgiven ;  reproach  "  rolled  away  "  (Josh.  v.  9) ;  chastisements  blessed ;
the  long-looked-for  land  of  promise  entered.  All  these  blessings  show  us  "the
righteous  acts  of  the  Lord."  They  remind  us  of  the  successive  acts  of  God's  righteous
grace.  They  make  sin  against  him  shamefully  ungrateful  as  well  as  grossly  unjust.
Oh,  that  the  goodness  of  God  may  lead  to  repentance!  that  he  may  overcome 'our  evil
by  his  good !  that  "  the  love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  "  may  constrain
us  to  live  henceforth,  not  to  ourselves,  but  to  him ! — B.  S.  P.

Vers.  6 — 8. — The  essentials  of  godliness.    If  the  questions  of  vers.  6  and  7  are  those
of  Bakk  and  the  answers  are  Balaam's,  they  remind  us  of  how  a  man  may  know  and
irrnAiT.  ■


08  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  Icfo.  vi.  1—16.

explain  clearly  the  path  of  righteousnoas  and  peace,  and  yet  neglect  it.  Balaam  may
prophesy ;  Demas  may  preach ;  Judas  may  cast  out  devils ;  but  "  I  never  knew  you ;
d»p»rt  from  me  ye  that  work  iniquity ! "  Or  if  we  regard  the  questions  as  proposed,
ei+.hor  by  the  nation  convicted  of  sin  (vers.  1 — 5),  or  by  any  one  sin-stricken  soul,  we
l&an  the  same  truths.  It  is  the  old  controversy,  older  than  Balak,  between  God  and
man,  as  to  the  grounds  of  man's  acceptance  with  God  and  the  essential  requirements
from  man  by  God.    We  see —

I.  Anxious  questions.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  These  questions  remind  ua  of;  1.  Man's
sense  of  distance  from  Ood.  He  is  not  consciously  walking  "  with  God,"  like  Enoch ;
"  before  God,"  like  Abraham.  2.  Eis  conviction  that  he  cannot  come  to  Ood  by  any
right  or  merit  of  his  own.  "Wherewith?"  He  cannot  come  just  as  he  is,  empty-
handed.  He  has  no  right  of  entry  to  the  court  of  the  Divine  King,  3.  And  that  if  he
comes  at  all  he  must  "  low,"  as  an  inferior,  conscious  of  absolute  dependent.  This
"  consciousness  of  absolute  dependence  "  (Sohleiermacher'fl  definition  of  religion),  which
is  shared  by  all  intelligent  creatures,  is  intensified  by  the  consciousness  of  sin.  Sin  has
as  its  shadow  guilt,  and  the  brighter  the  light  the  clearer  and  darker  the  shadow.  That
shadow  projects  itself  into  the  mysterious  future.  A  sense  of  desert  of  punishment  and
"  a  certain  fearful  looking  for  of  judgment "  are  the  attendants  of  sin,  though  there
may  be  no  meltings  of  godly  sorrow  from  a  sense  of  its  base  ingratitude.  Thus  sin  is
the  great  separator ;  man  feels  it ;  God  declares  it  (Isa.  lix.  1,  2).  Hence  there  follow
suggestive  inquiries  as  to  the  means  by  which  acceptance  with  God  may  be  obtained.
Sh*ll  they  be  "burnt  offerings"?  There  was  a  germ  of  truth  in  this  thought  (cf.
2  Sam.  xxiv.  24).  Burnt  offerings  were  entirely  devoted  to  God.  They  might  be
prnciouB  in  quality,  like  "  calves  of  a  year  old,"  or  multiplied  in  quantity  ("  thousands
of  rams,"  etc.).  These  burnt  offerings  were  designed  to  denote  God's  right  to  our
entire  surrender,  but  could  be  no  substitute  for  that  surrender.  They  might  be  signs
of  eager  desire  for  acceptance,  though  at  a  high  price.  But  in  themselves  they  could
bring  no  sense  of  access  to  God  and  of  peace  with  him.  Then  comes  the  suggestion  of
a  sacrifice  infinitely  more  costly  ("  my  firstborn,"  etc.).  To  a  parent  a  child's  life  is
more  precious  than  his  own.  If  the  sinner  can  be  forgiven  and  accepted  only  at  such
a  price,  shall  it  be  paid  ?  Terror-stricken,  deluded  consciences  have  answered,  "  Tes ; "
but  the  peace  has  not  come.  While  some  of  these  proposals  are  detestable  to  God,  all
of  them  are  worthless.  Unless  the  man  himself  is  right  with  God,  no  sacrifice  caa
avail.  Tet  many  would  rather  sacrifice  health,  life,  wife,  child,  than  give  up  sin  which
is  the  great  separater.  Sinful  man  can  ask  such  anxious  questions  as  these,  but  he
cannot  answer  them.  His  suggestions  land  him  in  deeper  guilt,  or  at  the  best  leave
him  in  blank  despair.

II.  Ebassubino  akswbbs.  (Ver.  8.)  These  come  from  God  himself.  Eveiy  frag-
ment of  gospel — ^news  of  good,  is  news  from  God.  It  was  given  not  now  for  the  first
time.  God  had  spoken  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners  by  Moses  and  the  earlier
prophets.  All  previous  revelations  of  Law  and  grace  were  means  of  showing  men
"  what  is  good."  In  regard  to  man  himself,  God  from  the  beginning  has  testified
that  his  only  real  "  good "  is  real  godliness.  This  was  the  sum  of  his  requirements
(see  Deut.  x.  12,  13,  etc.).  He  did  not  seek  for  something  firom  themselves,  but  for
themselves  and  for  the  fruit  of  his  Spirit  within  them.  There  were  fdlte  methods  by
which  "that  which  is  good"  was  sought,  such  as  heathen  sacrifices  and  austerities.
There  were  inadequate  methods,  such  as  God's  own  appointed  system  of  sacrifices  and
services,  when  emptied  of  the  spirit  of  self-surrender  they  were  designed  to  foster  and
of  the  teaching  they  contained  of  the  need  of  "  better  sacrifices  "  (Heb.  ix.  23).  These
symbolical  educational  sacrifices  were  but  part  of  a  process  which  was  to  issue  in  man's
acceptance  by  God,  that  thus  man  might  render  to  God  what  he  required,  and  might
know  and  "  prove  what  is  that  good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of  God  "  (cf.  Heb.
X.  1 — 10, 19 — 25).  Looking  closely  at  ver.  8,  we  see  a  summing  np  of  both  Law  and
gospel.  1,  "  To  do  Justly."  Elementary  morality  is  here  linked  with  all  that  is  Divine.
To  io  Justly  is  not  only  to  do  what  is  just,  but  because  it  is  just,  and  with  an  earnest
desire  to  be  right  with  God.  The  "  righteousness  "  which  "  the  righteous  Lord  loveth  "
(Ps.  xi.  7)  is  more  than  the  outward  act.  And  yet  these  most  elementary  acts  oi
righteousness  were  neglected  by  many  then  (vers.  10—12  and  ch.  rii.  3)  as  well  as  now,
who  proposed  anxious  questions  about  their  acceptance  with  God  or  even  professed  te


CM.  Tt  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  99

have  found  satisractory  answers  to  them.  2.  "  To  love  mercy"  Mercy  is  more  than
justice,  just  as  "  a  good  man  "  is  more  than  a  merely  "  righteous  "  one  (Rom.  v.  7).  Th»
lack  of  it  may  arise  from  hardness  of  character,  or  from  nerer  having  passed  through
the  temptations  by  which  some  have  fallen.  To  cultivate  the  lore  of  mercy  will  bring
us  nearer  to  God,  and  will  make  it  easy  for  us  to  scatter  blessings  around  our  path,  even  ■
to  the  unthankful  and  the  evil  (Prov.  xxi.  21 ;  Matt.  v.  7  ;^  Luke  vi.  82 — 36).  Such  «
disposition  is  incompatible  with  .spiritual  pride.  But  lest  a  just  and  benevolent  mau
should  be  tempted  to  pride  himself  and  to  rely  on  his  outward  conduct,  we  are  reminded
of  Qod's  last  requirement.  3.  "  To  walk  humbly  with  thy  Ood."  Here  the  first  table  of
the  Decalogue  and  the  law  of  the  gospel  are  combined.  "  Walk  with  God."  How  can
the  sinner,  except  he  be  reconciled  (Amos  iii.  3)  ?  Hence  the  need  of  peace  ia  God's
appointed  way.  This  way  to  us  is  not  the  way  of  self-righteousness  or  the  way  of
ceremonies  and  sacraments,  but  it  is  tlie  way  of  faith  in  Gail's  own  appointed  and
accepted  atonement  (Rom.  iv.  4,  5;  1  John  iii.  23).  To  "submit"  to  this  righteous-
ness  of  God  Tec[uires  a  humbling  of  many  a  proud  hiart.  And  if  we  have  welcomed
reconciliation  as  God's  free  gift  through  Christ,  we  shall  ever  after  walk  humbly  vith
car  Ood  as  his  grateful,  happy  children.  Such  a  humble  walk  will  make  justice  and
mercy  easier  to  us.  When  Luther  was  asked  what  wag  the  first  step  in  religion,  ha
replied  "  Humility ; "  and  when  asked  what  was  the  second  and  the  third,  answered  in
the  same  way.  Therefore  walk  humbly,  as  a  learner;  as  a  pensioner;  as  a  pardoned
and  joyous  chilrl,  "  looking  for  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  eternal  life"
(Titui  iL  11— 14).— E.  S.  P.

Ver.  9. — The  voice  of  the  rod.  God's  voice  has  often  called  to  Jerusalem  In  mercy
and  in  warning ;  now  it  cries  in  judgment — it  is  the  voice  of  the  rod.    Notice —

I.  The  sins  that  call  fob  it.  In  the  context  many  of  the  chief  national  sins  are
once  more  enumerated,  such  as  ill-gotten  gains  (ver.  10),  false  weights  and  measuiea
(vers.  10,  11),  oppression  of  the  poor  by  the  potty  magnates  of  the  city  (ver.  12),
habitual  fraud  and  falsehood  (ver.  12),  Apply  these  illustiations  to  some  of  England  s
national  sins.  But  as  though  these  were  not  enough,  there  were  added  thereto  the
sins  of  the  darkest  period  of  the  northern  kingdom,  viz.  from  Omri  to  Jehu  (see
ver.  16  margin,  "  He  doth  much  keep,"  t.e.  does  diligently  keep  such  statutes  as  these
rather  than  the  statutes  of  Jehovah,  which  his  people  are  exhorted  diligently  to  keep,
Exod,  XV.  26,  etc.).  These  sins  included  the  establishment  of  idolatry  and  all  the
immoralities  associated  with  Baal-worship,  the  persecution  of  God's  faithful  servants
(1  Kings  xviii.  13 ;  xix.  10 ;  xxii.  27),  and  oppression  even  by  the  highest  (e.g.
Naboth).  In  the  days  of  Ahaz  the  kingdom  of  Judah  sank  to  such  a  level  as  this.
All  these  evils  were  concentrated  at  Jerusalem,  so  that  it  is  to  this  city  the  rod
appeals.

IL  The  uessages  it  bbikos.  Some  elements  of  distinct  retributive  justice  are
discernible.  1.  Uneasiness,  from  consciousness  of  gnilt,  while  pursuing  and  seeking
to  enjoy  their  nefarious  courses  (ver.  11  margin, "  Shall  I  be  pure,"  etc.  ?).  Conscience
may  be  like  an  Elijah  confronting  Ahab  in  Kaboth's  vineyard.  Illust. :  Shakespeare's
Bichard  III.  2.  As  they  defrauded  the  poor,  so  should  they  be  bitterly  disappointed
when  seeking  the  fruit  of  their  own  labour  (ver.  14 ;  Eccles.  vi.  1,  2).  3.  Their  labour
would  be  for  the  benefit  of  others,  and  all  their  efforts  to  secure  it  for  themselves
would  be  as  much  frustrated  as  were  the  toilsome  labours  of  those  whom  they  had
defrauded  (vers.  14,  15).  For  they  can  save  nothing  from  the  hand  of  Qoi.  4.  Thus
their  wounds  would  be  incurable  (ver.  13),  and  their  ill-gotten  gain  a  treasure  of  wrath
(Jas.  V.  1 — 4).  6,  These  luxurious  and  delicate  ones  should  become  a  scandal  and  %
reproach  to  all  around  them  (ver.  16).

III.  The  spirit  that  will  silence  it.  1.  Recognizing  Ood's  hand  as  holding  U,
He  "  hath  appointed  it."  (Illustrate  from  Isa.  x.  5  ;  Jer.  xlvii.  6,  7  ;  so  now  Amos  iii.  6.)  ■
2.  Listening  to  God's  voice  speaking  through  it.  Their  great  sin  in  the  past  has  been
the  disregard  of  God's  voice  (Isa.  xlviii.  18 ;  Jer.  xiii.  15—17).  The  voices  of  entreaty
and  warning  were  not  heard,  so  now  tlie  voice  of  cliastisement  speaks.  Yet  even  in
the  time  of  such  chastisement  thero  might  be  hope  (Prov.  i.  24 — ^27,  33 ;  and  see
Lev.  xivL  40 — 45).  3.  Honouring  God's  Name.  "  The  man  of  wisdom  shall  see  thy
Name."    God's  Name  declares  his  character,  and  it  is  his  character-  u  a  holy  Gkid'


100  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  n.  1-1&

that  requires  the  punishment  of  the  vmrighteous  (Exod.  xzxiv,  7).  So  long  as  men
persist  in  sin,  they  must  remain  under  the  wrath  of  God,  Sinning  and  punishment
are  inseparable.  Till  sinners  "  see  God's  Name "  by  recognizing  its  meaning  and
learning  that  they  can  honour  it  by  nothing  but  a  renunciation  of  sin,  tbe  voice  of  the
rod  must  be  heard  even  through  the  ages  of  eternity ,^E.  S.  P.

Vers.  6 — 8. — Man's  yearning  for  his  Maker.  The  prophet  supposes  that  his  earnest
appeals  have  had  some  effect — that  the  people  are  stirred  from  their  senselessness,  and
are  beginning  to  feel  after  God.  Overwhelmed  with  a  consciousness  of  sin,  they  dare
not  approach  him  as  they  are.  Their  hesitation  and  their  self-communing  are  like
those  of  the  prodigal  in  the  far  country  when  he  came  to  himself.  The  sense  of
distance  between  the  finite  and  tbe  infinite,  between  the  sin-stained  and  the  holy,  is
oppressive  and  painful,  and  it  finds  expression  in  the  words  of  our  text.

I.  The  anxious  inquirt.  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow
myself  before  the  high  God?"  Whether  men  wish  to  do  so  or  not,  they  are  bound  by
the  inexorable  laws  of  God  to  appear  before  him.  They  may  come  as  sinners,  casting
themselves  upon  his  mercy,  as  David  and  the  publican  came ;  but  they  rmjut  come,  on
the  last  great  day,  as  responsible  creatures,  to  give  an  account  of  the  deeds  done  in  the
body,  whether  they  are  good  or  bad.  It  is  not  as  a  race,  or  even  as  families,  that
judgment  will  be  received  by  men,  but  by  each  in  his  individual  capacity.  Hence  the
wise  man  asks  himself,"  Wherewith  shall  /come  before  the  Lord  ?  "  1.  This  implies  idief
in  a  personal  God.  There  is  no  conception  here  or  elsewhere  in  Scripture  of  the  world
being  ruled  by  an  impersonal  Power,  by  a  tendency  which  makes  for  righteousness.
Buch  theories  are  in  the  long  run  destructive  of  the  sense  of  personal  accountability,
and  therefore  fatal  to  the  basis  on  which  moral  law  rests.  2.  This  implies  conviction
pftin.  Else  why  this  nameless  dread,  and  this  notion  of  sin  offering?  It  matters  not
how  it  is  aroused,  whether  by  tender  touches  of  Divine  love  or  by  fervid  appeals  by
inspired  messengers ;  nor  is  it  of  consequence  whether  the  sins  were  those  of  omission
or  of  commission ;  but  in  some  form,  and  by  some  means,  a  sense  of  sin  is  aroused  in
most  men  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  office  it  is  to  "convince  the  world  of
sin,  of  rio;hteousness,  and  of  a  judgment  to  come."  3.  This  implies  willingness  to  mah»
some  sacrifice.  Even  the  heathen  have  had  the  innate  consciousness  that  without
the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission.  The  Jews  had  a  divinely  ordained  and
most  elaborate  system  of  sacrifice,  which  kept  this  idea  before  their  minds,  in  all  the
changeful  conditions  of  life.  But  they  were  taught  that  it  was  not  these  outward
and  visible  offerings  which  atoned  for  sin.  "  Thou  desirest  not  sacrifice,  else  would  I
give  it,"  etc.  "Lebanon  is  not  sufficient  to  burn,"  etc.  "  The  sacrifices  of  God  arc  a
broken  spirit :  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart,  0  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise."

II.  The  8AT1SFA0T0BT  ANSWER.  With  ever-incrcasiug  fulness  it  came,  until  at  last
the  voice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  was  heard  saying, "  I  am  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life ;
BO  man  cometh  unto  the  Father,  but  by  me."  1.  Christ  Jesus  has  offered  an  atonement
for  us.  "  Once,  in  the  end  of  the  world,  he  hath  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacri-
fice of  himself."  He  has  not  repealed  the  moral  law ;  he  has  not  abolished  the  neces-
sity for  means  of  moral  culture ;  he  has  not  quenched  the  Divine  wrath ;  but  he  has
revealed  (not  created)  the  Divine  purpose,  and  has  commended  (not  purchased)  the
Divine  love.  "  God  commendeth  his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinnersi
Christ  died  for  us."  2.  Christ  Jesus  has  brought  Ood  near  to  us.  lu  him
God  is  manifest  in  the  flesh.  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  (1)  By
seeing  him  we  can  understand  what  God  is.  The  unseen  power  which  pulsates  througli
this  boundless  universe  is  too  vast  for  our  appreciation ;  but  revealed  in  the  Lord  Jesus,
we  know  him  to  be  a  Person,  speaking  to  us  in  wisdom  and  love.  (2)  Through  Jesus
we  know  that  God  is  love.  He  inspires  hope  and  trust  in  those  who  are  alienated  and
afraid.  A  display  of  Divine  glory  would  terrify  us ;  but  we  are  encouraged  to  draw
near  by  One  who  appeared  as  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem,  as  the  patient  Teacher  of  the
disciples,  as  the  gracious  Friend  of  the  sinful  and  distressed.  3.  Christ  Jesus  attractt
us  to  Ood.  Arousing  gratitude  and  confidence,  he  is  the  great  magnet  of  human
hearts.     "  And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up,  will  draw  all  men  unto  me."

HI.  The  Ditink  bequibehent.  "He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good;
ftud  what  doth  th«  Lord  requir*  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  lore  mercy,  and


CH.TI.1— 1«.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  Ml

to  walk  hnmbly  with  thy  God."  This  is  not  required  as  a  means  of  our  Justifica-
tion, but  as  an  evidence  of  it.  It  does  not  exclude  the  work  of  Christ,  but  presup-
poses it.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  effectually  refutes  the  notion  that  the  elect  can  lire
as  they  list.  They  are  only  "  predestined  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son."
1.  "Zb  do  Justly"  involves  the  discharge  of  fairly  demanded  duties  both  towards
Gtod  and  towards  man.  We  are  unjust  in  our  dealings  with  God  when  we  withhold
time  and  wealth  and  influence  which  we  are  able  to  devote  to  him.  We  are  unjust  as
servants  when  we  render  mere  eye-service ;  unjust  as  employers  when  we  look  only
"  on  our  own  things."  Buyers  and  sellers,  statesmen  and  diplomatists,  need  all  hearken
to  this  law.  2.  "  2b  love  mercy  "  is  to  go  beyond  the  strict  rights  which  others  may
claim  of  us  in  the  exercise  of  generosity  and  pity.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  considereth
the  poor,"  etc. ;  "  If  thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him."  3.  "To  walk  hwrnhly  with  ffod  "
implies  fellowship,  constant  and  real.  Beverence  and  seriousness  in  the  treatment  of
the  Divine  revelation ;  consciousness  of  the  infinitude  of  truth,  and  our  incapacity  to
grasp  it ;  lowly  submission  to  our  Father's  will,  when  it  is  contrary  to  our  own  wishes ;
and  steadfast  progress  in  the  Christian  life,  as  we  walk  hand-in-hand  with  iiim,  are  all
iavolved  in  walking  humbly  with  our  God.

"  Walking  in  reverence
Humbly  with  thee,
Yet  &om  all  abject  fear
•    Lovingly  free ;
Ken  as  a  Mend  with  Mend,
Cheered  to  the  joomey's  end,
Walking  with  thee.^

A.B.

Vers.  1 — 6.— iifon  In  the  moral  eowi  of  history.  "  Hear  ye  now  what  the  Lord
smith;  Arise,  contend  thou  before  the  mountains,  and  let  the  hills  hear  thy  voice.
Hear  ye,  0  mountains,  the  Lord's  controversy  and  ye  strong  foundations  of  the  earth  :
for  the  Lord  hath  a  controversy  with  his  people,  and  he  will  plead  with  Israel,"  eto.
There  are  three  things  here  very  striking  and  deserving  our  solemn  attention.

I.  Here  is  a  call  on  man  to  give  audienoe  to  Almightt  God.  "  Hear  ye  now
what  the  Lord  saith."  These  are  the  words  of  the  prophet  who  speaks  in  the  name  of
Jehovah,  and  on  his  behalf.  Such  an  audience  as  this  is :  1.  Natural,  What  is  more
natural  than  for  the  child  to  hang  on  the  lips  and  attend  to  the  words  of  bis  parent?
How  much  more  natural  for  the  finite  intelligence  to  open  its  ears  to  the  words  of  tha
Infinite  I  It  is  more  natural  for  the  human  soul  to  look  up,  listening,  to  the  great
Father-Spirit,  and  to  receive  communication  icova  him,  than  for  the  earth  to  thirst  for
the  sunbeam  and  the  shower.  The  human  soul  is  made  for  it.  2.  Binding,  Of  all
duties  it  is  the  most  primary  and  imperative.  The  great  command  of  God  to  all  is,
"  Hearken  diligently  to  me ;  hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live  "  (Isa.  Iv.  2,  3).  The  con-
science of  every  man  tells  him  that  his  great  duty  is  to  hear  God  in  all  the  operations  of
nature.  In  all  the  events  of  Ufe,  in  all  the  teachings  of  the  Bible,  in  all  the  monitions
of  the  soul.  God  is  always  speaking  to  man.  Would  that  the  human  ear  was  ever
open  to  his  voice  I  3.  Indispensalle.  It  is  only  as  men  hear,  interpret,  digest,
appropriate,  and  incarnate  God's  Word  that  they  can  rise  to  a  true,  a  noble,  and  a
happy  life.  "  Hear  ye  now,"  then,  "  what  the  Lord  saith."  "  Now."  In  the  scenes
of  retribution  whither  you  are  hastening,  you  will  be  bound  to  hear  his  voice,  whether
you  wish  or  not.

II.  Hebe  ib  a  buumons  to  inanimate  natubb  to  heab  the  oontboverst  between
God  and  man.  "  Arise,  contend  thou  before  the  moimtains,  and  let  the  hills  hear  thy
voice.  Hear  ye,  0  mountains,  the  Lord's  controversy,  and  ye  strong  foundations  of
the  earth :  for  the  Lord  bath  a  controversy  with  his  people,  and  he  will  plead  with
Israel."  "  It  is  not  unusual,"  says  an  eminent  biblical  scholar,  "  with  the  prophets  to
make  appeals  respecting  the  enormity  of  human  guilt  to  the  inanimate  part  of  ci«atioB,
as  if  it  were  impossible  for  it  not  to  inspire  them  with  life,  and  call  them  forth  •■
intellijgent  witnesses  of  what  had  taken  place  in  their  presence  (see  Deut  zxxii.  1;
Isa.  i.  2;  Jer.  iL  12,  13).  By  a  similar  personification,  the  mountains  and  duraUo
foundations  of  the  earth  are  hare  summoned  to  appear  is  the  court  of  haaTaii.  Jehovah,


102  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  [oh.  TL 1— 1&

however,  instead  of  bringiug  forward  the  charge,  abdicates,  as  it  were,  his  right,  and
leaves  It  to  the  guilty  party  to  state  the  case.  In  the  appeal  to  lofty  and  ever-during
mountains,  in  which  the  puny  affairs  of  man  could  excite  no  prejudice,  and  which
might  therefore  be  regarded  as  quite  impartial  juiiges,  there  is  something  inexpressibly
sublime."  The  appeal  to  inanimate  nature :  1.  Indicates  the  earnestness  of  the  prophets
He  would  seem  to  speak  with  such  vehement  earnestness  as  if  he  would  wake  the  dead
mountains  and  hills  to  hear  his  voice,  and  shake  tlie  very  "  foundations  of  the  earth  "
with  his  thunders.  He  would  cry  aloud  and  spare  not.  Every  minister  should  l«
earnest.  "  Passion  is  reason  "  here.  2.  Suggests  the  stupidity  of  the  people.  Perhaps
the  prophet  meant  to  compare  them  to  the  dead  hills  and  mountains.  As  firmly
settled  in  sin  were  they  as  the  mountains,  as  hard  in  heart  as  the  rocks.  3.  Bints  the
universality  of  his  theme.  His  mission  had  no  limitation;  his  doctrine  was  no  secret,
it  was  as  open  and  free  as  nature.

III.  Here  ib  a  oballengg  to  man  to  find  fault  with  Drvnns  dbalikos.  "  O
my  people,  what  have  I  done  unto  thee?  and  wherein  have  I  wes^ried  thee?  Testify
against  me."  His  challenge :  1.  Implies  that  they  could  bring  nothing  against  him.
"  What  have  I  done  unto  thee  ?  "  which  means,  "  I  have  done  nothing.  I  have  not
treated  you  with  injustice,  I  have  laid  on  you  no  intolerable  burdens,  I  dare  you  to
charge  me  with  any  act  unrighteous  or  unkind."  What  fault  has  the  sinner  to  find
with  God?  2.  Declares  that  he  had  done  everything  for  them.  He  here  reminds  thera
of:  (1)  His  delivering  them  from  Egyptian  bondage.  "I  brought  thee  up  out  of  the
land  of  Egypt,  and  redeemed  thee  out  of  the  house  of  servants."  (2)  What  he  did  for
them  on  the  way  to  Canaan.  "I  sent  before  thee  Moses,  Aaron,  and  Miriam."  Moses
the  lawgiver,  Aaron  the  priest,  and  Miriam  the  prophetess.  (3)  What  he  did  for  them
in  Canaan.  "  0  my  people,  remember  now  what  Balak  King  of  Moab  consulted,"  etc.
He  not  only  furnished  them  with  inspired  teachers,  but  counteracted  the  designs  of
false  ones,  as  in  the  case  of  Balaam,  who  was  engaged  by  Balak  to  curse  them,  but
was  inspired  by  Heaven  to  bless  them.  If  the  Israelites  could  find  no  fault  with
God,  and  if  he  did  so  much  for  them,  how  stand  we  here  in  this  country  and  in  this
age  under  the  full  light  of  the  gospel  dispensation  ?  What  more  could  he  have  done
for  us  than  he  has?  «tc.

Conclusion.  Sinner,  you  are  in  the  great  moral  court  of  the  universe,  you  are
arraigned  before  your  Judge,  you  are  commanded  to  listen  to  his  voice.  Inanimate
nature  around  is  a  witness  against  you  in  this  court ;  the  very  timbers  of  the  wall  will
cry  out  against  you.  You  are  commanded  to  give  a  full  explanation  of  your  conduct.
If  you  have  any  fault  to  find  with  the  Almighty,  bring  it  forth.  If  you  have  not,
ponder  until  your  heart  breaks  into  penitence  and  gratitude  at  the  memory  of  his
wonderful  mercies  to  you. — D.  T.

Vers.  6 — 8. — Fellowship  with  Ood,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and
bow  myself  before  the  high  God  ?  shall  I  come  before  him  with  burnt  offerings,  with
calves  of  a  year  old?  Will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands  of  rams,  or  with  ten
thousands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  "  etc.   We  raise  from  these  words  three  general  observations —

I.  That  a  LoyiNG  fellowship  with  the  great  God  is  the  one  urgent  need  of
HUMANITY.  "Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord?"  The  language  is  that  of  a
soul  convinced  of  its  sin,  and  roused  to  a  sense  of  the  importance  of  friendship  with  the
Almighty.  "Wherewith  shall  I  come?"  Come  J  must ;  I  feel  that  distance  from  him
is  my  great  sin  and  misery.  1.  Loving  fellowship  with  the  great  Ood  is  essential  to
the  happiness  of  moral  intelligences.  Reason  suggests  this.  All  souls  are  the  offspring
of  God ;  and  where  can  children  find  happiness  but  in  the  friendship,  the  intercourse,
and  the  presence  of  their  loving  Father?  Conscience  indicates  this.  Deep  in  the
moral  souls  of  all  men  is  the  yearning  for  intercourse  with  the  Infinite.  The  hearts  of
all  "  cry  out  for  the  living  God."  The  Bihle  teaches  this.  What  mean  such  utterances
as  these :  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together ;"  "  Return  to  the  Lord ; "  "  Come  unto
me,"  etc.?  Not  more  impossible  is  it  for  a  planet  to  shiue  when  cut  off  from  the  sun,
a  liver  to  flow  when  cut  off  from  the  fountain,  a  branch  to  grow  when  severed  from
the  root,  than  for  a  soul  to  be  happy  apart  from  God.  "  In  thy  presence  is  fulness  of
joy."  2.  Man,  in  his  unregenerate  state,  is  estranged  and  far  away  from  Ood.  He  is
represented  as  a  lost  sheep  wandering  in  the  wilderness  away  from  the  fold,  as  the


OH.  vi.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  103

proiligal  son  remote  from  his  father's  house  and  in  a  far  country.  How  far  is  the
human  soul,  in  its  unregenerate  state,  from  God?  How  far  is  selfishness  from
benevolence,  error  from  truth,  pollution  from  holiness,  wrong  from  right?  The  moral
space  or  gulf  that  lies  between  is  immeasurable.

II.  That  sacrifices  the  most  costly  aeb  utteblt  iNstrFFiciENT  to  sbotjbb  this
FELLOWSHIP.  "Shall  I  come  before  him  with  burnt  ofiForingB,  with  calves  of  a  year
old? "  Such  offerings  were  presented  under  the  Law  (Lev.  i.,  etc.).  "  Will  the  Lord
be  pleased  with  thousands  of  rams,  or  with  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil  ?  "  This  also
was  enjoined  in  Leviticus.  Oil  was  to  be  poured  on  the  meat  offering.  "  Shall  I  give
my  firstborn  for  my  transgression,  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  soul?  "  The
Jews  offered  many  human  sacrifices  in  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  They  caused  their
children  to  pass  through  the  fire  in  honour  of  Moloch.  The  idea  is — Are  there  any
sacrifices  I  can  make,  however  costly  and  however  painful,  in  order  to  commend  me  to
the  favour  and  friendship  of  Almighty  Grod?  The  interrogatory  implies  a  negative —
No.  Offer  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills :  can  they  be  a  satisfaction  for  sin  ?  Can
they  commend  you  to  Infinite  Love?  All  are  his.  How  men  came  at  first  to  suppose
that  human  sacrifices  could  be  acceptable  to  God  is  one  of  the  greatest  enigmas  in
history.  "  Though  a  man  give  his  body  to  be  burned,  without  charity  he  is  nothing."
Two  things  are  here  presented.  1.  The  great  cry  of  a  sin-convicted  soul  is  for  Ood.
No  sooner  is  conviction  of  sin  struck  into  the  human  soul,  than  it  turns  itself  away  at
once  from  the  world  to  God :  "  I  want  God ;  I  have  lost  him ;  God  I  must  have ;  oh
that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  ! "  2.  Worldly  possessions,  in  the  estimation  of  a
sin-convicted  soul,  are  comparatively  worthless.  He  is  prepared  to  make  any  sacrifices.
Holocausts,  thousands  of  rams,  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil ;  what  are  they  ?  Nothing
in  comparison  with  the  interests  of  the  soul.  "  What  shall  it  profit  •  man  if  he  gain
the  whole  world,"  etc.  ?    It  feels  this  when  convicted  of  sin.

III.  That  mobal  excellence  is  the  on*;  method  bt  whioh  this  fellowship  can
BE  obtained.  "  He  hath  showed  thee,  0  man  [Hebrew, '  Adam,'  the  whole  race,  Jew  and
Oentile  alike],  what  is  good ;  and  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,
and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God  ? "  This  moral  excellence
consists  of  two  parts,  social  and  religious.  1.  2%a<  which  refers  to  man.  (1)  "Do
Justly ; "  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  so  to  them."
"  Render  to  all  men  their  due."  (2)  "  Love  mercy."  Mere  justice  is  not  enough,  there
must  be  tender  commiseration  for  the  suffering;  the  poor  and  the  distressed  must  be
remembered.  Mercy  must  not  only  be  shown,  but  loved.  To  help  the  needy  muit  be
delight.  2.  That  which  refers  to  Ood.  "  Walk  humbly  with  thy  God."  Walking
with  God  implies  consciousness  of  the  Divine  presence,  harmony  with  the  Divine  will,
progress  in  Divine  excellence.  This  is  moral  excellence — the  moral  excellence  that
God  has  revealed  to  all  men,  Jew  and  Gentile,  the  entire  race,  and  which  he  requires
from  all;  and  this  is  the  condition  of  fellowship  with  him.  How  is  this  moral
excellence  to  be  attained  ?  it  may  be  asked.  Philosophically,  I  know  but  of  one  way
— faith  in  him  who  is  the  Revelation,  the  Incarnation,  the  Example  of  all  moral
excellence — Jesus  Christ.

Conclusion.  Learn  from  this  what  religion  is — how  transcendent  I  It  is  the  soul
going  away  from  sin  and  the  world  to  God.  Not  merely  to  temples,  theologies,
ceremonies,  but  to  God;  and  to  him,  not  through  intellectual  systems  or  ceremonial
observances,  but  throi^h  a  true  life,  bothin  relation  to  man  and  God. — D.  T.

Ver.  9. — God^s  voice  to  cities.  "The  Lord's  voice  crieth  unto  the  city,  and  the  man
of  wisdom  shall  see  thy  Name :  hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath  appointed  it."  We  raise
three  remarks  from  this  verse.

I.  That  God  has  a  "  voice  "  to  cities.  "  The  Lord's  voice  crieth  unto  the  city,"
The  city  meant  here  is  Jerusalem.  He  speaks  to  a  city :  1.  Through  its  commerce.
The  failures  that  follow  fraud,  indolence,  chicanery,  2.  Through  its  mortality.  The
funeral  processions  that  darken  the  streets,  the  cemeteries  that  lie  within  and  around.
8.  Through  its  churches.  The  sermons  that  are  preached,  the  agents  that  are
employed  to  enlighten  the  ignorant,  to  comfort  the  distressed,  reclaim  the  lost.
Heavenly  Wisdom  "  standeth  at  the  corner  of  the  streets ;  she  crieth  aloud,"  etc.

n.  The  wise  in  cities  becoonize  the  voice.    "  The  man  of  wisdom  skall  see  thy


ajyjyji^     yji:      i3±i.\jja.i-t.a


Name."  "  And  wisdom  has  thy  Name  in  its  eye  "  (Delitzsch),  "  And  he  who  is  wise
will  regard  thy  Name  "  (Henderson).  The  idea  seems  to  he  this — that  the  wise  man
will  recognize  God's  voice.  Joh  says,  "  God  speaks  once,  yea  twice,  and  they  perceive
it  not."  The  crowds  that  populate  cities  are  deaf  to  the  Divine  "  voice."  The  din  oi
passion,  the  hum  of  commerce,  the  chimes  of  animal  pleasures,  drown  the  voice  of  OtoA,
But  the  wise  man  has  his  soul  ever  in  a  listening  attitude.  Like  young  Samnel,  he
says,  "Speak,  Lord;  for  thy  servant  heareth."  Abraham  heard  the  voice  of  God
concerning  Sodom,  Daniel  concerning  Babylon,  Jonah  cuucerning  Nineveh,  Jeremiah
concerning  Jerusalem.  "  I  will  hear  what  the  Lord  God  will  say  " — this  is  the  language
of  wise  men.

III.  The  judgment  op  cities  is  in  that  voice.  "  Hear  ye  the  rod,  and  who  hath
appointed  it."  The  rod  is  the  symbol  of  judgment.  "  0  Assyrian,  the  rod  of  my  anger,
the  staff  in  their  hand  is  my  indignation  "  (Isa.  x.  6).  1.  Ood  warns  cities.  (1)  He
warns  them  of  ultimate  temporal  ruin.  All  cities  must  go— go  with  Nineveh,  Greece,
Babylon,  Rome,  Jerusalem.  London,  Paris,  Petersburg,  New  York,  etc.,  all  must  go  as
these  have  gone.  It  is  only  a  question  of  time.  (2)  He  warns  them  of  spiritual
danger.  "  The  sold  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  This  is  his  voice  to  every  citizen.
Here  is  the  "rod" — the  warning — pver  all  cities.  2.  His  warning  should  be  attended
to.  "  Hear  ye  the  rod,"  The  only  way  to  escape  is  attention.  Hear  it,  and  flee  for
refuge;  hear  it,  and  thunder  it  abroad  to  alarm  the  careless;  hear  it  before  it  is  too
late.  "  If  thou  hadst  known  the  things  that  belong  to  thy  peace  in  this  day  1  but
now  ar«  they  hid  from  thine  eyes  "  (Luke  xix.  42).

"Heaven  gives  the  needful,  but  neglected,  calL
What  day,  what  hour,  but  knocks  at  human  hearts,
To  wake  the  soul  to  sense  of  luture  scenes  ?
Deaths  stand,  like  Mercuries,  in  every  way.
And  kindly  point  us  to  onr  journey's  end.

(Young.)

D.T.

Vers.  10 — 16. — Oivie  sins.  "  Are  there  yet  the  treasures  of  wickedness  in  the  house
of  the  wicked,  and  tke  scant  measure  that  is  abominable  ?  Shall  I  count  them  pure
with  the  wicked  balances,  and  with  the  bag  of  deceitful  weights  ?  For  the  rich  men
thereof  are  full  of  violence,"  etc.  In  these  verses  we  have  specified  a  sample  of  the
crimes  which  abounded  in  the  city,  and  which  would  bring  on  the  threatened  judg-
ment. The  passage  leads  us  to  make  two  remarks  concerning  civic  sins,  or  the  sins  of
a  city.

L  Theib  vabiett.  1.  Eere  is  fraud.  "  Are  there  yet  the  treaures  of  wickedness
in  the  house  of  the  wicked,  and  the  scant  measure  that  is  abominable?  "  "Are  there
still  in  the  house  of  the  wicked  treasures  of  wickedness  and  the  scanty  ephah?"
(Henderson).  This  sin  is  described  in  Amos  viii.  5,  "  When  will  the  new  moon  be
gone,  that  we  may  sell  corn  ?  and  the  sabbath,  that  we  may  set  forth  wheat,  making
the  ephah  small,  and  the  shekel  great,  and  falsifying  the  balances  by  deceit?"  Fraud
is  one  of  the  most  prevalent  crimes  in  all  cities.  Perhaps  in  no  city  was  it  ever  more
prevalent  than  it  is  in  London  to-day.  Our  commercial  inmiorality  is  that  at  which
thoughtful  men  stand  aghast.  2.  Here  is  viol  nee.  "The  rich  men  thereof  are  full  of
violence."  Strong  in  every  age  has  been  the  tendency  of  rich  men  to  oppress  the  lower
classes  by  unrighteous  exactions  of  service,  by  oppressive  enactments.  Wealth  has  a
tendency  to  make  men  arrogant,  haughty,  heartless,  often  inhuman.  The  tyrant  in  man,
as  a  rule,  grows  with  the  increase  of  his  wealth.  3.  Bere  is  falsehood.  "  The  inhabitants
thereof  have  spoken  lies,  and  their  tongue  is  deceitful  in  their  mouth."  Unveracity  is
a  crime,  and  a  crime  most  prevalent  in  all  cities.  There  is  scarcely  a  trade  or  profession
carried  on  without  deception.  Fortunes  are  made  by  lies.  Men  are  everywhere
deceiving  each  other.     Such  are  samples  of  the  crimes  prevalent  in  Jerusalem.

II.  Their  rbteibution.  All  these  crimes  are  offensive  to  the  Ruler  of  the  universe,
and  by  the  law  of  retribution  bring  dire  results  upon  the  population.  God  says, "  Shall
I  count  them  pure  with  the  wicked  balances  ?  "  It  is  said  in  Ps.  xviii.  26  that  with
the  "  pure  God  will  show  himself  pure ;  but  with  the  froward  he  will  show  himself
froward."     And   what   are   the   results?      Several    are  here   specified.      1.  Disease,


CH.  Ti.  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  105

"Therefore  also  will  I  make  tbee  sick  in  smiting  thee."  Crime  is  inimical  to  physical
health  and  strength.  The  diseases  that  prevail  in  cities  are,  in  most  cases,  traceable  to
their  crimes.  In  every  sin  there  is  a  germ  of  physical  disease,  a  something  which
tends  to  disturb  the  nerves,  taint  the  blood,  and  sap  the  constitution.  2.  Desolation.
"  In  making  thee  desolate  because  of  thy  sins."  What  is  desolation  ?  It  is  not  the
mere  loss  of  property,  friends,  or  the  external  means  of  physical  enjoyment.  A  man
may  have  all  these  and  yet  be  desolate.  It  is  the  awful  sense  of  lonesomeness,  desertion.
A  desolate  man  is  one  who  neither  loves  nor  is  loved ;  and  sin  produces  this  state.
Few  states  of  mind  are  more  awful  or  more  crushing  than  the  sense  of  aloneness.  3.
Dissatisfaction.  "Thou  shalt  eat,  but  not  be  satisfied."  Of  whatever  a  sinful  man
partakes,  however  delicious  the  viands,  however  choice  aud  costly  the  provisions,  he
has  no  satisfaction  of  soul.  He  has  in  connection  with,  and  in  spite  of,  all  a  hunger
deep,  gnawing,  unappeasable.  Sin  and  satisfaction  can  never  coexist.  4.  Disappoint-
ment. "  Thou  shalt  sow,  but  thou  shalt  not  reap ;  thou  shalt  tread  the  olives,  but  thou
shalt  not  anoint  thee  with  oil ;  and  sweet  wine,  but  shalt  not  drink  wine."  A  sinful
soul  can  never  get  out  of  its  labour  that  which  it  expects.  He  toils  hard  for  enjoyment,
but  all  the  toils  are  fruitless ;  enjoyment  is  not  won.  The  autumn  conies,  and  the  frnits
are  gathered  iu — the  wheat,  the  olives,  the  sweet  wine ;  but  they  do  not  bring  him  what
he  has  struggled  for — ^true  enjoyment.  He  has  laboured  for'  that  which  satisfieth  not.
6.  Destruction.  "Thy  casting  down  shall  be  ia  the  midst  of  thee;  and  thou  shalt
take  hold,  but  shalt  not  deliver;  and  that  which  thou  deliverest  will  I  give  up  to  the
sword."  Henderson's  translation  of  this  seems  to  me  good ;  "  Thou  shalt  be  inwardly
depressed ;  thou  mayest  remove,  but  thou  shalt  not  rescue,  or  what  thou  rescuest  I
will  give  to  the  sword."

Conclusion.  Mark  the  law  of  retribution.  "Be  not  deceived;  God  is  not  mocked:
for  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap ; "  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you
out."  Not  more  certain  is  it  that  the  rivers  flow  to  the  ocean,  the  planets  follow  tha
sun,  than  that  suffering  follows  sin.  Sins  brings  with  it  disease,  desolation,  dissatisfac-
tion, disappointment,  destruction. — ^D.  T.

Yer.  16. — Omri  and  Ahdb :  lessons  worth  study.  "  For  the  statutes  of  Omri  are
kept,  and  all  the  works  of  the  house  of  Ahab,  and  ye  walk  in  their  counsels ;  that  I
should  make  thee  a  desolation,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof  an  hissing :  therefore  ye
shall  bear  the  reproach  of  my  people."  On  the  long  dark  roll  of  human  infamy  there
are  few  darker  names  than  those  of  Omri  and  Ahab.  The  former,  who  at  first  was
an  officer  in  the  army  of  Israel  (1  Kings  xvi.  30),  through  blood  and  slaughter  took
possession  of  the  throne  of  Israel,  which  he  held  polluted  and  disgraced  for  twelve  long
years.  He  built  Samaria  and  made  it  the  capital  of  the  ten  tribes.  Ahab  was  his
son  and  his  successor,  and  rivalled  even  his  father  in  immorality  and  impiety.  Ha
established  the  worship  of  Baal  as  the  national  religion.     I  draw  three  lessons  from  thii


I.  That  the  eeligious  sentiment  in  man  is  often  tebbibly  pebvebted.  Omri
and  Ahab  were  not  only  idolaters  themselves,  but  established  idolatry  in  their  country.
They  worshipped  Baal,  the  god  that  was  worshipped  by  the  Carthaginians,  th«
Babylonians,  the  Assyrians,  and  others — the  god,  it  is  supposed,  who  is  sometimes
called  Moloch,  to  whom  the  Ammonites  made  their  cruel  and  bloody  sacrifices.  For
the  service  of  this  god  Ahab  established  a  numerous  hierarchy  of  priests.  The  religious
sentiment  in  man  is  perhaps  the  fundamental  element  of  his  nature.  Man  is  made  to
worship,  and  to  worship  the  one  true  and  living  God  only.  But  so  blinded  is  Lis
intellect,  so  debased  his  nature,  so  utterly  corrupt,  that,  instead  of  worshipping  the
infinitely  Great,  he  falls  down  before  the  infinitely  contemptible.  The  perversity  of
the  religious  sentiment :  1.  Explains  the  errors,  crimes,  and  miseries  of  the  viorld.
Man's  strongest  love  is  the  spring  of  all  his  activities,  the  fontal  source  of  all  his
influence.  When  this  is  directed  to  an  idol,  the  whole  of  his  life  is  corrupted.  2.
Beveals  man's  absolute  need  of  the  gospd.  There  is  nothing  but  the  gospel  of  Christ
that  can  give  this  sentiment  a  right  direction.

II.  That  obedience  to  human  sovebeigns  is  sometimes  a  gbeat  obime.  The
worship  of  Baal  was  enacted  by  the  "  statutes  "  of  Omri  and  enforced  by  the  practice  of
Ahab.    If  the  establishment  of  a  religion  by  law  can  make  it  right,  it  was  right  that


106


THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAa


[oh,  vn.  1—20.


tie  people  should  worsliip  Baal.  Bat  it  was  not  right ;  it  was  wrong.  A  hnman  law,
enacted  hj  the  greatest  sovereign  in  the  world  with  the  sanction  of  the  most  illustrious
statesmen,  if  it  is  not  in  accord  with  the  eternal  principles  of  justice  and  truth,  as
revealed  in  God's  Word,  should  be  repudiated,  renounced,  and  transgressed.  "  Whether
it  is  right  to  obey  God  rather  than  man,  judge  ye."

in.  That  the  crimes  of  even  two  men  mat  bxbbt  a  coRKUPmrG  inflcenob  upon
lllLiiiONB  IN  FUTURE  GENERATIONS.  The  reigus  of  Omri  and  Ahab  were  ages  before  the
time  when  Micah  lived.  Notwithstanding,  their  enactments  were  still  obeyed,  their
examples  were  still  followed,  and  their  practices  were  still  pursued.  The  wickedness
of  these  two  men  was  now,  ages  after,  perpetrated  by  a  whole  nation.  How  great  the
influence  of  man  for  good  or  evil  I  Verily  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good.  From
one  corrupt  source  may  flow  a  stream  of  polluting  influence  that  shall  roll  down  all
future  times,  widen  and  deepen  in  its  course,  and  bear  thousands  on  its  bosom  to
crime  and  ruin.

"Cm  many  deeds,  the  thoughts  that  we  have  thought,
They  go  out  from  us  thronging  every  home;
And  in  them  all  is  folded  up  a  power
That  on  the  earth  doth  move  them  to  and  fro;
And  mighty  are  the  marvels  they  have  wrought
In  heart!  we  know  not  and  may  never  know."

(F.  W.  Faber.)


D.T.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  vn.


Yeri.  1 — 6. — {  5.  IsraeVi  penitential
mcknoaUdgment  of  fhe  general  corruption.

Ver.  1. — ^Woe  is  me !  (Job  x.  15).  Micah
threatens  no  more ;  he  represents  repentant
Israel  confessing  its  corruption  and  lament-
ing the  necessity  of  punishment.  I  am  as
when  they  have  gathered  the  summer  fruits ;
literally,  I  am  as  the  gatherings  of  the  fruit-
harvest.  The  point  of  comparison  is  only  to
be  inferred  from  the  context.-  At  the  fruit-
harvest  no  early  figs  are  to  be  found,  and
(in  the  next  olause)  after  the  vintage  no
more  grapes;  so  in  Israel  there  is  none
righteous  left.  The  Septuagint  gives  a
plainer  exposition,  'EyeniiBriv  &s  avviyav
Koxdiitiv  iv  ayuTjT^T,  "  I  became  as  one  that
pathereth  straw  in  harvest ; "  so  the  Vulgate,
Factut  turn  ticut  qui  coUegit  in  autumno
racemos  vindimite,  joining  the  two  clauses
together.  My  soul  desired  the  first-ripe  fruit ;
better,  nor  early  fig  which  my  soul  desired.
The  holiness  and  grace  of  more  primitive
times  are  wholly  absent  iirom  this  later
period  (see  Hos.  ix.  10,  where  a  similar
figure  is  used ;  compare  also  Christ's  dealing
with  the  barren  fig  tree.  Matt.  xxi.  18,  etc.).
The  first-ripe  figs  were  proverbially  sweet
and  good  (see  Isa.  xxviii.  i ;  Jer.  xxiv.  2 ;
•nd  Hosea,  he.  cit.).

Ver.  2. — This  verse  explains  the  pre-
ceding comparison ;  the  grape  and  the  early
Sg  represent  the  righteous  man.  The  good
man;  LXX.,  tinjB^f,  the  godly,  pious  man.


The  Hebrew  word  (khasidh)  implies  one
who  exercises  love  to  others,  who  is  merciful,
loving,  and  righteous.  Is  perished  out  of
the  earth ;  has  disappeared  from  the  world
(oomp.  Pa.  xiv.  2,  3;  and  especially  Isa.
Ivii.  1).  They  all  lie  in  wait  for  blood.
They  all  practise  violence  and  rapine,  and
meditate  how  they  may  pursue  their  evil
desigas,  even  to  the  ihedding  of  blood.
LXX.,  n&VTes  eh  al/Mra  Siied^ovrai,  which
narrows  the  charge  to  one  special  kind  of
iniquity,  viz.  committing  judicial  murders.
They  hunt  every  man  his  brother  with  •
net.  They  ought  to  love  their  brethren,
their  fellow-countrymen,  partakers  of  the
same  hope  and  privileges  (Lev.  xix.  18).
Instead  of  this,  they  pursue  them  as  the
fowler  traps  birds,  or  the  hunter  beasts.
The  word  rendered  "net"  (oherem)  is  in
most  versions  translated  "destruction."
Thus,  Septungint,  4Ke\l$ova'ty  lKe\i$y  ;  Vul-
gate, ad  mortem  venatur;  so  the  Syriao  and
ChaJdee.  In  the  present  connection  it  ia
best  taken  as  "  net "  (Hab.  i.  15).

Ver.  8.— That  they  may  do  evil,  oto.;
rather,  both  hands  are  upon  (equivalent  to
"  busy  with  ")  evil  to  do  it  thoroughly.  Thi«
clause  and  the  rest  of  the  verse  are  very
obscure.-  Cheyne  supposes  the  text  to  be  cor-
rupt. Henderson  renders,  "  For  evil  their
hands  are  well  prepared;"  so  virtually,
Uitzig,  PuEoy,  and  the  Septuagint.  Caspar!
agrees  rather  with  the  Vulgate  (^Malum
manuum  suarum  dieunt  bonum), "  Hands  are
(busy)  upon  evil  to  make  (it  seem)  good,"
which  looks  to  that  extremity  of  iniquitr


OH.  TO.  1 — 20.]


THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.


107


when  men  "call  evil  good,  and  good  e-ril"
(Isa.  T.  20).  The  general  meaning  is  that
they  nro  ready  enough  to  do  evil,  and,  as
tho  next  clause  says,  can  be  bribed  to  do
anything.  The  piinoe  asketh ;  makes  some
nefarioua  demand  of  the  judge,  some  per-
version of  justice  at  his  hands,  as  in  the  case
of  Naboth  (1  Kings  xxi.).  The  judge  asketh
(is  ready)  for  a  reward.  The  judge  is  willing
to  do  what  the  prince  wishes,  if  he  is  bribed
for  it.  LKX.,  'O  (C/J1T7JI  eipjjuKoiij  \iyovs  i\i-
Aijo-e,  "  The  judge  speaks  words  of  peace  "
(comp.  oh.  iii.  11 ;  Isa.  i.  23 ;  Zeph.  iii.  3).
He  uttereth  his  misohievous  desire ;  or,  the
mischief  of  his  soul.  The  rich  man  speaks
out  unblashingly  tlie  evil  that  he  has  con-
ceived in  his  heart,  the  wicked  design  which
he  meditates.  So  they  wrap  it  up ;  better,
and  they  weave  it  together.  The  prince,  the
judge,  and  the  rich  man  weave  their  evil
plan  together,  to  make  it  strong  and  right
in  others'  eyes.  The  passage  is  altered  in
meaning  by  a  different  grouping  of  the
Hebrew  letters,  thus:  "The  prince  de-
mandeth  (a  reward)  to  do  good;  and  the
judge,  for  the  recompense  of  a  great  man,
uttereth  what  he  himself  desireth.  And
tliey  entangle  the  good  more  than  briars,
and  the  righteous  more  than  a  thorn-hedge."
The  LXX.  carries  on  the  sense  to  the  next
verse,  Kal  iJe\oE;Boi  t4  iyaia  alnuy  as  iriis
ixTpdyav,  "And  I  will  destroy  their  goods
as  a  consuming  moth."

Ver.  i. — The  best  of  them  is  as  a  brier;
haid  and  piercing,  catching  and  holding  all
that  passes  by.  The  plant  intended  by  the
word  chedek  is  a  thorny  one  used  for  hedges
(Prov.  XV.  19).  Under  another  aspect
thorns  are  a  symbol  of  what  is  noxious  and
worthless  (2  Sam.  iiiii.  6),  or  of  sin  and
temptat^'on.  The  most  upright  is  sharper
Qworte)  than  a  thorn-hedge.  Those  who
ieem  comparatively  upright  are  more  in-
jurious, tangled,  and  inaccessible  than  a
hedge  of  thorns.  In  punishment  of  all  this
corruption,  the  prophet  points  to  the  day  of
judgment.  The  day  of  thy  watchmen.  The
day  of  retribution  foretold  by  the  prophets
(Isa.  xxi.  6;  Jer.  vi.  17;  Ezek.  iii.  17).
And  (even)  thy  visitation;  in  apposition
with  the  day,  the  time,  and  explanatory  of
punishment.  Cometh ;  is  come— the  perfect
tense  denoting  tlie  certainty  of  the  future
event.  Septuagint,  Oial,  ai  ixSixiia-eis  aou
ItKotrt,  "Woe  I  thy  vengeance  is  come."
How  shall  be  their  perplexity.  When  this
day  of  the  Lord  comes,  there  shall  be  con-
fusion (Isa.  xxii.  5);  it  shall  bring  chastise-
ment before  deliverance.  The  prophet  here,
BS  elsewhere,  changes  from  the  second  to  tho
third  person,  speaking  of  the  people  gene-
rally. Septuagint,  Hvv  itrovrai  KKavBiuii
miTiv,  "  Now  shall  be  their  weeping ; "  so
the  Syiiao,    Fiisey  notes  the  paronomasia


here.  They  were  as  bad  at  a  thom-hedg»
(merucah);  they  shall  fall  into  perplexity
(mebucah).

Ver.  5. — Such  is  the  moral  corruption
that  the  nearest  relations  cannot  be  trusted :
selfishness  reigns  everywhere.  The  prophet
emphasizes  this  universal  evil  by  warning
the  better  portion  of  the  people.  Friend  ■  .  .
guide.  There  is  a  gradation  here,  beginning
with  "neighbour,"  or  "common  acquaint-
ance," and  ending  with  "  wife."  The  word
rendered  "guide"  means  "closest,  most
familiar  friend,"  as  in  Ps.  Iv.  13  (14,  Hebrew).
Our  version  is  sanctioned  by  tlie  Septuagint,
fiyotifiivois,  "leaders;"  and  the  Vulgate,  dues;
but  the  context  confirms  the  other  translation
(comp.  Prov.  xvi.  28 ;  xvii.  9).  Our  Lord  has
used  some  of  the  expressions  in  the  next  verse
in  describing  the  miseries  of  the  latter  day
(Matt.  X.  21,  35,  36 ;  xxiv.  12 ;  comp.  Luke
xii.  53;  xxi.  16;  2  Tim.  iii.  2).  Keep  the
doors  of  thy  month.  Guard  thy  secrets.
(For  the  phrase,  comp.  Ps.  cxli.  3.)  Her
that  lieth  in  thy  bosom.  Thy  wife  (Dent,
xiii.  6;  xxviii.  54).

Ver.  6. — For  the  son  dishonooreth ;  Sep-
tuagint, oTi/ttcifei:  Vulgate,  eontumeliam
facit;  literally,  treats  om  a  fool,  despisei
(Deut.  xxxii.  6,  15).  (For  the  rest  of  the
verse,  see  Matt.  x.  21,  35,  etc.)  Men  of  his
own  house.  His  domestic  servants  (Gen.
xvii.  27).  Henderson,  referring  to  this  dis-
solution of  every  natural  tie,  compares  Ovid,
'Metamorph.,'  i.  144,  etc. —
"Vivitur  ex  rapto;  non  hospes  ab  hospito
tutus,

Non  socer  a  genero ;  fratrum  quoque  gratia
rara  est ;

Imminet  exitio  vir  conjngis,  ilia  mariti ;

Lurida  terribiles  mlscent  aoonita  novercm ;

Filius  ante  diem  patrios  iuquirit  in  annos ;

Victa  jacet  pietas."

Vera.  7 — 13. — §  6.  Israel  expresses  her
faith  in  God,  though  she  tuffers  grievous
tribulation,  and  is  confident  in  the  fulfilment
of  the  promised  restoration.

Yer.  7. — ^Therefore  I ;  rather,  but  as  for
me,  I,  etc.  The  prophet  speaks  in  the  name
of  the  ideal  Israel.  Though  love  and  confi-
dence have  disappeared,  and  the  day  ot  visita-
tion has  come,  and  human  help  fails,  yet  Israel
loses  not  her  trust  in  the  Lord.  Will  look;
gaze  intently,  as  if  posted  on  a  watch-tower
to  look  out  for  help.  Will  wait  with  long-
ing ti-ust,  unbroken  by  delay.  The  God  of
my  salvation.  The  God  from  whom  my
salvation  comes  (Ps.  xviii.  46 ;  xxv.  5 ;  xxvii.
9;  Hab.  iii.  18).  My  God  wUl  hear  ma
My  prayer  is  sure  to  be  answered  (Isa.
XXX.  19).

Ver.  8. — Israel  in  her  sorrow  and  captivity
asserts  her  undiminished  confidence  in  the


108


THE  BOOK  OF   MICAH.


[oh.  vn.  1 — 20.


Lord.  0  mine  enem^.  The  oppressor  of
the  Church,  the  worldly  power,  is  repre-
sented at  one  time  by  Asehur,  at  another  by
Babylon.  God  uses  these  heathen  king>
doms  as  agents  ot  his  vengeance.  When  I
fall;  have  I  fallen  ;  if  I  have  fallen  ;  i.e.  sup-
pose I  have  suffered  calamity  and  loss  (Amos
V.  2).  Sit  in  darkness.  Darkness  is  another
metaphor  for  distress  (Fs.  zxiii.  4 ;  Isa.  iz.
2 ;  Lam.  iii.  6 ;  Amos  v,  18).  The  Lord
shall  be  a  light  unto  me,  giving  me  glad-
ness and  true  discernment  (comp,  Ps.  xxvlL
1 ;  xovii.  11).  The  distinction  between
darkness  and  the  full  light  of  day  is  more
marked  in  Eastern  countries  than  in  our
Northern  climes.

Ver.  9. — I  will  bear  the  indignation  of  the
Lord,  However  long  may  be  the  delay
before  relief  comes,  Israel  will  patiently  bear
the  chastisements  inflicted  upon  her,  because
■he  knows  that  they  are  deserved.  This  is
the  language  of  the  penitent  people,  own-
ing the  justice  of  the  sentence,  yet  trusting
to  the  covenant  Ood,who  in  wrath  remembers
mercy.  Vntil  he  plead  my  cause.  Until
God  considers  that  the  punishment  has  done
its  work,  and  takes  my  cause  in  hand,  and
judges  between  me  and  the  instruments  of
his  vengeance.  Execute  judgment  for  me.
Secure  my  rights,  violated  by  the  heathen,
who  misuse  tlie  power  given  them  by  God.
The  light  (see  note  on  ver.  8).  His  right-
eousness (ch.  vi.  5);  his  faithfulness  to
his  promises  exhibited  in  the  destruction  of
the  enemies  and  the  restoration  of  his
people.  For  this  conception  of  the  Divine
righteousness,  Gheyne  compares  1  John  i.  9,
"  He  is  faithful  and  righteous  to  forgive  us
our  sins."

Ver.  10. — She  that  is  mine  enemy.  The
worldly  power  is  here  personified,  as  so
often  "the  daughter  of  Jerusalem."  Shall
see  it.  She  shall  see  that  Israel  was  not
conquered  because  God  was  powerless  to
save.  Where  is  the  Lord  thy  God?  The
Assyrians  always  attributed  their  succtss  in
anus  to  the  assistance  of  their  gods  and  the
superiority  of  their  deities  to  those  of  the
conquered  nations  (comp.  Isa.  x.  9 — 11 ;
xxxvii.  10 — 13).  Thug  the  inscription  of  the
palace  of  Khoreabad  begins,  "The  gods
Aseur,  Nebo,  and  Merodaoh  have  conferred
on  me  the  royalty  of  the  nations.  .  .  .  Bj
the  grace  and  power  of  the  great  gods,  my
masters,  I  have  flung  my  arms,  by  my  force
I  have  defeated  my  enemies  "  ('  Becords  of
the  Past,'  vol.  ix.).  (For  taunts  like  that
in  the  text,  see  Ps.  xlii.  3 ;  Ixxix.  10 ;  cxv.
2 ;  Joel  ii.  17.)  Uine  eyes  shall  behold  her.
Israel  shall  behold  the  destruction  of  the
enemy.  As  the  mire  of  the  streets  (Isa.
X.  6 ;  Zech.  x.  5).

Ver.  11. — The  prophet  here  addresses
Zion,  and   announces  her  restoration.    In


the  day  that  thy  walls  art  to  be  bvUt;
rather,  a  day  for  building  thy  walh  (gader)
eometh.  Zion  is  represeuted  as  a  vineyard
whose  fence  has  been  destroyed  (Isa.  T.
5,  7).  The  announcement  is  given  abmptly
and  concisely  in  three  short  sentences.  In
that  day  shtUl  the  decree  be  far  removed.
The  decree  (Zepb.  ii.  2)  is  explained  by
Hengstenberg  and  many  commentators,
ancient  and  modem,  to  be  that  of  the  enemy
by  which  they  held  Israel  captive.  Keil
and  others  suppose  the  law  to  be  meant
which  separated  Israel  from  .  all  other
nations,  the  ancient  ordinance  which  con-
fined God's  people  and  the  blessings  of  the
theocracy  to  narrow  limits.  This  is  now  to
be  set  aside  (comp.  Eph.  ii.  11 — 16),  when
heathen  nations  flock  to  the  city  of  God.
Caspar!,  iHitzig,  Cheyne,  and  others  trans-
late, "  shall  the  bound  be  afar  off,"  t.e.  the
boundaries  of  the  land  of  Israel  shall  be
widely  extended  (comp.  Isa.  xzxiii.  17|
which  Cheyne  explains, "  Thine  eyes  shall
behold  a  widely  extended  territory ").
Wordsworth  obtains  much  the  same  mean-
ing by  taking  the  verb  in  the  sense  of  "  pro-
mulgated," and  referring  the  "  decree,"  as
in  Ps.  iL  7,  8,  to  God's  purpose  of  giving
to  Messiah  the  utmost  parts  of  the  earth  for
a  possession.  The  building  of  the  walla
does  not  indicate  the  narrowing  of  the
limits  of  the  theocratic  kingdom.  Whether
chok  be  taken  to  signify  "  decree "  (Jeos,
Vulgate)  or  "boundary,"  the  effect  of  ila
removal  afar  is  seen  by  the  next  verse  to  be
the  entrance  of  foreign  nations  into  the
kingdom  of  God.  The  LXX.  favours  the
first  interpretation,  'Airorpfif'cTai  \aTriiaeT(u,
Alex.3  v6fiifia  ffov  [aov  omit,  Alex.J  ^  VfJitp*
iKelvri,  "  'That  day  shall  utterly  abolish  thy
ordinances."

Ver.  12. — He  shall  come ;  (hey  *Aa2Z  eome.
Men  shall  flock  to  Zion  as  the  metropolis  of
the  new  kingdom  (ch.  iv.  2).  The  countries
named  are  those  in  which  the  Jews  were
dispersed  (see  Isa.  xi.  11).  Micah  embraces
in  one  view  the  restoration  of  Israel  and  the
conversion  of  the  heathen  (comp.  Isa.  xix.
24 ;  xxvii.  12,;i3).  Assyria.  The  type  of  the
greatest  enemy  of  God.  The  fortified  cities ;
rather,  the  cities  of  Mazor,  the  strong  land,
i.e.  Egypt.  The  usual  term  for  Egypt  is
Mizraim ;  but  Mazor  is  found  in  2  Kings  xix.
24;  Isa.  xix.  6;  xxxvii.  25.  Cheyne  com-
pares the  Assyrian  name  for  this  country,
Mufar.  !From  the  fortress ;  from  Mazor;
Sepluagint,  oirb  Tipou, "  from  Tyre  "  or  Tsor.
Even  to  the  river.  From  Egypt  to  the
Euphrates,  which  was  the  river  par  excel-
lence (Gen.  XV  18).  From  sea  to  sea.  Not
necessnrily  from  the  Mediterranean  to  the
Dead  Sea  or  to  the  Persian  Gulf  (as  Joel  ii.
20),  but  generally,  from  one  sea  to  another,
from  the  earth  as  bounded  by  the  seas ;  so^


CH.  Tn.  1 — ^20.1


THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.


109


from  numntain  to  moantain;  i.e.  not  from
Lebanon  to  Sinai,  or  from  Hor  (Numb.  xx.
22)  to  Hor  (Numb,  xxziv.  7),  which  ia  too
limited,  but  from  all  landa  situated  between
mountain-barriers,  which  are  the  bounds  of
the  world  (comp.  Isa.  Ix.  3,  etc.).

Vei.  13.— Notwithstanding  the  land  shall
be  desolate.  Very  many  commentators  con-
sider the  land  of  Canaan  to  be  liere  intended,
the  prophet  recurring  to  threatenings  of
judgment  before  the  great  restoration  comes
to  pa88 ;  but  it  is  best  to  regard  the  clause
as  referring  to  all  the  world,  exclusive  of
Canaan.  While  the  Messianio  kingdom  ia
set  up,  judgment  shall  fall  upon  the  sinful
world.  "  For  the  nation  and  kingdom  that
will  not  serve  thee  shall  perish ;  yea,  those
nations  shall  be  utterly  wasted"  (Isa.  Ix.
12 ;  comp.  Bev.  xil.  12).  And  the  material
world  shall  suffer  with  its  inhabitants  (Gen.
iii.  15,  18 ;  vi.  13 ;  xix.  25 ;  Isa.  xxxiv,  4,
etc.).  Their  doings.  Their  evil  deeds,  es-
pecially the  rejection  of  Messiah.

Vers.  14— 17.— §  7.  The  prophet  in  the
name  of  the  people  prayi  /or  thit  promised
talvation,  and  the  Lord  assures  him  that  his
mercies  shall  not  fail,  attd  that  the  hostile
natioM  shall  be  humbled.

Ver.  14. — Feed  thy  people  with  thy  rod.
The  propliet  prays  to  the  Shepherd  of  Israel
(Oen.  xlix.  24  ;  Fs.  Ixxx.  1),  beseeching  him
to  rule  and  lead  his  people,  and  to  find
them  pasture.  The  "  rod  "  is  the  shepherd's
staff  (Lev.  xxvii.  32;  Fs.  xxiii.  4).  The
flock  of  thine  heritage.  So  Israel  is  called
(Fs.  xxviii.  9 ;  xcT.  7 ;  comp.  Zeph.  iii.  13).
Which  dwell  solitarily;  or,  so  that  they  dwell;
separate  from  all  other  nations,  religiously
•nd  physically,  by  institution  and  geo-
graphic^ position.  Compare  Balaam's  words
(Numb,  xxiii.  9 ;  also  Deut.  xxziii.  28).  It
was  Israel's  special  oharaeteristio  to  be  holy,
(.e.  set  apart,  and  it  was  only  when  she
observed  her  duty  in  this  respect  that  she
prospered  (see  Exod.  xxxiii.  16).  In  the
wood  (Jorest)  in  the  midst  of  Carmel.  The
forest  would  isolate  the  flock,  and  secure  it
from  interference.  The  chief  pasture-lands
west  and  east  of  Jordan  are  named,  and  the
whole  country  is  included  in  the  description.
(For  Carmel,  see  note  on  Amos  L  2.)  Bashan
and  Gilead  were  also  celebrated  for  their
rich  pasture.  "Bulls  of  Bashan"  were  a
proverb  for  well-fed  animals,  and  a  meta-
phor for  bloated,  proud  aristocrats  (Deut.
xxxii.  14;  Fs.  xxii.  12;  Ezek.  xxxix.  18;
Amos  IT.  1).  Gilead  was  so  excellently
adapted  for  cattle  that  Beuben  and  Gad
were  irresistibly  drawn  to  settle  there
(Numb,  xxxii.  1,  5 ;  1  Chron.  t.  9 ;  see  the
nuallel  to  this  passage  in  Isa.  lxv.9, 10,  and
Ezek.  xxxIt.  13,  11).    As  in  the  days  of


old;  nsaally  taken  to  refer  to  the  time  of
Moses  and  Joshua,  but  also  and  mora
probably,  to  that  of  David  and  Solomon,
which  realized  the  ideal  of  peace  and  pros-
perity (comp.  ch.  iv.  4).

Ver.  15. — According  to  {as  in)  the  days.
The  Lord  answers  the  prophet's  prayer,
taking  up  his  last  word,  and  promising  oven
more  than  he  asks,  engaging  to  equal  the
wonders  which  marked  the  exodus  from
Egypt.  That  great  deliverance  was  a  type
and  foreshadowing  of  Messianio  salvation
(comp.  Isa.  xliii.  15,  etc. ;  IL  10 ;  1  Cor.  x.
1,  et».).  ITnto  him;  unto  the  people  of
Israel  (rer.  14).  MarvelloiiB  things;  Sep-
tuagint,  "O^ecee  eaunaarii,  "Ye  shall  see
marvellous  things."  Supernatural  occur-
reuces  are  meant,  as  Exod.  iii.  20;  xv.  11;
Fs.  Ixxvii.  14.  We  do  not  read  of  any
special  miracles  at  the  return  from  cap-
tivity, so  the  people  were  led  to  look
onward  to  the  advent  of  Messiah  for  these
wonders.

Ver.  16.— Shall  see.  The  heathen  shall
see  these  marvell(>us  things.  Be  confounded
at  (ashamed  of)  all  their  might.  Hostile
nations  shall  be  ashamed  when  they  find
the  impotence  of  their  boasted  power.  Com-
pare the  effect  of  the  Exodus  on  contiguous
nations  (Exod.  xv.  14,  etc. ;  Josh.  ii.  9, 10).
They  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  their  month.
They  shall  be  silent  from  awe  and  astonish-
ment (Judg.  xviii.  19;  Job  xxi.  5;  Isa.  Iii.
15).  Their  ears  shall  he  deaf.  Their  senses
shall  be  stupefied  by  the  wonders  which  they
see — that  which  Job  (xxvi.  14)  calls  "  the
thunder  of  his  mighty  deeds."  There  may
also  be  an  allusion  to  their  wilfol  obstinaoy,
and  unbelief.

Ver.  17.— They  shaU  lick  the  dust  like  a
serpent  (Gen.  iii.  14;  Isa.  Ixv.  2?).  The
enemies  of  God's  people  "  shall  lick  the
dust"  (Ps.  Ixxii.  9),  shall  be  reduced  to  the
utmost  degradation  (Isa.  xlix.  23).  They
shall  move  oat  of  their  holes,  etc. ;  rather
they  come  trembling  out  of  their  close  placet
(or,  fastnesses,  Fs.  xviii.  46),  like  crawling
tilings  of  the  earth.  They  who  prided  them-
selves on  their  security  shall  come  forth
from  their  strongholds  in  utter  fear,  driven
out  like  snakes  &om  their  lairs  (comp.  Fs.
ii.  11;  Hos.  xi.  10,  etc).  They  shall  be
afraid  of  (whine  with  fear  unto)  the  Lord
oar  &od.  They  shall  be  driven  by  terror  to
acknowledge  the  God  of  Israel.  The  ex-
pression is  ambiguous,  and  may  mean  servile
tear,  which  makes  a  man  shrink  from  God,
or  that  fear  which  is  one  step  towards  re-
pentance ;  the  latter  seems  intended  here,  as
in  Hos.  iii.  5,  where,  as  Pusey  says,  the
words,  "  and  his  goochiess,"  determine  the
ohaia«ter  of  the  fear.  Beoanse  of  (or,  he-
fore)  thee.  It  is  the  heathen  who  are  still
the  subject,  not  the  Israelites  (Jer.  x.  7>


ma   J3U\JQ.    yjc    aixujxa.


[VBU    VU*   X— 4JV^


The  sndden  change  of  persons  is  qnite  in
the  prophet's  style.

Vera.  18— 20.— §  8.  The  booh  endt  with
a  lyrie  ode  in  praise  of  God'$  mercy  and  faith-
fulnes).

Ver.  18. — In  view  of  the  many  provoca-
tions and  backslidings  of  the  people,  Micah
is  filled  with  wonder  ut  the  goodness  and
long-suffering  of  God.  Who  is  a  Ood  like
unto  thee?  The  question  seems  to  recall
the  prophet's  own  name,  which  means,
"  Who  is  like  Jehovah  ?  "  and  the  clause  in
Moses'  song  (Exod.  xv.  11),  "  Who  is  like
unto  thee,  U  Lord,  among  the  gods?"  Such
comparisons  are  made  from  the  standpoint
of  the  nations  who  believe  in  the  real  exist-
ence of  theii  false  gods.  That  pardoneth
iniquity  (comp.  Exod.  xxxiy.  7 ;  Numb.  xiv.
18).  Fasseth  by  the  transgression;  Sep-
tuagint,  imipfiahav  daepdas,  "passing  over
iniquities;"  Vulgate,  transit peceatum.  To
pass  by,  or  pass  over,  is  to  forgive,  as  Amos
yii.  8.  There  is  probably  an  allusion,  as
Jerojne  says,  to  the  night  of  the  Exodus.  Aa
the  destroying  angel  piissed  over  the
Israelites  and  destroyed  them  not,  so  God
spares  his  people,  imputing  not  their
iniquities  unto  them.  The  remnant  (oh.  ii.
12;  iv.  6,  7).  The  true  Israel,  which  is
only  a  remnant  (Isa.  x.  21 ;  Eom.  ix.  27).
He  retaineth  not  his  anger  for  ever  (Ps.
ciii.  9).  The  word  rendered  "  for  ever "  is
translated  by  Jerome  ultra,  and  by  the
Septuagint  cis  imp-ripioii,  i.e.  to  testify  the
justice  of  his  punishment.  He  delighteth
in  mercy.  As  the  Collect  says,  "  O  God,
whose  nature  and  property  is  always  to  have
mercy  and  to  forgive  "  (comp.  Wisd.  xi.  24).

Ver.  19. — He  will  turn  again,  and  have


compassion  upon  ns.  The  verb  "  turn  again,"
joined  with  another  verb,  often  denotes  the
repetition  of  an  action,  as  in  Job  vii.  7 ;  Hog.
xiv.  8,  etc. ;  so  here  we  may  tranblate  simply,
"  He  will  again  have  compassion."  He  will
subdue ;  literally,  tread  underfoot.  Sin  is
regarded  as  a  personal'  enemy,  which  by
God's  sovereign  grace  will  be  entirely  sut-
dned.  So,  according  to  one  interpretation,
sin  is  peroonified  (Gen.  iv.  7 ;  comp.  Ps.  Ixv.
3).  Cast  aU  their  sins  into  the  depUis  of
the  sea.  Thou  wilt  blot  out  and  bvuy  com-
pletely and  for  ever,  as  once  thou  didst
overwhelm  the  Egyptians  in  the  Bed  Sea
(Exod.  XV.  1,  4,  10,  21).  Tlie  miraculous
deliverance  of  the  Israelites  at  the  Exodus
is  a  type  of  the  greater  deliverance  of  the
true  Israelites  in  Christ  (Fs.  ciii.  12 ;  1  John
i.  7 ;  comp.  Isa.  xliii.  25).

Ver.  20. — Thou  wilt  perform  (literally,
give)  the  truth  to  Jacob,  and  the  mercy  to
Abraham,  Jacob  and  Abraham  are  men-
tioned as  the  chiefs  and  representatives  of
the  chosen  family ;  and  "  the  truth "  («'.«.
God's  faithfulness  to  his  promises)  and
"  mercy  "  are  equally  given  to  both,  sepa-
rately assigned  only  for  the  sake  of  the
parallelism.  Knabenbauer  compares  such
passages  as  Ps.  cxiv.  1,  "  When  Israel  went
forth  out  of  Egypt,  the  house  of  Jacob  from
a  people  of  strange  language "  (Ps.  ov.  6 ;
Isa.  xli.  8 ;  Ixiii.  16,  etc.).  The  general
meaning,  therefore,  is  that  God  will  perform
the  promises  made  to  the  forefathers,  as
Luke  i.  72,  etc.  Hast  sworn,  as  in  Gen.
xxii.  16,  etc. ;  zxviii.  13,  etc. ;  Dent.  vii.  12.
With  the  close  of  the~  ode  Hengstenberg
compares  Bom.  xi.  33 — 36.  Thus  the
checkered  prophecy  ends  with  the  glow  of
faith  and  happy  hope.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — The  good  in  degenerate  times.  We  are  not  to  understand  these  verses
•3  referring  specially  to  the  prophet  himself.  In  ch.  i.  8,  9  we  have  his  own  lamenta-
tion in  view  of  the  prevailing  ungodliness;  here  "the  speaker  is  not  the  prophet,  but
the  true  Israel,  i.e.  Israel  within  Israel,  personified "  (Cheyne).  God  has  never  left
himself  without  witnesses.  Even  in  the  most  corrupt  and  degenerate  times  he  has  had
a  people  to  show  forth  his  praise.  It  was  so  in  the  a^e  to  which  this  book  of  Scripture
refers.  Widespread  though  the  depravity  was,  "a  remnant"  continued  faithful,  true,
liiyal  to  God  and  obedient  to  his  will;  and  Micah  here  speaks  simply  as  the  mouth-
piece of  these,  setting  forth  their  sadness  in  view  of  the  abounding  wickedness,  yet
withal  their  unshaken  confidence  in  the  triumph  of  tmth  and  righteousness;  whilst
then,  as  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  he  declared  that  this  Cdnfidence  should  not  be  dis-
appointed, but  the  victory  anticipated  be  most  surely  won.  Notice  here,  concerning
the  Churcli  of  God —

I.  Her  bitter  disappointment.  (Vers.  1 — 6.)  I.  The  desire  for  spiritual  excei-
lence  was  ardently  cherished.  This  aspiration  of  the  good  is  here  expressed
figuratively.  "  My  soul  desired  the  first-ripe  figs  "  (ver.  I).  These  were  accounted
the  choicest  and  sweetest,  and  were  very  refreshing  and  very  welcome  to  the  weary
ti  aveller.  and  hence  were  chosen  as  the  symbol  of  spiritual  excellence.    So  elsewher*


oa.  vn.  1— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  Ill

in  the  prophetical  writings  (Hos,  ix,  10 ;  Jer.  zxiv.).  Tlie  meaning,  then,  is  that  i,ha
good  longed  for  the  prevalence  of  piety  in  the  cation,  and  to  see  the  people  briuging
forth  the  fruits  of  righteousness.  This  is  the  aspiration  of  the  good  in  every  age.  Aa
the  sculptor  ardently  desires  to  see  the  rough  block  transformed  into  the  perfect
stfltue,  or  the  artist  to  see  the  bare  canvas  before  him  covered  with  the  creations  of  his
genius,  or  the  horticulturist  to  see  the  waste  field  transformed  into  a  garden  of  delight,
and  bearing,  in  infinite  variety,  the  flowers  and  fruits ;  so  all  good  men  yearn  to  sea
the  spiritual  transformation  of  the  world.  "  My  soul  desired  the  first-ripe  figs  "  (ver.  1).
2.  This  ardently  cherished  desire  was  unrealized.  (Ver.  1.)  The  verse  brings  vividly
before  us  the  sense  of  disappointment  arising  from  the  spiritual  barrenness  and  unpro-
ductiveness that  prevailed  in  the  land.  The  scene  presented  was  not  that  of  an
abundant  harvest,  but  of  a  land  bare  and  barren,  whose  best  days  were  of  yore,  in
which  so  little  good  remained  as  to  be  but  like  gleanings  when  the  vintage  is  over,  not
even  a  cluster  remaining.  "  I  am  as  when  they  have  gathered,"  etc.  (ver.  1).  And  as
further  illustrating  this  disappointment,  a  graphic  desciiption  is  given  of  the  prevailing
spiritual  desolation.  (1)  Mortality  and  martyrdom  had  impoverished  the  land  in  the
removal  from  it  of  the  tender,  the  trusty,  the  true  (ver.  2 ;  Isa.  Ivii.  1).  (2)  Anarchy
reigned,  with  its  accompiinying  violence,  treachery,  and  injustice  (vers.  2,  3).  (3)  The
administration  of  justice  had  become  a  burlesque,  its  administrators  working  together,
"  wrapping  it  up,"  weaving  it  together  so  as  to  keep  up  the  form,  and  to  appear  just,
whilst  really  seeking  their  own  selfish  ends  (ver.  3),  and  even  "  the  best "  amonjcst
tliem  being  "hard  and  piercing,"  even  as  a  briar,  and  "the  most  upright"  being  as  "a
thorn-hedge  wliich,  set  for  protection,  inflicts  injury"  (ver.  4).  (4)  Friendship,
"  sweet'ner  of  life  and  solder  of  society,"  had  become  insincere  and  unreal ;  yea,  even
the  most  sacred  relationships  of  life  had  become  perverted,  and  natural  afl^ection
sacrificed  and  changed  to  hate  (vers.  5,  6).  3.  T%is  non-realization  occasioned  litter
disappointment.  "  Woe  is  me  I "  (ver.  1).  A  hfe  of  piety  is  marked  by  the  experienca
of  true  joy  (Ps.  i.  1 — 3 ;  Prov.  iii.  17).  Yet  it  is  not  always  sunshine  even  with  tha
good.  "  If  we  listen  to  David's  harp,  we  shall  hear  as  many  hearse-like  harmonies  as
carols"  (Bacon).  And  a  very  large  ingredient  in  the  cup  of  sorrow  to  the  good  is
occasioned  by  the  contemplation  of  the  blighting  effects  of  sin.  As  looking  around
them,  and  despite  their  endeavours  to  disseminate  truth  and  righteousness,  they  see
multitudes  walking  according  to  the  world's  maxims,  cherishing  its  spirit  and  reaping
its  sad  harvest,  sorrow  fills  their  hearts,  and  they  become  desponding  and  sad.  And
hence  the  lament  of  the  Church  in  view  of  her  small  numbers  and  the  general
corruption,  as  here  expressed, "  Woe  is  me  1 "  etc.  (ver.  1).

II.  Hbb  unswervino  oonfidbnob.  (Vers.  7 — 10.)  1.  This  confidence  rested  in
Oud.  "Therefore  1  will  look  unto  the  Lord"  (ver.  7).  In  times  of  seeming  non-
success  in  holy  service  we  should  cherish  unswerving  trust  in  the  God  of  truth,  and
having  faithfully  discharged  our  duty,  should  commit  the  rest  unto  him.  2.  This  con-
fidence was  expressed  in  patient  waiting/or  Ood.  He  had  "spoken  good  concerning
Israel,"  and  had  declared  "glorious  things"  respecting  Zion,  the  city  of  God.  And  in
the  dark  days  his  servants  were  prepared  patiently  to  wait  for  the  fulfilment  of  these,
even  as  the  mariner  waits  for  fair  winds  and  favourable  tide,  or  as  the  watchman  waits
through  the  long  night  for  the  coming  of  the  day.  "  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  ray
salvation  "  (ver.  7).  3.  This  confidence  was  sustained  by  inspiring  hope,  "  My  God
will  hear  me."  So  did  hope  cast  her  bow  of  promise  across  the  stormy  cloud  and
kindle  the  bright  star  in  the  dark  sky.  4.  TTiis  confidence  triumphed  even  in  the  midst
of  adversity.  The  world  was  very  evil,  and  the  good  in  the  land  were  few.  Iniquity
appeared  to  be  victorious,  and  might  to  triumph  over  right.  The  hearts  of  the  pious,
full  of  patriotism  and  of  the  love  of  God,  were  sad ;  yet  their  reliance  was  unshaken
and  unswerving.  Dark  days  were  before  them,  severe  chastisement  must  be  experienced,
and  they  would  soon  feel  the  rod  of  the  oppressor  and  be  exposed  to  the  taunts  of  the
heathen,  who  would  mockingly  ask,  "  Where  is  the  Lord  thy  God?"  But  they  could
rest  in  the  assurance  that  the  Lord  would  be  their  Light  in  darkness ;  that  he  would
interpose  on  their  behalf,  bringing  them  forth  out  of  the  gloom  into  the  light,  covering
their  foes  with  shame,  and  vindicating  his  own  righteotisness.  "  Eejoice  not  against
me,"  etc.  (vers.  8 — 10).

ni.  Heb  A88UBBD  viOTOBT.    (Vers.  11 — 13.)    In  these  verses,  speaking,  not  as  the ,


113  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  [oh.  Tii.  1— 2a

inoutlipiece  of  the  good  but  prophetically  as  the  seer,  Micah  delivers  the  assurance  he
was  inspired  by  God  to  utter,  and  beiiring  upon  the.  time  to  come.  His  words,  aa
rendered  in  the  Authorized  Version,  are  somewhat  obscure,  but  we  gather  from  them
that  a  brighter  future  should  dawn  upon  the  world  sin  had  darkened  and  defiled,  and
of  that  glorious  era  he  here  speaks.  And  as  his  people,  in  the  days  when  they  "  sat  by
the  rivers  of  Babylon,  and  wept  as  they  remembered  Zion,"  and  thought  of  the  desolation
sin  had  wrought,  turned  to  these  and  similar  assurances  of  the  golden  age  yet  to  come,
who  can  tell  to  what  an  extent  they  became  nerved  afresh  and  inspired  with  renewed
courage  and  hope  1  Even  so  let  those  to-day  who  grieve,  with  the  good  through  all
ages,  yver  the  blighting  effects  of  sin,  rejoice  in  the  prospect  of  the  ultimate  victory.
"Lift  up  your  heads  ,  .  .  redemption  draweth  nigh."  Now  death  reigns  and  sin
triumphs;  but  ere  long  grace  shall  reign  through  righteousness  unto  eternal  life.
Every  throe  of  sorrow  is  bringing  us  nearer  to  the  time  of  the  world's  full  deliverance
from  the  power  of  evil.  The  triumph  is  sure.  "  The  Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth."
This  suggestive  paragraph  closes  with  a  note  of  warning.  "  Notwithstanding,"  etc.
(ver.  13).  There  is  a  glorious  future  awaiting  the  Church  of  God,  but  meanwhile  the
work  of  judgment  must  be  perfected.  Notwithstanding  the  bright  prospect  here
unfolded,  sin  will  assuredly  work  its  dire  effects.  The  triumph  of  righteousness  carries
with  it  the  defeat  of  unrighteousness.  One  of  the  poets  sings  of  a  bell  suspended  on
the  Inchcape  rock,  that  the  sound  might  warn  the  sailors  of  their  nearness  to  danger ;
and  tells  how  pirates  cut  the  bell  so  as  to  sileuce  the  sound;  and  how  that  subse-
quently these  same  pirates  struck  upon  the  very  rock  which  they  had  deprived  of  its
means  of  warning  them.  Let  us  not  thus  treat  this  note  of  warning,  but  be  constrained
to  "  break  off  sin  by  righteousneas,"  as  it  reminds  us  that  "  God  i*  not  mocked,"  and
that  "  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."

Ver.  7. —  Waiting  for  Ood,  "I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my  salvation."  The  good,
personified,  are  here  represented  as  declaring  that  they  would  place  themselves  in
iarmony  with  the  wise  and  holy  will  of  God;  that  they  would  trustingly  acquiesce
and  quietly  endure,  drawing  from  intimate  personal  relationship  to  God  that  holy
inspiration  which  would  enable  them  in  the  dark  days  now  before  them,  with  true
heroism  to  encounter  every  difficulty,  and  with  calm  resignation  to  bear  every  sorrow,
and  to  find  in  so  doing  tranquillity  and  peace.    "  I  will  wait,"  etc.  (ver.  7).

I,    OUB  OIRCUMSTANCBB  IN  LIFE  OFTEN  CALL  FOE   THE   EXERCISE   OF   THIS   SFIBIT   OF

PATIENT  WAITING  FOB  GoD.  It  is  the  method  of  our  God  by  slow  processes  to  bring  to
pass  all  that  he  has  designed,  whether  in.  nature,  in  providence,  or  in  grace.  His
purposes  are  gradually  evolved.  His  delays  are  for  wise  and  gracious  reasons.  Hence,
instead  of  fretting  and  repining  and  growing  impatient  under  adversity,  as  though
some  strange  thing  were  happening  to  us,  it  behoves  us  to  "  rest  in  the  Lord,"  and  so
be  cheerful  even  in  the  night  and  under  the  shadow  of  the  cloud,  assured  that  to
those  rightly  exercised  by  sorrow  "  tribulation  worketh  patience,  aud  patience  expe-
rience, and  experience  hope  "  (Eom.  v.  3,  4).

IL  The  cherishing  of  this  spirit  ennobles  huuan  ohabaotsb.  1.  Tou  see  in
such  a  case  a  man  who  is  continually  gaining  triumphs  where  multitudes  are  worsted
and  defeated.  There  are  many  who  can  do,  but  who  cannot  bear.  They  can  actively
serve  God  and  strive  to  promote  the  interests  of  men,  but  they  cannot  passively  yield
themselves  up  to  the  will  of  God,  and,  without  resentment,  bear  the  reproaches  of
those  who  seek  their  hurt.  And  certainly  the  man  who  is  able  to  do  this  is  the  more
royal.  Who  can  doubt  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  when  he  said,  "  He  that  ruleth  his
spirit  is  better  than  he  that  taketh  a  city"  (Prov.  xvi.  32)?  2.  Tou  see  in  such  a  ca^
a  man  who  is  clearly  under  the  influence  of  high  Christian  motives.  The  influences
which  impel  a  man  calmly  and  trustingly  to  submit  to  God's  all-wise  but  often
inscrutable  appointments,  are  not  human,  but  Divine.  There  is  nothing  in  mere
earthly  considerations  that  is  at  all  calculated  to  inspire  this  patience.  It  is  only  as
we  bring  the  realities  of  eternity  to  bear  upon  our  present  experiences  that  we  become
liited  up  to  a  higher  realm,  and  are  enabled  patiently  to  endure.

in.  By  this  patient  waiting  God  is  olobified  and  bebteo.  The  thought  of
service  to  God  is  too  often  restricted  to  active  endeavour.  It  is  overlooked  that  he
may  be  served  by  us  passively  as  well  as  actively ;  by  quiet  redgnation  to  his  will  aa


OH.  vn.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  113


■well  as  by  open  and  earnest  toU  in  seeking  the  good  of  others.  "  They  also  serve  who
only  stand  and  wait."  Great  was  the  service  rendered  by  th^  Man  Christ  Jesus  as  he
traversed  the  cities  and  villages  of  Palestine,  going  about  doing  good,  and  speaking  of
the  things  pertaining  to  the  kingdom  of  Q-od ;  but  yet  higher  service  was  rendered  by
him  as  with  holy  resignation  he  acquiesced  in  the  great  Father's  will  and  "  endured
the  cross,  despising  the  shame."

rV.  Thi8  waitino  fob  the  Lord  shall  dj  no  wise  lose  its  bgwabo.  There  shall
be  ultimate  deliverance ;  salvation  shall  come,  and  the  thankful  acknowledgment  shall
be,  "Lo,  this  is  our  God;  we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  hath  saved  us:  this  is  the
Lord ;  we  have  waited  for  him,  we  wiU  evermore  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation  "
(Isa.  XXV.  9).

Vers.  8,  9. — From  darkness  into  light.  "  When  I  sit  in  darkness,  the  Lord  shall  be
a  Light  unto  me.  ...  He  will  bring  me  forth  to  the  light."  The  Bible  is  "the  heart-
book  of  the  world."  In  order  to  the  unravelment  of  its  deep  spiritual  teaching,  we  must
study  it  in  the  light  of  our  own  soul-experienbes — of  our  joys  and  sorrows  and  needs.
It  is  one  thing  to  be  able  to  understand  the  volume  in  the  meaning  of  its  words  and
the  constrnction  of  its  phrases  and  forms  of  expression ;  but  it  is  quite  another  thing
to  feel  that  it  is  ours  to  enter  into  the  inward  experiences  of  God's  saints  of  old,  through
whom  he  speaks  to  us  in  these  wondrous  pages — experiences  by  which  he  has  fitted
them  to  be  his  mesi^engers  of  help  and  hope  to  the  world ;  and  to  enter  into  these  we
must  bring  our  hearts  as  well  as  our  intellects  to  the  study  of  the  book,  and  endeavour
to  trace  the  application  of  its  teachings  to  the  wants  and  aspirations  of  the  human
spirit.     Notice  in  the  human  experience  here  described —

I.  Dabknesb.  The  adverse  influences  of  life  are  thus  symbolized.  We  are  con-
stantly attended  by  these.  It  must  be  so.  Human  life  is  a  pilgrimage,  and  no
traveller  can  expect  to  reach  the  end  of  his  journey  without  feeling  weary  and  worn.
It  is  a  voyage,  and  hence  we  must  encounter  storms.  The  world  is  a  stage,  and  we  are
the  players,  and  although  to  outward  appearances  it  may  seem  that  we  are  acting  our
respective  parts  with  ease,  who  can  tell  what  anxiety  is  encountered  behind  the  scenes  f
These  adverse  influences  meet  us  in  life's  daily  duties.  They  are  often  occasioned  by
differences  in  temper  and  disposition,  giving  rise  to  misunderstanding ;  or  by  the
temporal  circumstances  being  straitened;  or  by  prolonged  and  tedious  suspense  in
reference  to  the  success  or  failure  of  certain  projects ;  or  by  baffled  hopes  and  expecta-
tions. They  come  to  us  in  the  form  of  the  sorrows  of  life.  There  is  failure  of  health,
with  the  anxious  days  and  weary  nights  it  brings  to  the  household.  There  is  bereave-
ment, with  its  attendant  grief  and  gloom.  There  are  also  cruel  misrepresentations,
malicious  censures,  vmjust  reproaches  (ver.  10).  And  these  adverse  influences  follow  in
quick  succession,

"  When  sorrows  come,  they  come  not  single  apiea,
But  in  battalions."

They  fill  the  heart  with  sadness,  and  there  settles  down  upon  the  troubled  spirit  the
darkness  of  night.     "  I  sit  in  darkness."

II.  Light  in  darkness.  Light  is  revealing,  restoring,  gladdening,  in  its  effects.
Under  its  influence  that  which  was  before  concealed  becomes  manifest  to  us;  new  life
is  put  into  us,  and  joy  and  gladness  become  inspired  within.  So  shall  it  be  with  the
good  in  a  spiritual  sense.  In  their  gloomiest  seasons  these  gracious  influences  shall  be
experienced  by  them  by  reason  of  the  presence  with  them  of  the  Lord  their  God.  It  is
not  so  much  that  the  Lord  will  cause  light  to  break  in  upon  them  (although  that  is
gloriously  true),  as  that  he  himself  will  be  with  them  as  their  Light.  "  When  I  sit  in
darkness  the  Lord  shall  be  a  Light  unto  me ;"  "  The  Lord  is  my  Light  and  my  Salva-
tion "  (Ps.  xxvii.  1) ;  ""In  his  favour  is  life  "  (Ps.  xxx.  5).  Light  in  darkness,  spring-
ing from  the  conscious  presence  of  the  Lord,  is  the  thought  here  expressed.  And  in
the  next  verse  is  the  additional,  yet  closely  related  thought  of —

III.  Passing  out  of  darkness  into  the  light.  "He  will  bring  me  forth  to  the
light"  (ver.  9).  So  has  it  been  in  the  past  in  the  experience  of  the  good.  Jacob
(comp.  Gen.  xliL  36  with  xlv.  26—28);  Elijah  (comp.  1  Kings  xix.  4  with  vers.  5—8,
18);  the  Shunammite  (comp.  2  Kings  iv.  20  with  ver.  37);  the  Captivity  (oomp.

taOAM.  I


11«  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  [oh.  tii.  1—20.

Pi.  czxiii.  with  Pi.  cxxri.).  So  itill  to  all  triutiiig  hearti;  and  lo  hereafter,  "The
Lord  ihall  be  thine  ererlasting  Light,  and  the  daji  of  thy  mourning  ihall  be  ended"
(ba.lz.20>.

Vera.  14 — 17.— Prayer  and  <(f  reapomi.  How  myiterionily  great  ii  the  privilege
of  prayer  1  How  wonderful  that  finite  creatures  may  thui  draw  near  to  the  Infinite,
carrying  their  needi  into  the  Divine  preience,  breathing  their  desires  hito  the  ear  of
God,  and  obtaining  from  him  all  required  mercy  and  grace !  We  think  of  the  patriarch
who,  weary  and  worn  with  hia  wanderings,  slept,  with  a  itone  for  his  pillow,  and  we
ipeak  of  the  ladder  he  beheld  connecting  the  spot  where  he  lay  with  the  very  throne
of  God,  as  his  vision ;  but  the  thought  <$ prayer  changei  this  into  a  blessed  reality,  for
communication  between  earth  and  heaven  has  been  established,  and  thus  human
spirits  rise  to  God,  and  enrichments  descend  from  him  to  satisfy  men's  deepest  needs  t
nayer,  in  the  highest  conception  of  it,  is  a  thoughtful  communion  with  God.  It  ii
intercourse  with  God.  It  is  sympathetic  contact  with  him.  It  is  an  exercise  in  which
we  engage  that  we  may  have  fellowship  with  the  Invisible,  and  may  thus  understand
the  Divine  will,and  become  increasingly  disposed  to  become  obedient  thereunto.  Helpful,
indeed,  is  the  influence  we  derive  from  communion  with  the  pure  and  holy  amongst  men ;
then  say  how  elevating  must  be  contact  with  him  who  is  perfect  in  purity,  the  Eternal
Spirit  I  But  prayer  is  also  aupplication.  We  have  wants.  God  has  constituted  us
dependent  beings.  Needs,  both  temporal  and  spiritual,  press  upon  us  at  times  with  a
heavy  weight.  And  prayer  is  the  soul,  deeply  conscious  of  these  necessities,  coming  to
God  with  intense  desire  seeking  their  supply.  Our  supplications,  however,  should  rise
beyond  our  own  individual  wants.  Prayer  should  be  presented  by  us  on  behalf  of
others.  In  this  holy  exercise  we  should  seize  upon  interests  broader  than  those  per-
tuning  to  our  own  personal  life,  and,  with  a  true  concern,  should  bear  these  up  before
the  throne  of  G^.  As  the  great  Intercessor  pleads  for  us  before  his  Father's  throne,
80  we  alio  in  our  measure  are  to  be  intercessors  for  men.  The  Prophet  Micah  comes
before  us  in  these  verses  as  exercising  this  intercessory  function.    Note  here—

L  Thb  dbtotxd  bebb  FLEADnra  with  God  om  bbhalf  of  ma  fboplb.  (Ver.  14.)
Observe:  L  He  makes  mention  of  their  peculiar  relationship  to  the  Most  High:
fl)  As  being  his  chosen  servants.  "  Thy  people ; "  "  the  flock  of  thine  inheritaQce."
(2)  As  separated  from  the  nations  to  his  praise :  "  which  dwell  solitarily ."  2.  He
recalls  the  former  manifestationa  to  them  of  the  Divine  goodness  in  the  bestowment
of  rich  blessings.  "  The  daya  of  old."  8.  He  supplicates  the  Divine  Shepherd  to  be
with  them  in  the  dark  days  now  before  them,  sustaining  them  and  enriching  them
with  plenty  (ver.  14).

n.  Tbb  DmirE  besfonie  to  the  eabmest  sufplioation  of  the  prophet.
1.  The  prophet  was  assured  that  there  should  be  deliveraace  wrought  for  his  people  by
Divine  interposition  (ver.  16).  2.  It  was  declared  to  him  that  the  foes  who  would
triumph  over  them  should  ultimately  be  covered  with  confusion  and  shame  (vers.  16,
17).  Intercessory  prayer  is  still  an  essential  part  of  the  ministry  of  the  Church ;  it  ii
mighty  and  prevailing  ;  it  commands  and  wields  the  forces  of  heaven.  "  The  effectual
fervent  prayer  of  a  righteoui  man  availeth  much  "  (Jas.  v.  16).

Vers.  18, 19. — The  forgiving  Ood.  No  words  could  possibly  have  been  more  appro-
priate than  these  by  way  of  bringing  this  brief  book  of  prophecy  to  a  close.  Whea
we  think  of  the  degenerate  character  of  the  age  in  which  this  prophet  lived,  and  when
we  remember  that  he  had  constantly  to  deal  with  human  guilt  and  depravity,  to
declare  the  Divine  judgments,  and  to  endeavour  by  warnings  and  threateniugs  toi  bring
home  to  men  a  sense  of  their  sinfulness, — what  could  be  more  fitting  than  that,  in
closing  his  contribution  to  the  Divine  oracles,  he  should  expatiate,  as  he  does  here
■o  impressively,  upon  Jehovah  as  being  the  forgiving  Ood,  His  design  in  these
verses  clearly  was  to  extol  the  grace  and  mercy  of  the  Lord  his  God.  As  he  thought
«f  the  Divine  forgiving  love,  he  felt  that  with  the  Most  High  none  can  compare.  With
warmest  admiration,  combined  with  the  profoundest  adoration,  he  asks,  "  Who  is  a  God
Ifta  imto  thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the
nmaant  of  hii  heritage  ? "  (ver.  18).  And  instead  of  attempting  to  answer  his  own
faquiiy,  he  indicatei  what  hia  answer  would  be  by  enlarging  yet  ^ther  upon  God'i


OH.  TU.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  115

pardoning  grace :  "  He  retaineth  not,"  etc.  (vers.  18,  19).    Let  ua  reflect  upon  the
incomparableness  of  the  Lord  our  God,  viewed  as  the  Divine  Forgiver.    Consider —

L  What  thm  Divine  foboivbnbss  uiplieb.  1.  The  great  fact  of  tin.  There  are
those  who  have  endeavoured  to  explain  away  this  solemn  fact  of  sin ;  who  contend  that
there  is  not  to  be  found  in  man  any  intentional  preference  of  wrong  to  right ;  that
what  we  call  sin  is  something  predicable  of  society  rather  than  of  the  individual ;  that
man  himself  is  right  enough,  but  lacks  the  science  required  to  organize  society  rightly ;
and  that  what  we  call  gin  is  after  all  only  the  development  of  these  discordant  causes
in  society.  See  Bushnell's  reply  to  this,  setting  forth  on  this  theory  our  inconsistency  -
in  blaming  the  persons  by  whom  sinful  acts  have  been  wrought,  and  in  censuring
ourselves  when  we  have  done  unworthy  acts,  etc.  ('Nature  and  the  Supernatural,'
ch.  v.).  There  is  no  escape  from  admitting  the  great  fact  of  sin.  The  Word  is
unerring  as  it  declares  that  "  all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  Ood "
(Rom.  iii.  23);  that  "there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one"  (Bom.  iii.  12);  and
that  "  every  mouth  must  be  stopped,  and  the  whole  world  stand  guilty  before  God  "
(Bom.  iii.  19).  2.  2%«  Divine  interposition  with  a  view  to  the  deliverance  of  the  race
from  this  terrible  blight.  We  can  form  no  true  conception  of  the  Divine  for<;iv-eness
unless  these  facts  of  personal  guilt  and  transgression,  and  of  the  Divine  interposition  in
order  to  our  deliverance,  are  kept  prominently  before  us.  And  even  at  this  stage  our
admiration  is  called  into  exercise,  and  we  cry,  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee  ?  "  This
is  intensified  as  we  consider —

II.  What  this  DivraE  FOsaivsirBSS  iHOLnDBS.  It  includes  deliverance  from  the
sad  consequences  of  sin.  Note  what  these  are.  1.  Mark  the  consequences  of  tin  to
the  individuai.  (1)  There  is  loss  of  power.  Every  spiritual  defeat  is  attended  by  the
weakening  of  moral  strength.  (2)  There  is  disquietude  of  consdenee.  (3)  Separation
from  Ood.  There  can  be  no  communion  where  there  is  contrariety  of  nature.  "  How
can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed  ?  "  (4)  Suffering  and  death.  The  con-
nection between  the  spirit  and  the  body  is  so  intimate  that  the  body  necessarily  suffers
through  the  disorganization  sin  has  wrought  in  the  soul.  2.  Consequences  resulting  to
society.  These  also  are  sad  and  distressing.  "  The  bad  inheritance  passes,  and  fears,
frauds,  crimes  against  proper^,  character,  and  life,  abuses  of  power,  oppressions  of  the
weak,  persecutions  of  the  good,  piracies,  wars  of  revolt,  wars  of  conquest,  are  the  staple
of  the  world's  bitter  history.  It  is  a  pitiless  and  dreadful  power,  as  fallen  society  must
necessarily  be  "  (Bushnell, '  Nature  and  the  Supernatural,'  p.  123).  The  Divine  for-
giveness means  deliverance  from  all  these  sad  consequences  of  evil.  It  is  not  a  bare
pardon  merely,  but  it  carries  with  it  enfranchisement  from  the  blighting  effects  of  eviL
There  is  the  impartation  to  the  forgiven  of  a  Divine  power,  an  inward  spiritual  force  to
enable  them  to  resist  the  evil  and  downward  tendencies ;  the  lost  power  is  restored,
and  which  is  mighty  in  "  subduing  our  iniquities"  (ver.  19).  There  is  the  impartation
to  the  forgiven  of  peace  of  conscience;  the  discordant  and  disturbing  elements  are
hushed ;  the  harmonies  are  restored.  There  is  the  experience  of  renewed  communion
with  the  Eternal.  The  loul,  accepted  and  renewed,  would  ever  abide  at  the  feet  of
the  Lord.  There  is  oneness  and  agreement  now,  and  hence  fellowship  is  possible
and  practicable,  yea,  is  felt  to  be  desirable  and  essentiaL  "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in
heart :  for  they  shall  see  God."  And  whilst  suffering  and  death  remwn,  yet  by  a
Divine  alchemy  the  character  of  these  life-sorrows  becomes  entirely  changed,  and  they
cease  to  be  viewed  as  harsh  inflictions,  but  are  accepted  as  the  loving  discipline  by  which
the  Divine  Father  renders  the  character  perfect  and  entire,  whilst  "  the  sting  of  death  "
having  been  taken  away,  the  terror  also  is  gone.  And  as  men  become  thus  brought
into  this  holy  experience  will  the  regeneration  of  the  world  and  its  complete  deliverance
from  evil  be  brought  to  pass.  What  a  ftilness  of  meaning,  then,  there  is  when  God
is  spoken  of  as  "  pardoning  iniquity "  I  And  as  we  think  how  that  this  forgivenesa
carries  with  it  all  the  privileges,  honours,  and  enjoyments  here  and  hereafter  of  the
•piritoal  life,  our  admiration  of  him  who  has  made  all  this  possible  to  the  individual  and
the  race  rises  higher  still,  and  w«  cry  with  wondering  and  adoring  love,  "  Who  ii  a
God  like  unto  thee?"

III.  What  this  Dimns  FOBaivKNESs  zervoLVEs.  1.  It  has  involved  on  the  part  of
Ood  all  that  it  comprehended  in  the  gift  and  work  of  hit  Son  Jesut  Christ ;  for  it  i«
through  Christ  alone  that  this  forgiveness  of  sin  is  secured.    "  In  him  have  we


116  THE    BOOK   OF   MICAH.  [cm,  vii.  1—20.


fedemption  through  his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  cm  sins"  (Col.  i.  14),  It
involved  the  heavenly  Shepherd's  coming  forth  to  seek  his  lost  and  fallen  world.  "  The
Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost"  (Luke  xix.  10).  Lo  I  the
Christ  of  God,  the  Gift  of  the  Father's  love,  clothed  himself  in  our  humanity,  obeyed  the
Law  we  had  broken,  atoned  for  sin  in  the  death  of  the  cross,  that  we  might  not  perish,
that  we  might  exchange  the  wilderness  for  the  fold,  be  lifted  out  of  the  lost  condition
into  hope,  dignity,  and  character  here,  and  be  raised  hereafter  to  immortal  purity,  peace,
and  joy.  The  power  of  human  language  is  too  weak  adequately  to  describe  the  love  of
QoA  as  expressed  even  in  the  minutest  of  his  doings ;  but  in  reference  to  this  seeking
the  erring,  with  a  view  to  their  restoration,  it  signally  fails,  and  we  can  only  adoringly
cry,  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee  ?  "  2.  On  the  part  of  man  this  Divine  forgiveness
inYolveB  penitejice  and  faith.  "Repent  ye,  and  believe  the  gospel"  (Mark  i.  15).  On
conditions  thus  simple  the  vilest  transgressor  may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord.  And  if
there  is  another  thought  which  leads  us  to  feel  this  pardoning  love  of  God  to  be  the
more  wonderful,  it  is  the  remembrance  that  he  has  not  only  provided  the  pardon,  but
even  condescends  to  plead  with  men,  that  they  may  be  led  to  fulfil  the  righteous
conditions  and  to  receive  the  boon  (Isa.  i.  18 ;  Rev.  iii.  20).  Let  us  not  repel  him  who
has  come  to  bless  us  by  turning  us  away  from  our  iniquities,  but  rather  give  him  a
hearty  greeting.  Then,  with  this  ancient  seer  and  with  the  forgiven  through  all  ages,
we  shall  cry,  with  hearts  overflowing  with  love  and  praise,  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto
thee?"(ver8. 18, 19).

Ver.  20. — The  Divine  promite*  and  their  fulJUment.  These  words  bear  upon  them
the  impress  of  deep  human  experience.  They  form  the  crowning  testimony  of  a  man
who  had  Ipng  proved  the  reality  of  that  which  they  afBrm.  In  closing  his  book  of
prophecy  he  would,  with  all  his  heart  and  soul,  affix  his  seal  to  the  bright  declaration
that  Gkxl  is  ever  faithful  and  true.  Jehovah  was  to  him  a  living  reality,  the  centre
of  his  affections  and  the  strength  of  his  heart.  "  He  endured  as  seeing  him  who  is
invisible."  And  Divine,  indeed,  is  that  trust  in  the  eternal  Lord  which  fires  the  soul
and  nerves  it  for  entering  into  "  the  holy  war;"  which  stands  the  warrior  in  good  stead,
and  proves  invulnerable  whilst  he  engages  in  the  strife ;  and  which  also,  when  the  good
soldier,  having  fought  well  and  grown  grey  in  the  service,  begins  to  lay  aside  his
armour  and  quietly  to  await  the  summons  to  the  presence  and  joy  of  the  Lord  he
has  served,  proves  his  consolation  and  support.  Micui  doubtless  had  in  mind  the  rich
promises  given  by  God,  first  to  [Abraham,  and  then  reiterated  to  Jacob,  that  they
should  be  blessed  and  multiplied,  and  that  through  their  line  lasting  blessings  should
flow  to  all  the  families  of  the  earth  (Gten.  xxii,  16—18 ;  xxviii.  13, 14).    Notice —

I,  He  bepbesbnts  the  DivntB  pbouises  as  oharactebized  by  "herot"  and
"  TBUTH."  "  The  truth  to  Jacob,  and  the  mercy  to  Abraham "  (ver.  20),  The
expression  is,  at  first  sight,  rather  peculiar ;  yet  it  may  easily  be  explained.  By
"  mercy "  we  understand  favour  shown  to  the  undeserving.  Grand  hero  as  Abraham
was,  there  was  nothing  in  him  to  merit  such  distinguishing  honour  as  was  conferred
upon  him.  The  choice  was  altogether  traceable  to  the  abounding  mercy  and  grace
of  God.  So  also  with  Jacob,  who,  at  the  outset  of  his  career,  was  about  as  unlovely
as  man  could  well  be.  Then  why,  it  may  be  asked,  the  change  in  the  form  of
expression  ?  Why  not  "  the  mercy  to  Abraham  "  and  "  the  mercy  to  Jacob "  T
Why  "  the  mercy  to  Abraham ''  and  "  the  truth  to  Jacob  "  ?  Simply  to  introduce  the
additional  thought  of  "  truth,"  "  Truth  "  here  means  the  bringing  into  clearer  light
that  which  had  been  partially  hinted  at,  "  What  was  free  mercy  to  Abraham  became,
when  God  had  once  promised  It,  his  truth "  (Pusey).  And  his^  revelation  of  truth
became  clearer  and  brighter,  until  at  length  he  appeared  in  whom  both  "  grace  and
truth  "  came  in  their  unveiled  clearness  and  their  unrestricted  fulness.

II,  He  traces  these  Divine  promises  as  having  their  boukoe  and  bfriko  in  thb
ETERNAL  LOVB  OF  GoD.  "  From  the  days  of  old,"  i.e.  from  eternity,  God  has  cherished  the
loving  purpose  of  enriching  us  thus.    It  is  not "  a  modern  project,  but  an  ancient  charter."

III,  Hb    BBJOIOEB    in    the    ASSURANCE    THAT    THESE    DiVINE    PROMISES    SHALL    BE

UNDOUBTEDLY  FULFILLED,  "  Thou  wUt  perform,"  etc.  This  assurance  rested  on  the
Divine  pledge  ("  which  thou  hast  sworn  unto  our  fathers  "),  and  which  the  faithful
Promiser  is  both  able  and  willing  to  redeem.    "He  cannot  deny  himself"  (2  Tim,  iL


OH.  vn.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  U7


13),  In  building  the  temple  of  Solomon  two  pillars  were  set  up  in  the  porch  of
the  edifice — the  left  one  being  called  Boaz,  i.e.  "  In  God  is  strength ;  "  and  the  other  on
the  rijht  being  named  Jachin,  i.e.  "  He  will  establish  "—thus  beautifully  associating
together  the  thoughts  of  God's  ability  and  his  willing  resolve  to  bless.  Let  these
theughts  dwell  in  our  minds  respecting  him,  for  on  these  pillars  our  faith  and  hope
may  ever  securely  rest.


H0MILIB8  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — A  moral  dearth  in  the  land.  The  prophet,  speaking  in  the  name  of  the
godly  remnant  of  the  land,  laments  their  terrible  isolation.  We  are  thus  reminded  of
the  sad  condition  of  a  land  in  which  there  is  a  dearth  of  good  men.  For :  1.  They  are
the  choice  fruit  of  the  land — wholesome,  fragrant,  delicious.  The  ideal  Israel  is
compared  to  "  grapes  "  and  "  the  first  ripe  in  the  fig  tree  "  (Hos.  ix.  10).  The  Lord
"  taketh  pleasure  "  in  such ;  they  satisfy  the  hunger  of  the  Divine  heart  for  godliness
in  the  creature  (Ps.  cxlvii.  11;  cxlix.  4;  Prov.  li.  20).  So  far  as  they  share  the
spirit  of  Christ,  they  are,  like  him,  "  beloved  of  God,"  and  should  be  attractive  to  men.
2.  They  are  the  salt  of  the  earth — the  one  element  that  preserves  from  universal
corruption.  The  picture  presented  to  us  is  the  gradual  dying  out  of  the  godly ;  they
"  cease  "  (Ps.  xii.  1),  they  "  perish  "  (Isa.  Ivii.  1).  Some  few  remain,  "  two  or  three
in  the  top  of  the  uttermost  bough,"  which  were  not  touched,  or  those  unripe  which  were
but  imperfect  and  poor,  or  those  which  had  fallen, "  and  thus  were  fouled  and  stained,  and
yet  were  not  utterly  carried  away."  The  promise, "  Instead  of  thy  fathers  shall  be  thy
children  "  (Ps.  xlv.  16),  is  no  longer  fulfilled.  The  sons  and  daughters  of  the  godly  do
not  rise  up  to  fill  their  places  in  the  Church.  The  few  godly  survivors  are  heard
lamenting  and  longing  for  the  pious  companions  of  former  days ;  "  my  soul  desireth
the  first-ripe  fig "  (desiderio  tarn  cari  capitis).  The  fewer  the  good  that  remain,  the
more  difficult  it  is  for  them  to  retain  the  fervour  of  their  piety.  Embers  dispersed
soon  die  out.  It  is  hard  to  keep  up  a  June  temperature  under  December  skies.  From
this  dearth  of  the  godly  many  evils  follow.  There  is  a  loss  of  confidence,  first  in
spiritual  fellowship,  and  then  in  social  relations  (ver.  5).  There  is  a  loosening  of  the
most  sacred  family  bonds.  Depravity  and  degradation  become  deeper  and  darker
(vers.  3,  4).  The  little  remnant  of  God's  servants  are  increasingly  depressed  and  dis-
couraged :  "  Woe  is  me ! "  (cf.  Ps.  cxx.  5 ;  Isa.  vi.  5).  This  results  from  constant
contact  with  sin  and  from  the  heart-sickness  which  it  causes;  "great  heaviness  and
continual  sorrow  in  my  heart "  (Rom.  ix.  2).  Thus  we  leam :  1.  The  greatest  calamity
to  a  nation  is  not  war,  pestilence,  or  famine,  but  the  withholding  of  the  Spirit  of  grace
to  convert  the  hearts  of  men,  and  consequently  the  dying  out  of  the  righteous.  The
famine  of  bread  is  bad ;  the  famine  "  of  hearing  the  words  of  the  Lord  "  is  worse.  But
worst  of  all  is  the  dearth  of  living  witnesses  for  God  in  the  land.  2.  The  winning  of  souls
to  God  is  the  greatest  wisdom  and  the  most  enlightened  patriotism.  3.  The  welfare  of
a  nation  is  bound  up  with  the  living  God,  the  true  Church,  and  believing  prayer. — ^E.  S.  P.

Ver.  3. — JEarnest  sinners.  A  contrast  is  suggested  between  various  grades  of  evil-
doing.  Some  are  not  so  much  active  as  passive  in  sin.  They  drift ;  they  are  led ;
when  sinners  entice  them  they  "  consent,"  perhaps  reluctantly  at  first.  For  want  of
resisting  power  they  are  found  walking  "  in  the  counsel  of  the  ungodly,"  Ere  long
they  bestir  themselves  to  gratify  some  sinful  desire.  At  first  they  are  half-hearted  in
the  service  of  sin,  for  memory  and  conscience  still  restrain  them.  "  Their  heart  is
divided,"  and  it  is  only  one  hand  they  stretch  out  to  grasp  the  forbidden  fruit.  Their
other  hand  has  still  hold  on  the  book  of  the  Law  of  their  God  which  they  learned  at
their  mother's  knee.  They  soon  find  that  they  cannot  serve  two  masters.  The  book
of  God  is  dropped ;  the  hand  that  held  it,  released  from  the  mysterious  magnetic  power
which  the  Bible  exerts  on  those  that  study  it,  is  stretched  out  to  co-operate  with  its
fellow  in  deeds  of  sin.  Practice  makes  perfect ;  the  appetite  grows  by  what  it  feeds
upon ;  and  soon  the  transgressor,  who  not  so  long  ago  blushed  even  at  the  enticements
to  sin  that  were  addressed  to  him,  now  is  foiemost  among  those  who  "  do  evil  with
both  hands  earnestly."     In  these  earnest  sinners  we  note  the  following  points.     1,  Unity


118  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  [oh.  to.  1— 2a

of  purpose.  They  mb  men  of  one  idea— how  to  please  themselves.  As  they  have
abandoned  all  thought  of  seeking  their  pleasure  in  doing  the  will  of  God,  and  doing
"  good  unto  all  men,"  they  concentrate  their  energies,  "  both  hands,"  on  gratifying
every  desire  whatever  the  cost  may  be.  2.  Perversion  of  conscience.  We  are  reminded
of  this  by  Jerome's  rendering,' "  They  call  the  evil  of  their  hands  good."  They  speak
of  the  evil  done  as  "  well  done."  They  could  hardly  be  so  earnest  in  sin  unless  they
had  in  some  way  perverted  conscience.  Some  of  the  forms  of  iniquity  disclosed  in
vers.  3—6  imply  this.  And  certainly  this  is  one  of  the  most  fatal  results  of  sinning.
Acts  of  sin  form  habits  of  sinning  which  react  on  the  judgment  and  pervert  it  till  the
doom  is  incurred, "  Woe  unto  them  that  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil  1  etc.  (Isa.  v.  20).
3.  A  conspiracy  of  men  t^  influence.  We  expect  a  certain  amount  of  crime  and  moral
obliquity  in  what  has  been  called  the  residuum  of  society ;  but  profligacy  in  high
places  is  a  scandal  and  "a  reproach  to  any  people."  See  Jeremiah^  experience
(v.  1 — 5).  Wherever  the  infection  began,  it  has  spread  now  to  the  court  and  the
judgment-ball :  "  Death  is  entered  into  our  palaces."  There  is  such  a  dearth  of  good
men  (vers.  1,  2)  that  the  restraint  of  their  protests,  or  even  of  the  silent  testimony  of
their  presence,  is  awanting.  The  princes  expect  bribes,  or  "  black  mail."  The  judges
judge  for  reward.  The  testimony  of  contemporaneous  and  later  prophets  on  this  point  is
very  strong  (Isa.  i.  23 ;  Ezek.  xxii.  27 ;  Hos.  iv.  18 ;  Amos  v.  12).  And  they  veil  these
crimes  under  milder  names.  The  prince  demands,  but  calls  it  "  asking."  The  judge's
tribe  is  called  a  reward  for  service  rendered.  The  great  man  hesitates  not  to  "  utter
his  mischievous  desire"  in  the  presence  of  meaner  men,  who,  he  knows,  will  be  ready
enough  to  carry  it  ont,  if  they  can  thus  curry  favour  with  him  or  earn  money,  though
it  be  the  price  of  blood;  "thus  they  weave  it  together  "(Revised  Version).  lUustrateby
the  conspiracy  of  Ahab,  Jezebel,  and  the  elders  and  nobles  in  the  robbery  and  murder
of  Naboth.  4.  We  see  this  infection  extending  to  the  most  taered  scenes  of  family  life.
What  a  terrible  picture  is  suggested  by  vers.  6,  6 !  The  great  men  who  have  conspired
in  crime  carry  the  contagion  home  with  them.  They  cannot  leave  their  sin  on  the
threshold,  like  an  infected  garment.  Their  children  catch  the  plague.  Even  a  wife  is
not  above  suspicion.  Thus  curses  come  home  to  roost.  The  sins  of  the  fathers  are  visited
upon  the  children.  Families  are  demoralized.  "  The  end  of  those  things  is  death."
Learn :  1.  Hamestness  is  not  in  itself  an  excellent  thing.  The  devil  is  terribly  in
earnest, "  going  about  as  a  roaring  lion,"  etc.  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  False  teachers  are  sometimes
more  earnest  than  the  true.  "  They  zealously  seek  you  in  no  good  way  "  (Gal.  iv.  17).
Earnestness  may  be  as  glowing  as  a  fire,  and  as  destructive.  2.  Earnest  tinners  sho\ild
Je  a  motive  and  stimulus  to  the  servants  of  Christ.  If  they  are  so  eager  in  the  work  of
destruction,  what  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  the  work  of  salvation  ?  Yet  some
move  neither  hand,  but  stand  all  the  day  idle.  Others  are  half-hearted,  and  therefore
ply  their  work  with  but  one  hand,  not  devoting  all  their  faculties  to  him  whom  they  own
as  both  Redeemer  and  Lord.  Illustrate  from  King  Joash'i  interview  with  Elisha  (2  Eingi
xiii.  14 — 19).  Loyalty  to  our  Saviour-King  demands  concentration  of  energy  and
enthusiasm  of  devotion,  that  we  may  do  good  "  with  both  hands  earnestly." — ^E.  S.  P.

Ver.  7. — A  soul  shut  up  to  God.  The  word  "  therefore,"  or  the  term  in  the  Revised
Version,  "  but  as  for  me,  marks  the  transition  from  a  terrible  necessity  to  a  priceless
privilege.  It  was  a  time  when  it  was  needful  to  be  suspicious  of  those  who  ought  to
have  been  worthy  of  unlimited  confidence.  Neither  a  companion  nor  a  familiar  friend,
nor  even  a  child  or  a  wife,  could  be  trusted  (vers.  6, 6).  Such  had  been  the  experience
of  many  in  the  past.  Samsou  had  been  betrayed  by  his  tribesmen,  his  friend,  his
father-in-law  (Judg.  xiv.  20),  and  her  that  "  lay  in  his  bosom."  David  had  found  his
confidence  betrayed  by  the  men  of  Judah  (1  Sam.  xiiii.  12, 19),  by  Joab  (2  Sam.  iii.
22 — 39),  by  Ahithophel,  and  by  Absalom.  As  it  was  in  the  days  of  Micah,  so  would  it
be  in  the  ^ys  of  Jesus  Christ,  when  many  of  his  disciples  would  go  back  and  walk  no
more  with  him,  and  when  an  apostle  would  betray  him.  No  wonder  that  some  of  his
servants  are  called  to  a  similar  experience  (Matt.  x.  24, 34 — 36).  The  prospect  manvKird
is  thus  dark  and  depressing  in  the  extreme.  Note  what  a  disintegrating  and  desiructire
force  sin  is.  Tt  not  only  separates  between  man  and  God  (Isa.  lix.  2),  but  has  a  tendency
to  alienate  friends,  to  break  up  families,  to  destroy  human  confidences,  and  gender  a
pessimism  which  finds  expression  in  the  passionate,  though  not  deliberate,  verdict  of


OH.  TO.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  119

the  psalmist,  "  All  men  are  liars."  If  we  cannot  repose  confidence  in  others,  can  we
trust  in  ourselves  ?  Our  consciousness  of  sin  and  utter  failure  forbids  this  (vers.  8,  9 ;
Jer.  XTiL  9).  Thus  we  are  utterly  shut  up  to  God.  A  military  man,  sufferiag  from
some  obscure  disease  of  the  mind,  was  in  the  habit  of  promenading  in  a  certain  track
«n  the  ramparts,  after  sunset.  When  he  walked  eastward,  and  had  nothing  but  the
dark  sky  to  look  on,  extreme  dejection  oppressed  his  clouded  mind.  But  no  sooner
did  he  turn  towards  the  west,  where  his  eyes  caught  the  brightness  left  by  the  sun
that  had  set,  than  hope  and  peace  revived  in  his  heart.  There  are  times  when,  if  we
look  anywhere  but  towards  God,  our  Sun,  we  may  feel  ready  to  despond  or  despair.
Then  we  know  what  it  is  to  be  shut  up  to  God.  "  But  as  for  me,  I  will  look  unto  the
Lord."  That  look  implies  hope :  "  I  will  wait ; "  and  faith :  "  My  God  will  hear  me."
When  we  thus  look,  wait,  trust,  our  thoughts  may  express  themselves  in  the  following
thoughts  about  God,  and  our  "  meditation  of  him  shall  be  sweet."

I.  How  MDOH  WB  HAVE  IN  GoD.  1.  Sts  tMtne,  Jehovah,  describes  his  natwr*.  He
is  the  eternal,  unchangeable,  faithful,  covenant-keeping  God.  He  revealed  himself  by
that  new  name  when  he  came  as  the  Bedeemer  of  his  distressed  people.  And  this
JehoviJi  is  "  my  God."  Martin  Luther  remarks,  "  There  is  a  great  deal  of  divinity  in
the  pronouns,"  The  theology  taught  in  the  term  "  my  God  "  is  worth  more  than  all
the  lectures  ever  given  on  "  the  attributes."  2.  The  figures  employed  for  Ood  remind
us  of  the  treaswr*  we  have  in  him.  Look,  for  example,  at  a  single  group  of  figures  in
the  sixty-second  psalm.  There  God  is  described  as  "  my  Bock,"  on  which  I  can  safely
rest  and  securely  build;  as  "my  high  Tower"  (Bevised  Version); "  my  strong  Habitation,
whereunto  I  may  continually  resort "  (Ps.  Ixxi.  3);  and  therefore  as  "  my  Eef  iige,"  where  I
may  be  safe  from  the  sword  of  the  avenger  of  blood,  or  from  any  other  fue.  The  city
of  Metz  prided  itself  in  the  name  "  La  Pucelle,"  the  virgin-fortress ;  but  in  October,
1870,  its  fair  fame  was  tarnished  by  its  fall,  and  its  inhabitants  were  at  the  mercy  of
their  foes.  But  no  such  disaster  can  ever  overtake  those  who  can  say  of  the  Lord,
"  He  is  my  Eefuge  and  my  Portress,  my  God ;  in  him  will  I  trust."

IL  How  M0OH  WE  MAT  EXPECT  FROM  GoD.  "  My  soul.  Wait  thou  only  upon  God ;
for  my  expectation  is  from  him."  Among  the  blessings  we  may  expect  are  the  two
crowning  mercies  which  the  prophet  claims  by  faith.  1.  Answers  to  prayer ;  which
will  be  definite,  appropriate,  decisive  ("  My  God  will  hear  me  "),  such  as  God's  servants
of  old  received ;  e.g.  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii.),  Moses  (Numb,  xiv,  13 — ^20),  Asa  (2  Chron.  xiv.
11,  12),  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xx.).  These  prayers  will  bring :  2.  Deliverance ;  for
"  my  God  "  is  "  the  God  of  my  salvation."  Thus  in  the  midst  of  dangers  from  without
or  from  within  we  can  -say,  with  the  psalmist, "  I  shall  not  be  greatly  moved  "  (Ps.  Ixii.
2).  Like  the  rocking-stones  on  the  Cornish  coast,  we  may  at  times  be  slightly  shaken
but  not  "  greatly  moved ; "  moved,  but  not  removed.  Like  the  magnet,  we  may  oscillate
for  a  time,  and  be  slightly  affected  by  changing  conditions,  but  never  greatly  moved
from  our  purpose  of  witnessing  faithfully  for  God  and  his  truth.  Yet  our  confidence
in  regard  to  our  stability  is  not  in  ourselves,  but  in  our  God,  in  "  the  love  of  God  which
is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,"

IIL   How  WORTHY  HK  18  OF  UNLIMITED  CONFIDENCE.      "  I  will  look  ;  "  "  I  Will  Wait ;  "

"  My  soul,  wMt  thou  only  upon  God ; "  "  Trust  in  him  at  all  times."  "  It  is  com-
paratively easy,"  says  Dr.  Edward  Payson,  "to  wait  upon  God,  but  to  wait  upon  him

only to  feel,  so  far  as  our  strength,  happiness,  and  usefulness  are  concerned,  as  if  all

creatures  and  second  causes  were  annihilated,  and  we  were  alone  in  the  umverse  with
Ood,  is,  I  suspect,  a  difficult  and  rare  attainment."  This  is  the  unlimited  confidence
to  which  we  aspire.  Then  we  may  not  only  waii  upon  God,  but  wait /or  God,  leaving
the  time  and  method  of  our  deliverance  to  him  (Ps.  xxxvii.  7 — 9  ;  cxxx.  5,  6),  Then
we  shall  not  only  be  shut  up  to  God,  but  shut  in  with  God  (Ps.  xci.  1).  With  God  on
our  side  we  are  in  the  majority.  "How  many  do  you  count  me  for?"  asked  an
ancient  commander  of  an  ofiicer  who  was  alarmed  at  the  disparity  of  the  forces  they
could  amy  against  the  foe.    "  I  will  fear  no  evil, /or  thou  art  with  me."

"Be  thou  my  God,  and  the  whole  world  is  mine ;
Whilst  thou  art  Sovereign,  Fm  secnie ;
I  shall  be  rich  till  thou  ait  poor;
For  all  I  fear  and  all  I  wish,  heaven.
Garth,  and  hell  are  thine."

K.S.P.


Vers.  8,  9. — Ood  the  Vindicator  of  the  penitent.  The  troths  here  taaght  might  be
applied  to  the  people  of  Israel,  with  whom  the  prophet  identifies  himself,  when
humbled  before  exulting  foes  like  the  Edomites  (Obad,  8 — 15)  or  their  Chaldean  con-
querors. Light  came  to  them  in  Babylon,  through  the  witness  borne  by  Daniel  and
his  friends,  the  ministry  of  Ezekiel,  the  favour  of  Gyrus,  and  above  all  by  their
deliTerance  from  the  curse  of  idolatry  before  their  restoration  to  their  land.  They  may
be  applied  also  to  a  Church  in  a  depressed  or  fallen  state.  A  godly  remnant  could  yet
look  forward  to  deliverance  and  revival.  E.g.  Sardis  (Rev.  iii.  1 — 5).  We  may  also
use  the  words  as  describing  the  experience  of  a  sinner  humbled  before  God  and  man.
Notice —

I.  His  present  state.  1.  Se  has  fallen.  Then  he  had  stood  before.  He  hag
been  no  hypocrite,  but  a  pilgrim  on  the  highway  from  the  City  of  Destruction  to  the
Celestial  City.  Like  Christian  in  Banyan's  immortal  allegory,  he  has  been  confronted
by  ApoUyon.  In  the  struggle  he  has  been  wounded  in  the  head,  the  hand,  and  the
foot.  "  Then  Apollyoii,  espying  his  opportunity,  began  to  gather  up  close  to  Christian,
and,  wrestling  with  him,  gave  him  a  dreadful  fall ;  and  with  that  Christian's  sword  flew
out  of  his  hand."  Prostrate  and  powerless,  he  seems  "drawn  unto  death  and  ready  to
be  slain."  'A.  He  sits  in  darkness.  A  hardened  sinner  in  such  a  crisis  may  have  a
light,  such  as  it  is  ("  Walk  in  the  light  of  your  fire,  and  in  the  sparks  that  ye  have
kindled,"  Isa.  1.  11).  But  the  fallen  Christian  is  heard  bemoaning  himself  (Job  xxiz.
2,  3).  The  sun,  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  is  gone.  It  is  a  night  of  mist.  Not
even  a  star  of  promise  can  be  seen  except  when  the  mist  is  for  a  moment  or  two
dispersed  before  a  rising  breath  of  the  Divine  Comforter,  who,  though  grieved,  will  not
depart.  3.  He  is  exposed  to  the  indignation  of  the  Lord.  He  cannot  attribute  his
darkness  to  sickness  or  nervous  depression.  In  the  gloom  caused  by  conscience  he
sees  the  shadow  caused  by  the  righteous  anger  of  God  (Isa.  lix.  1,  2).  "  Therefore  we
wait  for  light,  but  behold  obscurity ;  for  brightness,  but  we  walk  in  darkness."  "  For
our  transgressions  are  multiplied,"  etc.  (vers.  9,  12).  4.  He  has  to  hear  the  scorn  of
men.  His  enemies  rejoice.  This  makes  the  cup  of  bitterness  overflow.  The  self-
righteous  formalist  thanks  God  he  is  not  as  other  men,  or  even  as  this  Christian.  The
profiigate  man  finds  one  more  excuse  for  asserting  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  real
religion  (cf.  Ps.  xxxv.  15,  16,  21,  25).  We  can  imagine  the  morbid  curiosity  in  the
streets  of  Jerusalem,  when  it  began  to  be  whispered  that  a  dark  deed  had  been  com-
mitted in  the  palace  of  King  David,  and  that  Uriah's  death  had  been  procured  by  foul
means.  Would  not  the  men  of  Belial  mock  at  the  royal  psalmist — seducer — murderer
(2  Sam.  xii.  14)  ?  How  the  soldiers  and  the  servants  round  the  fire  within  the  judgment-
hall  must  have  chuckled  while  Peter  was  weeping  without  I  The  world  may  hold  its
most  riotous  carnival,  not  when  martyrs  are  burning  at  the  stake,  or  their  dead  bodies
are  lying  in  the  street  of  Sodom,  but  when  the  Saviour  is  wounded  in  the  house  of  his
friends,  and  the  Church  is  mourning  over  the  lust  reputations  of  its  fallen  members
(Luke  xvii.  1).

II.  The  gkounds  or  his  confidence  fob  the  future.  The  fallen  Christian  looks
forward  to  rising  again.  He  anticipates  a  new  day  when  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  shall
again  rise  on  him.  He  speaks  boldly  (ver.  8).  This  is  either  the  grossest  presumption
or  the  noblest  faith.  It  is  like  Samson's  boast,  "  I  will  go  out  as  at  other  times;"  or
like  David's  trustful  anticipation,  "Then  will  I  teach  transgressors  thy  ways,"  etc.
That  these  words  are  no  vain  vaunting  we  learn  from  the  grounds  of  his  confidence.

1.  He  resolves  quietly  to  endure  Ood's  chastening  strokes.  Such  submission  is  one
sign  of  genuine  repentance.  Illust. :  The  Jews  in  captivity  (Lev.  xxvi.  40 — 42,
"and  they  then  accept  the  punishment  of  their  inquity ;  then  will  I  remember  my
covenant," etc.);  Eli  (1  Sam.  iii.  18) ;  David,  all  through  his  long  chastisement  (see  e.g.
2  Sam.  xii.  20 ;  xv.  25,  26 ;  xvi.  11 ;  cf.  Job  xxxiv.  31 ;  Lam.  iii.  39 ;  Heb.  xii.  5—7).

2.  He  puts  his  trust  entirely  in  Ood.  He  has  just  before  (ver.  7)  spoken  of  himself  as
shut  up  to  God.  Again  he  returns  to  him  and  repeatedly  expresses  his  faith,  "  The
Lord  shall  be  a  Light  unto  me :  he  shall  plead  my  cause :  he  will  bring  me  forth  to  the
light."  His  godly  sorrow  and  cheerful  submission  are  signs  that  there  is  a  mystic
film,  a  spiritual  cord  that  binds  him,  even  in  his  fallen  state,  to  his  Father-God.
And  he  has  promises  to  plead  (Ps.  xxxvii.  24 ;   Prov.  xxiv.  1^.    Ilhist. :  Jonah  (iL

3.  4),  St.  Paul  (Rom.  vii,  24,  25).     Grievoun  bb  are  the  sing  of  God's  adopted  children,


OH.  vn.  1-20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MICAH.  121

they  are  provided  for ;  "  My  little  children,  these  things  write  I  unto  yon,  that  ye  sin
not.  And  if  any  man  sin" — ^if  any  one  of  you  httle  children  sin,  grievous  and
aggravated  as  your  sin  may  be — "  we  Iiave  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ
the  righteous :  and  he  is  the  Propitiation  /or  owr  sins "  (1  John  ii.  1,  2).  God
vindicates  such  a  penitent.  He  restores  his  soul.  He  renews  his  peace.  He  re-estab-
lishes his  tarnished  reputation.  He  puts  a  new  song  in  his  mouth  (Fa.  xL  1 — 3 ;  Isa.
xii.  1,  2 ;  Ivii.  18,  19).— B.  8.  P.

Ver.  13. — "  Hie  fruit  of  their  doings."  This  expression  is  a  most  suggestive  one.  It
occurs  three  times  in  the  Prophet  Jeremiah.  In  Jer.  xvii.  10  Qod  declares,  as  one  of
the  signs  of  his  omniscient,  heart-searching  power,  that  he  can  not  only  recompense  each
individual  according  to  his  ways,  but "  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings,"  In  Jer.
xxi.  14  a  similar  declaration  is  addressed  to  the  royal  house  of  Bavid :  "  I  will  punish
you  according  to  the  fruit  of  your  doings."  And  in  Jer.  xxxii,  17 — 19  the  prophet
expresses  his  admiration  at  the  discriminating  omnipotence  of  Gkxi — "  great  in  counsel,
and  mighty  in  work  :  for  thine  eyes  are  open  upon  the  ways  of  the  sons  of  men :  to  give
unto  every  one  according  to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings."  Our
text  calls  for  exposition  and  admits  of  illustratum.

I.  Exposition.  An  act  is  one  thing ;  the  fruit  of  that  act  is  another  thing.  By
fruit  we  understand  that  which  is  the  natural  result  of  the  acts  we  perform.  Those
natural  results  under  the  reign  of  moral  law  we  might  foresee.  Acts,  like  trees,  bring
forth  fruit  "  after  their  kind."  For  such  fruit  we  are  held  responsible.  Responsi-
bility varies  according  to  knowledge  acquired  or  attainable.  A  child's  falsehood,
though  fraught  with  lifelong  disasters,  is  less  criminal  than  the  less  injurious  lie  of  an
adult.  But  we  cannot  disconnect  our  acts  and  their  fridt.  We  cannot  kill  them  in
the  seed,  or  nip  them  in  the  bud,  or  blight  them  in  the  flower ;  they  will  bear  fiuit
of  some  kind.  We  are  not  held  responsible  for  what  we  may  call  the  accidental
issues  of  our  acts.  Our  good  may  be  evil  spoken  of.  The  most  unjustifiable  inferences
may  be  drawn  from  our  words  or  deeds.  Our  Lord's  teaching  has  been  the  occasion  of
discord  in  families  and  strife  in  states  (Matt.  x.  34 — 36).  St.  Paul's  doctrine  was  per-
verted (Bom.  iii.  8).  A  clear  judgment  is  needed  to  discern  what  will  be  the  natural
effect  of  our  conduct.  We  may  not,  dare  not,  leave  our  influence  on  others  out  of  the
account.  We  must  use  the  enlightening  Word,  and  pray  for  the  aid  of  the  illuminating
Spirit,  that  we  may  acquire  an  enlightened  conscience.  And  then  we  must  seek  so  to
live  that  the  fruit  of  out  doings  will  bring  honour  to  God  and  be  for  our  own  "  praise
and  honour  and  glory  at  the  appearing  of  Jesus  Christ."

II.  Illustration.  Our  first  class  of  illustrations  will  be  those  in  which  the  fruit
of  our  doings,  like  the  fruit  of  the  tree  in  the  garden,  is  "  good  "  and  "  pleasant  to  the
eyes,"  and  "  to  be  desired  "  as  food  for  the  soul  through  all  eternity.  1.  Ihe  life  and
work  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  "good  Master"  "went  about  doing  good."  He  did  the
will  of  him  that  sent  him,  and  in  doing  it  "  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the
death  of  the  cross."  What  is  the  fruit  of  these  doings  ?  .  Eternity  alone  can  reveal.
His  reward  will  be  according  to  it — according  to  the  glory  brought  to  God  and  the
blessedness  to  men  (Isa.  liii.  11, 12).  2.  The  characters  and  labours  of  devoted  servants
of  Christ.  The  life  and  work  of  Christ  is  a  pattern  and  an  encouragement  to  all  his
followers  (Luke  vi.  40).  Sow  now  the  seed  of  Christian  living  and  doing.  It  may
seem  to  be  lost,  like  the  seed  cast  on  the  surface  of  flooded  lands,  but  you  shall  find  it
after  many  days.  You  may  die  without  seeing  the  fruitage  in  this  life ;  you  may  rest
bom  your  labours,  but  your  works  will  follow  you  (Gal.  vi.  7 — 9).  Incidents  confirm-
ing this  frequently  come  to  light.  At  a  Unitarian  anniversary  in  New  England  a  few
years  ago,  one  of  the  ministers,  speaking  of  the  small  results  of  his  work,  added,  "  It
must  be  remembered  where  my  field  is.  The  Connecticut  valley  is  the  home  of
Jonathan  Edwards,  and  though  he  has  been  dead  a  century,  he  is  a  great  name  and  a
power  for  orthodoxy  through  all  that  country  to-day."  A  devoted  pastor.  Rev.  Thomas
Hall,  laboured  for  twenty-seven  years  at  Heckmondwike,  Yorkshire,  amid  great  dis-
couragement because  he  saw  so  little  fruit  from  his  labours.  His  successor  could  report
that  for  a  long  time  after  his  death  most  of  those  who  were  added  to  the  fellowship  of
the  Church  acknowledged  their  indebtedness  to  their  deceased  pastor  for  their  first
religious  impressions  or  some  other  snecial  spiritual  help.    Take  courage,  fellow-


labourers.  If  you  seem  to  have  laboured  in  vain,  you  can  add,  "  My  judgment  it  with
the  Lord,  and  my  work  with  my  God"  (Isa.  xlix.  i).  He  will  recompense  you  accord-
ing to  the  natural  results  of  your  life's  work,  "  the  fruit  of  your  doings  "  (Isa.  ilL  10).
Yet  this  fruit  must  vary  with  the  quality  of  our  work  (see  this  lesson  taught  in  1  Cor.
iii.  8 — 15).  But  the  truth  of  our  text  has  its  shady  as  well  as  its  sunny  side.  3.
A  nation  will  he  recompensed  according  to  ii»  national  tin*  and  the  fruit  of  them.
Illust. :  Great  Britain  and  the  opium  traffic.  Even  national  repantance  and  refonr.»-
tioQ  may  not  avert  some  of  the  disastrous  consequences  of  past  transgressions.  Colonial
slavery  has  left  some  of  its  foul  stains  on  the  present  generation.  4.  Sinners  must
aicait  "  the  harvest "  which  is"  the  end  of  the  world  "  hefore  they  can  receive  the  Jvst
recompense  of  their  deeds.  William  Cowper,  in  a  letter  to  John  Newton,  alluding  to
the  translation  of  Homer  on  which  he  was  engaged,  says  very  truly,  "  An  author  had
need  narrowly  to  watch  his  pen,  lest  •  line  should  escape  it  which  by  possibility  may
do  mischief  when  he  has  been  long  dead  and  buried.  What  we  have  done  when  we
have  written  a  book  will  never  be  known  till  the  day  of  judgment ;  then  the  account
will  be  liquidated,  and  all  the  good  that  it  has  occasioned  will  witness  either  for  or
against  ua."  Homer  himself  supplies  an  illustration  of  this.  We  are  told  it  was  the
'  Iliad '  that  did  much  to  mould  the  character  of  Alexander  of  Macedon.  The  life  of
Alexander  was  the  inspiration  of  two  other  notorious  warriors — Julius  Cesar  and
Charles  XII.  of  Sweden.  In  contrast  to  the  posthumous  influence  of  Jonathan  Edwards,
there  stands  on  record  the  baneful  effect  on  a  village  in  Berkshire  of  the  infidel,  wit,
and  libertine.  Lord  Bolingbroke.  He  died  in  1751 ;  but  he  had  so  poisoned  the  minds
of  the  poor  villagers  against  religion,  that  three  quarters  of  a  century  afterwards  "  the
fruit  of  his  doings  "  was  most  distinctly  to  be  traced.  Nor  need  our  acts  be  flagrantly
evil  to  bring  forth  bitter  fruit.  The  neglect  of  duty  tends  to  make  others  neglect  it,
and  thus  to  leave  that  duty  altogether  undone.  The  neglect  of  "  assembling  ourselves
together"  in  public  worship  tends  to  the  dissolution  of  such  assemblies  and  the
abandonment  of  such  worship.  The  fruit  of  secret  discipleship  would  be  the  dying  out
of  Christian  Churches.  What  can  be  the  fruit  of  sin  but  sorrow,  suffering,  loss  ?  "  The
harvest  shall  be  a  heap  in  the  day  of  grief  and  of  desperate  sorrow  "  (Isa.  xvii.  11).
Even  though  sin  be  forgiven  through  repentance  and  faith,  the  consequences  of  misused
or  wasted  years  will  remain.  And  as  those  consequences,  ever  widening,  cannot  be
summed  up  till  the  great  day  of  God,  "we  must  all  be  made  manifest  before  the
judgment-seat  of  Christ ;  that  each  one  may  receive  the  things  done  in  the  tody,  accoid-
to  what  he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad."  Let  us  therefore  "  make  it  our
aim  ,  .  -  to  be  well-pleasing  unto  him  "  (2  Cor.  v.  9,  10).— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  18,  19. — Matchless  mercy.  "The  Lord  thy  God  turned  the  curse  into  a
blessing  unto  thee,  because  the  Lord  thy  Gcd  loved  thee.''  These  words  of  Moses
receive  a  striking  illustration  in  the  fact  that  every  one  of  the  "minor"  prophets  who
threatens  judgments  against  Israel  ends  by  promises  of  deliverance  which  anticipate
the  days  of  the  Messiah.  In  none  is  this  more  strikingly  seen  than  in  Micah.  In  this
chapter  the  prophet,  who  has  been  lamenting  the  universal  corruption  of  the  people
(vers.  1 — 6),  finds  comfort  in  God  alone,  to  whom  he  looks  with  submission  and  hope,
and  obtains  an  assurance  of  renewed  Divine  favour  when  the  chastisement  is  past
(vers.  7 — 13).  This  encourages  him  to  pray  (ver.  14).  His  prayer  is  answered  by  a
promise  of  deliverance  such  as  God  accomplished  for  his  people  in  Egypt  (vers.  15 — 17).
Upon  this  he  breaks  forth  in  adoration  of  God's  matchless  mercy,  and  anticipates  the
fulfilment  of  promises  which  would  only  be  realized  by  the  coming  of  the  long  looked-
for  Deliverer  (vers.  18 — 20 ;  and  cf.  Luke  1.  70 — 75).  This  matchless  mercy  is  shown
both  in  God's  essential  character  and  in  his  treatment  of  sinners.  Each  clause  suggests
some  fresh  thought  on  this  attractive  subject.

I.  "Who  18  A  God  like  unto  thek?"  The  reference  to  the  Exodus  (ver.  15)
reminds  us  of  Moses'  words  (Exod.  xv.  11).  If  there  is  none  like  God,  "  glorious  in
holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing  wonders,"  what  wonder  can  be  so  great  as  deliverance
from  sin  ?  If  even  imgodly  men  are  charmed  into  adoration  for  a  brief  period  at  some
deliverance  from  danger,  how  profoundly  and  unceasingly  should  we  adore  and  glorify
God  for  salvation  from  sin,  which  is  a  more  dreadful  evil  than  cholera,  lunacy,  or  death  I
Notice  how  a  question  like  this  is  often  asked  or  answered ;  e.g.  in  regard  to  Gh>d'i


OH.  TH.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  128

power  (Deut.  xxxui.  26\  his  faithfulness  (1  Kings  viii,  23),  his  delhrerence  of  the
oppressed  (Ps.  xzxt.  10),  his  condescension  to  the  lowly  (P».  cxiii.  6,  6V  In  a  word,
in  his  character  and  in  all  his  dealings  he  stands  alone  (Fs.  Ixzxiz.  6 — 8).

IL  "That  pabdoneth  iniquity."  This  is  as  essential  a  part  of  God's  character  as
is  maternal  love  in  a  mother's  heart.  When  Moses  said  to  God,  "  I  beseech  thee,  show
me  thy  glory,"  the  answer  was,  "  I  will  make  all  my  goodness  pass  before  thee,  and  I
will  proclaim  the  Name  of  the  Lord  before  thee  "  (Exod.  xxxiii.  18,  19).  And  when
the  sublime  proclamation  was  made,  one  of  the  essential  elements  of  Jehovah's  character,
as  revealed  in  his  Name,  was  "  forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression  and  sin "  (Exod.
xxxiv.  5 — 7).  God  loves  to  be  reminded  of  his  Name,  and  to  see  that  it  is  that  on
which  our  hopes  of  pardon  rest ;  e.g.  Numb.  xiv.  17 — 20 ;  Ps.  iiv.  11 ;  Ixxxvi.  6, 15  ;
cxxx.  4 ;  Dan.  ix.  9.

III.  "And  passbth  by  thk  tbansobgbsion  of  the  bemnant  of  his  hebitaoe."
This  denotes  a  continual  action  on  the  part  of  God.  Isolated  acts  of  pardon  would  not
meet  the  case.  He  comes  with  bis  eyes  as  a  flame  of  fire,  and  yet  he  does  not  "  mark
iniquities  "  (Ps.  cxxx.  3 ;  and  of.  Numb,  xxiii.  21).    What  he  commends  he  practises

(Frov.  xix.  11).  Yet  not  because  of  any  laxity  in  his  relations  to  sin,  but  because  of
bis  righteous  grace.  Such  declarations  of  Divine  mercy  as  the  Old  Testament  is  foil
of  can  only  be  perfectly  understood  when  read  in  the  light  of  the  New  Testament,  and
of  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ,  "  for  the  redemption  of  the  transgressions  that  were
imder  the  first  covenant ; "  "  Whom  God  set  forth  to  be  a  Propitiation,  through  &ith,  by
his  blood,  to  show  his  righteousness,  because  of  the  pasting  over  of  the  sins  done  afore-
time, in  the  forbearance  of  God  "  (Bom.  iiL  26 ;  Heb.  ix.  16).

IV.  "  He  bxtaiiteth  kot  his  anoeb  fob  eveb,  because  he  dkuohteth  nt
v EBOY."  In  the  midst  of  words  of  grace  we  have  a  distinct  recognition  of  anger  as  one
of  God's  perfections.  So  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  7,  "  that  will  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty."
If  he  were  not  angry  with  sinners  he  would  be  less  perfect.  This  truth  needs  to  be
emphasized  in  the  present  days  of  superficial  views  of  sin.  But  if  he  were  to  retain  hi*
anger  for  ever,  it  would  be  fatal  (Isa.  Ivii.  16).    So  "he  will  not  always  chide,"  etc  j_

he  "  will  not  cast  off  for  ever  ;  but  though  he  cause  grief,  yet  will  he  have  compassion
according  to  the  multitude  of  his  mercies"  (Ps.  ciii.  9 ;  Lam.  iii.  31,  32).  And  this
"  because  he  delighteth  in  mercy."  In  its  literal  sense  "  he  is  bent  on  mercy."  Proofs
of  this  crowd  on  us  from  every  side.    We  see  it  in  the  history  of  Israel  (Neh.  ix,  16 — 19,

26 31 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.),  in  the  cross  of  Christ  (1  John  iv.  10),  in  the  long  lives  of  many

of  the  most  impenitent  (Rom.  ii.  4),  and  in  the  experience  of  those  who  are  now
rejoicing  in  salvation  (Eph.  ii.  4—7 ;  Titus  iiL  4 — 7).  It  is  therefore  a  joy  to  God  to
forgive  and  save.  The  parables  of  Luke  xv.  1 — 10  remind  us  of  this.  The  pearl  of
parables  that  follows  might  be  called,  not "  The  prodigal  son," but  "The  long-suffering
and  rejoicing  father."

V.  "  He  will  TUBS  again,  he  will  bats  oohfassion  upon  us."  In  our  idiom
"  He  will  again  have  compassion  on  us."  When  Otoi  sent  Jesus  Christ  "  preaching
peace  "  to  Israel,  it  was  no  new  thing.  It  was  the  latest  and  sublimest  illustration  of  a
Divine  habit  (Heb.  1. 1).  In  the  wilderness-days, "  he,  being  full  of  compassion,  forgave
their  iniquiiy,  and  destroyed  them  not :  yea,  many  a  time  turned  he  his  anger  away,
and  did  not  stir  up  all  his  wrath  "  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  38).  Thus  God  treated  them  all
through  their  history.  See  the  summary  of  the  later  history  of  Judah  in  2  Ohron.
xxxvL  14^-16,  "...  till  there  was  no  remedy,"  etc  But  he  again  had  compassion ;
he  turned  again  their  captivity,  according  to  his  promises  by  Moses  (Dent.  xxx.  1—6).
And  though  they  crucified  the  Christ,  and  were  "  broken  off,"  they  are  still  "  beloved
for  the  fathers'  sake"  God  will  again  have  compassion  on  them  (Zech.  xiL  10 — 14 ;
xiii.  1).  "  And  so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved.''  These  repeated  acts  of  the  mercy  in
which  God  delights  may  encourage  the  vilest  to  appeal  for  forgiveness,  "  according  unto
the  multitude  of  thy  tender  mercies  "  (Ps.  Ii.  1).

VI.  "  He  will  subdue  oub  iniquities."  He  will  tread  them  down,  trample  them
underfoot.  One  of  the  marked  peculiarities  of  the  Divine  forgiveness  is  the  result  on
the  sinner  himself.  No  one  pamons  with  such  a  good  effect  on  the  sinner  pardoned.
Some  are  disappointed  in  those  they  forgive.  Not  so  God.  Whenever  he  remits  sin
he  reforms  the  sinner.  His  salvation  being  from  the  love  and  the  power  as  well  as  the
punishment  of  sin,  a  sinner  cannot  grasp  the  pardon  and  neglect  the  purity.    Nor  does


he  desire  to.  The  most  sacred  motives  forbid.  The  promise  of  pardon  is  accompanied
with  the  assurance  of  the  purifying  Spirit  (Ezek.  zxxvi.  26 — 27 ;  Bom.  viii.  1,  2 ;
1  Cor.  vi.  11).  Sin  is  a  serpent  to  be  crushed  under  the  heel  (Rom.  xvi.  20).  It  is  a
foe  to  be  conquered,  and  who  shall  be  conquered  because  we  are  "  not  under  the  Law,
but  under  grace  "  (Bom.  vi.  14).  The  victory  is  God's,  though  the  blessedness  of  it  is
ours  (Ps.  xcviii.  1),  "  He  will  subdue  our  iniquities."

VII.  "Thou  wilt  oast  all  theib  sins  into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  This
indicates  the  completeness  of  the  Divine  salvation.,  Elsewhere  we  have  the  promise
(Ps.  ciii.  12).  Hezekiah  says,  "  Thou  hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  my  back,"  so  that
the  accuser  cannot  get  them  without  going  behind  the  very  throne  of  God ;  and  God
himself  will  never  turn  to  see  them.  Here  the  figure  is  still  more  striking;  sins  cast,
not  in  the  shallows,  subject  to  the  tidal  waves  which  might  throw  them  up  into  sight
again,  but  into  the  depths  of  the  sea  (cf.  Jer.  1.  20).  Other  figures  are  used  to  teach
the  same  truth — the  cloud  blotted  out,  never  to  be  seen  again  (Isa.  zliv.  22) ;  sin  for-
gotten, even  by  God  himself  (Isa,  zliii.  26).  Such  is  God's  matchless  mercy  in  pardon-
ing sin.  And  when  our  sins  are  finally  subdued  as  well  as  pardoned,  cast  into  the
depths  of  the  sea,  while  we  are  standing  on  the  eternal  shore,  justified,  sanctified,
glorified,  then  we  shall  sing  the  final  song, "  Thanks  be  to  God  who  giveth  us  the  victory
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  And  because  we  are  already  being  saved  by  a  God  of
such  matchless  mercy,  in  whom  we  have  placed  our  trust,  we  have  no  fear  m  to  the
issue  (Bom.  viiL  38,  39).

"  We  lift  OUT  hands  exulting
In  thine  Almighty  faTonr,
The  love  Divine,  which  made  ui  thine,.
Shall  keep  us  thine  for  ever."

E.8.  P.

Vers.  18, 19. — '*  A  pardoning  Qod."  In  the  days  of  Micah  the  social  and  religious
condition  of  Jerusalem  was  deplorable.  All  through  the  country  evils  prevailed,  but
they  were  worst  at  its  centre.  Instinctively  the  vicious  make  their  way  to  a  crowded
city.  If  vice  is  condemned  in  the  nation,  its  disgracefulness  is  less  conspicuous  in  a
crowd ;  and  if  vice  is  not  condemned,  the  city  affords  the  best  opportunities  for  the
gratification  of  unholy  desire.  It  still  needs  courage  and  wisdom  to  recognize  and
combat  evils  prevailing  in  great  cities,  and  God  still  requires  knights  of  the  cross
who  will  fight,  not  as  of  old  for  the  grave  of  Christ,  but  for  his  Church.  Micah  was
one  of  these.  The  prevalent  sins  of  the  prophet's  days  were  threatening  the  existence
of  society,  loosening  the  ties  which  gave  unity  to  the  nation,  and  dividing  into  factions
members  of  the  same  family.  The  wealthy  were  sucking  the  very  life-blood  of  the
poor,  and  the  judges  openly  asked  for  bribes,  without  the  smallest  sense  of  shame ;  so
that  the  prophets  were  not  only  the  teachers  of  truth,  but  also  the  tribunes  of  the
people.  Unbelief  in  God  lay  at  the  root  of  such  wrong-doing,  for  unless  rulers  recognize
responsibility  to  him,  one  of  the  greatest  safeguards  against  their  abuse  of  authority
is  destroyed.  Persuading  themselves  that  God  was  such  a  one  as  themselves,  idolatry
prevailed,  and  although  the  temple  still  stood  and  its  worship  was  as  gorgeous  as  ever,
unreality  anil  hypocrisy  rendered  such  religion  worse  than  useless.  A  few  voices  were
lifted  up  boldly  against  this  condition  of  things.  Isaiah  and  Micah  stood  side  by  side
in  their  protests,  and  did  much  to  stem  the  tide  of  iniquity.  With  all  their  vigorous
denunciation  of  sin,  however,  hope  was  constantly  held  out  to  the  sinner,  and  never
was  the  mercy  of  God  more  clearly  set  forth  than  in  the  words  of  our  text.  Seven
hundred  years  after  this  prophet's  death,  Wise  Men  from  the  East  came  to  Jerusalem
inquiring  for  him  who  was  born  to  be  the  King  of  the  Jews  and  the  Light  of  the
woild.  They  were  answered  in  the  words  of  Micah,  and  it  was  through  following  his
directions  that  they  saw  and  worshipped  the  infant  Jesus.  Even  in  our  day  we  may
say,  "He  being  dead  yet  speaketh."  While  the  splendid  orations  of  Cicero  and
Demosthenes  have  no  influence  over  modern  society,  and  the  speeches  recorded  by
'I'acitus  and  Thucydides  have  only  their  marvellous  literary  value,  the  words  of  this
ancient  prophet  meet  our  necessities,  give  us  guidance  and  comfort,  emboldening  ua  to
trust  in  the  mercy  of  •pardoning  God.  The  subject  of  Divine  pardon  luggested  her*
will  now  have  our  consideration.


OH.  vii.  1— m]  THE  BOOK  Off  MIOAH.  126

I.  The  FBEBoaATiVE  OF  PABDOH  IS  OLAiMED  BT  OoD  FOB  HIMSELF.  He  knew  the
needs  of  his  children,  and  therefore  proclaimed  his  pardoning  love  from  the  first.  Even
amid  the  terrors  of  Sinai  he  revealecl  himself  as  a  Qod  "pardoning  iniquity."  David
was  emholdened  to  come  into  his  presence,  after  the  commission  of  most  grievous
sins,  praying,  "  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  Lord,  according  to  thy  loviug-kindness,"  etc.
He  [lardons  of  his  own  free-will,  because,  as  Micah  says,"  he  delighteth  in  mercy,"  and
with  a  perfect  knowltd.^e  of  what  is  worst  in  us,  he  declares  his  wiliidgness  to  forgive
all  who  are  penitent.  This  power  he  has  delegated  to  no  man.  If  Jesus  had  simply
been  human,  the  Pharisees  would  have  been  justified  in  saying, "  This  man  blasphemeth,"
when  he  forgave  the  sins  of  the  paralytic.  Nor  did  our  Lord's  declaration  to  his  apostles,
"  Whose  sins  soever  ye  remit,  they  are  remitted  unto  them,"  endue  them  with  a  super-
natural or  exclusive  privilege.  Their  right  was  only  ministerial  and  declarative,  and  is
shared  by  all  those  who,  by  Divine  grace,  have  been  made  "  kings  and  priests  unto  God."

II.  Divine  pardon  seems  the  mobb  wondekfcl  when  compabed  with  man's  foe-
GIVENES8.  "  As  the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  higher  than
your  ways,"  etc.  Suppose  the  case  of  an  employe,  who,  having  robbed  his  master,  is
detected,  but  on  evidence  of  siucere  contrition  is  reinstated  in  his  position.  His
restitution  is  accompanied  by  hard  terms,  he  is  watched  suspiciously,  and  his  employer
considers  that  he  has  been  exceptionally  generous  to  restore  him  at  all.  Contrast  this
with  what  our  Lord  tells  of  God's  pardoning  love  in  his  parable  of  the  prodigal  son.
Instead  of  being  refused,  his  father  sees  him  "  when  a  great  way  off;  "  instead  of  angry
reproaches,  he  has  "  compassion  upon  him ; "  instead  of  cold  reserve,  he  falls  on  his
neck,  and  kisses  him;  instead  of  suspicion,  there  is  gladness,  and  all  the  house  is  filled
with  music  and  dancing.  Or  take,  as  another  contrast,  the  reception  given  at  home
to  a  girl  who  has  gone  wrong,  with  the  touching  story  of  our  Lord's  love  to  the  woman
who  was  a  sinner.  And  Jesus  says,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  tlie  Father."
"  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity  ?  "

III.  Divine  pardon  is  proffered  fob  all  kinds  of  sm.  Different  words  are  used
here  and  elsewhere  in  order  to  show  that  no  sort  of  wrong-doing  is  exempt  from
pardon ;  so  that  the  moral  and  the  vicious,  those  who  have  sinned  inwardly  or  out-
wardly, may  alike  be  encouraged  to  return  to  the  Lord.  "  Trwnsgression"  is  an  act  of
evil  committed  against  a  Law  acknowledged  to  be  holy.  It  signifies  stepping  across  a
line  which  is  drawn  and  visible.  "  Iniquity  "  is  the  inward  tendency  which  responds
to  suggestions  of  evil ;  which  we  cannot  root  out,  and  which  makes  self-reformation
hopeless.  "  Sins  "  are  acts  done  from  wrong  motives.  All  these  it  is  promised  shall
be  done  away  with  on  our  repentance.

IV.  Divine  pardon  is  complete  and  thobough.  1.  "  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sim
into  the  depths  of  the  sea."  If  we  drop  a  knife  into  a  tidal  pool,  we  can  see  it  and
regain  it ;  but  if  we  sail  out  of  sight  of  land,  and  drop  it  overboard  in  the  "  depths  of
the  sea,"  it  is  gone  for  ever.  So  completely  gone  are  our  forgiven  sins.  2.  "  Se  will
suhdue  our  iniquities."  If  our  nature  is  not  sanctified,  we  shall  only  do  again  our  evil
deeds.  All  our  affections  and  thoughts  must  be  subjected  to  the  Divine  will,  and  this
can  only  be  the  result  of  God's  own  work.

CJoNOLUSlON.  How  can  Ood  be  just,  and  yet  owr  Justifier  t  This  mystery,  which
lieb  at  the  root  of  his  moral  government,  finds  its  only  answer  in  the  cross  of  Christ.
God's  laws  are  eternal  and  inexorable.  He  cannot  swerve  from  absolute  righteousness.
Sin  must  bring  shame,  misery,  and  death,  here  and  hereafter.  If,  therefore,  God  had
said  all  shall  be  overlooked,  the  penalty  shall  be  removed,  the  Law  repealed,  it  would
appear  to  myriads  of  intelligent  beings  (compared  with  whose  multitude  the  human
race  is  as  nothing)  that  the  Law  was  either  unjust  in  its  enunciation  or  unjust  in  its
repeal.  Yet  a  sense  of  the  perfect  integrity  of  God  is  the  foundation  of  his  creature's
bliss.  But  the  Son  of  God  became  the  Son  of  man.  He  gathered  up  into  himself  all
the  sympathies,  powers,  and  suffermgs  of  our  race.  He  stood  forth  as  our  Represen-
tative, vindicating  the  Law  by  his  obedience,  and  dying  on  the  cross  for  transgressors.
This  would  evoke  grander  reverence  fur  Law  than  if  the  race  had  been  punished ;  and
such  a  display  of  love  wins  all  hearts  from  disobedience.

*  My  faith  would  lay  her  hand
On  that  dear  head  of  thine,

While  like  a  penitent  I  stand,
Ajid  there  confess  my  sin."  A-  K.


120  THK    BUUK.   OJT    MIUAU.  1.0H.  YU.  1— ZO.

Vers.  1 — 6. — 2%e  wail  of  a  true  patriot  on  the  moral  corruptions  of  his  cov/ntry.
"  Woe  IB  me  1  for  I  am  as  when  thej  have  gathered  the  summer  fruits,  as  the  grape-
gleanings  of  the  vintage :  there  is  no  cluster  to  eat :  my  soul  desired  the  first-ripe
Aniit,"  etc.  In  these  verses  the  prophet  bewails  the  moral  condition  of  bis  country.
The  picture  he  draws  of  its  wickedness  is  a  very  hideous  one.  It  answers  not  only  to
the  character  of  the  people  in  the  reign  of  Ahaz,  but  to  their  character  under  the  reign
of  other  kings  and  in  other  times.  Take  the  words  as  presenting;  the  wail  of  a  true
patriot  over  the  moral  corruptions  of  his  country.  "  Woe  is  me  1 "  etc.  He  means  to
say,  "  It  is  with  me  as  one  seeking  fruit  after  the  harvest,  grapes  after  the  vint^e ;  there
is  not  one  cluster."    There  are  several  things  that  he  bemoans.

I.  The  depabtube  or  excellence  rBOM  his  countbt.  "  The  good  man  is  perished
out  of  the  earth."  Who  are  the  good  men  referred  to  here  is  not  known.  The
statement  is  put  in  general  terms,  and  may  imply  merely  that  there  are  no  good  men
to  be  found  in  the  country.  Or  do  the  words,  as  some  think,  point  especially  to
Hezekiah,  Josiah,  or  to  good  men  unknown  to  fame  ?  They  had,  however,  departed.
Whether  they  had  emigrated  to  distant  lands  or  gone  into  the  great  eternity,  is  not
said.  The  latter  is  the  more  probable  idea.  In  any  case,  the  departure  of  sach  men
is  a  great  loss — a  loss  which  true  patriots  may  well  bemoan.  Good  men  are  the
"lights  of  the  world."  They  are  the  "  salt  of  the  earth."  Their  influence  penetrates
the  mass,  counteracts  its  tendency  to  corruption,  removes  its  moral  insipidity,  gives  it
a  new  spirit — a  spirit  pungent  and  savoury.  They  are  the  conservators  of  the  good
and  the  peaceful  reformers  of  the  bad.  "  Perished  out  of  the  earth."  It  does  not  say,
"  perish^  out  of  being."  They  had  left  the  land,  but  not  the  universe.  They  were
thinking,  feeling,  active  still.  There  is  a  sense,  indeed,  in  which  they  could  not  perish
out  of  the  land.  Good  men  leave  behind  them  principles,  ideas,  a  character,  which  will
live  and  spread  and  work  to  the  end  of  time.

II.  The  bampanot  of  avabice  in  his  countbt.  The  workings  of  avarice  are
indicated  in  the  latter  end  of  the  second  and  two  following  verses.  1.  Here  we  have  its
working  amongst  the  general  community.  "  They  all  lie  in  wait  for  blood ;  they  hunt
every  man  his  brother  with  a  net."  To  get  wealth  for  themselves  was  with  them  such
a  furious  passion,  that  the  rights  and  lives  of  others  were  disregarded.  Their  avarice
was  as  ravenous  as  the  passion  of  a  wild  beast.  Nay,  they  looked  upon  men  only  as
victims  for  their  prey.  Does  not  this  avarice  work  tliuB  in  English  society  ?  Man
has  come  to  value  man  just  in  proportion  as  he  can  render  him  service,  enrich  hii
exchequer,  and  advance  his  aggrandizement.  What  nets  are  spread  out  in  every  street,
in  every  mart  and  office,  in  every  journal,  in  order  to  catch  men !  "  They  hunt  every
man."  2.  Eere  we  have  its  working  amongst  the  higher  classes.  "That  they  may
do  evil  with  both  hands  earnestly,  the  prince  asketh,  and  the  judge  asketh  for  a
reward ;  and  the  great  rnan,  he  uttereth  his  mischievous  desire :  so  they  wrap  it  up."
The  idea  seems  to  be  this — that  the  "great  man,"  the  "prince,"  for  some  corrupt
motive,  seeks  the  condemnation  of  some  innocent  person;  and  the  "judge,"  for  a
bribe,  gratifies  his  wish.  A  judge  from  avarice  wUl  pronounce  an  innocent  man
gvulty.  All  this  is] done  very  industriously  "with" two  hands."  The  business  must
be  despatched  as  soon  as  possible,  lest  some  event  should  start  up  to  thwart  them ;
•nd  when  it  is  done  "  they  wrap  it  up."  "  So  they  wrap  it  up."  Avarice,  like  all
sinful  passions,  seeks  to  wrap  up  its  crimes.  But  the  Authorized  Torsion  is  probably
wrong,  and  the  rendering  should  be  "they  weave  it  together,"  i.e.  join  in  plotting
(see  Exposition).

TIL  The  misohibvousness  op  the  best  in  his  countbt.  "  The  best  of  them  is  as
a  briar :  the  most  upright  is  sharper  than  a  thorn-hedge."  There  is  a  gradation  of
wickedness  of  the  men  in  the  country,  but  the  best  of  them  is  like  a  prickly  thorn  and
worse  than  a  thorn-hedge.  The  prophet  is  so  struck  with  this  that  the  thought  of
retribution  takes  hold  of  him,  and  he  says,  "  The  day  of  thy  watchmen  and  thy  visita-
tion Cometh ;  now  shall  be  their  perplexity,"

IV.  The  lack  of  tbuthfulness  in  the  countbt.  "  Trust  ye  not  in  a  friend,  put
ye  not  confidence  in  a  guide,"  etc.  "  Place  no  faith  in  a  companion ;  trust  not  a
familiar  friend ;  from  her  that  lieth  in  thy  bosom  guard  the  doors  of  thy  mouth.  For
the  son  despiseth  the  father,  the  daughter  riseth  up  against  her  mother,  the  daughter-
in-law  against  her  mother-in-law ;  a  man's  enemies  are  the  members  of  his  own  family  "


OH.  vn.  1— 20.J  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  127

(Henderson]|.  All  social  faith  was  gone ;  a  man  had  lost  all  confidence  in  hia  brother.
Social  scepticism  and  suspicion  prevailed  in  all  circles.  No  faith  was  to  be  put  in  a
friend.  The  very  lips  were  to  be  sealed.  No  confidence  in  the  wife,  no  longer  was
ihe  to  be  treated  as  an  object  of  trust.  No  confidence  in  the  son,  the  daughter,  or
the  mother.  The  nearest  relations  were  counted  as  enemies.  "  A  man's  enemies  are
the  men  of  his  own  house."

CoNoiiUSiON.  Such  were  the  evils  over  which  this  patriotic  prophet  pours  forth  his
lamentations.  What  right-hearted  man '  would  not  bewail  such  a  moral  corruption
in  his  country?  Jeremiah  said,  "Oh  that  mine  head  were  waters  and  mine  eyes  a
fountain  of  tears,  that  I  might  weep  day  and  night  1 "  etc.  Paul  said,  "  Would  that  I
were  accursed !  **  etc.  Christ  said,  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem  I "  etc.  It  is  the  charac-
teristic of  a  true  patriot  that  he  feels  a  deeper  concern  for  the  mort^  state  of  his  country
than  for  its  educational  or  commercial  condition. — D.  T.

Vers.  7 — 9. — UTOe  postibilitiu  of  godly  men/dUing  into  great  trouNe.  "Therefore  I
will  look  unto  the  Lord;  I  will  wait  for  the  GK>d  of  my  salvation :  my  God  will  hear
me.  Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy :  when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise ;  when  I  sit  in
darkness,  the  Lord  shall  he  a  light  unto  me,"  etc.  The  prophet,  having  reverted  ia
the  preceding  verses  of  this  chapter  to  the  wickedness  of  his  people,  which  he  had
before  depicted  in  most  dark  and  dreadful  colours,  here  proceeds  to  represent  them  in
their  state  of  captivity,  reduced  to  repentance,  and  yearaing  for  that  Divine  interposi-
tion which  would  involve  the  complete  destruction  of  their  enemiea,  I  take  the  words
as  exhibiting  the  possiHliUes  of  godly  men,

I.  Thk  possibilitt  of  oodlt  kek  FAUiiHa  INTO  OBEAT  TBOUBU.  "Bejoice  not
against  me,  0  mine  enemy :  when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise."  Who  is  the  enemy  here
referred  to  scarcely  matters,  whether  Babylon,  Edom,  or  some  other  persons  or
peoples.  All  godly  men  have  ever  had  their  enemies.  All  who  have  ever  endeavoured
to  lead  a  godly  life  have  suffered  persecution  in  some  mode  and  measure.  Two
things  are  referred  to  here  concerning  the  trouble.  1.  It  uxu  a  "faO."  Godly  men
are  liable  to  many  falls — falls  from  health  to  sickness,  from  wealth  to  poverty,  from
social  friendship  to  desolation ;  but  the  greatest  fall  is  moral — the  fall  of  character.
To  this  the  best  of  men  are  liable,  e.g.  Moses,  David,  Peter.  2.  The  troubh  weu  a  "  dark-
ness." "  When  I  sit  in  darkness."  Light  and  darkness  are  frequently  used  for  pros-
perity and  adversity.  There  are  many  things  that  darken  the  souL  Disappointment
is  a  cloud,  remorse  is  a  cloud,  despair  is  a  cloud.  Some  of  these  clouds  often  mantle
the  mental  heaven  in  sackcloth.  Godly  men  are  often  permitted  to  walk  in  darkness
and  to  have  no  light.

IL  Thb  fobbibiutt  of  oodlt  hen  buho  olobioublt  sustained  in  tboitblk.
"  Therefore  I  will  look  unto  the  Lord ;  I  Trill  wait  for  the  God  of  my  salvation,"  etc.
The  godly  man  has  a  power  within  him,  with  the  Divine  help,  of  lifting  his  soul  above
the  crushing  cares,  simeriogs,  and  sorrows  of  life.  "  Bejoice  not  over  me,  O  mine
enemy :  when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise ;  when  I  sit  in  darkness,  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light
unto  me."  How  does  he  do  it  ?  1.  By  looking  at  Ood.  "  Therefore  I  will  look  unto
the  Lord."  The  man  who  fastens  his  eyes  on  the  sun  becomes  unconscious  of  the
small  things  around  him.  The  soul  which  feels  Gbd  to  be  the  grand  object  in  its
horizon  con  scarcely  fail  to  be  buoyant  and  courageous.  2.  By  waiting  upon  God.
"  I  will  wait  for  the  God  of  my  salvation."  He  is  sure  to  come  to  my  deliverance ;  it
is  only  a  question  of  time,  and  I  will  wait.  As  the  farmer  in  the  snows  and  storms  of
winter  waits  for  the  vernal  season,  certain  that  it  will  come,  so  the  godly  man,  in  trial,
waits  for  Gk)d*s  approach.  3.  By  trusting  in  Ood.  "  My  Cbd  will  hear  me."  He  has
promised  to  do  so ;  he  has  done  so  before ;  he  is  a  prayer-hearing  God.  He  has  said,
"  Unto  that  man  will  I  look,"  etc.  4.  By  suibmitting  to  Ood.  "  I  will  bear  the  indig-
nation of  the  Lord,  because  I  haye  sinned  against  him."  I  will  not  repine  nor  rebel  imder
my  suffering;  I  will  bow  to  his  will,  for  I  deserve  punishment,  as  I  have  sinned  against
him.  The  sufferings  I  endure  are  insignificant  compared  to  the  sins  I  have  committed.
5.  By  hoping  fw  Ood.  "  He  will  bring  me  forth  to  the  light,  and  I  shall  behold  his
righteousness."  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy  cometh  with  the  morning."
Thus  it  is  possible  for  godly  men  to  rise  in  courage  and  even  triumph  in  the  greatest
calamities.    Sunk  in  the  deepest  affliction,  they  may  look  their  enemies  in  the  face


li;»  TMa   cuujv  \jc    mnja.ii.  |_oii.  vii.  x — ««•

and  say,  "  Bejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine  enemy :  when  I  fall,  I  shall  ariM."    Thoi^h
I  am  now  down,  I  shall  rise  again.    Blessed  hope !

*  It  whisperg  o'er  the  cradled  child

Fast  locked  in  peaceful  sleep,
Ere  its  pure  soul  is  sin-beguiled,
Ere  sorrow  bids  it  weep.

"  It  soothes  the  mother's  ear  with  hopa,
Like  sweet  bells'  silver  chime.
And  bodies  forth  the  unknown  ssop*
Of  dark,  mysterious  Time  I

"'Tis  heard  in  manhood's  riseu  day,
•  And  Derves  the  soul  to  might.

When  life  shines  forth  with  fullest  ray.
Forewarning  least  of  night.

"It  speaks  of  noble  ends  to  gain,
A  world  to  mend  by  love
That  tempers  strength  of  band  and  braia
With  softness  of  the  dove.

"  It  falls  upon  the  aged  ear

Though  deaf  to  hnman  ToijW,
And  when  man's  eyening  closes  dreal,
It  bids  him  still  rejoice.

*  It  tells  of  bliss  beyond  the  grara,

The  parted  souls  to  thrill —
The  guerdon  of  the  truly  brave
Who  fonght  the  powers  of  ill."

QHotuehold  Word$.')

D.  T.

Ver.  lO.-^Beligiom  perucuton.  *<  Then  she  that  Is  mine  enemy  shall  see  it,  and
shame  shall  cover  her  which  said  unto  me,  Where  is  the  Lord  thy  God?  mine  eyes
shall  behold  her :  now  shall  she  be  trodden  down  as  the  mire  of  the  streets."  "  And
may  mine  enemy  see  it,  and  shame  cover  her  who  hath  said  to  me.  Where  is  Jehovah
thy  God  ?  Mine  eyes  will  see  it ;  now  will  slie  be  for  a  treading  down  like  mire  in
the  streets  "  (Delitzsoh).  "  Although,  for  example,  God  had  given  up  his  nation  to
the  power  of  its  enemies,  the  nations  of  the  world,  on  account  of  its  sins,  so  that  they
accomplished  the  will  of  God  by  destroying  the  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah  and
carrying  away  the  people  into  exile ;  yet  they  grew  proud  of  their  own  might  in  so
doing,  and  did  not  recognize  themselves  as  instruments  of  punishment  in  the  hand  of
the  Lord,  but  attributed  their  victories  to  the  power  of  their  own  arm,  and  even  aimed
at  the  destruction  of  Israel  with  scornful  defiance  of  the  living  God.  Thus  they
violated  the  rights  of  Israel,  so  that  the  Lord  was  obliged  to  conduct  the  contest  of  his
people  with  the  heathen,  and  secure  the  rights  of  Israel  by  the  overthrow  of  the
heathen  power  of  the  world  "  (ibid.).  The  words  present  to  us  a  few  thoughts  concerning
religious  persecutors.

I.  Thbir  humiliatiko  vision.  "  Then  she  that  is  mine  enemy  shell  see  it,  and
shame  shall  cover  her."  "  See  "  what  ?  The  deliverance,  the  exaltation  which  God
wrought  for  the  victims.  Few  things  are  more  painful  to  a  malign  nature  than  to
witness  the  prosperity  and  happiness  of  the  object  of  its  intense  aversion.  Every
beam  of  delight  in  the  hated  one  falls  as  flre  on  the  soul-nerves  of  the  hater.  Witness
Haman  and  Mordecai.  It  is  destined  that  every  ungodly  persecutor  shall  witness  one
day  the  happiness  of  the  godly  whom  he  has  tormented.  The  songs  of  the  martyr
shall  fall  on  the  ears  of  the  human  demons  that  forged'  his  chains,  kindled  his  fires,
and  tortured  him  when  living.  "  There  shall  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth,  when
ye  shall  see  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  all  the  prophets,  in  the  kingdom  of
God,  and  you  yourselves  thrust  out."  Another  thing  in  the  passage  prosented  to  us
concerning  religious  persecutors  is —

IL  Thbib  taunting  spibit.     "  Where  is  the  Lord  thy  God  ?  "    Scorn  is  one  of  the


OH.  Til.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MIOAH.  129


leading  elements  in  the  soul  of  the  persecutor.  "  My  tearg,"  said  David,  "  have  been
my  food  day  and  night,  while  mine  enemies  continually  say,  Where  is  now  thy  God  ?"
Again,  "Mine  enemies  reproach,  saying  daily  unto  me.  Where  is  thy  God?"  Again,
"  Wherefore  should  the  heathen  say,  Where  is  their  God?"  How  this  taunting  sjarit
was  shown  in  those  who  persecuted  and  put  to  death  the  Son  of  God  I  "  They  that
passed  by  reviled  him,  wagging  their  heads,  and  saying.  Thou  that  destroyest  tha
temple,  and  buildest  it  in  three  days,  save  thyself.  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  come
down  from  the  cross  "  (Matt,  sxvii.  40).  The  taunting  spirit  is  generally  malifie.  It
is  fiendish,  has  in  it  the  venom  of  hell.  The  taunting  spirit  is  generally  haughty,
"  Proud  and  haughty  scorner  is  his  name  "  (Prov.  xxi.  24).  The  taunting  spirit  ii
generally  ignorant.  He  who  deals  in  ridicule  generally  lacks  the  power  of  information
and  argument.

III.  Thgib  ittteb  buin.  "Kow  shall  she  be  trodden  down  as  the  mire  of  the
streets."  There  is  a  God  that  judges  on  the  earth,  and  his  retributive  forces  are  ever
on  the  heels  of  crime.  The  blood  of  martyrs  cries  to  heaven,  and  stirs  these  forces  to
action.  "  How  long,  0  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood
on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth  ?  "  (Rev.  vi.  10).

"  Avenge,  O  Iiord,  thy  slaughtered  saints,  whose  bonei
Lie  scattered  on  the  Alpine  mountains  cold ;
Bt'u  them  who  kept  thy  truth  so  pure  of  old,
When  all  our  fathers  worshipped  stocks  and  stonea,
Fercet  not :  in  thy  book  record  their  groans
Who  were  thy  sheep,  and  in  their  ancient  fold
Slain  by  the  bloody  Piedmontese  that  rolled
Mother  with  infant  down  the  rocks.    Their  moans
The  vales  redoubled  to  the  hills,  and  they

To  heaven.    Their  martyr'd  blood  and  ashes  sow
O'er  all  th'  Italian  fields,  where  still  doth  sway
The  triple  tyrant ;  that  from  these  may  grow
A  hundredfold,  who,  having  learned  thy  way.
Early  may  fly  the  Babylonian  woe."

(Milton.)

D.T.

Vers.  11, 12. — The  good  time  coming.  "  In  the  day  that  thy  walls  are  to  be  built,
in  that  day  shall  the  decree  be  far  removed.  In  that  day  also  he  shall  come  even  to
thee  from  Assyria,  and  from  the  fortified  cities,  and  from  the  fortress  even  to  the  river,
and  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  mountain  to  mountain."  The  prophet  here  speaks  in
the  name  of  Israel,  and  seems  to  exult  in  the  expectation  of  the  full  restoration  of
Jerusalem.  Her  walls  would  be  rebuilt,  and  her  scattered  citizens  would  be  gathered
unto  her  from  Assyria  to  Egypt,  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  mountain  to  mountain.
"The  most  natural  construction,"  says  Henderson,  "is  that  the  decree  of  God
respecting  the  political  changes  that  were  to  take  place  was  not  to  be  confined  to
Babylon,  but  was  to  be  extended  to  all  the  countries  round  about  Judaea,  in  conse-
quence of  which  great  numbers  would  become  proselytes  to  the  Jewish  faith."  The
words  may  be  used  to  illustrate  two  things  concerning  the  good  time  coming,

I.  It  will  be  a  time  fob  kebuildino  the  botnbd.  "  In  the  day  that  thy  walls
are  to  be  built."  The  walls  of  Jerusalem  are  referred  to— the  walls  of  fortification,
protection ;  these  are  to  be  rebuilt.  Daniel  said  that  they  were  to  be  rebuilt  in  trouble-
some times  (Dan.  ix.  25).  There  is,  however,  a  more  important  rebuilding  than  this
— a  rebuilding  that  is  going  on,  and  will  go  on,  until  the  great  moral  city  shall  be
complete.  1.  2%e  human  soul  is  a  building.  It  is  a  temple,  a  "  spiritual  house"  reared
as  a  residence  for  the  Eternal,  a  home  for  the  Holy  Ghost  to  dwell  in.  It  is  "a  city
whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God."  2.  ITie  human  soul  is  a  building  in  ruins.  The
walls  are  broken  down ;  its  columns,  arches,  roof,  rooms,  all  in  ruins.  3.  2%e  human
soul  is  a  building  to  be  rebuilt.  Christ  is  to  be  the  Foundation-stone,  etc.  "  Ye  are
built  together  for  a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit "  (Eph.  ii.  22).  This  rebuilding
is  going  on  according  to  a  plan  of  the  great  moral  Architect;  is  being  worked  out  by
agents  that  know  nothing  of  the  plan.  It  will  be  completed  one  day;  the  top-stone
will  be  brought  forth  one  day,  with  shouts  of  "  Grace,  grace ! "  (Zech.  iv.  7).    This  new

WTOAH.  T


Jemsalem  establiihed  on  earth,  what  a  magnificent  city  it  will  bel  The  words  may  b«
used  to  lUiutrate  another  thing  concerniog  the  good  time  coming.

n.  It  wilii  bi  a  time  fob  BEOATHEBiira  the  hoattebeo.  "In  that  day  also  he
shall  come  eren  to  thee  from  Assyria,  and  from  the  fortified  cities,  and  from  the
fortresseg  even  to  the  river,  and  from  sea  to  sea,  and  from  mountain  to  mountain."
"  All,"  says  an  old  writer,  "  that  belong  to  the  land  of  Israel,  whithersoever  dispersed
and  however  distressed,  far  and  wide  over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth,  shall  come
flockino;  to  it  again.  He  shall  come  even  to  thee,  having  liberty  to  return  and  a  heart
to  return  from  Assyria,  whither  the  ten  tribes  were  carried  away,  though  it  lay  remote
from  the  fortified  cities  and  from  the  fortress — those  strongholds  in  which  they
thought  they  had  them  fast ;  for  when  God's  time  comes,  though  Pharaoh  will  not  let
the  people  go,  God  will  fetch  them  out  with  a  high  hand.  They  shall  come  from  all
the  remote  parts,  from  sea  to  sea,  and  mountain  to  mountain,  not  turning  back  for  fear
of  your  discouragements,  but  they  shall  go  from  strength  to  strength,  till  they  come  to
Zion."  The  human  family,  which  Heaven  intended  to  live  as  one  grand  brotherhood,
has  been  riven  into  moral  sections,  antagonistic  to  each  other,  and  scattered  all  over
the  world.  The  time  will  come  when  they  shall  be  gathered  together,  not,  of  course,
in  a  local  sense,  but  in  a  spiritual — in  unity  of  sentiment,  sympathy,  aim,  soul.  All
shall  be  one  in  Christ.  They  will  be  gathered  in  spirit  together  from  the  four  winds
of  heaven.

CoNOLnsioH.    Haste  this  good  time  I    May  the  chariot-wheels  of  Providenc*  revolvt
with  gre&t«r  speed!

"  One  iong  employs  all  nations ;  and  all  cry,
*  Worthy  the  Lamb,  for  he  was  slain  for  ns  I '
The  dwellers  in  the  vales  and  on  the  rocks
8boat  to  each  other,  and  the  monntain-topi
From  distant  mountains  catch  the  flying  yaj ;
Till,  nation  after  nation  taught  the  strain,
Earth  lolU  the  raptnrons  Hosauna  loond."

(Cowper.)

D.  T.

Ver.  13. — Jfan'i  ntin  th*  fruit  of  hi$  own  conduct.  "Kotwithatanding  the  land
shall  be  desolate  because  of  them  that  dwell  therein,  for  the  fruit  of  their  doings."
Here  is  a  prediction  of  what  would  take  place  before  the  advent  of  those  glorious  events
pointed  out  in  the  preceding  verses.  There  will  be  a  dark  night  before  the  morning,  a
great  storm  before  the  calm.  The  subject  here  is — Man's  ruin  the  fruit  of  his  own
conduct.  The  reason  why  the  land  should  be  "  desolate "  before  the  coming  of  the
glorious  times  is  here  stated — "  for  the  fruit  of  their  doings."  That  man's  ruin  springs
from  his  conduct  is  demonstrated  by  universal  experience  as  well  as  by  the  Word  of
God.  "  0  Israel,  thou  hast  destroyed  thyself . . .  O  Israel,  return  unto  the  Lord  thy  God ;
for  thou  hast  fallen  by  thine  iniquity"  (Hos.  xiiL  9;  xiv.  1).  It  is  the  man  who
heareth  the  sayings  of  Christ  and  doeth  them  not  that  will  be  ruined  at  last.
"  Whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  Assuming  it  to  be  a  fact  that
man's  ruin  is  evermore  the  fruit  of  his  own  conduct,  four  things  follow.

I.  That  his  misery  will  be  identified  with  eemorse.  Morally  it  is  impossible
for  a  man  to  ascribe  his  ruin  to  his  organization,  to  circumstances,  or  to  any  force  over
which  he  has  no  control.  He  must  feel  that  he  has  brought  it  on  himself;  and  thit
feeling  it  is  that  makes  his  miserable  condition  a  very  hell.  The  suffering  of  remorse  la-
the soul  of  suffering.    "A  wounded  spirit  who  can  bear?"

n.  That  in  his  suffkbinos  he  must  vindicate  the  Ditins  ohabacteb.
Forced  to  see  and  feel  that  all  his  sin  and  miseries  spring  from  his  own  conduct,  he
will  be  compelled  to  say,  "  Just  and  right  art  thou,"  etc.  (Eev.  xv.  3).  Into  the
deepest  heart  of  such  God  speaks  the  words,  "  They  hated  knowledge,  they  despiaed
all  my  reproof;  therefore  shall  they  eat  the  fruit  of  their  own  way,  and  be  fillfed  with
their  own  devices  "  (Prov.  i.  29).  All  their  misery  is  but  the  eating  of  the  finit  of
their  own  doings ;  they  reap  that  which  they  have  sown.  As  fruit  answers  to  seed,  as
echoes  to  sound,  their  calamities  answer  to  their  conduct.

TIL  That   na  salvation    fboh    suin    beqcues  a   oeanob   or   life.    Men's


OH.  TH.  1—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  131

conduct  is  fashioned  and  ruled  by  their  likings  and  dislikings,  their  sympathies  and
antipathixa ;  in  other  words,  if  their  conduct  is  bad,  it  can  only  be  made  good  by  a
change  of  heart.     "  Marvel  not  that  I  said  unto  you,  Ye  must  be  born  again."

IV.  That  Oheistianity  is  the  only  system  that  can  meet  his  case.  The
mission  of  Christianity  is  to  change  the  heart,  to  renew  the  life,  and  effect  a  spiritual
reformation.  This  it  is  designed  to  do,  this  it  is  fitted  to  do,  this  it  has  done,  this  it  is
doing ;  and  no  other  system  on  earth  is  capable  of  accomplishing  this  work. — D.  T.

Ver.  14. — A  prayer.  "  Peed  thy  people  with  thy  rod,  the  flock  of  thine  heritage,
which  dwell  solitarily  in  the  wood,  in  the  midst  of  Carmel :  let  them  feed  in  Bishan
and  Gilead,  as  in  the  days  of  old."  Here  is  a  prayer  addressed  by  the  prophet  to
Almighty  God.  It  is  brief,  but  beautiful,  beautiful  in  spirit  and  style.  It  has  a
prophetic  aspect.    This  prayer  recognizes  three  things.

I.  An  intebestino  belation  between  Ckio  and  his  people,  flooe  and  Shefhebd.
The  Jews,  here  as  elsewhere,  are  metaphorically  referred  to  as  a  flock,  and  Jehovah  as
their  Shepherd  (Ps.  Ixxx.  1;  zcv.  7,  etc.).  "  The  Lord  is  my  Shepherd ; "  "1  am  tha
good  Shepherd."  What  a  Shepherd  is  he  1  1.  He  is  the  absolute  Owner  of  the  flock.
"  My  sheep  are  mine,  and  I  know  them."  "  AU  souls  are  mine."  How  incalculably
valuable  is  one  soul ! — a  free,  ever  active,  influential,  undying  spirit !  How  rich  is  this
Shepherd,  to  ovm  untold  millions  of  such  1  2.  He  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  flock.
He  knows  what  they  are,  what  they  have  been,  what  they  will  be  through  all  the
future.  "  I  know  my  sheep,"  etc.  (John  I.).  3.  Be  has  an  infinite  love  for  the  flock.  The
good  Shepherd  hath  laid  down  his  life  for  them.  4.  Se  has  abundant  supplies  for  the
flock.  Though  thar  wants  are  varied,  numerous,  urgent,  ever-recurring,  he  is  able  to
meet  them  all.  "  I  give  unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out
of  my  hands ; "  "  He  is  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  more  than  we  can  ask  or
think"  (Eph.  iii.  20);  "Peed  thy  people  with  thy  rod,"  or  staft    It  recognizes —

II.  The  TBYiNa  condition  in  which  God's  people  abb  bouetimbs  found.  "  Which
dwell  solitarily  in  the  wood,  in  the  midst  of  Carmel."  The  primary  reference  is  to
their  captivity  in  Babylon.  (For  another  view,  see  Exposition.)  They  were  as  sheep
in  the  forest  or  wood ;  in  danger  of  being  lost  in  the  thickets  or  being  devoured  by
beasts  of  prey.  Human  souls  in  this  world  are  in  a  moral  wilderness ;  beset  with
perils  on  every  hand.  "  They  are  scattered  on  the  mountains  as  sheep  having  no
shepherd."  Two  facts  render  this  condition  peculiarly  distressing.  1.  It  is  caused  by
wilf.  Souls  have  not  been  driven  away  into  moral  captivity.  "  All  we  like  sheep  have
gone  astray."  2.  It  is  undeliverable  by  self.  No  soul  ever  found  its  way  back  to  God
by  its  own  unaided  efforts ;  hence  Christ  came  to  "  seek  and  to  save  the  lost."

IIL  The  iMPOBrANCB  of  bbstobation  to  fomeeb  enjoyments.  "  Let  them  feed
in  Basban  and  Gilead,  as  in  the  days  of  old."  The  regions  of  Bashan  and  Gilead,  on
the  east  of  the  Jordan,  were  celebrated  for  their  rich  pasturage,  and  on  this  account
were  chosen  by  the  tril)es  of  Beuben  and  Gad  and  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh  (Numb,
xii. ;  Deut.  iii.  17).  Morally,  the  great  need  of  man  is  the  restoration  of  normal
rights,  normal  virtues,  normal  enjoyments.

«  Good  Shepherd,  hasten  thou  that  glorious  day.
When  we  shall  all
In  the  one  fold  abide  with  thee  for  aye  I "

D.  T.

Vers.  15 — 17. — The  uUimate  deliverance  of  man  from' sin.  "  According  to  the  days
of  thy  coming  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt  will  I  show  unto  him  marvellous  things.  The
nations  shall  see  and  be  confounded  at  all  their  might :  they  shall  lay  their  hand  upon
their  mouth,  their  ears  shall  bo  deaf.  They  shall  lick  the  dust  like  a  serpent,  they  shall
move  out  of  their  holes  like  worms  of  the  earth  :  they  shall  be  afraid  of  the  Lord  our
God,  and  shall  fear  because  of  thee."  In  this  passage  there  is  an  answer  to  the
prophet's  prayer.  It  contains  a  Divine  assurance  that  wonders  analogous  to  those
displayed  in  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews  from  Egypt  would  be  vouchsafed  in  their
deliverance  from  Babylonish  captivity;  and  that  the  display  of  those  wonders  would
lead  to  the  utter  confusion  and  ruin  of  the  "  nations  "  who  were  their  enemies.  Thej
would  feel   that  all   their  strength  was   contemptible  impotence  in  the  presence  ot


God's  great  power.    This  deliverance,  thus  described,  resembles  the  iiltimate  deliverance
of  man  from  sin  and  ruin  in  two  respects.

I.  It  involves  the  exhibition  of  the  mabvelloub.  There  were  "  marvellous
things  "  shown  when  the  Hebrews  were  delivered  from  Egypt ;  marvellous  things  when
they  were  brought  out  of  Babylonian  captivity ;  but  these  marvellous  tilings  are  but
mere  shadows  of  the  marvels  displayed  ia  the  moral  redemption  of  mankind.  The
incarnation  of  Christ ;  the  wonders  that  his  mighty  hand  performed ;  the  extraordinary
phenomena  connected  with  his  death,  his  resurrection,  and  ascension  to  heaven ;  the
revolutions  in  the  moral  character  and  institutions  of  mankind ; — all  these  are,  in  truth,
the  wonders  of  the  wonderful,  the  marvels  of  the  marvellous.

II.  It  mvoLTES  the  cokfubion  of  enemies.  "The  nations  shall  be  confounded
at  their  might,  they  shall  lay  their  hand  upon  their  mouth,"  etc.  As  Egypt  and
Babylon  were  confounded,  humbled,  and  terrified  at  Q-od's  marvels  in  their  deliverance,
so  will  all  the  spiritual  foes  of  Christ  be  ultimately  overwhelmed  at  the  wonders  dis-
played at  the  redemption  of  the  world.  Matthew  Henry's  remarks  on  this  passage  are
worth  quoting.  "  1.  Those  that  had  exulted  over  the  people  of  God  in  their  distress,
and  gloried  that  when  they  had  them  down  they  would  keep  them  down,  shall  be
confounded  when  they  see  them  thus  surprisingly  rising  up ;  they  shall  be  confounded
at  all  the  might  with  which  the  captives  shall  now  exert  themselves,  whom  they
thought  for  ever  disabled.  They  shall  now  lay  their  hands  upon  their  mouths  as  being
ashamed  of  what  they  have  said,  and  not  be  able  to  say  any  more  by  way  of  triumph
over  Israel.  Nay,  their  ears  shall  be  deaf  too,  so  much  so  tl^i  they  shall  be  ashamed  at
the  wonderful  deliverance ;  they  shall  stop  their  ears  as  being  not  willing  to  hear  any
more  of  God's  wonders  wrought  for  that  people  whom  they  had  so  despised  and
exulted  over.  2.  Those  that  had  impudently  confronted  God  himself  shall  now  be
strnck  with  a  fear  of  him,  and  thereby  brought,  in  profession  at  least,  to  submit  to
him.  They  shall  lick  the  dust  like  a  serpent ;  they  shall  be  so  mortified  as  if  they
were  to  be  sentenced  to  the  same  curse  the  serpent  was  laid  under  (Gen.  iii.  14).  They
shall  be  brought  to  the  lowest  abasements  imaginable,  and  shall  be  so  dispirited  that
they  shall  tamely  submit  to  them.  They  shall  lick  the  dust  of  the  Church's  feet
(Isa.  xlix.  23).  Froud  oppressors  shall  be  made  sensible  how  mean  and  little  they  are
before  the  great  God ;  and  they  shall  with  trembling  and  the  lowest  submission  move
out  of  the  holes  into  which  they  had  crept,  like  worms  of  the  earth  as  they  are,  being
ashamed  and  afraid  to  show  their  heads;  so  low  shall  they  be  brought  and  such
abjects  shall  they  be  when  they  are  abased.  When  God  did  wonders  for  his  Church,
many  of  the  people  of  the  land  became  Jews  because  the  fear  of  the  Jews  and  of  their
God  fell  on  them  (Bsth.  viii.  17).  So  it  is  promised  here  that  they  shall  be  afraid  of
the  Lord  our  God,  and  shall  fear  because  of  thee,  0  Israel !  Forced  submissions  are
often  feigned  submissions;  yet  they  redound  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  Church
though  not  to  the  benefit  of  the  dissemblers  themselves." — D.  T,

Ver.  18. — Uie  incomparahleness  of  Ood  illustrated  in  his  forgiveness  of  sin:  1.  Vm
nature  of  Ms  forgiveness.  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  and
passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage  ? "  The  prophet  here —
anticipating  the  full  deliverance,  not  only  of  the  Jews  from  Babylonian  captivity,  but
probably  of  humanity  itself  from  the  curse  of  sin  through  Jesus  Christ — breaks  forth  in
a  sublime  strain  of  praise  and  admiration  in  relation  to  the  incomparable  character  ol
God.  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  thee  ?"  The  subject  of  the  two  verses  (18, 19)  is  Divine
forgiveness,  its  nature,  its  source,  and  its  completeness.  We  shall  confine  ourselves  now
to  the  natvre  of  Divine  forgiveness.  God's  forgiveness  here  is  represented  in  the  words,
he  "  passeth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage."  This  does  not  mean
that  God  is  unobservant  of  sin,  for  all  things  are  naked  and  open  unto  him ;  nor  that  it
is  not  an  offence  to  him,  for  it  is  "an  abomination  in  his  sight,"  but  that  he  regards
it  in  no  fault-finding  spirit,  but  with  a  noble  generosity.  As  loving  parents  are  disposed
to  overlook  much  in  their  children  of  which  they  cannot  approve,  the  great  Father  is
disposed  to  overlook  much.  "  He  is  not  strict  to  mark  iniquity."  He  passes  it  by,
pursues  his  benevolent  march  as  if  it  did  not  exist.  Theology,  which  has  thrown  s
haze  over  many  of  the  bright  things  of  revelation,  has  clouded  this,  one  of  its  most
glorious  orbs.     Forgetting  that  the  Bible  is  a  popular  book,  using  language  in  accom-


OH.  TO.  1— 2a]  THE  BOOK  OF  MIOAH.  133


modation  to  our  habits  of  thought  and  expression,  it  has  constructed  its  theories  upon
the  etymology  of  words.  The  truth  and  pertinence  of  this  remark  will  be  seen  if,  at
the  outset,  we  consider  the  very  diversified  forms  in  which  the  Bible  represents  to  us
the  doctrine  of  Divine  forgiveness.  Generally,  indeed,  I  find  it  set  forth  under  figures
corresponding  to  the  aspects  in  which  sin  stands  before  the  mind  of  the  writer  at  the
time.    For  example —

L  When  sin  afpeabs  as  a  debt,  an  unfulfilled  obligation,  then  pabdon
IS  spoken  of  as  a  CANOELLiNa.  Thus  in  the  forty-third  chapter  of  Isaiah  Jefaovah
is  represented  as  saying,  "  I,  even  I,  am  he  who  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions ; "  and
Peter,  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  exhorts  his  vast  auditory  to  "  repent,  that  their  sins
toay  be  blotted  out."  When  a  man  has  paid  bis  debts,  or  when  some  one  else  has
discharged  them,  the  creditor  takes  his  pen  in  hand  and  strikes  from  the  ledger  both
the  name  of  the  debtor  and  the  amount.  But  sin  is  a  debt  in  a  very  figurative  sense,
and  therefore  such  representations  of  pardon  must  not  be  taken.in  a  Uteral  meaning.

II.  When  sin  afpeabb  as  an  estbanoembnt  fbom  God,  then  foboiveness  is
BEPBESBNTED  AS  BECONCiLiATioN.  But  as  the  estrangement  is  not  mutual,  it  being
exclusively  on  man's  part ;  in  the  reconciliation  there  is  no  mutual  change  of  mind.
God  cannot  change,  and  need  not  change,  to  be  reconciled  to  the  sinner.

ni.  When  bin  afpeabb  as  an  indictment,  foboiveness  is  spoken  of  as  a
JUSTIFICATION.  But  justification  can  in  the  nature  of  the  case  have  but  a  very  remote
resemblance  to  the  forensic  term  as  used  by  men.  In  civil  justification,  for  instance,
the  charge  has  been  found  false,  the  accused  demands  justification  as  a  right,  and  retires
from  the  court  with  a  high  sense  of  insulted  innocence.

rV.  When  sin  appeabs  as  a  pollution,  foboiveness  is  bepbebented  a>  a
OLEANSiNa.  Hence  we  read  of  Christ's  blood  cleansing  from  all  sin.  But  it  is  only  in
a  very  figurative  sense  that  you  can  employ  the  word  "  washing  "  to  the  mind,  which
is  an  invisible  and  impalpable  power.

y.  When  sin  appeabs  ab  a  disease,  fobqiveness  is  bepbebented  as  a  healino.
"  I  will  beal  your  backsliding ; "  "  I  am  come  to  bind  up  the  broken-hearted."

TI.  When  bin  appeabs  as  an  obstbuction  between  the  soul  and  God,  fob-
eivENESs  is  bepbesentsd  ab  a  olearinq.  The  mountains  are  levelled,  the  clouds
are  dispersed,  the  foes  are  crashed  and  are  buried  as  Pharaoh  and  his  host  were  buried
in  the  depths  of  the  sea.  There  are  three  points  of  contrast  between  Divine  forgive-
ness and  human.  1.  In  human  governments  forgiveness  is  exercised  with  most  cautious
limitations.  Human  sovereigns,  however  generous  their  natures,  can  only  bestow
pardon  on  a  few  out  of  numerous  criminals.  Were  forgiveness  to  become  general,  the
power  of  the  government  to  maintain  order  would  be  weakened.  There  is  no  such
limitation  to  the  exercise  of  thi»  prerogative  in  God.  He  offers  pardon  to  cM.  2.  In
human  forgiveness  there  is  no  guarantee  against  future  criminality.  The  prisoner
pardoned  by  a  human  sovereign  may  be  inspired  by  gratitude  and  prompted  perhaps
to  resolve  upon  a  life  of  future  obedience,  and  yet  his  heart  remain  unchanged.  The
principles  that  led  to  his  crime  may  still  be  in  him,  and,  being  there,  they  may  break
forth  again.  But  in  Divine  forgiveness  it  is  not  so.  The  pardoned  man  is  a  changed
man :  he  has  a  new  heart  put  within  him — a  heart  inspired  with  such  love  to  the
Sovereign  as  will  secure  a  joyous  and  constant  obedience.  3.  Bwman  forgiveness  can
ntver  put  the  criminal  in  such  a  good  position  as  he  had  before  his  transgression.  He
has  his  freedom  as  before,  but  he  has  not  his  self-respect,  he  has  not  the  same  standing
in  society ;  his  contemporaries  will  never  .look  upon  him  in  the  same  light  again.
Some  will  shun  him,  others  will  suspect  him,  and  few  will  venture  to  give  him  their
confidence  and  their  love.  But  in  Divine  forgiveness  the  criminal  is  raised  to  a  higher
status  even  than  that  of  innocence.  I  know  not  whether  the  angels  would  have  been
bis  servants  had  he  never  fallen ;  but  after  his  forgiveness  they  become  so.  They
rejoice  with  him  on  his  conversion,  they  cheer  him  on  his  pilgrimage,  they  bear  him  on
their  pinions  to  their  heavenly  scenes.  He  is  brought  into  an  "  innumerable  company
of  angels."  We  see  partially  from  his  state  in  Eden  what  relations  man  would  have
entered  into  with  his  Maker  had  he  never  sinned ;  but  I  believe  that  he  never  would
have  had  what  the  pardoned  sinner  has — the  honour  of  seeing  his  Maker,  in  the  Person
of  Jesus,  on  the  thron*  of  the  imiverse,  gazed  on  by  every  eye  and  worshipped  by  every
heart.— D.  T.


Ver.  18. — 2%«  incomparableness  of  God  illustrated  in  his/orgivenest  of  tin :  2.  Thi
Mource  of  hit  forgiveness.  "  He  retaineth  not  his  an,'er  for  ever,  because  he  delighteth  in
mercy."  Aiiger  in  God  is  not  passion,  but  principle ;  not  antagonism  to  existence,  but
to  the  evils  that  curse  existence.  His  anger  is  but  love  excited  against  everything  that
tends  to  disturb  the  harmony,  cloud  the  brightness,  and  injure  the  happiness  of  his
creation.  "  Fury  is  not  in  me,"  etc.  (Isa.  xxvii.  4).  Here  is  the  source  of  forgiveness :
"  He  delighteth  in  mercy."

I.  FoROiVENESB  IS  A  itiERoiFUL  AOT.  It  is  not  an  act  of  equity,  but  of  compassion ;
not  of  justice,  but  of  love.  It  is  the  prerogative  of  mercy.  "  The  Lord  passed  by
before  him,  and  proclaimed, The  Lord,  The  Lord  Q-od,  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering
and  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forgiving  iniquity
and  transgression  and  sin."  Again,  "  The  Lord  is  long-suffering  and  of  great  mercy,
forgiving  iniquity  and  transgression."  It  is  mercy  that  cancels  the  debt,  blots  out  the
cloud,  effects  the  reconpiliation,  cleanses  the  stain,  and  heals  the  disease.  "  Not  by
works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,"  etc.  All  the  redeemed  in  heaven  acknow-
ledge this :  "  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  [loosed]  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own
blood,"  etc.  (Rev.  i.  6).

II.  This  act  op  meeot  ib  the  delight  of  God.  "He  delighteth  in  mercy."
Mercy  is  a  modification  of  benevolence.  It  always  implies  misery,  for  if  there  were  no
misery  there  would  be  no  mercy.  Whilst  God  does  not  delight  in  misery,  he  delights
in  removing  it.  What  greater  delight  has  a  loving  parent  than  in  restoring  to  health
•nd  vigour  a  diseased  and  suffering  child  ?  To  a  true  soul  the  delight  of  moral  restora-
tion is  even  greater  than  this.  A  noble  father  has  perhaps  more  delight  in  the  virtues
and  fellowship  of  the  son  whom  he  has  been  the  means  of  raising  from  moral  depravity
to  spiritual  purity  and  power,  than  in  those  of  the  one  who  has  always  pursued  the
virtuous  way.  It  is  thus  with  him  from  whom  all  human  love  proceeds,  he  delights  in
mercy.  Will  not  the  song  of  the  redeemed  have  more  music  in  his  ear  than  the  lofty
■trains  of  those  who  have  never  fallen?  He  delights  to  welcome  to  his  bosom  and  his
home  his  returning  prodigals.  1.  If  he  delights  in  mercy,  then  hush  for  ever  the
pulpits  that  hlasphemously  represent  him  as  malign.  The"  God  that  you  have  in  tho
Calvinian  theology  is  not  the  God  of  the  Bible,  but  the  God  of  ill-natured,  morose,  and
vindictive  souls.     Hence  the  masses  of  England  turn  away  in  horror  from  some  modem

Eulpits.  "  He  delighteth  in  mercy."  Let  us  declare  this !  "  Let  the  wicked  forsake
is  way,''  etc. ;  "  Come,  let  us  reason  together,"  etc. ;  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  are
weary  and  heavy  laden,"  etc.  2.  If  he  delights  in  mercy,  then  let  no  sinner  despair
on  account  of  the  enormity  of  hit  tint.  Let  ail  the  sins  of  the  world  be  embodied  in
one  man's  life ;  let  that  one  man  return  to  God,  and  he  will  "  abundantly  pardon "
him.  He  will  do  it,  not  reluctantly,  not  half-heartedly,  but  with  aboundings  of  joy.
He  will  rejoice  over  you.  "There  is  more  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that
repenteth,"  etc.  Z.  If  he  delightt  in  mercy,  may  we  not  hope  that  one  day  there  will
come  an  end  to  all  the  misery  of  the  moral  tmiverte  t  "  He  retaineth  not  his  anger  for
ever."  Who  shall  say  but  in  some  distant  future,  by  some  way  not  revealed,  every
discord  in  the  moral  universe  shall  be  hushed,  every  prison  opened,  all  sufferers
delivered,  and  all  hells  quenched?  What  generous  heart  would  not  •  thousand  times
rather  believe  in  this,  if  they  could,  than  in  eternal  torment  or  utter  extinction  ? — D.  T.

Ver.  19. — 2%e  incompardblenett  of  Ood  illustrated  in  his  forgiveness  </»in :  3.  The
completeness  of  his  forgiveness.  "  He  will  turn  again,  he  will  have  compassion  upon  us ;
he  will  subdue  our  iniquities ;  and  thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the  depths  of  the
sea."  The  reference  is  here,  perhaps,  to  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh  and  his  host.-
"  He  will  destroy  their  sins  as  he  destroyed  them,  and  buried  them  in  the  depths  of
the  sea  "  (Exod.  xv.  4, 10).

I.  Thk  entire  BUBjnaATiON  OP  AIL  8INB.  "Sin,"  says  Henderson,  "must  ever  be
regarded  as  hostile  to  man.  It  is  not  only  contrary  to  his  interests,  bat  it  powerfully
•pposes  and  combats  the  moral  principles  of  his  nature  and  the  higher  principles
implanted  by  grace ;  and,  but  for  the  counteracting  energy  of.  Divine  influence,  must
prove  victorious.  Without  the  subjugation  of  evil  propensities,  pardon  would  not  be
a  blessing.  If  the  idolatrous  and  rebellious  disposition  of  the  Jews  had  not  been
■nbdued  during  their  stay  in  Babylon,  they  would  not  have  been  restored."    Sin  is  tlu


CH.vn.  1— 20.]  THE  BOOK  OP  MICAH.  lo5

enemy  of  all  enemies.  K  it  is  in  us,  H  sets  the  boly,  happy  heavens  against  us.  Taka
it  from  us,  and  hell  becomes  our  minister  for  good.  This  Qoi  subdues.  In  truth.
Divine  forgiveness  is  the  destruction  of  sin  in  us,  nothing  else.  It  ii  not  something
outside ;  it  ia  all  within.

n.  The  sntibe  bdbuebbioit  of  all  snr.  "  Thou  wilt  cast  all  their  sins  into  the
depths  of  the  sea."  Forgiveness  is  deliverance  from  sin.  How  strong  is  the  imagery
employed  in  the  Bible  to  represent  the  completeness  of  this  deliverance!  It  ii  as  the
"  blotting  out  of  a  thick  cloud."  See  that  dark  mass  of  cloud  up  yonder;  how  it  hides
the  sun  and  chills  the  air  1  A  breeze  has  sprung  up,  and  it  is  gone — the  sky  is  azure,
the  scene  is  bright,  and  the  flowing  air  warm  with  life.  That  cloud  can  never  come
again ;  no  more  may  thy  sins.  It  is  as  the  throwing  of  them  behind  God.  "  Thou
hast  cast  all  my  sins  behind  thy  back."  Who  knows  where  the  back  of  God  is  ?  I
■ee  his  face  in  nature.  His  smiles  are  the  beauty  of  the  world.  I  see  his  face  in  Jesus,
"  the  Brightness  of  his  glory."  But  where  is  his  back  ?  It  is  the  fathomless  abyss
of  nothingness.  It  is  a  separation  as  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west.  Tell  me  the
distance  from  the  east  to  the  west,  and  I  will  tell  you  the  distance  which  the  pardoned
sinner  is  from  sin.  It  is  a  casting  them  into  the  "  depths  of  the  sea."  Not  on  the  shore,
to  be  washed  back  by  the  incoming  waves,  but  into  the  "  depths."  Into  the  abysses
of  some  mighty  Atlantic,  where  no  storms  shall  stir  them  up,  no  trump  shall  wake
them  from  their  graves.  "  In  those  days,  saith  the  Lord,  the  iniquity  of  Israel  shall
be  sought  for,  and  shall  not  be  found."  But  where  are  they  buried  ?  In  the  forget-
fnlaess  of  infinite  love..  "  I  will  remember  their  sin  no  more."  Can  Infinite  Intelligence
forget?  Yes,  and  bis  forgetfulness  is  one  of  the  radiant  attributes  of  his  character.
Does  not  all  true  forgiveness  involve  forgetfulness?  Those  who  say  they  forgive  and
cannot  forget,  lack  the  faculty  of  forgiveness ;  as  yet.  Heaven  has  not  endowed  them
with  the  power  of  granting  absolution.  It  is  of  the  very  nature  of  love  to  hide  injuries.
Charity  covereth  sins.  God  has  the  power  of  forgetting  injuries,  because  he  is  Love.
I  see  the  power  of  love  in  hiding  injuries  working  everywhere  in  nature.  The  sea
hastes  to  cover  up  the  wounds  which  ruthless  ships  have  ploughed  into  its  noble
bosom.  The  tree,  bleeding  with  the  sores  which  the  woodman  has  inflicted,  loses  no
time  in  its  efforts  to  conceal  the  marks  of  violence  it  has  received.  Day  by  day  goes
«n,  until  the  year  comes  roimd,  when,  amidst  its  luxurious  foliage  you  look  in  vain  for
the  old  scars.  And  thus,  as  the  waves  of  the  sea  and  the  flowing  sap,  love  ever  works.
It  hastes  to  cover  up  from  the  eye  of  memory  the  injuries  it  has  received.  How  soon
the  love  of  a  wife  buries  in  forgetfulness  any  injuries  she  has  received  from  the  man
she  lores  too  well  I  The  countless  pains  which  the  thoughtlessness  and  waywardness
of  children  in  their  early  days  inflict  upon  the  parental  heart  are  soon  buried  in  the
sea  of  parental  love.  Love  digs  in  the  heart  of  parents  a  grave  for  the  wrongs,  and
builds  a  museum  for  the  virtues  of  theii  children.  All  this  is  of  God,  Gh)d-Uke,
Infinite  love  "  passeth  by  the  transgression."  He  leaves  it  behind  him  as  he  proceeds,
in  the  majesty  of  his  goodness,  to  diffuse  wider  and  wider  for  ever  the  blesaedneu  of
Ui  own  being. — ^D.  "S,


HOMILETICAL   INDEX


THE    BOOK    OF    MIOAH.


CHAPTEB  I.

THKMK

rAOfl

iHEin

PAOI

God's  Truth

...

31

True  Spiritnal  Teachers    ...

6

Sin  an  Antagonist

32

The  Divine  Judgments  against  Israel

8

The  Soul's  Exodus

33

The  OontagionsnesB  of  Sin

9

Israel's  Popular  Preacher ...

34

The  Prevalence  of  Sin  the  Sonroe  of

Gospel  Work

35

Grief  to  the  Oood           ...            ...

10

Borrow  following  in  the  Train  of  Evil

11

CHAPTER  III.

The    Lord    God  a  Witness   against

Sinners              ...            ...            ...

11

The  Abuse  of  Influence      ...

•«•

88

Sins  in  the  Metropolis        ...            ...

12

Avarice ...            ...            ...

...

89

DiTine  Revelation               ...            ...

13

Worldly  and  Spiritual  Power  t  a  Con-

Ckid's  Frocednre  in  Belation  to  Sin ...

14

trast  ...             ...             ...

...

40

Mora!  InonrablenesB           ...

15

GKfts  for  Divine  Service    ...

.M

40

Be  quick              ...            ...            ».

IS

National  Stability

.a*

42

The  Ministry  viewed  in  Relation  to

CHAPTER  n.

"Hire"
The  Desolating  Effects  of  Sin

...
.at

42
42

Delineations  of  Deep  Transgression,

God's  Gift  of  a  Faithful  Ministry

...

44

Righteous  Retribution,  and  Divine

Spurious  Faith    ...

...

44

Equity

21

Civil  Rulers          ...

...

45

God's  Ways  vindicated      ...

22

False  Prophets    ...            ...

••■•

46

The    Beneficial    Influence    of    God's

The  True  Prophet

»•«

47

Words  upon  the  Obedient

23

"  Glorious  Things"  spoken  of  the  True

CHAPTER  IV.

Xsrael...            ...            ...            ...

23

The  Breaker        ...            ...

25

The  Messiah's  Spiritual  Kingdom

•  at

62

Deliberate  Sins  bringing  Predestined

Enthusiasm  in  Religion      ...

...

64

Punishments    ...

26

Higher  Spiritual  Life         ...

•  ..

65

Xn.   Impious   Veto;    a   Fatal   With-

God  our  Teacher...

...

55

drawal              ...

27

Obedience  to  the  Divine  Will

••a

66

Judgment,    God's     Strange    Work;

Through  Trial  to  Triumph

...

57

Mercy,  his  Delight         ...            ...

28

A  New  Mount  Zion

...

58

Sin  the  Great  Disturber     ...            ...

29

"  The  Peaceable  Fruit  of  Righteous-

God the  Great  Bond-breaker            ...

30

ness"...

...

69

Avarice  •••            »m           •••            ••*

31

The  Restoration  of  Israel  ...

•a.

60

THEUI  FAOK

Discipline  and  Deliverance               ...  61

The  Gospel  Age  ...            ...            ...  62

Han's  Religions  Nature     ...             ...  64

The  Moral  Monarchy  of  Christ  in  the

World                64

The  Moral  Regeneration  of  the  World  65

CHAPTER  V.

Bethlehem  Ephratah          ...            ...  70

The  Nature  of  the  Messiah's  Rnle  ...  71
The  Eternal  "Goings  forth"  of  the

Christ  of  God  ...            ...            ...  72

Sncoess ;  bat  in  God's  Own  Time    ...  73

The  Ministering  Christ      ...            ...  74

"The  Prince  of  Peace"     ...            ...  75

The  Spiritual  Influence  of  Good  Men

symbolized       ...            ...            ...  76

A  New  David :    the  Lowliness  and

Majesty  of  the  Messiah  ...            ...  77

The  Gentleness  and  Terribleness  of

the  People  of  God          ...            ...  78

The  Promise  of  Messiah    ...            ...  79

The  Chnrch  of  God            ...             ...  80

Christ    ...            ...            ...            ...  81

Christ    as  the    Great    Shepherd    of

Mankind           ...            ...             ...  82

An  Invasion        ...            ...            ...  83

God's  People,  their  Tender  and  Ter.

rible  Aspect  in  the  World  ...  84
God's  Depriving  Dispensation  towards

Men    ...            ...            ...            M«  85

CHAPTER  VL

The  Memories  of  the  Way ...            ...  90

Man's  Spiritual  Need,  and  its  Supply  91
The  Divine  Response  to  the  Cry  of

Humanity         ...             ...             ...  92

Trhe  Piety :  its  Olear  Delineation  ...  92

True  Piety :  its  Exalted  Character  ...  93

Divine  Chastisement          ...            ...  94

"  Weighed  in  the  Balances,  and  found

Wanting"         ...             ...             ...  94

Tbe  Inflnence  of  Evil  Men                ...  96

A  Protest  and  a  Retrospect              ...  96


THEUB  PAai

The  Essentials  of  Godliness              •.•  97

The  Voice  of  the  Bod        ...            ...  99

Man's  Yearning  for  his  Maker          ...  100

Man  in  the  Moral  Court  of  History  101

Fellowship  with  God          ...            ...  102

God's  Yoice  to  Cities         ...             ...  103

Civic  Sins              ...             ...             ...  104

Omri  and  Ahab :  Lessons  worth  study  105

CHAPTER   VII.

The  Good  in  Degenerate  Times        ...  110

Waiting  for  God  ...             ...             ...  112

From  Darkness  into  Light                ...  113

Prayer  and  its  Response    ...             ...  114

The  Forgiving  God            ...      '      ...  114
The  Divine  Promises  and  their  Ful.

filment                ...             ...             ...  US

A  Moral  Dearth  in  the  Land            ...  117

Earnest  Sinners  ...            ...             ...  117

A  Soul  shut  up  to  God       ...            ...  118

God  the  Vindicator  of  the  Penitent  120

"The  Fruit  of  their  Doings"            ...  121

Matchless  Mercy                 ...             ...  122

"A  Pardoning  God"           ...             ...  124

The  Wail  of  a  True   Patriot  on  the

Moral  Corruptions  of  his  Country  126
The  Possibilities  of  Godly  Men  falling

into  Great  Trouble          ...              ...  127

Religions  Fersecntors         ...              ...  128

The  Good  Time  coming     ...             ...  129

Man's    Buin    tbe    Fruit  of   his   Own

Conduct            ...            ...             ...  130

A  Prayer              ...            ...            ...  131

The   Ultimate    Deliverance   of    Man

from  Sin           ...             ...             ...  131

The  Incomparableness  of  God  illus-
trated in    his  Forgiveness  of   Sin :

1.  The  Nature  of  his  Forgiveness  132
The  Incomparableness  of  God  illns-

trated  in  his  Forgiveness  of  Sin:

2.  The  Source  of  his  Forgiveness  134
The  Incomparableness  of  God  illus-
trated, in  his  Forgiveness  of  Sin :

3.  The  Completeness  of   his    For-
giveness           ...            ...            ...  184
